It is the unhappy usage of our schools and universities to study the history of mankind only
during periods of mechanical unprogressiveness. The historical ideas of Europe range between
the time when the Greeks were going about the world on foot or horseback or in galleys or sailing
ships to the days when Napoleon, Wellington, and Nelson were going about at very much the same
pace in much the same vehicles and vessels. At the advent of steam and electricity the muse
of history holds her nose and shuts her eyes. Science will study and get the better of a modern
disease, as, for example, sleeping sickness, in spite of the fact that it has no classical
standing; but our history schools would be shocked at the bare idea of studying the effect
of modern means of communication upon administrative areas, large or small. This defect in
our historical training has made our minds politically sluggish. We fail to adapt readily enough.
In small things and great alike we are trying to run the world in areas marked out in or before
the eighteenth century, regardless of the fact that a man or an army or an aeroplane can get
in a few minutes or a few hours to points that it would have taken days or weeks to reach under
the old foot-and-horse conditions. That matters nothing to the learned men who instruct our
statesmen and politicians. It matters everything from the point of view of social and economic
and political life. And the grave fact to consider is that all the great states of Europe,
except for the unification of Italy and Germany, are still much of the size and in much the
same boundaries that made them strong and safe in the eighteenth century, that is to say, in
the closing years of the foot-horse period. The British empire grew and was organized under
those conditions, and had to modify itself only a little to meet the needs of steam shipping.
All over the world are its linked possessions and its ports and coaling stations and fastnesses
on the trade routes. And British people still look at the red-splashed map of the world with
the profoundest self-satisfaction, blind to the swift changes that are making that scattered
empire--if it is to remain an isolated system--almost the most dangerous conceivable.

Let me ask the British reader who is disposed to sneer at the League of Nations and say he
is very well content with the empire, thank you, to get his atlas and consider one or two propositions.
And, first, let him think of aviation. I can assure him, because upon this matter I have some
special knowledge, that long-distance air travel for men, for letters and light goods and for
bombs, is continually becoming more practicable. But the air routes that air transport will
follow must go over a certain amount of land, for this reason that every few hundred miles
at the longest the machine must come down for petrol. A flying machine with a safe non-stop
range of 1500 miles is still a long way off. It may indeed be permanently impracticable because
there seems to be an upward limit to the size of an aeroplane engine. Philander Chase, in founding
Kenyon and Jubilee Colleges, gave to the Episcopalians of the West two of their leading literary
institutions.

John M. Ellis founded Illinois College, which, with the influences that centered around it, in large
measure "gave character" to the State.
Not less plainly did he write his name upon the foundations of Wabash
College, and not less plainly have Charles White, Edmund D. Hovey,
and Caleb Mills written their names upon the superstructure. Directly any trade difficulty breaks out, any country
can begin a vexatious campaign against its neighbour's air traffic. It can oblige it to alight
at the frontier, to follow prescribed routes, to land at specified places on those routes and
undergo examinations that will waste precious hours. But so far as I can see, no European statesman,
German or Allied, have begun to give their attention to this amazing difficulty. Without a
great pooling of air control, either a world-wide pooling or a pooling at least of the Atlantic-Mediterranean
Allies in one Air League, the splendid peace possibilities of air transport--and they are indeed
splendid--must remain very largely a forbidden possibility to mankind.

And as a second illustration of the way in which changing conditions are altering political
questions, let the reader take his atlas and consider the case of that impregnable fastness,
that great naval station, that Key to the Mediterranean, Gibraltar. British boys are brought
up on Gibraltar and the Gibraltar idea. To the British imagination Gibraltar is almost as sacred
a national symbol as the lions in Trafalgar Square. Now, in his atlas the reader will almost
certainly find an inset map of this valuable possession, coloured bright red. The inset map
will have attached to it a small scale of miles. From that he will be able to satisfy himself
that there is not an inch of the rock anywhere that is not within five miles or less of Spanish
land, and that there is rather more than a semicircle of hills round the rock within a range
of seven or eight miles. That is much less than the range of a sixteen-inch gun. In other words,
the Spaniards are in a position to knock Gibraltar to bits whenever they want to do so, or
to smash and sink any ships in its harbour. They can hit it on every side. Consider, moreover,
that there are long sweeps of coast north, south, and west of the Rock, from which torpedoes
could be discharged at any ship that approached. Inquire further where on the Rock an aeroplane
can land. And having ascertained these things, ask yourself what is the present value of Gibraltar?

I will not multiply disagreeable instances of this sort, though it would be easy enough to
do so in the case both of France and Italy as well as of Great Britain. I give them as illustrations
of the way in which everywhere old securities and old arrangements must be upset by the greater
range of modern things. Let us get on to more general conditions. There is not a capital city
in Europe that twenty years from now will not be liable to a bombing raid done by hundreds
or even thousands of big aeroplanes, upon or even before a declaration of war, and there is
not a line of sea communication that will not be as promptly interrupted by the hostile submarine.
I point these things out here only to carry home the fact that the ideas of sovereign isolation
and detachment that were perfectly valid in 1900, the self-sufficient empire, Imperial Zollverein
and all that stuff, and damn the foreigner! are now, because of the enormous changes in range
of action and facility of locomotion that have been going on, almost as wild--or would be if
we were not so fatally accustomed to them--and quite as dangerous, as the idea of setting up
a free and sovereign state in the Isle of Dogs. All the European empires are becoming vulnerable
at every point. Surely the moral is obvious. The only wise course before the allied European
powers now is to put their national conceit in their pockets and to combine to lock up their
foreign policy, their trade interests, and all their imperial and international interests into
a League so big as to be able to withstand the most sudden and treacherous of blows. And surely
the only completely safe course for them and mankind--hard and nearly impossible though it
may seem at the present juncture--is for them to lock up into one unity with a democratized
Germany and with all the other states of the earth into one peace-maintaining League.

If the reader will revert again to his atlas he will see very clearly that a strongly consolidated
League of Free Nations, even if it consisted only of our present allies, would in itself form
a combination with so close a system of communication about the world, and so great an economic
advantage, that in the long run it could oblige Germany and the rest of the world to come in
to its council. Divided the Oceanic Allies are, to speak plainly, geographical rags and nakedness;
united they are a world. To set about organizing that League now, with its necessary repudiation
on the part of Britain, France, and Italy, of a selfish and, it must be remembered in the light
of these things I have but hinted at here, a now hopelessly unpracticable imperialism, would,
I am convinced, lead quite rapidly to a great change of heart in Germany and to a satisfactory
peace. But even if I am wrong in that, then all the stronger is the reason for binding, locking
and uniting the allied powers together. It is the most dangerous of delusions for each and
all of them to suppose that either Britain, France or Italy can ever stand alone again and
be secure.

And turning now to the other aspect of these consequences of the development of material science,
it is too often assumed that this war is being as horrible and destructive as war can be. There
never was so great a delusion. This war has only begun to be horrible. No doubt it is much
more horrible and destructive than any former war, but even in comparison with the full possibilities
of known and existing means of destruction it is still a mild war. Perhaps it will never rise
to its full possibilities. At the present stage there is not a combatant, except perhaps America,
which is not now practising a pinching economy of steel and other mechanical material. The
Germans are running short of first-class flying men, and if we and our allies continue to press
the air attack, and seek out and train our own vastly greater resources of first quality young
airmen, the Germans may come as near to being "driven out of the air" as is possible. I am
a firmer believer than ever I was in the possibility of a complete victory over Germany--through
and by the air. But the occasional dropping of a big bomb or so in London is not to be taken
as anything but a minimum display of what air war can do. In a little while now our alliance
should be in a position to commence day and night continuous attacks upon the Rhine towns.
Not hour-long raids such as London knows, but week-long raids. Then and then only shall we
be able to gauge the really horrible possibilities of the air war. They are in our hands and
not in the hands of the Germans. In addition the Germans are at a huge disadvantage in their
submarine campaign. Their submarine campaign is only the feeble shadow of what a submarine
campaign might be. Turning again to the atlas the reader can see for himself that the German
and Austrian submarines are obliged to come out across very narrow fronts. A fence of mines
less than three hundred miles long and two hundred feet deep would, for example, completely
bar their exit through the North Sea. The U-boats run the gauntlet of that long narrow sea
and pay a heavy toll to it. If only our Admiralty would tell the German public what that toll
is now, there would come a time when German seamen would no longer consent to go down in them.
Consider, however, what a submarine campaign would be for Great Britain if instead of struggling
through this bottle-neck it were conducted from the coast of Norway, where these pests might
harbour in a hundred fiords. Consider too what this weapon may be in twenty years' time in
the hands of a country in the position of the United States. Great Britain, if she is not altogether
mad, will cease to be an island as soon as possible after the war, by piercing the Channel
Tunnel--how different our transport problem would be if we had that now!--but such countries
as Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, directly they are involved in the future in a war against
any efficient naval power with an unimpeded sea access, will be isolated forthwith. I cannot
conceive that any of the great ocean powers will rest content until such a tremendous possibility
of blockade as the submarine has created is securely vested in the hands of a common league
beyond any power of sudden abuse.

It must always be remembered that this war is a mechanical war conducted by men whose discipline
renders them uninventive, who know little or nothing of mechanism, who are for the most part
struggling blindly to get things back to the conditions for which they were trained, to Napoleonic
conditions, with infantry and cavalry and comparatively light guns, the so-called "war of manoeuvres."
It is like a man engaged in a desperate duel who keeps on trying to make it a game of cricket. But
other names claim our notice. Amos Twitchell, by tireless industry and fidelity in his regular
professional work, and his boldness and skill as an operative surgeon, gained a reputation
equaled by few in New England, and extending to the Old World. I am not making
any particular complaint against the British and French generals in saying this. It is what
must happen to any country which entrusts its welfare to soldiers. A soldier has to be a severely
disciplined man, and a severely disciplined man cannot be a versatile man, and on the whole
the British army has been as receptive to novelties as any. The German generals have done no
better; indeed, they have not done so well as the generals of the Allies in this respect. But
after the war, if the world does not organize rapidly for peace, then as resources accumulate
a little, the mechanical genius will get to work on the possibilities of these ideas that have
merely been sketched out in this war. We shall get big land ironclads which will smash towns.
We shall get air offensives--let the experienced London reader think of an air raid going on
hour after hour, day after day--that will really burn out and wreck towns, that will drive
people mad by the thousand. We shall get a very complete cessation of sea transit. Even land
transit may be enormously hampered by aerial attack. I doubt if any sort of social order will
really be able to stand the strain of a fully worked out modern war. We have still, of course,
to feel the full shock effects even of this war. Most of the combatants are going on, as sometimes
men who have incurred grave wounds will still go on for a time--without feeling them. The educational,
biological, social, economic punishment that has already been taken by each of the European
countries is, I feel, very much greater than we yet realize. Russia, the heaviest and worst-trained
combatant, has indeed shown the effects and is down and sick, but in three years' time all
Europe will know far better than it does now the full price of this war. And the shock effects
of the next war will have much the same relation to the shock effects of this, as the shock
of breaking a finger-nail has to the shock of crushing in a body. In Russia to-day we have
seen, not indeed social revolution, not the replacement of one social order by another, but
disintegration. Let not national conceit blind us. Germany, France, Italy, Britain are all
slipping about on that same slope down which Russia has slid. Which goes first, it is hard
to guess, or whether we shall all hold out to some kind of Peace. At present the social discipline
of France and Britain seems to be at least as good as that of Germany, and the morale of the
Rhineland and Bavaria has probably to undergo very severe testing by systematized and steadily
increasing air punishment as this year goes on. The next war--if a next war comes--will see
all Germany, from end to end, vulnerable to aircraft....

