XII.  Whatsoever comes to pass in the object of the idea, which constitutes the human  mind,
must be perceived by the human mind, or there will necessarily be an idea in the  human mind
of the said occurrence.  That is, if the object of the idea constituting the  human mind be
a body, nothing can take place in that body without being perceived by  the mind.

>>>>>Proof--Whatsoever comes to pass in the object of any idea, the knowledge  thereof is necessarily
in God (II. ix. Cor.), in so far as he is considered as affected by  the idea of the said object,
that is (II. xi.), in so far as he constitutes the mind of anything.   Therefore, whatsoever
takes place in the object constituting the idea of the human mind,  the knowledge thereof is
necessarily in God, in so far as he constitutes the essence of the  human mind; that is (by
II. xi. Cor.) the knowledge of the said thing will necessarily be  in the mind, in other words
the mind perceives it.

*****Note--This proposition is also evident, and is more clearly to be understood from  II.
vii., which see.

XIII. Cor.) in virtue of his constituting  our mind, but in virtue of his constituting the
mind of something else; that is (II. xi. Cor.)  the ideas of the modifications of the body
would not be in our mind:  now (by II.   Further, if there were any other object of the idea
constituting the mind besides body,  then, as nothing can exist from which some effect does
not follow (I. xxxvi.) there would  necessarily have to be in our mind an idea, which would
be the effect of that other object  (II. xi.); but (I. Ax. v.) there is no such idea.  Wherefore
the object of our mind is the body  as it exists, and nothing else.  Q.E.D.

*****Note--We thus comprehend, not only that the human mind is united to the body,  but also
the nature of the union between mind and body.  However, no one will be able  to grasp this
adequately or distinctly, unless he first has adequate knowledge of the nature  of our body.
The propositions we have advanced hitherto have been entirely general,  applying not more to
men than to other individual things, all of which, though in different  degrees, are animated
(animata).  For of everything there is necessarily an idea in God, of  which God is the cause,
in the same way as there is an idea of the human body; thus  whatever we have asserted of the
idea of the human body must necessarily also be asserted  of the idea of everything else.

Wherefore, in order to determine, wherein the human mind differs from other things, and  wherein
it surpasses them, it is necessary for us to know the nature of its object, that is,  of the
human body.  What this nature is, I am not able here to explain, nor is it necessary  for the
proof of what I advance, that I should do so.  I will only say generally, that in  proportion
as any given body is more fitted than others for doing many actions or receiving  many impressions
at once, so also is the mind, of which it is the object, more fitted than  others for forming
many simultaneous perceptions; and the more the actions of the body  depend on itself alone,
and the fewer other bodies concur with it in action, the more fitted  is the mind of which
it is the object for distinct comprehension.  We may thus recognize  the superiority of one
mind over others, and may further see the cause, why we have only a  very confused knowledge
of our body, and also many kindred questions, which I will, in  the following propositions,
deduce from what has been advanced.  Wherefore I have  thought it worth while to explain and
prove more strictly my present statements.  In order  to do so, I must premise a few propositions
concerning the nature of bodies.

---Axiom I.  All bodies are either in motion or at rest.

---Axiom II.  Every body is moved sometimes more slowly, sometimes more quickly.

Lemma I.  Bodies are distinguished from one another in respect of motion and rest,  quickness
and slowness, and not in respect of substance.

>>>>>Proof--The first part of this proposition is, I take it, self-evident.  That bodies are
not distinguished in respect of substance, is plain both from I. v. and I. viii.  It is brought
out still more clearly from I. xv., Note.

Lemma II.  All bodies agree in certain respects.

>>>>>Proof--All bodies agree in the fact, that they involve the conception of one and the 
same attribute (II., Def. i.).  Further, in the fact that they may be moved less or more  quickly,
and may be absolutely in motion or at rest.

Lemma III.  A body in motion or at rest must be determined to motion or rest by another  body,
which other body has been determined to motion or rest by a third body, and that  third again
by a fourth, and so on to infinity.

>>>>>Proof--Bodies are individual things (II., Def. i.), which (Lemma i.) are distinguished
one from the other in respect to motion and rest; thus (I. xxviii.) each must necessarily be
determined to motion or rest by another individual thing, namely (II. vi.) by another body,
which other body is also (Ax. i.) in motion or at rest.  And this body again can only have
been set in motion or caused to rest by being determined by a third body to motion or rest.
This third body again by a fourth, and so on to infinity.  Q.E.D.

<<<<<Corollary--Hence it follows, that a body in motion keeps in motion, until it is  determined
to a state of rest by some other body; and a body at rest remains so, until it is  determined
to a state of motion by some other body.  This is indeed self-evident.  For  when I suppose,
for instance, that a given body, A, is at rest, and do not take into  consideration other bodies
in motion, I cannot affirm anything concerning the body A,  except that it is at rest.  If
it afterwards comes to pass that A is in motion, this cannot have  resulted from its having
been at rest, for no other consequence could have been involved  than its remaining at rest.
If, on the other hand, A be given in motion, we shall, so long as  we only consider A, be unable
to affirm anything concerning it, except that it is in motion.   If A is subsequently found
to be at rest, this rest cannot be the result of A's previous  motion, for such motion can
only have led to continued motion; the state of rest therefore  must have resulted from something,
which was not in A, namely, from an external cause  determining A to a state of rest.

-----Axiom I--All modes, wherein one body is affected by another body, follow  simultaneously
from the nature of the body affected and the body affecting; so that one  and the same body
may be moved in different modes, according to the difference in the  nature of the bodies moving
it; on the other hand, different bodies may be moved in  different modes by one and the same body.

-----Axiom II--When a body in motion impinges on another body at rest, which it is  unable
to move, it recoils, in order to continue its motion, and the angle made by the line  of motion
in the recoil and the plane of the body at rest, whereon the moving body has  impinged, will
be equal to the angle formed by the line of motion of incidence and the  same plane.

So far we have been speaking only of the most simple bodies, which are only distinguished 
one from the other by motion and rest, quickness and slowness.  We now pass on to  compound bodies.

Definition--When any given bodies of the same or different magnitude are compelled by  other
bodies to remain in contact, or if they be moved at the same or different rates of  speed,
so that their mutual movements should preserve among themselves a certain fixed  relation,
we say that such bodies are 'in union,' and that together they compose one body  or individual,
which is distinguished from other bodies by the fact of this union.

-----Axiom III--In proportion as the parts of an individual, or a compound body, are in  contact
over a greater or less superficies, they will with greater or less difficulty admit of  being
moved from their position; consequently the individual will, with greater or less  difficulty,
be brought to assume another form.  Those bodies, whose parts are in contact  over large superficies,
are called 'hard;' those, whose parts are in contact over small  superficies, are called 'soft;'
those, whose parts are in motion among one another, are  called 'fluid.'

Lemma IV.  If from a body or individual, compounded of several bodies, certain bodies be  separated,
and if, at the same time, an equal number of other bodies of the same nature  take their place,
the individual will preserve its nature as before, without any change in its  actuality (forma).

>>>>>Proof--Bodies (Lemma i.) are not distinguished in respect of substance:  that which  constitutes
the actuality (formam) of an individual consists (by the last Def.) in a union of  bodies;
but this union, although there is a continual change of bodies, will (by our  hypothesis) be
maintained; the individual, therefore, will retain its nature as before, both in  respect of
substance and in respect of mode.  Q.E.D.

Lemma V.  If the parts composing an individual become greater or less, but in such  proportion,
that they all preserve the same mutual relations of motion and rest, the  individual will still
preserve its original nature, and its actuality will not be changed.

>>>>>Proof--The same as for the last Lemma.

Lemma VI.  If certain bodies composing an individual be compelled to change the motion,  which
they have in one direction, for motion in another direction, but in such a manner,  that they
be able to continue their motions and their mutual communication in the same  relations as
before, the individual will retain its own nature without any change of its  actuality.

>>>>>Proof--This proposition is self-evident, for the individual is supposed to retain all
that, which, in its definition, we spoke of as its actual being.

Lemma VII.  Furthermore, the individual thus composed preserves its nature, whether it  be,
as a whole, in motion or at rest, whether it be moved in this or that direction; so long  as
each part retains its motion, and preserves its communication with other parts as  before.

>>>>>Proof--This proposition is evident from the definition of an individual prefixed to  Lemma iv.

*****Note--We thus see, how a composite individual may be
affected in many different  ways, and preserve its nature
notwithstanding.  Thus far we have conceived an individual  as
composed of bodies only distinguished one from the other in
respect of motion and  rest, speed and slowness; that is, of
bodies of the most simple character.  If, however, we  now
conceive another individual composed of several individuals of
diverse natures, we  shall find that the number of ways in which
it can be affected, without losing its nature, will  be greatly
multiplied.  Each of its parts would consist of several bodies,
and therefore (by  Lemma vi.) each part would admit, without
change to its nature, of quicker or slower  motion, and would
consequently be able to transmit its motions more quickly or more
 slowly to the remaining parts.  If we further conceive a third
kind of individuals composed  of individuals of this second kind,
we shall find that they may be affected in a still greater 
number of ways without changing their actuality.  We may easily
proceed thus to infinity,  and conceive the whole of nature as
one individual, whose parts, that is, all bodies, vary in 
infinite ways, without any change in the individual as a whole. 
I should feel bound to  explain and demonstrate this point at
more length, if I were writing a special treatise on  body.  But
I have already said that such is not my object; I have only
touched on the  question, because it enables me to prove easily
that which I have in view.

POSTULATES I.  The human body is composed of a number of individual parts, of diverse nature,
each  one of which is in itself extremely complex.

II.  Of the individual parts composing the human body some are fluid, some soft, some  hard.

III.  The individual parts composing the human body, and consequently the human body  itself,
are affected in a variety of ways by external bodies.

IV.  The human body stands in need for its preservation of a number of other bodies, by  which
it is continually, so to speak, regenerated.

V.  When the fluid part of the human body is determined by an external body to impinge  often
on another soft part, it changes the surface of the latter, and, as it were, leaves the  impression
thereupon of the external body which impels it.

VI.  The human body can move external bodies, and arrange them in a variety of ways.

PROPOSITIONS XIV.  The human mind is capable of perceiving a great number of things, and is
so in   proportion as its body is capable of receiving a great number of impressions.

>>>>>Proof--The human body (by Post. iii. and vi.) is affected in very many ways by  external
bodies, and is capable in very many ways of affecting external bodies.  The idea, which constitutes
the actual being of the human mind, is not simple, but  compounded of a great number of ideas.

>>>>>Proof--The idea constituting the actual being of the human mind is the idea of the  body
(II. xiii.), which (Post. i.) is composed of a great number of complex individual  parts. 
But there is necessarily in God the idea of each individual part whereof the body is  composed
(II. viii. Cor.); therefore (II. vii.), the idea of the human body is composed of  each of
these numerous ideas of its component parts.  Q.E.D.

XVI.  The idea of every mode, in which the human body is affected by external bodies,  must
involve the nature of the human body, and also the nature of the external body.

>>>>>Proof--All the modes, in which any given body is affected, follow from the nature  of
the body affected, and also from the nature of the affecting body (by Ax. i., after the  Cor.
of Lemma iii.), wherefore their idea is also necessarily (by I, Ax. iv.) involves the  nature
of both bodies; therefore, the idea of every mode, in which the human body is  affected by
external bodies, involves the nature of the human body and of the external  body.  I have 
amply illustrated this in the Appendix to Part I.

XVII.  If the human body is affected in a manner which involves the nature of any external
body, the human mind will regard the said external body as actually existing, or as present
to itself, until the human body be affected in such a way, as to exclude the existence or the
presence of the said external body.

>>>>>Proof--This proposition is self-evident, for so long as the human body continues to  be
thus affected, so long will the human mind (II. xii.) regard this modification of the body
--that is (by the last Prop.), it will have the idea of the mode as actually existing, and
this  idea involves the nature of the external body; therefore the mind (by II. xvi., Cor.
i.) will  regard the external body as actually existing, until it is affected, &c.  Q.E.D.

<<<<<Corollary--The mind is able to regard as present external bodies, by which the  human
body has once been affected, even though they be no longer in existence or present.

