"Pity!  Who are you, that you should dare to pity me!  By -, my young woman, it is I that pity
you.  I must cut your throat unless you give me money.  Do you know that?"

"Money!  I have got no money."

"I'll make you have some before I go.  Come; don't move till I have done."  And as he spoke
to her he went on tugging at the bone, and swallowing the lumps of stale bread.  He had already
finished the bowl of milk.  "And, now," said he, "tell me who I am."

"I suppose you are Aaron Trow," she answered, very slowly.  He said nothing on hearing this,
but continued his meal, standing close to her so that she might not possibly escape from him
out into the darkness.  Twice or thrice in those few minutes she made up her mind to make such
an attempt, feeling that it would be better to leave him in possession of the house, and make
sure, if possible, of her own life.  There was no money there; not a dollar!  What money her
father kept in his possession was locked up in his safe at Hamilton. And might he not keep
to his threat, and murder her, when he found that she could give him nothing?  She did not
tremble outwardly, as she stood there watching him as he ate, but she thought how probable
it might be that her last moments were very near.  And yet she could scrutinise his features,
form, and garments, so as to carry away in her mind a perfect picture of them.  Aaron Trow--for
of course it was the escaped convict--was not a man of frightful, hideous aspect. Had the world
used him well, giving him when he was young ample wages and separating him from turbulent spirits,
he also might have used the world well; and then women would have praised the brightness of
his eye and the manly vigour of his brow.  But things had not gone well with him.  He had been
separated from the wife he had loved, and the children who had been raised at his knee,-- separated
by his own violence; and now, as he had said of himself, he was a wolf rather than a man. 
As he stood there satisfying the craving of his appetite, breaking up the large morsels of
food, he was an object very sad to be seen.  Hunger had made him gaunt and yellow, he was squalid
with the dirt of his hidden lair, and he had the look of a beast;--that look to which men fall
when they live like the brutes of prey, as outcasts from their brethren.  But still there was
that about his brow which might have redeemed him,--which might have turned her horror into
pity, had he been willing that it should be so.

"And now give me some brandy," he said.

There was brandy in the house,--in the sitting-room which was close at their hand, and the
key of the little press which held it was in her pocket.  It was useless, she thought, to refuse
him; and so she told him that there was a bottle partly full, but that she must go to the next
room to fetch it him.

"We'll go together, my darling," he said.  "There's nothing like good company."  And he again
put his hand upon her arm as they passed into the family sitting-room.

"I must take the light," she said.  But he unhooked it himself, and carried it in his own hand.

Again she went to work without trembling.  She found the key of the side cupboard, and unlocking
the door, handed him a bottle which might contain about half-a-pint of spirits.  "And is that
all?" he said.

"There is a full bottle here," she answered, handing him another; "but if you drink it, you
will be drunk, and they will catch you."

"By Heavens, yes; and you would be the first to help them; would you not?"

"Look here," she answered.  "If you will go now, I will not say a word to any one of your coming,
nor set them on your track to follow you.  There, take the full bottle with you.  If you will
go, you shall be safe from me."

"What, and go without money!"

"I have none to give you.  You may believe me when I say so.  I have not a dollar in the house."

Before he spoke again he raised the half empty bottle to his mouth, and drank as long as there
was a drop to drink.  "There," said he, putting the bottle down, "I am better after that. 
As to the other, you are right, and I will take it with me.  And now, young woman, about the
money?"

"I tell you that I have not a dollar."

"Look here," said he, and he spoke now in a softer voice, as though he would be on friendly
terms with her.  "Give me ten sovereigns, and I will go.  I know you have it, and with ten
sovereigns it is possible that I may save my life.  You are good, and would not wish that a
man should die so horrid a death.  I know you are good. Come, give me the money."  And he put
his hands up, beseeching her, and looked into her face with imploring eyes.

"On the word of a Christian woman I have not got money to give you," she replied.

"Nonsense?"  And as he spoke he took her by the arm and shook her. He shook her violently so
that he hurt her, and her breath for a moment was all but gone from her.  "I tell you you must
make dollars before I leave you, or I will so handle you that it would have been better for
you to coin your very blood."

"May God help me at my need," she said, "as I have not above a few penny pieces in the house."

"And you expect me to believe that!  Look here!  I will shake the teeth out of your head, but
I will have it from you."  And he did shake her again, using both his hands and striking her
against the wall.

"Would you--murder me?" she said, hardly able now to utter the words.

"Murder you, yes; why not?  I cannot be worse than I am, were I to murder you ten times over.
But with money I may possibly be better."

"I have it not."

"Then I will do worse than murder you.  I will make you such an object that all the world shall
loathe to look on you."  And so saying he took her by the arm and dragged her forth from the
wall against which she had stood.

Then there came from her a shriek that was heard far down the shore of that silent sea, and
away across to the solitary houses of those living on the other side,--a shriek, very sad,
sharp, and prolonged,--which told plainly to those who heard it of woman's woe when in her
extremest peril.  That sound was spoken of in Bermuda for many a day after that, as something
which had been terrible to hear.  But then, at that moment, as it came wailing through the
dark, it sounded as though it were not human.  Of those who heard it, not one guessed from
whence it came, nor was the hand of any brother put forward to help that woman at her need.

"Did you hear that?" said the young wife to her husband, from the far side of the arm of the sea.

"Hear it!  Oh Heaven, yes!  Whence did it come?"  The young wife could not say from whence
it came, but clung close to her husband's breast, comforting herself with the knowledge that
that terrible sorrow was not hers.

But aid did come at last, or rather that which seemed as aid.  Long and terrible was the fight
between that human beast of prey and the poor victim which had fallen into his talons. "Well, may God
long preserve him from such an awful death!" said the other. "But there comes our party. Look
after your horse, Mohrle."

The conversation was thus abruptly cut short. The ladies and gentlemen mounted the animals that
were waiting for them, and in a few minutes the space in front of the inn was cleared of the busy throng.

"Now,
then," said the young Scotchman, whose attention had been occupied with the company which had just
left, and who now turned to Walter.  And then, when one hand was loosed in the struggle, she twisted it through
his long hair, and dragged back his head till his eyes were nearly starting from their sockets.
Anastasia Bergen had hitherto been a sheer woman, all feminine in her nature.  But now the
foam came to her mouth, and fire sprang from her eyes, and the muscles of her body worked as
though she had been trained to deeds of violence.  Of violence, Aaron Trow had known much in
his rough life, but never had he combated with harder antagonist than her whom he now held
beneath his breast.

"By--I will put an end to you," he exclaimed, in his wrath, as he struck her violently across
the face with his elbow.  His hand was occupied, and he could not use it for a blow, but, nevertheless,
the violence was so great that the blood gushed from her nostrils, while the back of her head
was driven with violence against the floor. But she did not lose her hold of him.  Her hand
was still twined closely through his thick hair, and in every move he made she clung to him
with all her might.  "Leave go my hair," he shouted at her, but she still kept her hold, though
he again dashed her head against the floor.

There was still light in the room, for when he first grasped her with both his hands, he had
put the lamp down on a small table.  Now they were rolling on the floor together, and twice
he had essayed to kneel on her that he might thus crush the breath from her body, and deprive
her altogether of her strength; but she had been too active for him, moving herself along the
ground, though in doing so she dragged him with her.  But by degrees he got one hand at liberty,
and with that he pulled a clasp knife out of his pocket and opened it.  "I will cut your head
off if you do not let go my hair," he said.  But still she held fast by him.  He then stabbed
at her arm, using his left hand and making short, ineffectual blows.  Her dress partly saved
her, and partly also the continual movement of all her limbs; but, nevertheless, the knife
wounded her.  It wounded her in several places about the arm, covering them both with blood;--but
still she hung on.  So close was her grasp in her agony, that, as she afterwards found, she
cut the skin of her own hands with her own nails.  Had the man's hair been less thick or strong,
or her own tenacity less steadfast, he would have murdered her before any interruption could
have saved her.

And yet he had not purposed to murder her, or even, in the first instance, to inflict on her
any bodily harm.  But he had been determined to get money.  With such a sum of money as he
had named, it might, he thought, be possible for him to win his way across to America.  He
might bribe men to hide him in the hold of a ship, and thus there might be for him, at any
rate, a possibility of escape. That there must be money in the house he had still thought when
first he laid hands on the poor woman; and then, when the struggle had once begun, when he
had felt her muscles contending with his, the passion of the beast was aroused within him,
and he strove against her as he would have striven against a dog.  But yet, when the knife
was in his hand, he had not driven it against her heart.

Then suddenly, while they were yet rolling on the floor, there was a sound of footsteps in
the passage.  Aaron Trow instantly leaped to his feet, leaving his victim on the ground, with
huge lumps of his thick clotted hair in her hand.  Thus, and thus only, could he have liberated
himself from her grasp.  He rushed at the door, and there he came against the two negro servant-girls
who had returned down to their kitchen from the road on which they had been straying.  Trow,
as he half saw them in the dark, not knowing how many there might be, or whether there was
a man among them, rushed through them, upsetting one scared girl in his passage.  With the
instinct and with the timidity of a beast, his impulse now was to escape, and he hurried away
back to the road and to his lair, leaving the three women together in the cottage.  Poor wretch!
As he crossed the road, not skulking in his impotent haste, but running at his best, another
pair of eyes saw him, and when the search became hot after him, it was known that his hiding-place
was not distant.

It was some time before any of the women were able to act, and when some step was taken, Anastasia
was the first to take it.  She had not absolutely swooned, but the reaction, after the violence
of her efforts, was so great, that for some minutes she had been unable to speak.  She had
risen from the floor when Trow left her, and had even followed him to the door; but since that
she had fallen back into her father's old arm-chair, and there sat gasping not only for words,
but for breath also.

At last she bade one of the girls to run into St. George, and beg Mr. Morton to come to her
aid.  The girl would not stir without her companion; and even then, Anastasia, covered as she
was with blood, with dishevelled hair, and her clothes half torn from her body, accompanied
them as far as the road.  There they found a negro lad still hanging about the place, and he
told them that he had seen the man cross the road, and run down over the open ground towards
the rocks of the sea-coast.  "He must be there," said the lad, pointing in the direction of
a corner of the rocks; "unless he swim across the mouth of the ferry."  But the mouth of that
ferry is an arm of the sea, and it was not probable that a man would do that when he might
have taken the narrow water by keeping on the other side of the road.

At about one that night Caleb Morton reached the cottage breathless with running, and before
a word was spoken between them, Anastasia had fallen on his shoulder and had fainted.  As soon
as she was in the arms of her lover, all her power had gone from her.  The spirit and passion
of the tiger had gone, and she was again a weak woman shuddering at the thought of what she
had suffered.  She remembered that she had had the man's hand between her teeth, and by degrees
she found his hair still clinging to her fingers; but even then she could hardly call to mind
the nature of the struggle she had undergone.  His hot breath close to her own cheek she did
remember, and his glaring eyes, and even the roughness of his beard as he pressed his face
against her own; but she could not say whence had come the blood, nor till her arm became stiff
and motionless did she know that she had been wounded.

It was all joy with her now, as she sat motionless without speaking, while he administered
to her wants and spoke words of love into her ears.  She remembered the man's horrid threat,
and knew that by God's mercy she had been saved.  And he was there caressing her, loving her,
comforting her!  As she thought of the fate that had threatened her, of the evil that had been
so imminent, she fell forward on her knees, and with incoherent sobs uttered her thanksgivings,
while her head was still supported on his arms.

It was almost morning before she could induce herself to leave him and lie down.  With him
she seemed to be so perfectly safe; but the moment he was away she could see Aaron Trow's eyes
gleaming at her across the room.  At last, however, she slept; and when he saw that she was
at rest, he told himself that his work must then begin. Hitherto Caleb Morton had lived in
all respects the life of a man of peace; but now, asking himself no questions as to the propriety
of what he would do, using no inward arguments as to this or that line of conduct, he girded
the sword on his loins, and prepared himself for war.  The wretch who had thus treated the
woman whom he loved should be hunted down like a wild beast, as long as he had arms and legs
with which to carry on the hunt.  He would pursue the miscreant with any weapons that might
come to his hands; and might Heaven help him at his need as he dealt forth punishment to that
man, if he caught him within his grasp.  Those who had hitherto known Morton in the island,
could not recognise the man as he came forth on that day, thirsty after blood, and desirous
to thrust himself into personal conflict with the wild ruffian who had injured him.  The meek
Presbyterian minister had been a preacher, preaching ways of peace, and living in accordance
with his own doctrines.  The world had been very quiet for him, and he had walked quietly in
his appointed path.  But now the world was quiet no longer, nor was there any preaching of
peace.  His cry was for blood; for the blood of the untamed savage brute who had come upon
his young doe in her solitude, and striven with such brutal violence to tear her heart from
her bosom.

He got to his assistance early in the morning some of the constables from St. George, and before
the day was over, he was joined by two or three of the warders from the convict establishment.
There was with him also a friend or two, and thus a party was formed, numbering together ten
or twelve persons.  They were of course all armed, and therefore it might be thought that there
would be but small chance for the wretched man if they should come upon his track.  At first
they all searched together, thinking from the tidings which had reached them that he must be
near to them; but gradually they spread themselves along the rocks between St. George and the
ferry, keeping watchman on the road, so that he should not escape unnoticed into the island.

Ten times during the day did Anastasia send from the cottage up to Morton, begging him to leave
the search to others, and come down to her.  But not for a moment would he lose the scent of
his prey. What! should it be said that she had been so treated, and that others had avenged
her?  He sent back to say that her father was with her now, and that he would come when his
work was over.  And in that job of work the life-blood of Aaron Trow was counted up.

Towards evening they were all congregated on the road near to the spot at which the path turns
off towards the cottage, when a voice was heard hallooing to them from the summit of a little
hill which lies between the road and the sea on the side towards the ferry, and presently a
boy came running down to them full of news.  "Danny Lund has seen him," said the boy, "he has
seen him plainly in among the rocks."  And then came Danny Lund himself, a small negro lad
about fourteen years of age, who was known in those parts as the idlest, most dishonest, and
most useless of his race.  On this occasion, however, Danny Lund became important, and every
one listened to him. He had seen, he said, a pair of eyes moving down in a cave of the rocks
which he well knew.  He had been in the cave often, he said, and could get there again.  But
not now; not while that pair of eyes was moving at the bottom of it.  And so they all went
up over the hill, Morton leading the way with hot haste.  In his waist-band he held a pistol,
and his hand grasped a short iron bar with which he had armed himself.  They ascended the top
of the hill, and when there, the open sea was before them on two sides, and on the third was
the narrow creek over which the ferry passed.  Immediately beneath their feet were the broken
rocks; for on that side, towards the sea, the earth and grass of the hill descended but a little
way towards the water. Casting himself down lightly by a cabinet worked with Dutch beads interspersed
with seed-pearls, and toying with the gnarled handle of the axe,
the Right Hon. WILLIAM EWART GLADSTONE tells you the story of his
life.

At the outset you are a little puzzled to gather where exactly he was born. At first you think
it was in Scotland. Anon some town in England claims the honour.

Then Wales is incidentally mentioned, and next the tearful voice of Erin claims her son. But, as
the story goes forward with long majestic stride, these difficulties fade in the glamour of
the Old Man's eloquence, and when you awake and find your host has not yet got beyond the second
course--the fish, as it were, of the intellectual banquet--you say you will call again.
  It was a singularly romantic spot, but now well known to them all there,
for they had visited it over and over again that morning.

"In there," said Danny Lund, keeping well behind Morton's body, and pointing at the same time
to a cavern high up among the rocks, but quite on the opposite side of the little inlet of
the sea.  The mouth of the cavern was not twenty yards from where they stood, but at the first
sight it seemed as though it must be impossible to reach it.  The precipice on the brink of
which they all now stood, ran down sheer into the sea, and the fall from the mouth of the cavern
on the other side was as steep.  But Danny solved the mystery by pointing upwards, and showing
them how he had been used to climb to a projecting rock over their heads, and from thence creep
round by certain vantages of the stone till he was able to let himself down into the aperture.
But now, at the present moment, he was unwilling to make essay of his prowess as a cragsman.
He had, he said, been up on that projecting rock thrice, and there had seen the eyes moving
in the cavern.  He was quite sure of that fact of the pair of eyes, and declined to ascend
the rock again.

Traces soon became visible to them by which they knew that some one had passed in and out of
the cavern recently.  The stone, when examined, bore those marks of friction which passage
and repassage over it will always give.  At the spot from whence the climber left the platform
and commenced his ascent, the side of the stone had been rubbed by the close friction of a
man's body.  A light boy like Danny Lund might find his way in and out without leaving such
marks behind him, but no heavy man could do so.  Thus before long they all were satisfied that
Aaron Trow was in the cavern before them.

Then there was a long consultation as to what they would do to carry on the hunt, and how they
would drive the tiger from his lair.  That he should not again come out, except to fall into
their hands, was to all of them a matter of course.  They would keep watch and ward there,
though it might be for days and nights.  But that was a process which did not satisfy Morton,
and did not indeed well satisfy any of them.  It was not only that they desired to inflict
punishment on the miscreant in accordance with the law, but also that they did not desire that
the miserable man should die in a hole like a starved dog, and that then they should go after
him to take out his wretched skeleton.  There was something in that idea so horrid in every
way, that all agreed that active steps must be taken.  The warders of the prison felt that
they would all be disgraced if they could not take their prisoner alive.  Yet who would get
round that perilous ledge in the face of such an adversary?  A touch to any man while climbing
there would send him headlong down among the wave!  And then his fancy told to each what might
be the nature of an embrace with such an animal as that, driven to despair, hopeless of life,
armed, as they knew, at any rate, with a knife!  If the first adventurous spirit should succeed
in crawling round that ledge, what would be the reception which he might expect in the terrible
depth of that cavern?

They called to their prisoner, bidding him come out, and telling him that they would fire in
upon him if he did not show himself; but not a sound was heard.  It was indeed possible that
they should send their bullets to, perhaps, every corner of the cavern; and if so, in that
way they might slaughter him; but even of this they were not sure.  Who could tell that there
might not be some protected nook in which he could lay secure?  And who could tell when the
man was struck, or whether he were wounded?

"I will get to him," said Morton, speaking with a low dogged voice, and so saying he clambered
up to the rock to which Danny Lund had pointed.  Many voices at once attempted to restrain
him, and one or two put their hands upon him to keep him back, but he was too quick for them,
and now stood upon the ledge of rock.  "Can you see him?" they asked below.

"I can see nothing within the cavern," said Morton.

"Look down very hard, Massa," said Danny, "very hard indeed, down in deep dark hole, and then
see him big eyes moving!"

Morton now crept along the ledge, or rather he was beginning to do so, having put forward his
shoulders and arms to make a first step in advance from the spot on which he was resting, when
a hand was put forth from one corner of the cavern's mouth,--a hand armed with a pistol;--and
a shot was fired.  There could be no doubt now but that Danny Lund was right, and no doubt
now as to the whereabouts of Aaron Trow.

A hand was put forth, a pistol was fired, and Caleb Morton still clinging to a corner of the
rock with both his arms was seen to falter.  "He is wounded," said one of the voices from below;
and then they all expected to see him fall into the sea.  But he did not fall, and after a
moment or two, he proceeded carefully to pick his steps along the ledge.  The ball had touched
him, grazing his cheek, and cutting through the light whiskers that he wore; but he had not
felt it, though the blow had nearly knocked him from his perch.  And then four or five shots
were fired from the rocks into the mouth of the cavern.  The man's arm had been seen, and indeed
one or two declared that they had traced the dim outline of his figure.  But no sound was heard
to come from the cavern, except the sharp crack of the bullets against the rock, and the echo
of the gunpowder.  There had been no groan as of a man wounded, no sound of a body falling,
no voice wailing in despair.  For a few seconds all was dark with the smoke of the gunpowder,
and then the empty mouth of the cave was again yawning before their eyes.  Morton was now near
it, still cautiously creeping.  The first danger to which he was exposed was this; that his
enemy within the recess might push him down from the rocks with a touch.  But on the other
hand, there were three or four men ready to fire, the moment that a hand should be put forth;
and then Morton could swim,--was known to be a strong swimmer;--whereas of Aaron Trow it was
already declared by the prison gaolers that he could not swim.  Two of the warders had now
followed Morton on the rocks, so that in the event of his making good his entrance into the
cavern, and holding his enemy at bay for a minute, he would be joined by aid.

It was strange to see how those different men conducted themselves as they stood on the opposite
platform watching the attack.  The officers from the prison had no other thought but of their
prisoner, and were intent on taking him alive or dead.  To them it was little or nothing what
became of Morton.  It was their business to encounter peril, and they were ready to do so;--feeling,
however, by no means sorry to have such a man as Morton in advance of them. Very little was
said by them.  They had their wits about them, and remembered that every word spoken for the
guidance of their ally would be heard also by the escaped convict.  Their prey was sure, sooner
or later, and had not Morton been so eager in his pursuit, they would have waited till some
plan had been devised of trapping him without danger.  But the townsmen from St. George, of
whom some dozen were now standing there, were quick and eager and loud in their counsels. 
"Stay where you are, Mr. Morton,--stay awhile for the love of God--or he'll have you down."
"Now's your time, Caleb; in on him now, and you'll have him."  "Close with him, Morton, close
with him at once; it's your only chance."  "There's four of us here; we'll fire on him if he
as much as shows a limb."  All of which words as they were heard by that poor wretch within,
must have sounded to him as the barking of a pack of hounds thirsting for his blood.  For him
at any rate there was no longer any hope in this world.

My reader, when chance has taken you into the hunting-field, has it ever been your lot to sit
by on horseback, and watch the digging out of a fox?  The operation is not an uncommon one,
and in some countries it is held to be in accordance with the rules of fair sport.  For myself,
I think that when the brute has so far saved himself, he should be entitled to the benefit
of his cunning; but I will not now discuss the propriety or impropriety of that practice in
venery.  I can never, however, watch the doing of that work without thinking much of the agonising
struggles of the poor beast whose last refuge is being torn from over his head.  There he lies
within a few yards of his arch enemy, the huntsman.  The thick breath of the hounds make hot
the air within his hole.  The sound of their voices is close upon his ears.  His breast is
nearly bursting with the violence of that effort which at last has brought him to his retreat.
And then pickaxe and mattock are plied above his head, and nearer and more near to him press
his foes,--his double foes, human and canine,--till at last a huge hand grasps him, and he
is dragged forth among his enemies.  Almost as soon as his eyes have seen the light the eager
noses of a dozen hounds have moistened themselves in his entrails.  Ah me!  I know that he
is vermin, the vermin after whom I have been risking my neck, with a bold ambition that I might
ultimately witness his death-struggles; but, nevertheless, I would fain have saved him that
last half hour of gradually diminished hope.

And Aaron Trow was now like a hunted fox, doomed to be dug out from his last refuge, with this
addition to his misery, that these hounds when they caught their prey, would not put him at
once out of his misery.  When first he saw that throng of men coming down from the hill top
and resting on the platform; he knew that his fate was come.  When they called to him to surrender
himself he was silent, but he knew that his silence was of no avail.  To them who were so eager
to be his captors the matter seemed to be still one of considerable difficulty; but, to his
thinking, there was no difficulty.  There were there some score of men, fully armed, within
twenty yards of him.  If he but showed a trace of his limbs he would become a mark for their
bullets.  And then if he were wounded, and no one would come to him!  If they allowed him to
lie there without food till he perished!  Would it not be well for him to yield himself?  Then
they called again and he was still silent.  That idea of yielding is very terrible to the heart
of a man.  And when the worst had come to the worst, did not the ocean run deep beneath his
cavern's month?

