ALARIC II., king of the Visigoths, whose dominions included all Gaul and most of Spain; defeated
by the Franks at Poitiers, and killed by the hand of Clovis, their king, in 567.

ALARIC COTIN, Voltaire's nickname for Frederick the Great, the former in recognition of him
as a warrior, the latter as a would-be littérateur, after an indifferent French poet of the
name of Cotin.

ALAS`CO, JOHN, the uncle of Sigismund, king of Poland, and a zealous promoter in Poland of
the Reformation, the friend of Erasmus and Zwinglius (1499-1560).

ALAS`KA (32), an immense territory belonging to the U.S. by purchase from Russia, extending
from British N. America to Behring Strait; it is poor in resources, and the inhabitants, who
are chiefly Indians and Eskimos, live by hunting and fishing, and by the export of salmon;
seal fishery valuable, however.

ALASNAM, a hero related of in the "Arabian Nights" as having erected eight statues of gold,
and in quest of a statue for a ninth unoccupied pedestal, finding what he wanted in the person
of a beautiful woman for a wife.

ALAS`TOR, an avenging spirit, given to torment families whose history has been stained by some
crime.

A`LAVA (97), the southernmost of the three Basque provinces of Spain, largest, but least populous;
rich in minerals, and fertile in soil.

ALAVA, RICARDO DE, a Spanish general, born in Vittoria, joined the national party, and was
aide-de-camp to the Duke of Wellington, and became eventually ambassador to London and Paris
(1771-1843).

ALBA LONGA, a city of Latium older than Rome.

ALBACETE (229), a province in Spain, with a capital (30) of same name, 173 m. SE. of Madrid.

ALBAN LAKE, near Alban Mount, 6 m. in circuit, occupying the basin of an extinct volcano, its
surface 961 ft. above the sea-level.

ALBAN MOUNT, a small mountain overlooking Alba Longa.

ALBAN, ST., the first martyr in Britain to the Christian faith in 303; represented in art as
carrying his head between his hands, having been beheaded.

ALBA`NI, an Italian painter, a disciple of Caracci, born at Bologna; surnamed the Anacreon
of painting; his pictures more distinguished for grace than vigour.

ALBA`NI, an illustrious Roman family, members of which attained the highest dignities in the
Church, one, Clement XI., having been Pope.

ALBANI, MME., née Emma la Jeunesse, a well-known and highly popular operatic singer of French-Canadian
descent; b. 1847.

ALBA`NIA, a region in Balkan peninsula, on the Adriatic, extending from Servia to Greece.

ALBANO, LAKE OF, a small crater-like lake 15 m. SE. of Rome, near which rises the Castel Gandolfo,
where the Pope has a villa.

ALBANY, the old Celtic name for the Scottish highlands.

ALBANY, a town in W. Australia, on King George Sound, 261 m. SE. of Perth, a port of call for
Australian liners; also the capital (94) of the State of New York, on the Hudson River, a well-appointed
city; seat of justice for the State, with a large trade and numerous manufactures.

ALBANY, COUNTESS OF, wife of English pretender, Prince Charles Stuart, a dissolute woman (1753-1824).

ALBANY, THE DUKE OF, a title formerly given to a member of the royal family, and revived in
the present reign.

ALBANY, DUCHESS OF, daughter of Prince Waldeck Pyrmont and widow of Prince Leopold of England;
b. 1861, widow since 1884.

ALBATEGNI, a distinguished Arabian astronomer, born in Mesopotamia in the 9th or 10th century
of our era; his observations extended over 50 years; he so improved the methods and instruments
of observation as to earn the title of the Ptolemy of the Arabs.

ALBATROSS, the largest and strongest of sea-birds, that ranges over the southern seas, often
seen far from land; it is a superstition among sailors that it is disastrous to shoot one.

ALBERO`NI, an Italian of humble birth, became a Cardinal of the Church and Prime Minister to
Philip V. of Spain, wrought hard to restore Spain to its ancient grandeur, was defeated in
his project by the quadruple alliance of England, France, Austria, and Holland, and obliged
to retire (1664-1752).

ALBERT, archbishop of Mainz, a dignity granted him by Pope Leo X. at the ransom of £15,000,
which he was unable to pay, and which, as the Pope needed it for building St. Peter's, he borrowed,
the Pope granting him the power to sell indulgences in order to repay the loan, in which traffic
Tetzel was his chief salesman, a trade which roused the wrath of Luther, and provoked the German
Reformation (1450-1545).

ALBERT, the last Grandmaster of the Teutonic knights, who being "religious in an eminent degree
and shaken in his belief" took zealously to Protestantism and came under the influence of Luther,
who advised him to declare himself Duke of Prussia, under the wing of Sigismund of Poland,
in defiance of the Teutonic order as no longer worthy of bed and board on the earth, and so
doing, became founder of the Prussian State (1490-1568).

ALBERT, markgrave of Brandenburg, defined by Carlyle "a failure of a Fritz," with "features"
of a Frederick the Great in him, "but who burnt away his splendid qualities as a mere temporary
shine for the able editors, and never came to anything, full of fire, too much of it wildfire,
not in the least like an Alcibiades except in the change of fortune he underwent" (1522-1557).

ALBERT, PRINCE, second son of Ernest, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, born Aug. 26, 1819, an accomplished
man with a handsome presence, who became the consort of Queen Victoria in 1840, and from his
prudence and tact was held in the highest honour by the whole community, but died at Windsor
of typhoid fever, Dec. 14, 1861, to the unspeakable sorrow of both Queen and country.

ALBERT, ST., bishop of Liège, was assassinated by the emissaries of the Emperor Henry VI. in
1195. Festival, Nov. 21.

ALBERT EDWARD. See WALES, PRINCE OF.

ALBERT I., emperor of Germany from 1298 to 1308, eldest son of Rudolf of Hapsburg, "a most
clutching, strong-fisted, dreadfully hungry, tough, and unbeautiful man, whom his nephew at
last had to assassinate, and did assassinate, as he crossed the river Reuss with him in a boat,
May 1, 1308."

ALBERT II., a successor, "who got three crowns--Hungary, Bohemia, and the Imperial--in one
year, and we hope a fourth," says the old historian, "which was a heavenly and eternal one,"
for he died the next year, 1439.

ALBERT III., elector of Brandenburg. See ACHILLES OF GERMANY.

ALBERT MEDAL, a medal of gold and of bronze, instituted in 1866, awarded to civilians for acts
of heroism by sea or land.

ALBERT THE BEAR, markgrave of Brandenburg, called the Bear, "not from his looks or qualities,
for he was a tall handsome man, but from the cognisance on his shield, an able man, had a quick
eye as well as a strong hand, and could pick what way was straightest among crooked things,
was the shining figure and the great man of the North in his day, got much in the North and
kept it, got Brandenburg for one there, a conspicuous country ever since," says Carlyle, "and
which grows more so in our late times" (1100-1175).

ALBERT NYAN`ZA, a lake in Equatorial Africa, in the Nile basin, discovered by Sir Samuel Baker
in 1864, 150 m. long by 40 broad, and 2500 feet above sea-level.

ALBER`TA (26), a fertile region with large forests in British America, on the E. slope of the
Rocky Mountains, the south abounding in cattle ranches, and the mountainous districts in minerals.

ALBERTI, an illustrious Florentine family, rivals of the Medicis and the Albrizzi.

ALBER`TUS MAGNUS, one of the greatest of the scholastic philosophers and theologians of the
Middle Ages, teacher of Thomas Aquinas, supreme in knowledge of the arts and sciences of the
time, and regarded by his contemporaries in consequence as a sorcerer (1190-1280).

ALBI, a town of some antiquity and note in S. of France, 22 m. NE. of Toulouse.

ALBIGEN`SES, a religious sect, odious, as heretical, to the Church, which sprung up about Albi,
in the S. of France, in the 12th century, against which Pope Innocent III. proclaimed a crusade,
which was carried on by Simon de Montfort in the 13th century, and by the Inquisition afterwards,
to their utter annihilation.

ALBINOS, persons or animals with preternaturally pale skin and fair hair, also with pupils
of a red or pink colour, and eyes too weak to bear full light.

ALBINUS, an able professor of anatomy and therapeutics at Leyden (1696-1770).

ALBION, a white cliff, the ancient name of Great Britain.

ALBOIN, king of the Lombards in the 6th century, from 561 to 573; invaded Italy as far as the
Tiber, and set up his capital in Pavia; incurred the resentment of his wife, who had him assassinated
for forcing her to drink wine out of the skull of her father.

ALBORAK, a wonderful horse of Mahomet, an impersonation of the lightning as his steed.

ALBOR`NOZ, a Spanish statesman, archbishop of Toledo, a bold defender of the faith against
the Moor and a plain-spoken man in the interest of Christianity (1310-1367).

ALBRECHT. See ALBERT.

ALBRIZZI, a powerful Florentine family, rivals of the Medicis and the Alberti.

ALBUE`RA, a Spanish village 12 m. SE. of Badajoz, scene of a victory (May 16, 1811) of General
Beresford over Marshal Soult.

ALBUFE`RA, a lake on the coast of Spain, 7 m. S. of Valencia, near which Marshal Suchet gained
a victory over the English in 1811.

AL`BULA, Swiss mountain pass in the canton of Grisons, 7595 ft. high.

ALBUMEN, a glairy substance a constituent of plants and animals, and found nearly pure in the
white of an egg or in the serum of the blood.

ALBUQUERQUE`, ALFONSO D', a celebrated Portuguese patriot and navigator, the founder of the
Portuguese power in India, who, after securing a footing in India for Portugal that he sought
for, settled in Goa, where his recall at the instance of jealous rivals at home gave him such
a shock that he died of a broken heart just as he was leaving. The Indians long remembered
his benign rule, and used to visit his tomb to pray him to deliver them from the oppression
of his successors (1453-1513).

ALBYN, ancient Celtic name of Scotland.

ALCÆ`US OF MITYLENE, a Greek lyric poet, an aristocrat by birth, a contemporary and an alleged
lover of Sappho, and much admired by Horace; flourished about 600 B.C.

ALCA`LA DE HENA`RES (14), a town in Spain, the birthplace of Cervantes, 21 m. E. of Madrid,
long the seat of a famous university founded by Cardinal Ximenes.

ALCAN`TARA, a town of Spain, on the Tagus, near Portugal, with a bridge of six arches, 670
ft. long and 210 ft. high, built in honour of Trajan in 104. The Order of Alcantara, a religious
and military order, was established in 1176 here, for defence against the Moors, and was suppressed
in 1835.

ALCESTE, the chief character in Molière's Misanthrope.

ALCES`TIS, the wife of Admetus, who gave herself up to death to save her husband. Hercules
descended to the lower world and brought her back. She is the subject of one of the tragedies
of Euripides.

ALCHEMY, the early analysis of substances which has in modern times developed into chemistry,
and which aimed chiefly at the discovery of the philosopher's stone, of a universal solvent,
and of the elixir of life; it has been defined to be "an art without art, which has its beginning
in falsehood, its middle in toil, and its end in poverty."

ALCIBI`ADES, an Athenian of high birth, and related to Pericles, possessed of a handsome person,
brilliant abilities, and great wealth, but was of a wayward temper and depraved, whom Socrates
tried hard to win over to virtue, but failed. He involved his country in a rash expedition
against Sicily, served and betrayed it by turns in the Peloponnesian war, and died by assassination
in exile (450-404 B.C.).

ALCI`DES, the grandson of Alcæus, a patronymic of Hercules.

ALCIN`OUS, a king of the Phæacians, the father of Nausicaa, who figures in the Odyssey as the
host of Ulysses, who had been shipwrecked on his shore.

ALCI`RA (18), a walled town in Spain, on an island 22 m. SW. of Valencia.

ALCMAN, an early Greek lyric poet, born at Sardis.

ALCME`NE, the wife of Amphitryon and the mother of Hercules.

ALCMEONIDÆ, a powerful Athenian family, of which Pericles and Alcibiades were members, who
professed to be descended from Alcmæon, the grandson of Nestor.

ALCOCK, JOHN, an eminent ecclesiastic of the reign of Edward IV., distinguished for his love
of learning and learned men; d. 1500.

ALCOHOL, pure or highly rectified spirit obtained from fermented saccharine solutions by distillation,
and the intoxicating principle of all spirituous liquors.

ALCOHOLISM, the results, acute or chronic, of the deleterious action of alcohol on the human
system.

ALCORAN`. See KORÂN.

ALCOTT, LOUISA MARY, a popular American authoress, who acted as a nurse to the wounded during
the Civil War; her works mostly addressed to the young (1832-1888).

ALCOY (30), a town in Spain, N. of Alicanti; staple manufacture, paper.

AL`CUIN, a learned Englishman, a disciple of Bede; invited by Charlemagne to introduce scholarly
culture into the empire and establish libraries and schools of learning; was one of those men
whose work lies more in what they influence others to do than in what they do themselves (735-804).

ALCY`ONE, daughter of Æolus, who threw herself into the sea after her husband, who had perished
in shipwreck, and was changed into the kingfisher.

ALDE`BARAN, the bull's-eye, a star of the first magnitude in the eye of the constellation Taurus;
it is the sun in the Arabian mythology.

ALDEHYDE, a limpid, very volatile liquid, of a suffocating odour, obtained from the oxidation
of alcohol.

AL`DERNEY (2), one of the Channel Islands, 3 or 4 m. long by 2 broad, celebrated for its breed
of cows; separated from Cape de la Hogue by the dangerous Race of Alderney.

AL`DERSHOT, a permanent camp, established in 1855, for instruction in military manoeuvres,
on a moorland 35 m. SW. of London.

ALDINE EDITIONS, editions, chiefly of the classics, issued from the press of Aldus Manutius
in Venice in the 16th century, and remarkable for the correctness of the text and the beauty
and clearness of the printing.

ALDINGAR, SIR, legendary character, the steward of Eleanor, wife of Henry II., who accused
her of infidelity, and offered to substantiate the charge by combat, when an angel in the form
of a child appeared and certified her innocence.

ALDOBRANDINI, a Florentine jurisconsult (1500-1558).

AL`DRED, bishop of Worcester in the reign of Edward the Confessor, made a pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
became archbishop of York, and crowned the last of the Saxon and the first of the Norman kings
of England; d. 1063.

AL`DRICH, dean of Oxford, an accomplished ecclesiastic; was a skilful musician, and composed
many services for the Church; wrote a system of logic, long in use in Oxford University (1647-1710).

ALDROVAN`DI, ULYSSES, a famous Italian naturalist of Bologna, who collected an immense body
of interesting facts in natural history, published partly in his lifetime and partly after
his death (1522-1607).

ALDUS MANUTIUS, or ALDO MANUZIO, an Italian printer, born at Bassano, established a printing-office
in Venice in 1488, issued the celebrated Aldine Editions of the classics, and invented the
italic type, for the exclusive use of which for many years he obtained a patent, though the
honour of the invention is more probably due to his typefounder, Franciso de Bologna, than
to him (1447-1515).

ALEC`TO, one of the three Eumenides or Furies.

ALEMAN`, a Spanish novelist, author of the celebrated romance Guzman de Alfarache, which in
6 years ran through 26 editions, was translated several times into French; died in Mexico in 1610.

ALEMAN`NI, a confederacy of tribes which appeared on the banks of the Rhine in the 3rd cent.,
and for long gave no small trouble to Rome, but whose incursions were arrested, first by Maximinus,
and finally by Clovis in 496, who made them subject to the Franks, hence the modern names in
French for Germany and the Germans.

ALEMTE`JO (369), a southern province of Portugal; soil fertile to the east.

ALENÇON (17), a town in the dep. of Orne, 105 m. W. of Paris, once famous for its lace.

ALENÇON, COUNTS AND DUKES OF, a title borne by several members of the house of Valois--e. g.
CHARLES OF VALOIS, who fell at Crécy (1346); JEAN IV., who fell at Agincourt (1415).

ALEP`PO (130), a city in Northern Syria, one of the finest in the East, once one of the greatest
trading centres in the world.

ALE`SIA, a strong place in the E. of Gaul, which, as situated on a hill and garrisoned by 80,000
Gauls, cost Cæsar no small trouble to take.

ALESIUS, or ALANE, a noted Reformer, born in Edinburgh, converted to Protestantism by Patrick
Hamilton; was driven first from Scotland and then from England, till he settled as a theological
professor in Germany, and took an active part in the Reformation there (1500-1563).

ALESSANDRIA (78), a strongly fortified and stirring town on the Tenaro, in Northern Italy,
the centre of 8 railways, 55 m. SE. of Turin.

ALESSI, architect, born at Perugia, architect of the monastery and church of the ESCURIAL,
q. v. (1500-1572).

ALETSCH GLACIER, THE, the largest of the glaciers of the Alps, which descends round the south
of the Jungfrau into the valley of the Upper Rhône.

ALEU`TIAN ISLANDS (2) a chain of volcanic islands, 150 in number, stretching over the N. Pacific
from Alaska in N. America, to Kamchatka, in Asia.

ALEXANDER THE GREAT, the king of Macedonia, son of Philip by Olympias, daughter of Neoptolemus,
king of Epirus; born at Pella, 356 B.C.; had the philosopher Aristotle for tutor, and being
instructed by him in all kinds of serviceable knowledge, ascended the throne on the death of
his father, at the age of 20; after subduing Greece, had himself proclaimed generalissimo of
the Greeks against the Persians, and in 2 years after his accession crossed the Hellespont,
followed by 30,000 foot and 5000 horse; with these conquered the army of Darius the Persian
at Granicus in 334 and at Issus in 333; subdued the principal cities of Syria, overran Egypt,
and crossing the Euphrates and Tigris, routed the Persians at Arbela; hurrying on farther,
he swept everything before him, till the Macedonians refusing to advance, he returned to Babylon,
when he suddenly fell ill of fever, and in eleven days died at the early age of 32. He is said
to have slept every night with his Homer and his sword under his pillow, and the inspiring
idea of his life, all unconsciously to himself belike, is defined to have been the right of
Greek intelligence to override and rule the merely glittering barbarity of the East.

ALEXANDER, ST., patriarch of Alexandria from 311 to 326, contributed to bring about the condemnation
of Arius at the Council of Nice; festival, Feb 26.

ALEXANDER, SOLOMON, first Protestant bishop of Jerusalem, of Jewish birth, cut off during a
journey to Cairo (1799-1845).

ALEXANDER III., pope, successor to Adrian IV., an able man, whose election Barbarossa at first
opposed, but finally assented to; took the part of Thomas à Becket against Henry II. and canonised
him, as also St. Bernard. Pope from 1159 to 1181.

ALEXANDER VI., called Borgia from his mother, a Spaniard by birth, obtained the popehood by
bribery in 1492 in succession to Innocent VIII., lived a licentious life and had several children,
among others the celebrated Lucretia and the infamous Cæsar Borgia; d. in 1503, after a career
of crime, not without suspicion of poison. In addition to Alexanders III. and VI., six of the
name were popes: Alexander I., pope from 108 to 117; Alexander II., pope from 1061 to 1073;
Alexander IV., pope from 1254 to 1261; Alexander V., pope from 1409 to 1410; Alexander VII.,
pope from 1653 to 1667, who was forced to kiss his hand to Louis XIV.; Alexander VIII., pope
from 1689 to 1691.

ALEXANDER I., king of Scotland, son of Malcolm Canmore and Margaret, sister of Edgar Atheling,
a vigorous prince, surnamed on that account The Fierce; subdued a rising in the North, and
stood stoutly in defence of the independent rights of both Crown and Church against the claim
of supremacy over both on the part of England; d. 1124.

ALEXANDER II., of Scotland, successor of William the Lion, his father, a just and wise ruler,
aided the English barons against John, and married Joan, the sister of Henry III.; d. 1249.

ALEXANDER III., son of the preceding, married a daughter of Henry III., sided with him against
the barons, successfully resisted the invasion of Haco, king of Norway, and on the conclusion
of peace gave his daughter in marriage to Haco's successor Eric; accidentally killed by falling
over a cliff near Kinghorn when hunting in 1285.

ALEXANDER I., emperor of Russia, son and successor of Paul I., took part in the European strife
against the encroachments of Napoleon, was present at the battle of Austerlitz, fought the
French at Pultusk and Eylau, was defeated at Friedland, had an interview with Napoleon at Tilsit
in 1813, entered into a coalition with the other Powers against France, which ended in the
capture of Paris and the abdication of Napoleon in 1814. Under his reign Russia rose into political
importance in Europe (1777-1825).

ALEXANDER II., emperor of Russia, son and successor of Nicholas I., fell heir to the throne
while the siege of Sebastopol was going on; on the conclusion of a peace applied himself to
reforms in the state and the consolidation and extension of the empire. His reign is distinguished
by a ukase decreeing in 1861 the emancipation of the serfs numbering 23 millions, by the extension
of the empire in the Caucasus and Central Asia, and by the war with Turkey in the interest
of the Slavs in 1877-78, which was ended by the peace of San Stephano, revised by the treaty
of Berlin. His later years were clouded with great anxiety, owing to the spread of Nihilism,
and he was killed by a bomb thrown at him by a Nihilist (1818-1881).

ALEXANDER III., emperor of Russia, son of the preceding, followed in the footsteps of his father,
and showed a marked disposition to live on terms of peace with the other Powers; his reign
not distinguished by any very remarkable event. The present Czar is his son and successor (1845-1894).

ALEXANDER I., king of Servia, b. 1876.

ALEXANDER NEVSKY, grand-duke of Russia, conquered the Swedes, the Danes, and the Teutonic Knights
on the banks of the Neva, freed Russia from tribute to the Mongols, is one of the saints of
the Russian Church.

ALEXANDER OF HALES, the Doctor irrefragabilis of the Schools, an English ecclesiastic, a member
of the Franciscan order, who in his "Summa Universæ Theologiæ" formulated, by severe rigour
of Aristotelian logic, the theological principles and ecclesiastical rites of the Romish Church;
d. in 1222.

ALEXANDER OF PARIS, a Norman poet of the 16th century, who wrote a poem on Alexander the Great
in twelve-syllabled lines, called after him Alexandrines.

ALEXANDER OF THE NORTH, Charles XII. of Sweden.

ALEXANDER SEVE`RUS, a Roman emperor, a wise, virtuous, and pious prince, conquered Artaxerxes,
king of Persia, in an expedition against him, but setting out against the Germans, who were
causing trouble on the frontiers of the empire, fell a victim, along with his mother, to an
insurrection among his troops not far from Mainz (205-235).

ALEXAN`DRIA (230), a world-famous city, the chief port of Egypt, founded by Alexander the Great
in 332 B.C., at one time a great centre of learning, and in possession of the largest library
of antique literature in the world, which was burned by the Caliph Omar in 640; at one time
a place of great commerce, but that has very materially decayed since the opening of the Suez
Canal. Alexandria, from its intimate connection with both East and West, gave birth in early
times to a speculative philosophy which drew its principles from eastern as well as western
sources, which was at its height on the first encounter of these elements.

ALEXANDRIA (14), a town on the Potomac, 7 m. S. of Washington, accessible to vessels of the
largest size; also a thriving town (7) on the river Leven, 3 m. N. of Dumbarton.

ALEXANDRIAN CODEX, an MS. on parchment of the Septuagint Scriptures in Greek in uncial letters,
which belonged to the library of the patriarchs of Alexandra.

ALEXANDRIAN LIBRARY, the library burned by the Caliph Omar in 642, said to have contained 700,000
volumes.

ALEXANDRI`NA LAKE, a lake in Australia into which the river Murray flows.

ALEXANDRINE PHILOSOPHY, a Gnostic philosophy, combining eastern with western forms of thought.

ALEXANDRINES. See ALEXANDER OF PARIS.

ALEXAN`DROPOL (22), the largest town in the Erivan district of Russian Armenia, and a fortress
of great strength.

ALEXIS, ST., the patron saint of beggars and pilgrims, represented in art with a staff and
in a pilgrim's habit; sometimes lying on a mat, with a letter in his hand, dying.

ALEXIS MICHAELOVITCH, czar of Russia, the father of Peter the Great, the first czar who acted
on the policy of cultivating friendly relations with other European states (1630-1677).

ALEXIS PETROVITCH, son of Peter the Great, conspired against his father as he had broken the
heart of his mother, was condemned to death; after his trial by secret judges he was found
dead in prison (1695-1718).

ALEXIUS COMNE`NUS, emperor of the East, began life as a soldier, was a great favourite with
the soldiers, who, in a period of anarchy, raised him to the throne at the period of the first
crusade, when the empire was infested by Turks on the one hand and Normans on the other, while
the crusaders who passed through his territory proved more troublesome than either. He managed
to hold the empire together in spite of these troubles, and to stave off the doom that impended
all through his reign of thirty-seven years (1048-1118).

ALFA, an esparto grass valuable for making paper.

AL`FADUR, the All-Father or uncreated supreme in the Norse mythology.

ALFARA`BI, an Arabian philosopher of the 10th century, had Avicenna for a disciple, wrote on
various subjects, and was the first to attempt an encyclopedic work.

ALFIE`RI, an Italian dramatist, spent his youth in dissipation before he devoted himself to
the dramatic art; on the success of his first drama "Cleopatra," met at Florence with the Countess
of Albany, the wife of Charles Edward Stuart, on whose death he married her; was at Paris when
the Revolution broke out, and returned to Florence, where he died and was buried. Tragedy was
his forte as a dramatist (1749-1803).

ALFONSINE TABLES, astronomical tables drawn up at Toledo by order of Alfonso X. in 1252 to
correct the anomalies in the Ptolemaic tables; they divided the year into 365 days, 5 hours,
49 minutes, 16 seconds.

ALFONSO I., the "Conqueror," founder of the kingdom of Portugal, was the first king, originally
only count, as his father before him; in that capacity took up arms against the Moors, and
defeating them had himself proclaimed king on the field of battle, a title confirmed to him
by the Pope and made good by his practically subjecting all Portugal to his sway (1110-1185).

