However, there is reason for hope that that can be left alone to achieve itself.  It is claimed
that the traffic will depopulate its sources of supply within the next twenty or thirty years.
Queensland is a very healthy place for white people--death-rate 12 in 1,000 of the population
--but the Kanaka death-rate is away above that.  The vital statistics for 1893 place it at
52; for 1894 (Mackay district), 68.  The first six months of the Kanaka's exile are peculiarly
perilous for him because of the rigors of the new climate.  The death-rate among the new men
has reached as high as 180 in the 1,000.  In the Kanaka's native home his death-rate is 12
in time of peace, and 15 in time of war.  Thus exile to Queensland--with the opportunity to
acquire civilization, an umbrella, and a pretty poor quality of profanity--is twelve times
as deadly for him as war.  Common Christian charity, common humanity, does seem to require,
not only that these people be returned to their homes, but that war, pestilence, and famine
be introduced among them for their preservation.

Concerning these Pacific isles and their peoples an eloquent prophet spoke long years ago--five
and fifty years ago.  In fact, he spoke a little too early.  Prophecy is a good line of business,
but it is full of risks.  This prophet was the Right Rev. M. Russell, LL.D., D.C.L., of Edinburgh:

     "Is the tide of civilization to roll only to the foot of the Rocky
     Mountains, and is the sun of knowledge to set at last in the waves
     of the Pacific?  No; the mighty day of four thousand years is
     drawing to its close; the sun of humanity has performed its destined
     course; but long ere its setting rays are extinguished in the west,
     its ascending beams have glittered on the isles of the eastern seas
     .  .  .  .  And now we see the race of Japhet setting forth to
     people the isles, and the seeds of another Europe and a second
     England sown in the regions of the sun.  But mark the words of the
     prophecy: 'He shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be
     his servant.'  It is not said Canaan shall be his slave.  To the
     Anglo-Saxon race is given the scepter of the globe, but there is not
     given either the lash of the slave-driver or the rack of the
     executioner.

Very well, Bright Improvement has arrived, you see, with her civilization, and her Waterbury,
and her umbrella, and her third-quality profanity, and her humanizing-not-destroying machinery,
and her hundred-and-eighty death-rate, and everything is going along just as handsome!

But the prophet that speaks last has an advantage over the pioneer in the business.  Rev. Mr.
Gray says:

     "What I am concerned about is that we as a Christian nation should
     wipe out these races to enrich ourselves."

And he closes his pamphlet with a grim Indictment which is as eloquent in its flowerless straightforward
English as is the hand-painted rhapsody of the early prophet:

     "My indictment of the Queensland-Kanaka Labor Traffic is this

     "1. It generally demoralizes and always impoverishes the Kanaka,
     deprives him of his citizenship, and depopulates the islands fitted
     to his home.

     "2. It is felt to lower the dignity of the white agricultural
     laborer in Queensland, and beyond a doubt it lowers his wages there.

     "3. The whole system is fraught with danger to Australia and the
     islands on the score of health.

     "4. On social and political grounds the continuance of the
     Queensland Kanaka Labor Traffic must be a barrier to the true
     federation of the Australian colonies.

     "5. The Regulations under which the Traffic exists in Queensland are
     inadequate to prevent abuses, and in the nature of things they must
     remain so.

