The plan of this edition leads me to insert in this place some account of the incidents on
which the Novel of Waverley is founded. They have been already given to the public by my late
lamented friend, William Erskine, Esq. (afterwards Lord Kinneder), when reviewing the Tales
of My Landlord for the Quarterly Review in 1817. The particulars were derived by the critic
from the Author's information. Afterwards they were published in the Preface to the Chronicles
of the Canongate. They are now inserted in their proper place.

The mutual protection afforded by Waverley and Talbot to each other, upon which the whole plot
depends, is founded upon one of those anecdotes which soften the features even of civil war;
and, as it is equally honourable to the memory of both parties, we have no hesitation to give
their names at length. When the Highlanders, on the morning of the battle of Preston, 1745,
made their memorable attack on Sir John Cope's army, a battery of four field- pieces was stormed
and carried by the Camerons and the Stewarts of Appine. The late Alexander Stewart of Invernahylewas
one of the foremost in the charge, and observing an officer of the King's forces, who, scorning
to join the flight of all around, remained with his sword in his hand, as if determined to
the very last to defend the post assigned to him, the Highland gentleman commanded him to surrender,
and received for reply a thrust, which he caught in his target. I loaded
all my friends, all strangers who came to Athens, all traders, travelers and Sailors with
the mission itself everywhere where it came to inquire after her, and so that they could be
less missed, I had a countless amount Kopeien her portrait , Make myself, or rather the God of love
with my hand in the most perfect similarity, drawn from the current Original, had, since we were
in Delphi; and I shared this Kopeien from among all those which I promise by large to stimulate
rewards, sought to give themselves for their discovery efforts. I confess to you so very, that
the desire to find my mind again, (initially at least) the principal Movable reason was why
I was looking for me to excel in the Republic. For, after all me other means had failed, it seemed to me
to stay no other choice than my name shall make known that he would have to come to their ears,
they also want to be where they wanted. This approach was indeed more spacious, and I would have
twenty years on in a bigger Deeds can do, as Hercules and Theseus, without the Hyrcanier that Massagetae
that hibernate, Laestrigonen or in whose hands they would have been able get more from me know that,
you as the inhabitants of the moon. By good luck was the protective spirit of our Love a shorter way
to match us, but in fact only to give us the opportunity to Give forever to take apart deposition.
"This went on Agathon, the beautiful Danae to tell the events to him on his travels down to
the hour when he She was known to have happened, and what we the reader in the first and second
Book of this history have been accountable, and after he was at the expense of the wise Hippias
made a little funny, he discovered his beautiful girlfriend (which his whole Narrative nowhere
less boring place when at this point) anything from the first Moment when he saw her, had taken
place in his heart. He spoke to them about just the sincerity with which he believed to feel it,
that it was made solely to is, his notions of idealistic perfection and a superhuman degree
of bliss to realize, that he, since he loved her, and was loved by her, without his former to
intellectual development-type are unfaithful, of what had been exaggerated and is chimerical,
just came back this was because he found in her all that of which he previously, only in the highest
enthusiasm of a fantasy force some imperfect shadow tag I can make, and because it was natural that the
imaginative power, as the seat of Enthusiasm to Würker stop doing so soon the soul had no choice
but to look at to enjoy. In a word: Agathon had raved in his life, perhaps never so much as
"now", as he imagined in the highest degree of love infatuation, that he has everything what
he vorsagte the gullible Danae, just as certainly and immediately see and feel their beautiful than he,
by the whole spirit of love and all its intoxicating lust drunken eyes fastened upon him saw,
or the beating of her heart under his errors Lips felt. He ended by saying that he made her
understand, from all its narrative have to think why, after so many times now by people, sometimes from
luck, been deceived by his own fancies soon, horrible for him would be if he ever cheated in the
hope to perform them, loved so completely and durability of their become, as it was necessary to
his bliss. He gestund with a frankness, which perhaps could bear only a Danae, that a vivid reminder
of the times his first love, with the notion of all the strange coincidences, Vera end changes
and disasters, which he at the age of five and learned twenty years earlier, brought him to a series
of melancholy thoughts, which he had had trouble his present Bliss for something real, and
not a delusion but repeated his imagination, to hold.
 He had been out, I believe, in 1715 and 1745, was an active partaker in all the
stirring scenes which passed in the Highlands betwixt these memorable eras; and, I have heard,
was remarkable, among other exploits, for having fought a duel with the broadsword with the
celebrated Rob Roy MacGregor at the clachan of Balquidder.

Invernahyle chanced to be in Edinburgh when Paul Jones came into the Firth of Forth, and though
then an old man, I saw him in arms, and heard him exult (to use his own words) in the prospect
of drawing his claymore once more before he died.' In fact, on that memorable occasion, when
the capital of Scotland was menaced by three trifling sloops or brigs, scarce fit to have sacked
a fishing village, he was the only man who seemed to propose a plan of resistance. He offered
to the magistrates, if broadswords and dirks could be obtained, to find as many Highlanders
among the lower classes as would cut off any boat's crew who might be sent into a town full
of narrow and winding passages, in which they were like to disperse in quest of plunder. I
know not if his plan was attended to, I rather think it seemed too hazardous to the constituted
authorities, who might not, even at that time, desire to see arms in Highland hands. A steady
and powerful west wind settled the matter by sweeping Paul Jones and his vessels out of the Firth.

If there is something degrading in this recollection, it is not unpleasant to compare it with
those of the last war, when Edinburgh, besides regular forces and militia, furnished a volunteer
brigade of cavalry, infantry, and artillery to the amount of six thousand men and upwards,
which was in readiness to meet and repel a force of a far more formidable description than
was commanded by the adventurous American. Time and circumstances change the character of nations
and the fate of cities; and it is some pride to a Scotchman to reflect that the independent
and manly character of a country, willing to entrust its own protection to the arms of its
children, after having been obscured for half a century, has, during the course of his own
lifetime, recovered its lustre.

Other illustrations of Waverley will be found in the Notes at the foot of the pages to which
they belong. Those which appeared too long to be so placed are given at the end of the chapters
to which they severally relate. [Footnote: In this edition at the end of the several volumes.]

PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION

To this slight attempt at a sketch of ancient Scottish manners the public have been more favourable
than the Author durst have hoped or expected. He has heard, with a mixture of satisfaction
and humility, his work ascribed to more than one respectable name. Considerations, which seem
weighty in his particular situation, prevent his releasing those gentlemen from suspicion by
placing his own name in the title-page; so that, for the present at least, it must remain uncertain
whether Waverley be the work of a poet or a critic, a lawyer or a clergyman, or whether the
writer, to use Mrs. Malaprop's phrase, be, 'like Cerberus, three gentlemen at once.' The Author,
as he is unconscious of anything in the work itself (except perhaps its frivolity) which prevents
its finding an acknowledged father, leaves it to the candour of the public to choose among
the many circumstances peculiar to different situations in life such as may induce him to suppress
his name on the present occasion. He may be a writer new to publication, and unwilling to avow
a character to which he is unaccustomed; or he may be a hackneyed author, who is ashamed of
too frequent appearance, and employs this mystery, as the heroine of the old comedy used her
mask, to attract the attention of those to whom her face had become too familiar. He may be
a man of a grave profession, to whom the reputation of being a novel-writer might be prejudicial;
or he may be a man of fashion, to whom writing of any kind might appear pedantic. He may be
too young to assume the character of an author, or so old as to make it advisable to lay it aside.

The Author of Waverley has heard it objected to this novel, that, in the character of Callum
Beg and in the account given by the Baron of Bradwardine of the petty trespasses of the Highlanders
upon trifling articles of property, he has borne hard, and unjustly so, upon their national
character. Nothing could be farther from his wish or intention. The character of Callum Beg
is that of a spirit naturally turned to daring evil, and determined, by the circumstances of
his situation, to a particular species of mischief. Those who have perused the curious Letters
from the Highlands, published about 1726, will find instances of such atrocious characters
which fell under the writer's own observation, though it would be most unjust to consider such
villains as representatives of the Highlanders of that period, any more than the murderers
of Marr and Williamson can be supposed to represent the English of the present day. As for
the plunder supposed to have been picked up by some of the insurgents in 1745, it must be remembered
that, although the way of that unfortunate little army was neither marked by devastation nor
bloodshed, but, on the contrary, was orderly and quiet in a most wonderful degree, yet no army
marches through a country in a hostile manner without committing some depredations; and several,
to the extent and of the nature jocularly imputed to them by the Baron, were really laid to
the charge of the Highland insurgents; for which many traditions, and particularly one respecting
the Knight of the Mirror, may be quoted as good evidence. [Footnote: A homely metrical narrative
of the events of the period, which contains some striking particulars, and is still a great
favourite with the lower classes, gives a very correct statement of the behaviour of the mountaineers
respecting this same military license; and, as the verses are little known, and contain some
good sense, we venture to insert them.]

THE AUTHOR'S ADDRESS TO ALL IN GENERAL

    Now, gentle readers, I have let you ken
    My very thoughts, from heart and pen,
    'Tis needless for to conten'
                  Or yet controule,
    For there's not a word o't I can men';
                  So ye must thole.

    For on both sides some were not good;
    I saw them murd'ring in cold blood,
    Not the gentlemen, but wild and rude,
                  The baser sort,
    Who to the wounded had no mood
                  But murd'ring sport!

    Ev'n both at Preston and Falkirk,
    That fatal night ere it grew mirk,
    Piercing the wounded with their durk,
                  Caused many cry!
    Such pity's shown from Savage and Turk
                  As peace to die.

    A woe be to such hot zeal,
    To smite the wounded on the fiell!
    It's just they got such groats in kail,
                  Who do the same.
    It only teaches crueltys real
                  To them again.

    I've seen the men call'd Highland rogues,
    With Lowland men make shangs a brogs,
    Sup kail and brose, and fling the cogs
                  Out at the door,
    Take cocks, hens, sheep, and hogs,
                  And pay nought for.

    I saw a Highlander,'t was right drole,
    With a string of puddings hung on a pole,
    Whip'd o'er his shoulder, skipped like a fole,
                        Caus'd Maggy bann,
    Lap o'er the midden and midden-hole,
                        And aff he ran.

    When check'd for this, they'd often tell ye,
    'Indeed her nainsell's a tume belly;
    You'll no gie't wanting bought, nor sell me;
                        Hersell will hae't;
    Go tell King Shorge, and Shordy's Willie,
                        I'll hae a meat.'

    I saw the soldiers at Linton-brig,
    Because the man was not a Whig,
    Of meat and drink leave not a skig,
                        Within his door;
    They burnt his very hat and wig,
                        And thump'd him sore.

    And through the Highlands they were so rude,
    As leave them neither clothes nor food,
    Then burnt their houses to conclude;
                        'T was tit for tat.
    How can her nainsell e'er be good,
                        To think on that?

    And after all, O, shame and grief!
    To use some worse than murd'ring thief,
    Their very gentleman and chief,
                        Unhumanly!
    Like Popish tortures, I believe,
                        Such cruelty.

    Ev'n what was act on open stage
    At Carlisle, in the hottest rage,
    When mercy was clapt in a cage,
                        And pity dead,
    Such cruelty approv'd by every age,
                        I shook my head.

    So many to curse, so few to pray,
    And some aloud huzza did cry;
    They cursed the rebel Scots that day,
                        As they'd been nowt
    Brought up for slaughter, as that way
                        Too many rowt.

    Therefore, alas! dear countrymen,
    O never do the like again,
    To thirst for vengeance, never ben'
                        Your gun nor pa',
    But with the English e'en borrow and len',
                        Let anger fa'.

    Their boasts and bullying, not worth a louse,
    As our King's the best about the house.
    'T is ay good to be sober and douce,
                        To live in peace;
    For many, I see, for being o'er crouse,
                        Gets broken face.

WAVERLEY

OR 'TIS SIXTY YEARS SINCE

CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY

The title of this work has not been chosen without the grave and solid deliberation which matters
of importance demand from the prudent. Even its first, or general denomination, was the result
of no common research or selection, although, according to the example of my predecessors,
I had only to seize upon the most sounding and euphonic surname that English history or topography
affords, and elect it at once as the title of my work and the name of my hero. But, alas! what
could my readers have expected from the chivalrous epithets of Howard, Mordaunt, Mortimer,
or Stanley, or from the softer and more sentimental sounds of Belmour, Belville, Belfield,
and Belgrave, but pages of inanity, similar to those which have been so christened for half
a century past? I must modestly admit I am too diffident of my own merit to place it in unnecessary
opposition to preconceived associations; I have, therefore, like a maiden knight with his white
shield, assumed for my hero, WAVERLEY, an uncontaminated name, bearing with its sound little
of good or evil, excepting what the reader shall hereafter be pleased to affix to it. But my
second or supplemental title was a matter of much more difficult election, since that, short
as it is, may be held as pledging the author to some special mode of laying his scene, drawing
his characters, and managing his adventures. What, however,
have been the cause of for the intentions of the Danae so detrimental change in his may, it is
certain that the same Wuerkungen in a short time so much hand-over took that Agathon himself
had difficulty in recognizing in themselves, or to understand how it received with this strange
transformation of the scene was. A magical fog before seemed his astonished eyes fall away,
the whole nature showed itself in a different form, got this lovely varnish, which had given
her the spirit of love, these gardens, in few days, the beloved residence of all joy and love
gods, these groves Elysian, This meandering rose bushes, where the listening pleasure was so hidden
like to have the pleasure to make the catch - "now awakened by the sight of nothing more than any
other shady eights place every other scrubs, the air he breathed was not this sweet breath of love,
of which each breath the flame of his heart stronger aufzuwehen seemed, Danae was already of
ideal perfection to the habitual Value of every other beautiful woman sunk, and he himself, who
recently, at Bliss the gods had the same appraised began to get very strong doubt whether he
in this effeminate figure, into which he had disguised the love, the name of a man earn? You
will not doubt that in this state, the memories of what he been formerly was - the wonderful
dream he more and more for the Wuerkung any campaigns charity one mind, and perhaps the shadow
of his departed beloved Psyche even keep was moved - the voice of virtue, which he once worshiped,
and what he everything had been sacrificed - and the accusations that she in some time ago about
a to make meaning of idle pleasure inglorious melting life started - good opportunity had, his
heart, his own best inclinations were on their side, with united strength attack again. They
had almost completely taken back when he first clearly aware was where it the considerations
to which he gave himself had to lead necessary. He startled when he saw that he is nothing but
to escape from this all too lovely sorceress his Previous figure can give back. To part with Danae!
to be separated forever - this Behaved thought of his soul at once all the strength back, which
they again to feel started and woke all the memories, all the sensations of his passion asleep
again. She who loved him so passionately, - she who had made him so happy - to leave - for all
their love, for everything she had done for him, and on such a binding, so noble nature had done
to give the torture of love rewarded with ingratitude price - No, to so vile, so ugly fact,
(as this was in his eyes) could his heart to decide. The virtue even to sacrifice his own satisfaction
what he was ready, could such a thankless and cruel process called not good - we have over it
is the decision-cold moral teachers: if virtue could or not, but our Hero was convinced by the latter so
vividly that he, rather than thinking of reasons, which he would have the sophistry of love
can destroy considered in all seriousness to Medium was the interest of his heart and virtue,
which seemed to him to be not incompatible, to always unite with each other.

The tender Danae had now to consider how easy it is to change, which acted in the spirit of
our hero, was perceived at first because it was noticeably. But the good Danae was far away to
give his heart to blame them, they cheated themselves on the true cause, and believed that the
change of place, and perhaps a small distance, give him all the animation in a short time the feeling
would return, he seemed to have lost.

 Much may also be gained by a lively display of a modern fete, such as we have
daily recorded in that part of a newspaper entitled the Mirror of Fashion, if we contrast these,
or either of them, with the splendid formality of an entertainment given Sixty Years Since;
and thus it will be readily seen how much the painter of antique or of fashionable manners
gains over him who delineates those of the last generation.

Considering the disadvantages inseparable from this part of my subject, I must be understood
to have resolved to avoid them as much as possible, by throwing the force of my narrative upon
the characters and passions of the actors;--those passions common to men in all stages of society,
and which have alike agitated the human heart, whether it throbbed under the steel corslet
of the fifteenth century, the brocaded coat of the eighteenth, or the blue frock and white
dimity waistcoat of the present day. [Footnote: Alas' that attire, respectable and gentlemanlike
in 1805, or thereabouts, is now as antiquated as the Author of Waverley has himself become
since that period! The reader of fashion will please to fill up the costume with an embroidered
waistcoat of purple velvet or silk, and a coat of whatever colour he pleases.] Upon these passions
it is no doubt true that the state of manners and laws casts a necessary colouring; but the
bearings, to use the language of heraldry, remain the same, though the tincture may be not
only different, but opposed in strong contradistinction. The wrath of our ancestors, for example,
was coloured gules; it broke forth in acts of open and sanguinary violence against the objects
of its fury. Our malignant feelings, which must seek gratification through more indirect channels,
and undermine the obstacles which they cannot openly bear down, may be rather said to be tinctured
sable. But the deep-ruling impulse is the same in both cases; and the proud peer, who can now
only ruin his neighbour according to law, by protracted suits, is the genuine descendant of
the baron who wrapped the castle of his competitor in flames, and knocked him on the head as
he endeavoured to escape from the conflagration. It is from the great book of Nature, the same
through a thousand editions, whether of black-letter, or wire-wove and hot-pressed, that I
have venturously essayed to read a chapter to the public. Some favourable opportunities of
contrast have been afforded me by the state of society in the northern part of the island at
the period of my history, and may serve at once to vary and to illustrate the moral lessons,
which I would willingly consider as the most important part of my plan; although I am sensible
how short these will fall of their aim if I shall be found unable to mix them with amusement--a
task not quite so easy in this critical generation as it was 'Sixty Years Since.'

CHAPTER II

WAVERLEY-HONOUR--A RETROSPECT

It is, then, sixty years since Edward Waverley, the hero of the following pages, took leave
of his family, to join the regiment of dragoons in which he had lately obtained a commission.
It was a melancholy day at Waverley-Honour when the young officer parted with Sir Everard,
the affectionate old uncle to whose title and estate he was presumptive heir.

A difference in political opinions had early separated the Baronet from his younger brother
Richard Waverley, the father of our hero. Sir Everard had inherited from his sires the whole
train of Tory or High-Church predilections and prejudices which had distinguished the house
of Waverley since the Great Civil War. Richard, on the contrary, who was ten years younger,
beheld himself born to the fortune of a second brother, and anticipated neither dignity nor
entertainment in sustaining the character of Will Wimble. He saw early that, to succeed in
the race of life, it was necessary he should carry as little weight as possible. Painters talk
of the difficulty of expressing the existence of compound passions in the same features at
the same moment; it would be no less difficult for the moralist to analyse the mixed motives
which unite to form the impulse of our actions. Richard Waverley read and satisfied himself
from history and sound argument that, in the words of the old song,

      Passive obedience was a jest,
      And pshaw! was non-resistance;

yet reason would have probably been unable to combat and remove hereditary prejudice could
Richard have anticipated that his elder brother, Sir Everard, taking to heart an early disappointment,
would have remained a bachelor at seventy-two. The prospect of succession, however remote,
might in that case have led him to endure dragging through the greater part of his life as
'Master Richard at the Hall, the Baronet's brother,' in the hope that ere its conclusion he
should be distinguished as Sir Richard Waverley of Waverley-Honour, successor to a princely
estate, and to extended political connections as head of the county interest in the shire where
it lay.

But this was a consummation of things not to be expected at Richard's outset, when Sir Everard
was in the prime of life, and certain to be an acceptable suitor in almost any family, whether
wealth or beauty should be the object of his pursuit, and when, indeed, his speedy marriage
was a report which regularly amused the neighbourhood once a year. His younger brother saw
no practicable road to independence save that of relying upon his own exertions, and adopting
a political creed more consonant both to reason and his own interest than the hereditary faith
of Sir Everard in High-Church and in the house of Stuart. He therefore read his recantation
at the beginning of his career, and entered life as an avowed Whig and friend of the Hanover
succession.

The ministry of George the First's time were prudently anxious to diminish the phalanx of opposition.
The Tory nobility, depending for their reflected lustre upon the sunshine of a court, had for
some time been gradually reconciling themselves to the new dynasty. But the wealthy country
gentlemen of England, a rank which retained, with much of ancient manners and primitive integrity,
a great proportion of obstinate and unyielding prejudice, stood aloof in haughty and sullen
opposition, and cast many a look of mingled regret and hope to Bois le Due, Avignon, and Italy.
[Footnote: Where the Chevalier St. George, or, as he was termed, the Old Pretender, held his
exiled court, as his situation compelled him to shift his place of residence.] The accession
of the near relation of one of those steady and inflexible opponents was considered as a means
of bringing over more converts, and therefore Richard Waverley met with a share of ministerial
favour more than proportioned to his talents or his political importance. It was, however,
discovered that he had respectable talents for public business, and the first admittance to
the minister's levee being negotiated, his success became rapid. Delphi had been to me (for example) taught that the whole edifice of Republican Constitution
on the virtue reasons, the Athenians taught me, however, that virtue is estimated to itself
nowhere less than in a republic, the Case, except, as it has its necessary, and in this case
it is under each Tyrants just as highly valued, and often better rewarded. at all had my stay
in Athens, the sublime theory of the excellence and dignity of human nature, which I was taken,
bestaetiget very bad, but I found nothing more inclined come back from it. I put all the blame
on the Contagion too large companies, the shortcomings of the legislation, the private interest,
which issued policies to all peoples, by an inexplicable mistake by their legislature in a perpetual
conflict with the common good is. In short, I'm none the worse of humanity, because the Athenians
had proved fickle, unjust and ungrateful to me, but I adopted a more stronger reluctance to
any other entity as such, which are based on matching principles, virtue and aspiration for
moral perfection founded his. The loss of my goods, and banishment from Athens seemed to me
the campaigns charity Event of a deity for me anxious to be, which I thus my true Provision did
want to play. It is very likely that I associated with application Means by the reputation of my friends
abroad, and even through the support the enemies of the Athenians, which to me at the very beginning
of my process, secretly offered been, perhaps, have been recovered in a short way could my
opponent in the enjoyment to disturb the fruit of their wickedness, and in triumph to return back
to Athens. But such attacks, and such funds are only sent for an ambitious, which wants to
rule, to satisfy his passions. To me it never occurred to the Athenians to try to force that
they should seek to do me good. I thought a Attempt that failed me was their own fault, my duty
to the bourgeois society have done a quiet enough, and now to be totally berechtiget, which
are natural Freedom, which gave me back my exile, for the benefit of my own bliss apply. So I
decided the intent, which I had already taken to Delphi, now to put into effect, and the sources
of the Eastern wisdom, the magician, and the Gymnosophists to visit India, the sacred solitudes
I the true gods of my soul; the wisdom and virtue of which, as I thought, only minor phantoms under
other men swarmed to find hope.

But before I get to the symptoms, by which I gehintert in the execution of this project, and was
taken in the form of a slave to Smyrna, I have to tell me my young friend again recall that we have lost
since my transfer to Athens from his face. "

CHAPTER VIII

Agathon ends his narrative

"The change that was happening to me since I made the groves of Delphi
to the scene the busy world in the tumult of a populous city, in the
restless movements one between democracy and aristocracy Republic
of driving back and forth, and in the moral chaos of bourgeois society
in which passions passions, intentions with intentions in a universal
and eternal battle against each other to run, and under the inharmonious
clash shapeless deformities did not exist, yet some is, nothing is
what it seems, even the shape of the reserves it .-- This change was
so great that I describe their effect on my mind, nothing else knows
than by the comparison with the anesthesia, which according to my
friends, Plato, our soul for a time, estranged from himself, are still
after them from the ocean of pure primordial light that filled the
heavenly spaces over, suddenly in the mud the coarse ground material
was heruntergestuerzt.

 Lawyer Clippurse found his patron
involved in a deep study, which he was too respectful to disturb, otherwise than by producing
his paper and leathern ink-case, as prepared to minute his honour's commands. Even this slight
manoeuvre was embarrassing to Sir Everard, who felt it as a reproach to his indecision. He
looked at the attorney with some desire to issue his fiat, when the sun, emerging from behind
a cloud, poured at once its chequered light through the stained window of the gloomy cabinet
in which they were seated. The Baronet's eye, as he raised it to the splendour, fell right
upon the central scutcheon, inpressed with the same device which his ancestor was said to have
borne in the field of Hastings,--three ermines passant, argent, in a field azure, with its
appropriate motto, Sans tache. 'May our name rather perish,' exclaimed Sir Everard, 'than that
ancient and loyal symbol should be blended with the dishonoured insignia of a traitorous Roundhead!'

All this was the effect of the glimpse of a sunbeam, just sufficient to light Lawyer Clippurse
to mend his pen. The pen was mended in vain. The attorney was dismissed, with directions to
hold himself in readiness on the first summons.

The apparition of Lawyer Clippurse at the Hall occasioned much speculation in that portion
of the world to which Waverley-Honour formed the centre. But the more judicious politicians
of this microcosm augured yet worse consequences to Richard Waverley from a movement which
shortly followed his apostasy. This was no less than an excursion of the Baronet in his coach-and-six,
with four attendants in rich liveries, to make a visit of some duration to a noble peer on
the confines of the shire, of untainted descent, steady Tory principles, and the happy father
of six unmarried and accomplished daughters.

Sir Everard's reception in this family was, as it may be easily conceived, sufficiently favourable;
but of the six young ladies, his taste unfortunately determined him in favour of Lady Emily,
the youngest, who received his attentions with an embarrassment which showed at once that she
durst not decline them, and that they afforded her anything but pleasure.

Sir Everard could not but perceive something uncommon in the restrained emotions which the
young lady testified at the advances he hazarded; but, assured by the prudent Countess that
they were the natural effects of a retired education, the sacrifice might have been completed,
as doubtless has happened in many similar instances, had it not been for the courage of an
elder sister, who revealed to the wealthy suitor that Lady Emily's affections were fixed upon
a young soldier of fortune, a near relation of her own.

Sir Everard manifested great emotion on receiving this intelligence, which was confirmed to
him, in a private interview, by the young lady herself, although under the most dreadful apprehensions
of her father's indignation.

Honour and generosity were hereditary attributes of the house of Waverley. As property of allzuwuerksamen; this assumed to
be certain, believed them from the volatity that they, without a reason and a highly regarded and strained imagination
power to achieve anything, as ong as there is no lack of recourses, for his spirit and his heart at
the same time with variety and fun that the nature of man needs to enjoy, has not had long enough, tired
of such a pleasant state to make They had reason to believe this more because she knew from expeirance
that Wuerksamkeit that the more the power that imagination holds decreases, the less beneficial pleasure
in the heart one has. When viewed from one side correctly, we get much of the use of means by which
they obtain their purpose. Hope, and hopefully not betrayed by love.

She sincerely and vigorously tried to make good inferences; and their
hearts led them gradually, aware that it was far beyond the limits
of moderation, at which they initially found so perfect, Perhaps a
secret jealousy about the mind(had little of the same feared they
ever occur in person, and that zurueckfodern the heart of her lover)
is mixed into play, and they have been so eager so the memory of joys
in first love, seeming too lively to wipe from memory.

 His sister,
Miss Rachel Waverley, presided at his table; and they became, by degrees, an old bachelor and
an ancient maiden lady, the gentlest and kindest of the votaries of celibacy.

The vehemence of Sir Everard's resentment against his brother was but short-lived; yet his
dislike to the Whig and the placeman, though unable to stimulate him to resume any active measures
prejudicial to Richard's interest, in the succession to the family estate, continued to maintain
the coldness between them. Richard knew enough of the world, and of his brother's temper, to
believe that by any ill-considered or precipitate advances on his part, he might turn passive
dislike into a more active principle. It was accident, therefore, which at length occasioned
a renewal of their intercourse. Richard had married a young woman of rank, by whose family
interest and private fortune he hoped to advance his career. In her right he became possessor
of a manor of some value, at the distance of a few miles from Waverley-Honour.

