     "This year, the Earl of Northumberland made a league and covenant
     and friendship with Owyn Glyndwr and Edmund Mortimer, son of the
     late Edmund Earl of March, in certain articles of the form and
     tenor following:--In the first place, that these Lords, Owyn, the
     Earl, and Edmund, shall henceforth be mutually joined, confederate,
     united, and bound by the bond of a true league and true       (p. 151)
     friendship, and sure and good union. Again, that every of these
     Lords shall will and pursue, and also procure, the honour and
     welfare one of another; and shall, in good faith, hinder any losses
     and distresses which shall come to his knowledge, by any one
     whatsoever intended to be inflicted on either of them. Every one,
     also, of them shall act and do with another all and every those
     things which ought to be done by good, true, and faithful friends
     to good, true, and faithful friends, laying aside all deceit and
     fraud. Also, if ever any of the said Lords shall know and learn of
     any loss or damage intended against another by any persons whatsoever,
     he shall signify it to the others as speedily as possible, and assist
     them in that particular, that each may take such measures as may
     seem good against such malicious purposes; and they shall be anxious
     to prevent such injuries in good faith; also, they shall assist
     each other to the utmost of their power in the time of necessity.
     Also, if by God's appointment it should appear to the said Lords
     in process of time that they are the same persons of whom the
     Prophet speaks, between whom the government of the Greater Britain
     ought to be divided and parted, then they and every of them shall
     labour to their utmost to bring this effectually to be accomplished.
     Each of them, also, shall be content with that portion of the
     kingdom aforesaid limited as below, without further exaction or
     superiority; yea, each of them in such portion assigned to him
     shall enjoy equal liberty. Also, between the same Lords it is
     unanimously covenanted and agreed that the said Owyn and his heirs
     shall have the whole of Cambria or Wales, by the borders, limits,
     and boundaries underwritten divided from Leogoed which is commonly
     called England; namely, from the Severn sea, as the river Severn
     leads from the sea, going down to the north gate of the city of
     Worcester; and from that gate straight to the ash-trees, commonly
     called in the Cambrian or Welsh language Ouuene Margion, which
     grow on the high way from Bridgenorth to Kynvar; thence by    (p. 152)
     the high way direct, which is usually called the old or ancient way
     to the head or source of the river Trent; thence to the head or
     source of the river Meuse; thence as that river leads to the sea,
     going down within the borders, limits, and boundaries above written. On
     cool, rainy days we all bore a hand at the espia, trotting with
     bare feet on the sloppy deck in Indian file to the tune of some wild
     boatman's chorus. We had a favorable wind for only two days
     out of the thirty-five, by which we made about forty miles, the
     rest of our long journey was accomplished literally by pulling
     our way from tree to tree. When we encountered a remanso near the
     shore, we got along very pleasantly for a few miles by rowing-- but
     this was a rare occurrence. During leisure hours the Indians
     employed themselves in sewing. Vicente was a good hand at cutting out
     shirts and trousers, and acted as master tailor to the whole party,
     each of whom had a thick steel thimble and a stock of needles and
     thread of his own. Vicente made for me a set of blue-check cotton
     shirts during the passage.
     
     The goodness of these Indians, like that of most others amongst whom
     I lived, consisted perhaps more in the absence of active bad qualities,
     than in the possession of good ones; in other words, it was negative
     rather than positive. These are characteristics of the whole race.
     On the morning when the favourable wind sprung up, one of the
     crew, a lad of about seventeen years of age, was absent ashore at
the time of starting, having gone alone in one of the montarias to
gather wild fruit.

The sails were spread and we travelled for several hours at great speed, leaving the poor
fellow to paddle after us against the strong current. Vicente, who might have waited a few minutes
at starting, and the others, only laughed when the hardship of their companion was alluded to.
He overtook us at night, having worked his way with frightful labor the whole day without
a morsel of food. He grinned when he came on board, and not a dozen words were said on either side.

Their
want of curiosity is extreme. One day we had an unusually sharp thunder shower. The crew were
lying about the deck, and after each explosion all set up a loud laugh; the wag of the party
exclaiming: "There's my old uncle hunting again!"-- an expression showing the utter emptiness of
mind of the spokesman. I asked Vicente what he thought was the cause of lightning and thunder...
He said, "Timaa ichoqua,"--I don't know. He had never given the subject a moment's thought!
It was the same with other things. I asked him who made the sun, the stars, the trees... He didn't
know, and had never heard the subject mentioned amongst his tribe.
The Tupi language, at least as taught by the old Jesuits, has a word--Tupana--signifying
God. Hall, on whom there exists strong reason for believing that Shakspeare rested as
his authority, asserts that the contracting parties were Glyndowr, the LORD PERCY (by which
title he throughout designates Hotspur), and the EARL OF MARCH. Hall's expressions would lead
us to infer that the circumstance was not generally recognised or known  (p. 154) by the chroniclers
before his time, but was recorded by one only of those with whose writings he was acquainted.
"A certain writer," he says, "writeth that this Earl of March, the Lord Percy, and Owyn Glyndowr
were unwisely made believe by a Welsh prophesier that King Henry was the Moldwarp cursed of
God's own mouth, and that they were the Dragon, the Lion, and the Wolf which should divide
the realm between them, by the deviation, not divination, of that mawmet Merlin." Hall then
proceeds to tell us that the tripartite indenture was sealed by the deputies of the three parties
in the Archdeacon's house; and that, by the treaty, Wales was given to Owyn, all England from
Severn and Trent southward and eastward, was assigned to the Earl of March, and the remnant
to Lord Percy.

                   [Footnote 151: This date cannot have been earlier
                   than February 1404, nor later than 1405. If we
                   interpret the words of the MS. to mean the regnal
                   year of Henry IV, the date will be the first of
                   those two years; if it was the February subsequent
                   to the election of Pope Innocent, October 1404,
                   immediately after noticing which the MS. records
                   this treaty, it will be the latter. The copy of
                   this manuscript agrees in all points with the
                   Sloane, except that it refers it to the 18th
                   instead of the 28th of February.]

The strange confusion made either by Hall, or "the certain writer" from whom he draws his story,
of Owyn's prisoner and son-in-law, Edmund Mortimer, with the Earl of March his nephew, then
a minor in the King's safe custody, throws doubtless great suspicion on his narrative; nevertheless,
such as it is, (allowing for that mistake,) his account seems far more probable than the statement
given in the Sloane manuscript,--the only authority, it is presumed, now known to have reported
the alleged words of the treaty. It is much more likely, that the project of dividing South
Britain among the houses of Glyndowr, Mortimer, and Percy, should have been entertained before
the       (p. 155) battle of Shrewsbury, when the Earl of Worcester's malicious love of mischief
might have suggested it, and Hotspur's headstrong impetuosity might have caught at the scheme,
and their troops, not yet dispirited by defeat, might have been sanguine of success, than after
that struggle, when the old Earl of Northumberland[152] was the only representative of the
house of Percy who could have signed it. The cause of Owyn, Mortimer, and Northumberland had
so sunk into its wane after Hotspur's death, that they could then scarcely have contemplated
as a thing feasible the division of the fair realm of England and Wales among themselves. Of
the authority of the manuscript from which the indenture is extracted, the Author (for reasons
stated in the Appendix) is      (p. 156) compelled to form a very low estimate. And if such
a deed ever was signed, it is far less improbable that the manuscript (full, as it confessedly
is elsewhere, of errors) should have inserted it incorrectly in point of chronological order,
than that the contracting parties should have postponed their contemplated arrangement to a
period when success must have appeared almost beyond hope. Independently, however, of the suspicion
cast on the document by the date assigned to it in the manuscript, it seems to carry with it
internal evidence against itself. The contract was made by Edmund Mortimer, the Earl of Northumberland,
and Owyn, and among them the land was to be divided; but, so far from the report of such an
intended distribution being corroborated by any other authority, there is much evidence to
render it incredible. Edmund Mortimer's own genuine letter, for example, announcing his adhesion
to Owyn, which preceded this agreement, makes no allusion to the Percies, or even to himself,
as portionists. "The cause," he says, "which he espoused would guarantee to Owyn his rights
in Wales, and, in case Richard were dead, would place the Earl of March on the throne." It
is, indeed, scarcely conceivable that the nobles, the gentry, and the people at large would
have suffered their land to be cut up into portions, destroying the integrity of the kingdom,
and exposing it with increased facilities to foreign      (p. 157) invasion, and interminable
intestine warfare; whilst neither of the three who were to share the spoil had any pretensions
of title to the crown. It is scarcely less inconceivable that three men, such as Mortimer,
Glyndowr, and Northumberland, could have seriously devised so desperate a scheme.

                   [Footnote 152: Nevertheless, it should be
                   remembered that many ancient accounts mention the
                   Earl of Northumberland's visit to Glyndowr
                   subsequently to his return from the flight into
                   Scotland, and that the French auxiliaries invaded
                   England under Glyndowr's standard long after the
                   battle of Shrewsbury. It was on the last day of
                   February 1408, that Rokeby, Sheriff of Yorkshire,
                   compelled Northumberland and Lord Bardolf to engage
                   with him in the field of Bramham Moor, when the
                   Earl fell in battle, and Lord Bardolf died of his
                   wounds. The Earl's head, covered with the snows of
                   age, was exposed on London Bridge. The people
                   lamented his fate when they recalled to mind his
                   former magnificence and glory. Many (says
                   Walsingham) applied to him the lines of Lucan:

