     "This flute (tibia) was hooped with brass bands, and had
     an immense resonance. It was used by both sexes; but, on
     public and on most religious occasions, was played by men.

     "The frequency with which it was used made the art of
     playing it a most remunerative one; and the flute-players
     soon formed themselves into a guild, or protective society.
     This guild had many privileges accorded to it, and existed
     for a period of some centuries. The 'Guild of Dionysian
     Artists' was a society of later date, and was a musical
     conservatory, academy, and agency, all in one. It flourished
     greatly under the patronage of various Roman emperors, and
     for a long time supplied singers and actors to the Roman
     world.

     "Valerius Maximus has given an anecdote which shows how
     powerful and exacting the guild of flute-players could
     afford to be. 

     6d. plain, 15s. richly coloured; in case, 10s. 6d. plain;
     18s. coloured.
     
     A CHART of ANCIENT ARMOUR, from the ELEVENTH to the SEVENTEENTH CENTURIES;
containing Eighteen Figures, with a Description and a Sketch of the
Progress of European Armour. This caused great
     embarrassment: no religious services could be held, and
     scarce any state ceremony properly conducted. The senate
     thereupon sent an embassy to induce them to return,--in
     vain: the angry musicians were inflexible. The wily
     ambassadors then called the inhabitants of Tibur to their
     aid, and these pretended to give a great feast to welcome
     the flute-players. At this feast the musicians were all made
     very drunk; and, while asleep from the effects of their
     liquor, they were bundled into chariots, and driven back to
     Rome, where all their old privileges were restored, and
     newer and greater ones added.

     "They received the right to give public representations and
     spectacles in Rome; but at these they were all masked, the
     reason being their shame at the manner of their inglorious
     return to the city.

     "Flutes were used at funerals; and it appears, at one time,
     the luxury and pomp of Roman obsequies grew so excessive,
     that a law was passed limiting the number of flute-players
     on such occasions to ten.

     "Only at one time did the flute disappear from any public
     worship, and that was when the worship of Bacchus was
     introduced into Rome. To this rite the kithara was used; but
     this worship, which was somewhat refined, though jovial,
     among the Greeks, became among the Romans so debauched and
     uxorious, that it was soon prohibited by law.

     "The flute was used in combination with other instruments at
     times. Apuleius speaks of a concert of flutes, kitharas, and
     chorus, and mentions its deliciously sweet effect. It was
     also used as a pitch-pipe, to give orators a guide in
     modulating their voices when addressing an assembly: thus
     Caius Gracchus always on such occasions had a slave behind
     him, whose duty it was to aid him to commence his orations
     in a proper pitch, and when his voice sank too low, or
     became too shrill, to call him to a better intonation by the
     sounds of the flute.

     "Although the flute was the favorite Roman instrument, it
     was by no means the only one. Trumpets were used to a great
     extent. A one-toned trumpet, of very loud voice, was used
     for battle-signals. These were of very large size, usually
     of brass; and their sound is described as 'terrible.' There
     was also a smaller (shepherd's) trumpet of mellower tone.

     "Another much-used instrument, of different character, was
     the sumphonium, which did not differ materially from the
     modern bagpipe.

