Early the next morning I received a visit from Grimaldo, Minister of Foreign Affairs, who,
overjoyed at my arrival, had announced it to their Catholic Majesties before coming to me.
Upon his example, apparently, the three other ministers, whom, according to usage, I ought
to have visited first, came also; so that one infamous difficulty which Cardinal Dubois had
placed in my path was happily overcome without effort on my part.

Grimaldo at once conducted me to the palace, and introduced me to the King.  I made a profound
reverence to him; he testified to me his joy at my arrival, and asked me for news of the King,
of M. le Duc d'Orleans, of my journey, and of my eldest son, whom, as he knew, I had left behind
at Burgos.  He then entered alone into the Cabinet of the Mirrors.  I was instantly surrounded
by all the Court with compliments and indications of joy at the marriages and union of the
crowns.  Nearly all the seigneurs spoke French, and I had great difficulty in replying to their
numberless compliments.

A half quarter of an hour after the King had entered his cabinet, he sent for me.  I entered
alone into the Hall of Mirrors, which is very vast, but much less wide than long.  The King,
with the Queen on his left, was nearly at the bottom of the salon, both their Majesties standing
and touching each other.  I approached with three profound reverences, and I will remark, once
for all, that the King never covers himself except at public audiences, and when he goes to
and comes from his mass.  The audience lasted half an hour, and was principally occupied, on
the part of the King and Queen, with compliments and expressions of joy at the marriages that
were to take place.  At its close, the Queen asked me if I would like to see the children,
and conducted me to them.

I never saw prettier boys than Don Carlos and Don Ferdinand, nor a prettier babe than Don Philip.
The King and Queen took pleasure in making me look at them, and in making them turn and walk
before me with very good grace.  Their Majesties entered afterwards into the Infanta's chamber,
where I tried to exhibit as much gallantry as possible.  In fact, the Infanta was charming-like
a little woman--and not at all embarrassed.  The Queen said to me that she already had begun
to learn French, and the King that she would soon forget Spain.

"Oh!" cried the Queen, "not only Spain, but the King and me, so as to attach herself to the
King, her husband, alone."  Upon this I tried not to remain dumb, and to say what was appropriate.
Their Majesties dismissed me with much goodness, and I was again encircled by the crowd with
many compliments.

A few moments after the King recalled me, in order to see the Prince of the Asturias, who was
with their Majesties in the same Hall of Mirrors. I found him tall, and really made to be painted;
fine light-brown hair, light fresh-coloured complexion, long face, but agreeable; good eyes,
but too near the nose.  I found in him also much grace and politeness.  He particularly asked
after the King, M. le Duc d'Orleans, and Mademoiselle de Montpensier, to whom he was to be
betrothed.

Their Catholic Majesties testified much satisfaction to me at the diligence I had used; said
that a single day would be sufficient for the ceremonies that had to be gone through (demanding
the hand of the Infanta, according it, and signing the marriage contract).  Afterwards they
asked me when all would be ready.  I replied it would be any day they pleased; because, as
they wished to go into the country, I thought it would be best to throw no delay in their path.
They appeared much pleased at this reply, but would not fix the day, upon which I proposed
the following Tuesday.  Overjoyed at this promptness, they fixed the Thursday for their departure,
and left me with the best possible grace.

I had got over one difficulty, as I have shown, that connected with the first visits, but I
had others yet to grapple with.  And first, there was my embarrassment at finding no letter
for the Infanta.  I confided this fact to Grimaldo, who burst out laughing, was to have my
first audience with the Infanta the next day, and it was then that the letter ought to be produced.
Grimaldo said he would arrange so that when I--went, the governess should come into the antechamber,
and say that the Infanta was asleep, and upon offering to awake her, I should refuse to allow
her, take my leave, and wait until the letter from the King arrived before I visited her again.
Everything happened just as it had been planned, and thus the second obstacle which the crafty
and malicious Cardinal had put in my path, for the sake of overturning me, was quietly got
over. Grimaldo's kindness encouraged me to open my heart under its influence. I found that
the Spanish minister knew, quite as, well as I did, what manner of person Dubois was.

On Sunday, the 23rd, I had in the morning my first private audience of the King and Queen,
together, in the Hall of Mirrors, which is the place where they usually give it.  I was accompanied
by Maulevrier, our ambassador.  I presented to their Catholic Majesties the Comte de Lorge,
the Comte de Cereste, my second son, and the Abbe de Saint-Simon and his bother.  I received
many marks of goodness from the Queen in this audience.

On Tuesday, the 25th of November, I had my solemn audience.  I went to the palace in a magnificent
coach, belonging to the King, drawn by eight grey horses, admirably dappled.  There were no
postillions, and the coachman drove me, his hat under his arm.  Five of my coaches filled with
my suite followed, and about twenty others (belonging to noblemen of the Court, and sent by
them in order to do me honour), with gentlemen in each.  The King's coach was surrounded by
my musicians, liveried servants on foot, and by officers of my household.  On arriving at the
open place in front of the palace, I thought myself at the Tuileries.  The regiments of Spanish
guards, clad, officers and soldiers, like the French guards, and the regiment of the Walloon
guards, clad, officers and, soldiers, like the Swiss guards, were under arms; the flags waved,
the drums beat, and the officers saluted with the half-pike.  On the way, the streets were
filled with people, the shops with dealers and artisans, all the windows were crowded.  Joy
showed itself on every face, and we heard nothing but benedictions.

The audience passed off admirably.  I asked the hand of the Infanta in marriage on the part
of the King; my request was graciously complied with, compliments passed on both sides, and
I returned to my house, well pleased with the reception I had met with from both their Catholic
Majesties.

There was still the marriage contract to be signed, and this was to take place in the afternoon.
Here was to be my great trial, for the majordomo-major and the nuncio of the Pope were to be
present at the ceremony, and, according to the infamous and extraordinary instructions I had
received from Dubois, I was to precede them!  How was this to be done?  I had to bring all
my ingenuity to bear upon the subject in order to determine.  In the embarrassment I felt upon
this position, I was careful to affect the most marked attention to the nuncio and the majordomo-major
every time I met them and visited them; so as to take from them all idea that I wished to precede
them, when I should in reality do so.

The place the majordomo-major was to occupy at this ceremony was behind the King's armchair,
a little to the right, so as to allow room for the captain of the guards on duty; to put myself
there would be to take his place, and push the captain of the guards away, and those near him.
The place of the nuncio was at the side of the King, his face to the armchair; to take it would
have been to push him beyond the arm of the chair, which assuredly he would no more have submitted
to than the majordomo-major on the other side.  I resolved, therefore, to hazard a middle term;
to try and introduce myself at the top of the right arm of the chair, a little sideways, so
as to take the place of neither, entirely; but, nevertheless, to drive them out, and to cover
this with an air of ignorance and of simplicity; and, at the same time, of eagerness, of joy,
of curiosity, of courtier-like desire to speak to the King as much as possible: and all this
I exactly executed, in appearance stupidly, and in reality very successfully!

When the time for the audience arrived, I took up my position, accordingly, in the manner I
have indicated.  The majordomo-major and the nuncio entered, and finding me thus placed, and
speaking to the King, appeared much surprised.  I heard Signor and Sefor repeated right and
left of me, and addressed to me--for both expressed themselves with difficulty in French--and
I replied with bows to one and to the other with the smiling air of a man entirely absorbed
in joy at his functions, and who understands nothing of what is meant; then I recommenced my
conversation with the King, with a sort of liberty and enthusiasm, so that the nuncio and majordomo-major:
soon grew tired of appealing to a man whose spirit was so transported that he no longer knew
where he was, or what was said to him.  In this manner I defeated the craft, cunning, and maliciousness
of Dubois.  At the conclusion of the ceremony, I accompanied the King and Queen to the door
of the Hall of Mirrors, taking good care then to show every deference to the majordomo-major
and the nuncio, and yielding place to them, in order to remove any impression from their minds
that I had just acted in a contrary manner from design. As soon as their Catholic Majesties
had departed, and the door of the salon was closed upon them, I was encircled and, so to speak,
almost stifled by the company present, who, one after the other, pressed upon me with the greatest
demonstrations of joy and a thousand compliments. I returned home after the ceremony, which
had lasted a long time.  While I occupied my stolen position I was obliged, in order to maintain
it, to keep up an incessant conversation with the King, and at last, no longer knowing what
to talk about, I asked him for an audience the next day, which he readily accorded me.  But
this direct request was contrary to the usage of the Court, where the ambassadors, the other
foreign ministers, and the subjects of the country of, whatever rank, address their requests
to an officer who is appointed to receive them, who communicates with the King, and names the
day and the hour when his Majesty will grant the interview.

Grimaldo, a little after the end of ceremony, had gone to work with the King and Queen, as
was customary.--I was surprised, an hour after returning home, to receive a letter from this
minister, asking me if I had anything to say to the King I did not wish the Queen to hear,
referring to the audience I had asked of the King for the morrow, and begging me to tell him
what it was for.  I replied to him instantly, that having found the opportunity good I had
asked for this audience; but if I had not mentioned the Queen, it was because I had imagined
she was so accustomed to be present that there was no necessity to allude to her: but as to
the rest, I had my thanks to offer to the King upon what had just passed, and nothing to say
to him that I should not wish to say to the Queen, and that I should be very sorry if she were
not present.

As I was writing this reply, Don Gaspard Giron invited me to go and see the illuminations of
the Place Mayor.  I quickly finished my letter; we jumped into a coach, and the principal people
of my suite jumped into others.  We were conducted by detours to avoid the light of the illuminations
in approaching them, and we arrived at a fine house which looks upon the middle of the Place,
and which is that where the King and Queen go to see the fetes that take place.  We perceived
no light in descending or in ascending the staircase.  Everything had been closed, but on entering
into the chamber which looks upon the Place, we were dazzled, and immediately we entered the
balcony speech failed me, from surprise, for more than seven or eight minutes.

This Place is superficially much vaster than any I had ever seen in Paris or elsewhere, and
of greater length than breadth.  The five stories of the houses which surround it are all of
the same level; each has windows at equal distance, and of equal size, with balconies as deep
as they are long, guarded by iron balustrades, exactly alike in every case.  Upon each of these
balconies two torches of white wax were placed, one at each end of the balcony, supported upon
the balustrade, slightly leaning outwards, and attached to nothing.  The light that this--gives
is incredible; it has a splendour and a majesty about it that astonish you and impress you.
The smallest type can be read in the middle of the Place, and all about, though the ground-floor
is not illuminated.

As soon as I appeared upon the balcony, all the people beneath gathered round and began to
cry, Senor!  tauro!  tauro!  The people were asking me to obtain for them a bull-fight, which
is what they like best in the world, and what the King had not permitted for several years
from conscientious principles.  Therefore I contented myself the next day with simply telling
him of these cries, without asking any questions thereon, while expressing to him my astonishment
at an illumination so surprising and so admirable.

Don Gaspard Giron and the Spaniards who were with me in the house from which I saw the illumination,
charmed with the astonishment I had displayed at this spectacle, published it abroad with all
the more pleasure because they were not accustomed to the admiration of the French, and many
noblemen spoke of it to me with great pleasure. Scarcely had I time to return home and sup
after this fine illumination than I was obliged to go to the palace for the ball that the King
had prepared there, and which lasted until past two in the morning.

The salon was very vast and splendid;'the dresses of the company were sumptuous; the appearance
of our finest fancy-dress balls did not approach the appearance of this.

What seemed strange to me was to see three bishops in lawn sleeves and cloaks in the ball-room,
remaining, too, all the evening, and to see the accoutrement of the camerara-mayor, who held
exposed in her hand a great chaplet, and who, while talking and criticising the ball and the
dancers, muttered her prayers, and continued to do so while the ball lasted.  What I found
very strange was, that none of the men present (except six special officers and Maulevrier
and myself) were allowed to sit, not even the dancers; in fact, there was not a single seat
in the whole salon, not even at the back, except those I have specified.

In Spain, men and women of all ages wear all sorts of colours, and dance if they like, even
when more than sixty years old, without exciting the slightest ridicule or astonishment.  I
saw several examples of this among men and women.

Amongst the company present was Madame Robecque, a Frenchwoman, one of the Queen's ladies,
whom I had known before she went to Spain.  In former days we had danced together at the Court.
Apparently she said so to the Queen, for after having danced with one of the children, she
traversed the whole length of the salon, made a fine curtsey to their Catholic Majesties, and
came to dislodge me from my retreat, asking me with a curtsey and a smile to dance.  I replied
to her by saying she was laughing at me; dispute, gallantries; finally, she went to the Queen,
who called me and told me that the King and she wished me to dance.

I took the liberty to represent to her that she wished to divert herself at my expense; that
this order could not be serious; I alleged my age, my position, the number of years since I
had danced; in a word, I did all I could to back out.  But all was useless.  The King mixed
himself in the matter; both he and the Queen begged me to comply, tried to persuade me I danced
very well; at last commanded me, and in such a manner that I was obliged to obey.  I acquitted
myself, therefore, as well as I could.

The ball being finished, the Marquis de Villagarcias, one of the majordomos, and one of the
most honest and most gracious of men I ever saw (since appointed Viceroy of Peru), would not
let me leave until I had rested in the refreshment-room, where he made me drink a glass of
excellent neat wine, because I was all in a sweat from the minuets and quadrilles I had gone
through, under a very heavy coat.

This same evening and the next I illuminated my house within and without, not having a moment's
leisure to give any fete in the midst of the many functions I had been so precipitately called
upon to fulfil.

CHAPTER CIX

On Thursday, the 27th of November, the King and Queen were to depart from Madrid to Lerma,
a pretty hamlet six leagues from Burgos, where they had a palace.  On the same day, very early
in the morning, our ambassador, Maulevrier, came to me with despatches from Cardinal Dubois,
announcing that the Regent's daughter, Mademoiselle de Montpensier, had departed on the 18th
of November for Spain, and giving information as to the places she would stop at, the people
she would be accompanied by, the day she would arrive at the frontier, and the persons charged
with the exchange of the Princesses.

Maulevrier and I thought this news so important that we felt there was no time to lose, and
at once hastened away to the palace to communicate it to their Majesties, who we knew were
waiting for it most impatiently.  We arrived at such an early hour that all was deserted in
the palace, and when we reached the door of the Hall of Mirrors, we were obliged to knock loudly
in order to be heard.  A French valet opened the door, and told us that their Catholic Majesties
were still in bed.  We did not doubt it, and begged him to apprise them that we wished to have
the honour of speaking to them.  Such an honour was unheard of, except under extraordinary
circumstances; nevertheless the valet quickly returned, saying that their Majesties would receive
us, though it was against all rule and usage to do so while they were in bed.

We traversed therefore the long and grand Hall of Mirrors, turned to the left at the end into
a large and fine room, then short off to the left again into a very little chamber, portioned
off from the other, and lighted by the door and by two little windows at the top of the partition
wall.  There was a bed of four feet and a half at most, of crimson damask, with gold fringe,
four posts, the curtains open at the foot and at the side the King occupied.  The King was
almost stretched out upon pillows with a little bed-gown of white satin; the Queen sitting
upright, a piece of tapestry in her hand, at the left of the King, some skeins of thread near
her, papers scattered upon the rest of the bed and upon an armchair at the side of it.  She
was quite close to the King, who was in his night-cap, she also, and in her bed-gown, both
between the sheets, which were only very imperfectly hidden by the papers.

They made us abridge our reverences, and the King, raising himself a little impatiently, asked
us our business.  We were alone, the valet having retired after showing us the door.

"Good news, Sire," replied I.  "Mademoiselle de Montpensier set out on the 18th; the courier
has this instant brought us the news, and we have at once come to present ourselves to you
and apprise your Majesties of it."

Joy instantly painted itself on their faces, and immediately they began to question us at great
length upon the details the courier had brought us.  After an animated conversation, in which
Maulevrier took but little part, their Catholic Majesties dismissed us, testifying to us the
great pleasure we had caused them by not losing a minute in acquainting them with the departure
of Mademoiselle de Montpensier, above all in not having been stopped by the hour, and by the
fact that they were in bed.

We went back to my house to dine and returned to the palace in order to see the King and Queen
depart.  I again received from them a thousand marks of favour.  Both the King and Queen, but
especially the latter, several times insisted that I must not lose any time in following them
to Lerma; upon which I assured them they would find me there as they alighted from their coach.

I set out, in fact, on the 2nd of December, from Madrid, to join the Court, and was to sleep
at the Escurial, with the Comtes de Lorges and de Cereste, my second son, the Abbe de Saint-Simon
and his brother, Pacquet, and two principal officers of the King's troops, who remained with
me as long as I stayed in Spain.  In addition to the orders of the King of Spain and the letters
of the Marquis de Grimaldo, I was also furnished with those of the nuncio for the Prior of
the Escurial, who is, at the same time, governor, in order that I might he shown the marvels
of this superb and prodigious monastery, and that everything might be opened for me that I
wished to visit; for I had been warned that, without the recommendation of the nuncio, neither
that of the King and his minister, nor any official character, would have much served me. 
It will be seen that, after all, I did not fail to suffer from the churlishness and the superstition
of these coarse Jeronimites.

They are black and white monks, whose dress resembles that of the Celestins; very idle, ignorant,
and without austerity, who, by the number of their monasteries and their riches, are in Spain
much about what the Benedictines are in France, and like them are a congregation.  They elect
also, like the Benedictines, their superiors, local and general, except the Prior of the Escurial,
who is nominated by the King, remains in office as long as the King likes and no more, and
who is yet better lodged at the Escurial than his Catholic Majesty.  'Tis a prodigy, this building,
of extent, of structure, of every kind of magnificence, and contains an immense heap of riches,
in pictures, in ornaments, in vases of all kinds, in precious stones, everywhere strewn about,
and the description of which I will not undertake, since it does not belong to my subject.
Suffice it to say that a curious connoisseur of all these different beauties might occupy himself
there for three months without cessation, and then would not have examined all.  The gridiron
(its form, at least) has regulated all the ordonnance of this sumptuous edifice in honour of
Saint-Laurent, and of the battle of Saint-Quentin, gained by Philippe II., who, seeing the
action from a height, vowed he would erect this monastery if his troops obtained the victory,
and asked his courtiers, if such were the pleasures of the Emperor, his father, who in fact
did not go so far for them as that.

There is not a door, a lock, or utensil of any kind, or a piece of plate, that is not marked
with a gridiron.

The distance from Madrid to the Escurial is much about the same as that from Paris to Fontainebleau.
The country is very flat and becomes a wilderness on approaching the Escurial, which takes
its name from a large village you pass, a league off.  It is upon an eminence which you ascend
imperceptibly, and upon which you see endless deserts on three sides; but it is backed, as
it were, by the mountain of Guadarama, which encircles Madrid on three sides, at a distance
of several leagues, more or less. There is no village at the Escurial; the lodging of their
Catholic Majesties forms the handle of the gridiron.  The principal grand officers, and those
most necessary, are lodged, as well as the Queen's ladies, in the monastery; on the side by
which you arrive all is very badly built.

The church, the grand staircase, and the grand cloister, surprised me. I admired the elegance
of the surgery, and the pleasantness of the gardens, which, however, are only a long and wide
terrace.  The Pantheon frightened me by a sort of horror and majesty.  The grand-altar and
the sacristy wearied my eyes, by their immense opulence.  The library did not satisfy me, and
the librarians still less: I was received with much civility, and invited to a good supper
in the Spanish style, at which the Prior and another monk did the honours.  After this fast
repast my people prepared my meals, but this fat monk always supplied one or two things that
it would not have been civil to refuse, and always ate with me; for, in order that he might
conduct us everywhere, he never quitted our sides. Bad Latin supplied the place of French,
which he did not understand; nor even Spanish.

In the sanctuary at the grand altar, there are windows behind the seats of the priest and his
assistants, who celebrate the grand mass.  These windows, which are nearly on a level with
the sanctuary (very high), belong to the apartment that Philippe II.  had built for himself,
and in which he died.  He heard service through these windows.  I wished to see this apartment,
which was entered from behind.  I was refused.  It was in vain that I insisted on the orders
of the King and of the nuncio, authorising me to see all I wished.  I disputed uselessly. 
They told me this apartment had been closed ever since the death of Philippe II., and that
nobody had entered it.  I maintained that King Philippe V.  and his suite had seen it.  They
admitted the fact, but at the same time told me that he had entered by force as a master, threatening
to break in the doors, that he was the only King who had entered since Philippe II., and that
they would not open the apartment to anybody.  I understood nothing of all this superstition,
but I was forced to rest content in my ignorance.  Louville, who had entered with the King,
had told me that the place contained only five or six dark chambers, and some holes and corners
with wainscots plastered with mud; without tapestry, when he saw it, or any kind of furniture;
thus I did not lose much by not entering.

In the Rotting-Room, which I have elsewhere described, we read the inscriptions near us, and
the monk read others as we asked him.  We walked thus, all round, talking and discoursing thereon.
Passing to the bottom of the room, the coffin of the unhappy Don Carlos offered itself to our
sight.

"As for him," said I, "it is well known why, and of what he died."  At this remark, the fat
monk turned rusty, maintained he had died a natural death, and began to declaim against the
stories which he said had been spread abroad about him.  I smiled, saying, I admitted it was
not true that his veins had been opened.  This observation completed the irritation of the
monk, who began to babble in a sort of fury.  I diverted myself with it at first in silence;
then I said to him, that the King, shortly after arriving in Spain; had had the curiosity to
open the coffin of Don Carlos, and that I knew from a man who was present ('twas Louville),
that his head had been found between his legs; that Philippe II., his father, had had it cut
off before him in the prison.

"Very well!" cried the monk in fury, "apparently he had well deserved it; for Philippe II.,
had permission from the Pope to do so!"  and, thereupon, he began to cry with all his might
about the marvels of piety and of justice of Philippe II., and about the boundless power of
the Pope, and to cry heresy against any one who doubted that he could not order, decide, and
dispose of all.

Such is the fanaticism of the countries of the Inquisition, where science is a crime, ignorance
and superstition the first of virtues.  Though my official character protected me, I did not
care to dispute, and cause a ridiculous scene with this bigot of a monk.  I contented myself
with smiling, and by making a sign of silence as I did so to those who were with me.  The monk,
therefore, had full swing, and preached a long time without giving over.  He perceived, perhaps,
by our faces, that we were laughing at him, although without gestures or words.  At last he
showed us the rest of the chamber, still fuming; then we descended to the Pantheon.  They did
me the singular favour to light about two-thirds of the immense and admirable chandelier, suspended
from the middle of the roof, the lights of which dazzled us, and enabled us to distinguish
in every part of the Rotting-Room; not only the smallest details of the smallest letter, but
the minutest features of the place.

I passed three days in the Escurial, lodged in a large and fine apartment, and all that were
with me well lodged also.  Our monk, who had always been in an ill-humour since the day of
the Rotting-Room, did not recover himself until the parting breakfast came.  We quitted him
without regret, but not the Escurial, which would pleasantly occupy a curious connoisseur during
more than a three months' stay.  On the road we met the Marquis de Montalegre, who invited,
us to dinner with him.  The meal was so good that we little regretted the dinner my people
had prepared for us.

At last we arrived on the 9th, at our village of Villahalmanzo, where I found most comfortable
quarters for myself and all who were with me.  I found there, also, my eldest son, still merely,
convalescent, with the Abbe de Monthon, who came from Burgos.  We supped very gaily, and I
reckoned upon taking a good excursion the next day, and upon amusing myself in reconnoitring
the village and the environs; but fever seized me during the night, augmented during the day,
became violent the following night, so that there was no more talk of going on the 11th to
meet the King and Queen at Lerma, as they alighted from their coach, according to arrangement.

The malady increased with such rapidity that I was found to be in great danger, and immediately
after, on the point of death.  I was bled shortly after.  The small-pox, with which the whole
country was filled, appeared. The climate was such this year that it froze hard twelve or fourteen
hours every day, while from eleven o'clock in 'the morning till nearly four, the sun shone
as brightly as possible, and it was too hot about mid-day for walking!  Yet in the shade it
did not thaw for an instant. This cold weather was all the more sharp because the air was purer
and clearer, and the sky continually of the most perfect serenity.

The King of Spain, who was dreadfully afraid of the small-pox, and who with reason had confidence
only in his chief doctor, sent him to me as soon as he was informed of my illness, with orders
not to quit me until I was cured.  I had, therefore, five or six persons continually around
me, in addition to the domestics who served me, one of the best and most skilful physicians
in Europe, who, moreover, was capital company, and who did not quit me night or day, and three
very good surgeons.  The small- pox came out very abundantly all over me; it was of a good
kind, and I had no dangerous accident.  Every one who waited upon me, master or man, was cut
off from all intercourse with the rest of the world; even those who cooked for us, from those
who did not.

The chief physician nearly every day provided new remedies in case of need, and yet administered
none to me, except in giving me, as my sole beverage, water, in which, according to its quantity,
oranges were thrown, cut in two with their skins on, and which gently simmered before my, fire;
occasionally some spoonful of a gentle and agreeable cordial during the height of the suppuration,
and afterwards a little Rota wine, and some broth, made of beef and partridge.

Nothing was wanting, then, on the part of those who had charge of me.  I was their only patient,
and they had orders not to quit me, and nothing was wanting for my amusement, when I was in
a condition to take any, so much good company being around me, and that at a time when convalescents
of this malady experience all the weariness and fretfulness of it.  At the end of my illness
I was bled and purged once, after which I lived as usual, but in a species of solitude.

During the long interval in which this illness shut me out from all intercourse with the world,
the Abbe de Saint-Simon corresponded for me with Cardinal Dubois, Grimaldo, Sartine, and some
others.

The King and Queen, not content with having sent me their chief physician, M. Hyghens, to be
with me night and day, wished to hear how I was twice a day, and when I was better, unceasingly
showed to me a thousand favours, in which they were imitated by all the Court.

But I was six weeks ill in all.

CHAPTER CX

Here I think will be the fitting place to introduce an account of the daily life of the King
and Queen of Spain, which in many respects was entitled to be regarded as singular.  During
my stay at the Court I had plenty of opportunity to mark it well, so that what I relate may
be said to have passed under my own eyes.  This, then, was their daily life wherever they were,
and in all times and seasons.

The King and Queen never had more than one apartment, and one bed between them, the latter
exactly as I have described it when relating my visit with Maulevrier to their Catholic Majesties
to carry to them the news of the departure from Paris of the future Princess of the Asturias.
During fevers, illness, no matter of what kind, or on whose side, childbirth even,--never were
they a single night apart, and even when the deceased Queen was eaten up with the scrofula,
the King continued to sleep with her until a few nights before her death!

About nine o'clock in the morning the curtains were drawn by the Asafeta, followed by a single
valet carrying a basin full of caudle.  Hyghens, during my convalescence, explained to me how
this caudle was made, and in fact concocted some for me to taste.  It is a light mixture of
broth, milk, wine (which is in the largest quantity), one or two yolks of eggs, sugar, cinnamon,
and a few cloves.  It is white; has a very strong taste, not unmixed with softness.  I should
not like to take it habitually, nevertheless it is not disagreeable.  You put in it, if you
like, crusts of bread, or, at times, toast, and then it becomes a species of soup; otherwise
it is drunk as broth; and, ordinarily, it was in this last fashion the King took it.  It is
unctuous, but very warm, a restorative singularly good for retrieving the past night, and,
for preparing you for the next.

