I am sorry, said she, for your averseness to this match: [match she was pleased to call it!]
but there is no help. The honour and interest of the family, as your aunt has told you, and
as I have told you, are concerned; and you must comply.

I was still speechless.

She folded the warm statue, as she was pleased to call me, in her arms; and entreated me, for
heaven's sake, to comply.

Speech and tears were lent me at the same time.--You have given me life, Madam, said I, clasping
my uplifted hands together, and falling on one knee; a happy one, till now, has your goodness,
and my papa's, made it! O do not, do not, make all the remainder of it miserable!

Your father, replied she, is resolved not to see you, till he sees you as obedient a child
as you used to be. You have never been put to a test till now, that deserved to be called a
test. This is, this must be, my last effort with you. Give me hope, my dear child: my peace
is concerned: I will compound with you but for hope: and yet your father will not be satisfied
without an implicit, and even a cheerful obedience--Give me but hope, child!

To give you hope, my dearest, my most indulgent Mamma, is to give you every thing. Can I be
honest, if I give a hope that I cannot confirm?

She was very angry. She again called me perverse: she upbraided me with regarding only my own
prepossessions, and respecting not either her peace of mind or my own duty:--'It is a grating
thing, said she, for the parents of a child, who delighted in her in all the time of her helpless
infancy, and throughout every stage of her childhood; and in every part of her education to
womanhood, because of the promises she gave of proving the most grateful and dutiful of children;
to find, just when the time arrived which should crown their wishes, that child stand in the
way of her own happiness, and her parents' comfort,and, refusing an excellent offer and noble
settlements, give suspicions to her anxious friends, that she would become the property of
a vile rake and libertine, who (be the occasion what it will) defies her family, and has actually
embrued his hands in her brother's blood.

'I have had a very hard time of it, said she, between your father and you; for, seeing your
dislike, I have more than once pleaded for you: but all to no purpose. I am only treated as
a too fond mother, who, from motives of a blamable indulgence, encourage a child to stand in
opposition to a father's will. I am charged with dividing the family into two parts; I and
my youngest daughter standing against my husband, his two brothers, my son, my eldest daughter,
and my sister Hervey. I have been told, that I must be convinced of the fitness as well as
advantage to the whole (your brother and Mr. Lovelace out of the question) of carrying the
contract with Mr. Solmes, on which so many contracts depend, into execution.

'Your father's heart, I tell you once more, is in it: he has declared, that he had rather have
no daughter in you, than one he cannot dispose of for your own good: especially if you have
owned, that your heart is free; and as the general good of his whole family is to be promoted
by your obedience. He has pleaded, poor man! that his frequent gouty paroxysms (every fit more
threatening than the former) give him no extraordinary prospects, either of worldly happiness,
or of long days: and he hopes, that you, who have been supposed to have contributed to the
lengthening of your grandfather's life, will not, by your disobedience, shorten your father's.'

This was a most affecting plea, my dear. I wept in silence upon it. I could not speak to it.
And my mother proceeded: 'What therefore can be his motives, Clary Harlowe, in the earnest
desire he has to see this treaty perfected, but the welfare and aggrandizement of his family;
which already having fortunes to become the highest condition, cannot but aspire to greater
distinctions? However slight such views as these may appear to you, Clary, you know, that they
are not slight ones to any other of the family: and your father will be his own judge of what
is and what is not likely to promote the good of his children. Your abstractedness, child,
(affectation of abstractedness, some call it,) savours, let me tell you, of greater particularity,
than we aim to carry. Modesty and humility, therefore, will oblige you rather to mistrust yourself
of peculiarity, than censure views which all the world pursues, as opportunity offers.'

I was still silent; and she proceeded--'It is owing to the good opinion, Clary, which your
father has of you, and of your prudence, duty, and gratitude, that he engaged for your compliance,
in your absence (before you returned from Miss Howe); and that he built and finished contracts
upon it, which cannot be made void, or cancelled.'

But why then, thought I, did they receive me, on my return from Miss Howe, with so much intimidating
solemnity?--To be sure, my dear, this argument, as well as the rest, was obtruded upon my mother.

She went on, 'Your father has declared, that your unexpected opposition, [unexpected she was
pleased to call it,] and Mr. Lovelace's continued menaces and insults, more and more convince
him, that a short day is necessary in order to put an end to all that man's hopes, and to his
own apprehensions resulting from the disobedience of a child so favoured. He has therefore
actually ordered patterns of the richest silks to be sent for from London--'

I started--I was out of breath--I gasped, at this frightful precipitance--I was going to open
with warmth against it. I knew whose the happy expedient must be: female minds, I once heard
my brother say, that could but be brought to balance on the change of their state, might easily
be determined by the glare and splendour of the nuptial preparations, and the pride of becoming
the mistress of a family.--But she was pleased to hurry on, that I might not have time to express
my disgusts at such a communication--to this effect: 'Your father therefore, my Clary, cannot,
either for your sake, or his own, labour under a suspense so affecting to his repose. He has
even thought fit to acquaint me, on my pleading for you, that it becomes me, as I value my
own peace, [how harsh to such a wife!] and as I wish, that he does not suspect that I secretly
favour the address of a vile rake, (a character which all the sex, he is pleased to say, virtuous
and vicious, are but too fond of!) to exert my authority over you: and that this I may the
less scrupulously do, as you have owned [the old string!] that your heart is free.'

Unworthy reflection in my mother's case, surely, this of our sex's valuing a libertine; since
she made choice of my father in preference to several suitors of equal fortune, because they
were of inferior reputation for morals!

'Your father, added she, at his going out, told me what he expected from me, in case I found
out that I had not the requisite influence upon you--It was this--That I should directly separate
myself from you, and leave you singly to take the consequence of your double disobedience--I
therefore entreat you, my dear Clarissa, concluded she, and that in the most earnest and condescending
manner, to signify to your father, on his return, your ready obedience; and this as well for
my sake as your own.'

Affected by my mother's goodness to me, and by that part of her argument which related to her
own peace, and to the suspicions they had of her secretly inclining to prefer the man so hated
by them, to the man so much my aversion, I could not but wish it were possible for me to obey,
I therefore paused, hesitated, considered, and was silent for some time. I could see, that
my mother hoped that the result of this hesitation would be favourable to her arguments. But
then recollecting, that all was owing to the instigations of a brother and sister, wholly actuated
by selfish and envious views; that I had not deserved the treatment I had of late met with;
that my disgrace was already become the public talk; that the man was Mr. Solmes; and that
my aversion to him was too generally known, to make my compliance either creditable to myself
or to them: that it would give my brother and sister a triumph over me, and over Mr. Lovelace,
which they would not fail to glory in; and which, although it concerned me but little to regard
on his account, yet might be attended with fatal mischiefs--And then Mr. Solmes's disagreeable
person; his still more disagreeable manners; his low understanding--Understanding! the glory
of a man, so little to be dispensed with in the head and director of a family, in order to
preserve to him that respect which a good wife (and that for the justification of her own choice)
should pay him herself, and wish every body to pay him.--And as Mr. Solmes's inferiority in
this respectable faculty of the human mind [I must be allowed to say this to you, and no great
self assumption neither] would proclaim to all future, as well as to all present observers,
what must have been my mean inducement. While the camels were loading, I bathed myself with infinite
pleasure for a long half hour in the Nile, and thus took leave of my old acquaintance, very doubtful
if we should ever meet again. We then turned to the north-east, leaving the Nile, and entering
into a bare desert of fixed gravel, without trees, and of a very disagreeable whitish colour,
mixed with small pieces of white marble, like alabaster. Our camels, we found, were too heavily
loaded; but we comforted ourselves with the reflection, that this fault would be remedied by
the daily consumption of our provisions.

We had been travelling only two days when our misfortunes began, from a circumstance we had not
attended to. Our shoes, that had long needed repair, became at last absolutely useless, and our feet
were much inflamed by the burning sand.

On the 13th, we saw, about a mile to the northwest of us, Hambily, a rock not considerable
in size, but, from the plain country in which it is situated, having the appearance of a great tower
or castle. South of it were too smaller hills, forming, along with it, landmarks of the utmost
consequence to caravans, because they are too considerable in size to be at any time covered by the
moving sands.

We alighted on the following day among some acacia trees, after travelling about twenty miles.
We were here at once surprised and terrified by a sight, surely one
of the most magnificent in the world.

In that vast expanse of desert, we saw a number of prodigious pillars of sand at different
distances, at one time moving with great celerity, at another stalking on with majestic slowness.
At intervals we thought they were coming to overwhelm us; and again
they would retreat, so as to be almost out of sight, their tops reaching
to the very clouds.

There the tops often separated from the bodies; and these, once disjoined, dispersed in the
air, and did not appear more. Sometimes they were broken near the middle, as if struck with a large
cannon shot. About noon, they began to advance with considerable swiftness upon us, the wind
being very strong at north. Eleven of them ranged alongside of us, about the distance of three
miles.

The greatest diameter of the largest appeared to me at that distance as if it would measure
ten feet. They retired from us with a wind at S.E., leaving an impression upon my mind to which
I can give no name, though surely one ingredient in it was fear, with a considerable deal of
wonder and astonishment.

It was vain to think of flying; the swiftest horse, or fastest sailing ship, could be of no
use to carry us out of this danger; and the full persuasion of this rivetted me to the spot
where I stood, and let the camels gain on me so much, that, in my
state of lameness, it was with some difficulty I could overtake them.

The effect this stupendous sight had upon Idris was to set him to his prayers, or rather to his charms;
for, except the names of God and Mahomet, all the rest of his words were mere gibberish and
nonsense. Ismael the Turk violently abused him for not praying in the words of the Koran, at
the same time maintaining, with great apparent wisdom, that nobody had charms to stop these
moving sands but the inhabitants of Arabia Deserta.

From this day subordination, though it did not entirely cease, rapidly declined; all was discontent,
murmuring, and fear. Our water was greatly diminished, and that terrible death by thirst began
to stare us in the face, owing, in a great measure, to our own imprudence. Ismael, who had been
left sentinel over the skins of water, had slept so soundly, that a Turcorory had opened one of the
skins that had not been touched, in order to serve himself out of it at his own discretion.
 Once more, however, I will put it to you,--Are you determined to brave
your father's displeasure?--Are you determined to defy your uncles?--Do you choose to break
with us all, rather than encourage Mr. Solmes?--Rather than give me hope?

Dreadful alternative--But is not my sincerity, is not the integrity of my heart, concerned
in the answer? May not my everlasting happiness be the sacrifice? Will not the least shadow
of the hope you just now demanded from me, be driven into absolute and sudden certainty? Is
it not sought to ensnare, to entangle me in my own desire of obeying, if I could give answers
that might be construed into hope?--Forgive me, Madam: bear with your child's boldness in such
a cause as this!--Settlements drawn!--Patterns sent for!--An early day!--Dear, dear Madam,
how can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's?

Ah, girl, never say your heart is free! You deceive yourself if you think it is.

Thus to be driven [and I wrung my hands through impatience] by the instigations of a designing,
an ambitious brother, and by a sister, that--

How often, Clary, must I forbid your unsisterly reflections?--Does not your father, do not
your uncles, does not every body, patronize Mr. Solmes? In the earlier Books the subject, the language,
and the moral are all as direct and simple as possible. As they advance, the language becomes rather
more intricate, because a studied simplicity, when detected by the pupil, repels rather than
attracts him. The subjects are more miscellaneous; but still, as far as possible, kept to those
which can appeal to the minds of scholars of eleven or twelve years of age, without either
calling for, or encouraging, precocity.


What could I do but weep?

I am extremely affected on my mother's account--more, I must needs say, than on my own. And
indeed, all things considered, and especially, that the measure she is engaged in, is (as I
dare say it is) against her own judgment, she deserves more compassion than myself.--Excellent
woman! What pity, that meekness and condescension should not be attended with the due rewards
of those charming graces!--Yet had she not let violent spirits (as I have elsewhere observed
with no small regret) find their power over hers, it could not have been thus.

