We have spoken of soul as the cause of the plant life in our bodies, but plants were not admitted
by the Stoics to be possessed of soul in the strict sense. What animated them was 'nature'
or, as we have called it above, 'growth'. Nature, in this sense of the principle of growth,
was defined by the Stoics as 'a constructive fire, proceeding in a regular way to production,'
or 'a fiery spirit endowed with artistic skill'. That Nature was an artist needed no proof,
since it was her handiwork that human art essayed to copy. But she was an artist who combined
the useful with the pleasant, aiming at once at beauty and convenience. In the widest sense,
Nature was another name for Providence, or the principle which held the universe together,
but, as the term is now being employed, it stood for that degree of existence which is above
cohesion and below soul. From this point of view, it was defined as "a cohesion subject to
self originated change in accordance with seminal reasons effecting and maintaining its results
in definite times, and reproducing in the offspring the characteristics of the parent". This
sounds about as abstract as Herbert Spencer's definition of life, but it must be borne in mind
that nature was all the time a 'spirit', and as such a body. It was a body of a less subtle
essence than soul. Similarly, when the Stoics spoke of cohesion, they are not to be taken as
referring to some abstract principle like attraction. 'Cohesions,' said Chrysippus, 'are nothing
else than airs, for it is by these that bodies are held together, and of the individual qualities
of things which are held together by cohesion, it is the air which is the compressing cause
which in iron is called "hardness", in stone "thickness" and in solver "whiteness"'. Not only
solidarity then, but also colours, which Zeno called 'the first schematisms' of matter were
regarded as due to the mysterious agency of air. In fact, qualities in general were but blasts
and tensions of the air, which gave form and figure to the inert matter underlying them.

As the man is in one sense the soul, in another the body, and in a
third the union of both, so it was with the cosmos. The word was used
in three senses--
  (1) God
  (2) the arrangement of the stars, etc.
  (3) the combination of both.

The cosmos as identical with God was described as an individual made up of all being who is
incorruptible and ungenerated, the fashioner of the ordered frame of the universe, who at certain
periods of time absorbs all being into himself and again generates it from himself. Thus the
cosmos on its external side was doomed to perish and the mode of its destruction was to be
by fire, a doctrine which has been stamped upon the world's belief down to the present day.
What was to bring about this consummation was the soul of the universe becoming too big for
its body, which it would eventually swallow up altogether. In the efflagration, when everything
went back to the primeval aether, the universe would be pure soul and alive equally through
and through. In this subtle and attenuated state, it would require more room than before and
so expand into the void, contracting again when another period of cosmic generation had set
in. As to the care and attention required, and the regularity of the periods at which they must be
bestowed, at the risk of losing the crop, it can be easily demonstrated
that these attentions and duties can be perfectly comprehended and
understood by several members of the family, by the older children,
and intelligent servants, so as to be overseen and performed by one
or another in the absence of the person to whom the care is usually
confided.

Moreover, when one becomes interested in the management of a grapery, the employment gets to be
too fascinating to allow of the thought of restricted action or irksome labor. It soon comes to
be regarded as a delightful as well as healthful employment, whose duties are simple, and easily
understood and performed.
 The grand apotheosis of suicide which he foresaw was a voluntary act; for the
heavenly bodies were Gods and were willing to lose their own in a larger life.

Thus all the deities except Zeus were mortal, or at all events, perishable. Gods, like men,
were destined to have an end some day. They would melt in the great furnace of being as though
they were made of wax or tin. Zeus then would be left alone with his own thoughts, or as the
Stoics sometimes put it, Zeus would fall back upon Providence. For by Providence they meant
the leading principle or mind of the whole, and by Zeus, as distinguished from Providence,
this mind together with the cosmos, which was to it as body. In the efflagration the two would
be fused into one in the single substance of aether. And then in the fulness of time there
would be a restitution of all things. Everything would come round regularly again exactly as
it had been before.

To us who have been taught to pant for progress, this seems a dreary prospect. But the Stoics
were consistent Optimists, and did not ask for a change in what was best. They were content
that the one drama of existence should enjoy a perpetual run without perhaps too nice a consideration
for the actors. Death intermitted life, but did not end it. For the candle of life, which was
extinguished now, would be kindled again hereafter. Being and not being came round in endless
succession for all save him, into whom all being was resolved, and out of whom it emerged again,
as from the vortex of some aeonian Maelstrom.

CONCLUSION

When Socrates declared before his judges that "there is no evil to a good man either in life
or after death, nor are his affairs neglected by the gods", he sounded the keynote of Stoicism,
with its two main doctrines of virtue as the only good, and the government of the world by
Providence. Let us weigh his words, lest we interpret them by the light of a comfortable modern
piety. A great many things that are commonly called evil may and do happen to a good man in
this life, and therefore presumably misfortunes may also overtake him in any other life that
there may be. The only evil that can never befall him is vice, because that would be a contradiction
in terms. Unless therefore Socrates was uttering idle words on the most solemn occasion of
his life, he must be taken to have meant that there is no evil but vice, which implies that
there is no good but virtue. Thus we are landed at once in the heart of the Stoic morality.
To the question why, if there be a providence, so many evils happen to good men, Seneca unflinchingly
replies: "No evil can happen to a good man, contraries do not mix." God has removed from the
good all evil: because he has taken from them crimes and sins, bad thoughts and selfish designs
and blind lust and grasping avarice. He has attended well to themselves, but he cannot be expected
to look after their luggage: they relieve him of that care by being indifferent about it. This
is the only form in which the doctrine of divine providence can be held consistently with the
facts of life Again, when Socrates on the same occasion expressed his belief that it was not
"permitted by the divine law for a better man to be harmed by a worse", he was asserting by
implication the Stoic position. Our own preference would be a position facing South-East, on account
of the advantage gained from the morning sun, which is so favorable to the health and growth
of all descriptions of plants.

Although an hour or two of the evening sun might be lost to a building in this position, yet the
rays are then comparatively feeble, and this loss would be much more than compensated by the
more genial morning light.

Cold Graperies, with span roofs, and glazed at both ends, are better
placed North and South,--that is, with the ends facing these points,--as
nearly as a due regard to the positions of other buildings in the
vicinity, and the general symmetry and apportionment of the grounds
will permit.

Each side of the roof will thus receive an equal amount of sun-light. There was too much balance about the master
mind of Aristotle for their narrow intensity. His recognition of the value of the passions
was to them an advocacy of disease in moderation: his admission of other elements besides virtue
into the conception of happiness seemed to them to be a betrayal of the citadel, to say as
he did that the exercise of virtue was the highest good was no merit in their eyes, unless
it were added to the confession that there was none beside it. The Stoics tried to treat man
as a being of pure reason. The Peripatetics would not shut their eyes to his mixed nature,
and contended that the good of such a being must also be mixed, containing in it elements which
had reference to the body and its environment. The goods of the soul indeed, they said, far
outweighed those of body and estate, but still the latter had a right to be considered.

Though the Stoics were religious to the point of superstition, yet they did not invoke the
terrors of theology to enforce the lesson of virtue. Plato does this even in the very work,
the professed object of which is to prove the intrinsic superiority of justice to injustice.
But Chrysippus protested against Plato's procedure on this point, declaring that the talk about
punishment by the gods was mere 'bugaboo'. By the Stoics indeed, no less than by the Epicureans,
fear of the gods was discarded from philosophy. The Epicurean gods took no part in the affairs
of men; the Stoic God was incapable of anger.

The absence of any appeal to rewards and punishments was a natural consequence of the central
tenet of the Stoic morality: that virtue is in itself the most desirable of all things. Another
corollary that flows with equal directness from the same principle is that is better to be
than to seem virtuous. Those who are sincerely convinced that happiness is to be found in wealth
or pleasure or power prefer the reality to the appearance of these goods; it must be the same
with him who is sincerely convinced that happiness lies in virtue.

Despite the want of feeling in which the Stoics gloried, it is yet true to say that the humanity
of their system constitutes one of its most just claims on our admiration. They were the first
fully to recognise the worth of man as man; they heralded the reign of peace for which we are
yet waiting; they proclaimed to the world the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man;
they were convinced of the solidarity of mankind, and laid down that the interest of one must
be subordinated to that of all. The word "philanthrop," though not unheard before their time,
was brought into prominence by them as a name for a virtue among the virtues.

Aristotle's ideal state, like the Republic of Plato, is still an Hellenic city; Zeno was the
first to dream of a republic which should embrace all mankind. In Plato's Republic all the
material goods are contemptuously thrown to the lower classes, all the mental and spiritual
reserved for the higher. When they are intended for the growth of plants, then the more sun-light
they can have the better.
FORMS OF HOUSES.

Until within a few years past, the straight-pitched
roof, both single and double, has been used almost exclusively in
the construction of glass houses.
His theories of the natural slave and of the natural nobility of the Greeks are mere attempts
to justify practice. In the Ethics there is indeed a recognition of the rights of man, but
it is faint and grudging. Aristotle there tells us that a slave, as a man, admits of justice,
and therefore of friendship, but unfortunately it is not this concession which is dominant
in his system, but rather the reduction of a slave to a living tool by which it is immediately
preceded. In another passage Aristotle points out that men, like other animals, have a natural
affection for the members of their own species, a fact, he adds, which is best seen in travelling.
This incipient humanitarianism seems to have been developed in a much more marked way by Aristotle's
followers, but it is the Stoics who have won the glory of having initiated humanitarian sentiment.

Virtue, with the earlier Greek philosophers, was aristocratic and
exclusive. Stoicism, like Christianity, threw it open to the meanest
of mankind. In the kingdom of wisdom, as in the kingdom of Christ,
there was neither barbarian, Scythian, bond, nor free. The only true
freedom was to serve philosophy, or, which was the same thing, to
serve God; and that could be done in any station in life. The sole
condition of communion with gods and good men was the possession of a
certain frame of mind, which might belong equally to a gentleman, to
a freedman, or to a slave. In place of the arrogant assertion of the
natural nobility of the Greeks, we now hear that a good mind is the
true nobility. Birth is of no importance; all are sprung from the
gods. "The door of virtue is shut to no man; it is open to all,
admits all, invites all--free men, freedmen, slaves, kings and
exiles. On the three sides--east, west, and south--there are separate
storeys of apartments over the vaults, which were used for various purposes
by the monks.

 In elevation--and of course this can best be seen from the Garth--each
bay is divided by a projecting buttress with diagonal one in the angles;
the arches are filled with open tracery carried by two mullions; it
is this tracery which marks most clearly the various changes of style.

The shape of the arch is similar throughout

.
 The Stoics meant this and
more. The city of which they claimed to be citizens was not merely this round world on which
we dwell, but the universe at large with all the mighty life therein contained. In this city,
the greatest of earth's cities--Rome, Ephesus or Alexandria, were but houses. To be exiled
from one of them was only like changing your lodgings, and death but a removal from one quarter
to another. The freemen of this city were all rational beings--sages on earth and the stars
in heaven. Such an idea was thoroughly in keeping with the soaring genius of Stoicism. It was
proclaimed by Zeno in his Republic, and after him by Chrysippus and his followers. It caught
the imagination of alien writers as of the author of the Peripatetic De Mundo who was possibly
of Jewish origin and of Philo and St Paul who were certainly so. Cicero does not fail to make
of it on behalf of the Stoics; Seneca revels in it; Epictetus employs it for edification and
Maucus Aurelius finds solace in his heavenly citizenship for the cares of an earthly ruler--as
Antoninus indeed his city is Rome, but as a man it is the universe.

The philosophy of an age cannot perhaps be inferred from its political conditions with that
certainty which some writers assume; still there are cases in which the connection is obvious.
On a wide view of the matter we may say that the opening up of the East by the arms of Alexander
was the cause of the shifting of the philosophic standpoint from Hellenism to cosmopolitanism.
If we reflect that the Cynic and Stoic teachers were mostly foreigners in Greece we shall find
a very tangible reason for the change of view. Greece had done her work in educating the world
and the world was beginning to make payment in kind. Those who had been branded as natural
slaves were now giving laws to philosophy. The kingdom of wisdom was suffering violence at
the hands of barbarians.

