Near the head of the valley he fortunately secured the services of Joe Blodgett, an old-timer
in this region, as guide and scout, who proved a valuable acquisition to his forces. The General
had been previously assured that it would be impossible to take his wagons over the high divide
between the Bitter Root and Big Hole Rivers, and had decided to leave them at the foot of the
mountains and proceed with such supplies as he could take on pack mules; but Blodgett assured
him that it would be possible to cross the range with lightly-loaded wagons, as he had recently
taken such over himself. This proved valuable information, for the wagons and the supplies
they contained were subsequently greatly needed by the troops.

When, however, the command reached the foot of the mountains and learned that the Indians had
already crossed, a number of the citizens became discouraged and hesitated about going farther.
Their affairs at home needed their attention. They were already out of provisions, and as it
now seemed doubtful as to when or where the fugitives would be overtaken, they thought it best
that they should return home. But the General knew that his handful of troops, veterans and
brave men though they were, were scarcely equal to the 400 trained warriors in front of them,
and appreciating the importance of keeping these hardy frontiersmen with him, he besought them
to keep on a few days longer.

He assured them that he was in earnest, and should strike the Indians a terrible blow as soon
as he could overtake them. He told the volunteers that they should have an honorable place
in the fight, if one occurred; that they might have all the horses that could be captured,
save enough to mount his command, and that meantime his men would divide their last ration
with their citizen comrades. This announcement created great enthusiasm among soldiers and
volunteers alike, and the latter at once decided to follow their gallant leader until the Indians
should be overtaken, no matter where or when that might be.

Lieutenant Bradley, with eight men of the Second Cavalry, and all of the mounted volunteers,
was now ordered to push on, strike the Indian camp before daylight the next morning, if possible,
stampede the stock and run it off. If this could be done, and the Indians set on foot, then
their overwhelming defeat would be certain. Lieut. J. W. Jacobs asked and obtained permission
to go with Bradley and share in this hazardous undertaking. This detachment, amounting, all
told, to sixty men, made a night march across the mountains, while the main command camped
at the foot of the divide on the night of the 7th, and at 5 o'clock the next morning, resumed
the march. The road up the mountain, a steep and difficult one at best, was seriously obstructed
at this time by large quantities of down timber that had to be cut out or passed around, so
that the ascent was very slow and trying to men and beasts. The wagons were but lightly loaded,
and by doubling teams and using all the men at drag ropes, the command succeeded in reaching
the summit, a distance of three miles, in six hours, and by the performance of such labor and
hardship as only those can realize who have campaigned in a mountainous country.

From the summit the road leads down a gentle incline for a mile, when it reaches the head of
Trail Creek, and follows down that stream a distance of ten miles into the Big Hole basin.
It crosses the creek probably fifty times, and the banks being abrupt, and the road obstructed
in many places by down timber, the progress of the command was extremely slow and tedious.

While ascending the mountain on the morning of the 8th, General Gibbon received a courier from
Lieutenant Bradley, with a dispatch stating that, owing to the difficult nature of the trail
and the distance to the Indian camp, he had been unable to reach it before daylight, and that
the Indians had broken camp and moved on. Later in the day, however, another courier brought
news that they had again gone into camp, after making but a short march, at the mouth of Trail
Creek, and that, not deeming it safe to attack in daylight, Bradley had concealed his command
in the hills, and was now awaiting the arrival of the infantry.

Upon receipt of this information, Gibbon took his men from the wagons (leaving twenty men to
guard the train), gave each man ninety rounds of ammunition and one day's rations, and pushed,
on on foot, having ordered that the wagons should come up as fast as possible. The gallant
General with his faithful little band moved quietly but rapidly forward, but owing to the bad
condition of the trail, it was nearly sundown when they reached Bradley's camp. Bradley informed
his chief that he believed the Indians intended to remain in their camp several days, for he
had secretly observed their movements from the top of a neighboring hill, and found that the
squaws were engaged in cutting and peeling lodge-poles to take with them for use on the treeless
plains of the buffalo country.

On arriving at Bradley's camp, the men filed into the gulch, ate a scanty supper of hard tack
and raw pork, and, without camp-fires or blankets, laid down to rest. Having conferred with
Lieutenant Bradley and his scouts as to the best disposition of the proposed attack, General
Gibbon ordered his adjutant to call him at 10 o'clock at night, and lying down under the spreading
branches of a pine tree, slept as peacefully as a child.

He knew there was bloody work at hand for him and his veterans; that the rising sun would see
them contending against a savage foe that outnumbered his own command more than three to one;
that ere nightfall many of his noble men, and perchance he himself, would sleep their long
sleep; yet he had a solemn duty to perform. It was a sad one; an awful one, but it was nevertheless
a duty. He and his men were there to fight their country's battle. They were to avenge the
blood of innocent men and women, whom these savages had wantonly murdered but a few days before
in a neighboring Territory. He had been ordered to strike and to punish them. He would strike,
and the blow would be a telling one. The true objection to slavery is not that it is unjust to
the inferior but that it corrupts the superior. There is only one sane and logical thing to
be done with a really inferior race, and that is to exterminate it.

Now there are various ways of exterminating a race, and most of them
are cruel.

You may end it with fire and sword after the old Hebrew fashion;
you may enslave it and work it to death, as the Spaniards did the
Caribs; you may set it boundaries and then poison it slowly with deleterious
commodities, as the Americans do with most of their Indians; you may
incite it to wear clothing to which it is not accustomed and to live
under new and strange conditions that will expose it to infectious
diseases to which you yourselves are immune, as the missionaries do
the Polynesians; you may resort to honest simple murder, as we English
did with the Tasmanians; or you can maintain such conditions as conduce
to "race suicide," as the British administration does in Fiji.

Suppose, then, for a moment, that there is an all-round inferior race; a Modern Utopia is under
the hard logic of life, and it would have to exterminate such a race as quickly as it could.
On the whole, the Fijian device seems the least cruel. But Utopia would do that without any
clumsiness of race distinction, in exactly the same manner, and by the same machinery, as
it exterminates all its own defective and inferior strains; that
is to say, as we have already discussed in Chapter the Fifth, section
1, by its marriage laws, and by the laws of the minimum wage.

That extinction need never be discriminatory. If any of the race did, after all, prove to
be fit to survive, they would survive--they would be picked out with a sure and automatic justice
from the over-ready condemnation of all their kind.

Is there, however, an all-round inferior race in the world? Even the Australian black-fellow
is, perhaps, not quite so entirely eligible for extinction as a good, wholesome, horse-racing,
sheep-farming Australian white may think. These queer little races, the black-fellows, the Pigmies,
the Bushmen, may have their little gifts, a greater keenness, a greater
fineness of this sense or that, a quaintness of the imagination or
what not, that may serve as their little unique addition to the totality
of our Utopian civilisation.

We are supposing that every individual alive on earth is alive in Utopia, and so all the surviving
"black-fellows" are there. Every one of them in Utopia has had what none have had on earth, a
fair education and fair treatment, justice, and opportunity. Suppose that the common idea is right
about the general inferiority of these people, then it would follow that in Utopia most of them
are childless, and working at or about the minimum wage, and some will have passed out of
all possibility of offspring under the hand of the offended law;
but still--cannot we imagine some few of these little people--whom
you must suppose neither naked nor clothed in the European style,
but robed in the Utopian fashion--may have found some delicate art
to practise, some peculiar sort of carving, for example, that justifies
God in creating them?



They proceeded with the greatest caution a distance of about a mile and a half, when the Corporal
whispered to Lieutenant Bradley that they were near the place where he had heard the voices.
They were surrounded by a thick growth of small pine trees, through which it was impossible
to see to any distance. Moving slowly forward, they soon heard the sound of axes, and inferred
that the squaws were cutting lodge-poles in the very body of woods they were then in.

Creeping along with bated breath; on the alert for every sound or sign; fearful lest they should
make known their presence to the Indians, bring on a skirmish, and thus avert the purpose of
the General, they scarcely dared breathe.

They finally caught the sound of voices and stopped. Here the officers held a whispered consultation
which resulted in their crawling ahead to a larger tree that stood about eighty paces in front
of them. Still they could see nothing of the camp, although the sounds came plainer, and all
were impressed with the knowledge that they were treading on the very crest of a volcano, as
it were. Jacobs suggested that they climb the tree, arguing that as it was taller than those
about it, they might be able to see something interesting from its top.

To this Bradley readily assented, and leaving their rifles with the Corporal and cautioning
him to keep a sharp lookout for any possible intruders, both officers climbed cautiously and
stealthily into the topmost branches of the pine tree. When they had gained this position,
they halted for a moment in a crouching posture, and then, cautiously straightening themselves
up, found that they were well above the surrounding foliage, and were thrilled at seeing hundreds
of Indian horses quietly grazing in a prairie almost beneath them, for the tree stood on top
of a high hill. Several herders sat on their ponies in and about the herd, while others lounged
lazily on the ground under the shade of neighboring trees. A few hundred yards beyond, they
saw the Indian camp where hundreds of warriors were resting and chatting, while squaws were
pitching tents, making beds, carrying in poles, and cooking the noonday meal.

A brief look was all these brave officers dared risk, for they feared detection, and hastily
lowering themselves to the ground, they lost no time in regaining their own camp.

A brief dispatch was sent off to the General, the receipt of which by him has already been
referred to, advising him of their discovery, and the remainder of the day was spent in impatient
awaiting his arrival.

CHAPTER III.

At 10 o'clock at night the officer of the guard spoke to the General in a whisper, and he arose
with the alacrity of a youth who goes forth to engage in the sports of a holiday. The men were
called at once, and in whispered orders the line of march was speedily formed. All were instructed
to preserve the most profound silence from that moment until the signal should be given to
open fire on the enemy, and, under the guidance of Joe Blodgett and Lieutenant Bradley, the
little band filed silently down the winding trail, threading its way, now through dark groves
of pine or fir; now through jungles of underbrush; now over rocky points; frequently wading
the cold mountain brook, waist deep, and tramping through oozy marshes of saw-grass; speaking
only in whispers; their rifles loaded, eyes peering into the starlit night, and ears strained
to catch the slightest sound that might indicate the hiding-place of any lurking foe who might
perchance be on an outpost to announce to his followers the approach of danger.

Five miles were thus stealthily marched without giving an alarm. Then the valley in which the
troops had been moving opened out into what is known as the Big Hole, that is, the valley of
the Big Hole River. This is a beautiful prairie basin, fifteen miles wide, and sixty miles
long, covered with rich bunch-grass and surrounded by high mountains. The Chinaman will speak the
same language as his wife--whatever her race may be--he will wear costume of the common civilised
fashion, he will have much the same education as his European rival, read the same literature, bow
to the same traditions. The men crept up to within a few hundred yards of the slumbering camp, when
they again crossed the creek down which they had been marching, and ascended its eastern bluff.
Here they encountered a large herd of ponies, some of whom neighed anxiously as the strange
apparition filed past them, but luckily did not stampede.

General Gibbon suggested to Bostwick, his post guide, that he take four or five men and drive
this herd back up the cañon, but Bostwick replied that there was probably a strong guard over
the herd who were sleeping at the moment, somewhere near by, but who would be awakened by any
attempt to drive the horses; that it would take several men to whip them, and that the fight
would alarm the camp. The General was so impressed with the scout's reasoning that he at once
countermanded the discretionary order. It subsequently transpired, however, that the Indians
had felt so secure for the time being that they had not a herder or a camp-guard out, and had
Gibbon known this at the time he could have captured this entire herd without firing a shot,
and thus have placed his enemy in a most critical situation.

Down the side of this steep bluff, thickly overgrown with sage brush, mountain laurel, and
jack pines; over rocks and through break-neck ravines and washouts, the soldiers and citizens
picked their way with, all the skill and adroitness of trained hunters, until at last they
reached a position overlooking the Indian camp, and within 150 yards of the nearest teepees.
The camp was pitched on the south bank of the Wisdom or Big Hole River, which is formed by
the confluence here of Trail and Ruby Creeks. It was in an open meadow, in a bend of the river,
and was partially surrounded by dense thickets of willows. There were eighty-nine lodges pitched
in the form of a V, with the angle up the stream, and below the camp 400 or 500 ponies grazed
peacefully, tethered to stakes and willows. The Indians had evidently secured them there in
order to be prepared, ready for any emergency. You will, no doubt, find the 'cut' and the 'boycott,'
and all those nice little devices by which dull people get a keen
edge on life, in their place here, and their place here is somewhere----"

I

turned a thumb earthward. "There!"

The botanist did not answer for a little while. Then he said, with some temper and great emphasis:
"Well, I'm jolly glad anyhow that I'm not to be a permanent resident in this Utopia, if our
daughters are to be married to Hottentots by regulation. I'm jolly glad."

He turned his back on me.

Now did I say anything of the sort? ...

I had to bring him, I suppose;
there's no getting away from him in this life. But, as I have already
observed, the happy ancients went to their Utopias without this sort
of company. "After a while you
will see some fires built up if we remain undiscovered."

Sure enough, in the course of an hour, squaws began to come forth from their lodges and replenish
their waning fires.

As these blazed up they stood about them, jabbered, turned, and warmed themselves, yawned,
and then one by one returned to their skin couches and betook themselves again to sleep. And
again the soldiers and their citizen allies were left to meditate, and in whispers to commune
with each other.

Their thoughts and words were serious, for they well knew that where now all was peace, war
in its veriest horror was soon to rage. The men doubted not that many of them would fill graves
in that wild mountain valley before the morrow's sun should set, and that many others should
suffer with grievous wounds. Yet they faltered not in their duty. On the contrary, they longed
for the coming of the light that should enable them to see the redskins through the sights
of their rifles, and complained only that it was too slow in coming.

Finally the night ended and the day approached from behind the eastern hills. As soon as it
was light enough to see to move advantageously the little army was again astir; but its movements
were yet as silent as the grave. Under whispered orders and with stealthy tread Sanno's and
Comba's companies, deployed as skirmishers, descended the bluff into the valley, groped their
way through the willow thickets, waded the icy river, the water coming nearly to their arm-pits.
Logan, Williams, and Rawn, with their companies, were sent to the extreme right to cross and
attack the camp near Ruby Creek, while Lieutenant Bradley, with his handful of soldiers and
citizen scouts, was sent down the stream with orders to cross and strike the camp lower down. No
generalisations about race are too extravagant for the inflamed credulity of the present time.
No attempt is ever made to distinguish differences in inherent quality--the true racial differences--from
artificial differences due to culture. He was en route to the pony herd on the hill-side above,
and so quietly had the advance been made that even he had not heard or seen the men, and was
within a few feet of them when he emerged from the thicket of willows. He and his horse were
instantly shot down.

The order had been given, "When the first shot is fired charge the camp with the whole line."
And most eagerly was this order obeyed. Volleys were fired into the teepees, and with an eager
yell the whole line swept wildly into the midst of the slumbering camp. The surprise was complete.
The Indians rushed from their lodges panic-stricken by the suddenness and ferocity of the attack.
They ran for the river banks and thickets. Squaws yelled, children screamed, dogs barked, horses
neighed, snorted, and many of them broke their fetters and fled.

Even the warriors, usually so stoical, and who always like to appear incapable of fear or excitement,
were, for the time being, wild and panic-stricken like the rest. "This is Utopia," I said, and
then sought once more to tranquillise his mind. "No doubt among the vulgar, coarse-minded people
outside the Rule there may be something of the sort. Every earthly moral blockhead, a little educated,
perhaps, is to be found in Utopia.

