    "The sun in heaven shone so gay:
     All things were joyful on that day."

It was yet early in the morning when we neared the city of Detroit, having almost reached the
head of Detroit River which separates the United States from Canada. Being about one-half to
three-quarters of a mile wide, and five and one-half fathoms deep, the river flows with a pretty
swift current.

Detroit is the most important city of Michigan, opposite the Canadian town Windsor.

Eighteen miles north of Lake Erie, it stretches with its suburbs about five miles along the
river, and the central part extends for about two miles back from the shore. Approaching the
city, we were more and more delighted with its attractive appearance. The streets, from fifty
to 100 feet wide, are for the most part ornamented with rows of trees. A number of avenues,
having an unusual width, diverge from the Grand Circus, a spacious park semi-circular in form,
which is divided into two quadrants by Woodward Avenue. But this old native, whose name was Ooseemeemou,
had by great patience and kindness so drilled his clever dog that he acted his part with extraordinary
cleverness and tact. He called the little fellow Koona, which is the Cree for "snow," and
was very appropriate, as the animal was of the purest white.

Taking the dog into the canoe with them, and giving all necessary directions, they soon were gliding
along the coast of the great bay.

Numerous flocks of ducks flew over their heads; and far away in the distance the water seemed
almost alive with the numbers of them on the dancing, sparkling waves.
This latter sight seemed to be what the old hunter was looking for,
and so the canoe was quickly paddled ashore and carried up on the
beach.
Detroit is not only the center of a great railroad system; more than 350 vessels are owned
here, and numerous daily lines of steamers run to various points of the lakes. Its manufacturing
industries are very important and consist of iron, flour, tobacco, cigars, lumber, and bricks.
The extensive Pullman Car Works are situated here; also one of the seven pin factories in the
United States.

Settled by the French, early in the eighteenth century, Detroit passed into the hands of the
English in 1763. It was then besieged for eleven months by the Indian chief Pontiac; ceded
to the Americans in 1783, but not occupied by them till 1796. As a city, it was incorporated
in 1824; and its present population is estimated to be 235,000. It was the capital of Michigan
from 1837 till 1847, when that honor was transferred to Lansing.

Having traversed Detroit River, we entered Lake St. Clair, a sheet of water eighteen miles
long and twenty-two miles wide. This small lake has many extensive sand-banks covered with
a depth of water varying from six to ten feet. Previous to 1858, much inconvenience was experienced
in navigating it, owing to the insufficient depth, but the governments of the United States
and Canada have dredged a canal through the bed of the lake, comprising a width of 300 feet. They
were full of excitement and curiosity, and wondered how it was going to be possible for them
to reach with ordinary guns the ducks, which were carelessly swimming
in multitudes some hundreds of yards out from the shore.

But they had not long to wait or conjecture.
 The horizon was of a fine, golden tint, changing gradually into the
deep blue of the mid-heaven.

None of us ventured to leave the deck fearing to miss some of those unrivaled sights constantly
offering new attractions.

This trip on River St. Clair--though having an extent of thirty-three miles--seemed but short
to us; and the fine spectacle displayed on the charming western bank may be reckoned among
the most delightful scenes we beheld on our long, enjoyable voyage. 

Cautiously balancing himself, and seizing a paddle that happened to have been fastened in it,
he paddled himself ashore amid the cheers of the onlookers.
"Well done, Frank!" said the old Indian.

He had done what some take
months to accomplish.
Horizontal bars of black shadow were forming under them, and lurid wreaths wrapped themselves
about the crests of the hills. The wind had grown more violent as Port Huron came in view.
Waving curtains of opaque rain, swinging from the overburdened clouds, dropped down upon the
surface of the river. The black swaying fringes, sweeping irresistibly along the water, churned
the surface into foam.

The sudden and unfavorable change of the weather determined our commodore to abide at Port
Huron, a prosperous city in Michigan. It commands a very advantageous situation, located on
the west bank of River St. Clair, and at the southern extremity of Lake Huron.

Being the county seat of St. Clair County, it is also a point of great importance in the railway
system, and the terminus of several lines of lake steamers.

The city, with a population of nearly 14,000, has a large lumber trade, ship-yards, dry-docks,
saw and flour mills.

Founded in 1819, Port Huron was incorporated as a village in 1835, and as a city in 1857.

Since the yacht lingered here until Monday, August 7th, we were enabled to become familiar
with its broad streets, regularly laid out and well shaded; some adorned by beautiful private
residences. The heavy, black clouds that had shrouded the whole sky ever since we made our
entry in Port Huron, were yet concealing the golden disk of the summer sun. Thus it is that,
even in religion, in spite of the passionate loyalty of the modern Irishman to the Roman See,
Ireland still stands somewhat distinct and aloof from the rest of Europe.

But if that be so in religion, still more is it so in customs and manners. Take the analogy of a
mould. The Celtic civilisation of Ireland is like a mould, into which fresh metal has been
always pouring; white-hot, glowing metal from all over the world,
from England and Scotland, from France, from Rome, and even from far-off
Spain.

Still, we found it advisable to wait until the foaming waves of the enraged element had been
appeased. In consequence of this decision we concluded to moor the yacht as near the entrance
of Lake Huron, as we conveniently could, ready for an early departure; for which we considered
the town of Sarnia, opposite Port Huron, the most favorable locality.

Romantically situated on the Canadian shore, Sarnia affords a splendid north and west view.
Its handsome streets and neat structures are quite attractive to the stranger; and not these
alone but also the residents who are generous and hospitable. We observed this fact, even during
our short stay, when receiving the visit of Mr. Clark and his amiable lady, who presented us
with a bouquet of fragrant flowers, a kind gift that we highly appreciated.

Long ere the east became purple with the morning light and the pinnacles of Sarnia were bathed,
one by one, in the glory of its burning, we departed from the pleasant city, and the white
sea-bird "Marguerite" spread her light wings over the surface of Lake Huron, whose waves--although
the wind was quite fresh--did not run as high as I anticipated; for I had been informed that
on the previous day the tide from the lake into Detroit River amounted to eight miles an hour. 

Mr Ross had named his house "Sa-gas-ta-wee-kee," a beautiful Indian word which literally means
a house full of sunshine. Mr Ross had spent many years as an official in the Hudson Bay Company's
service, as had his father before him. The fine deposits of sand and clay extending at
different places along the shore to a distance of twenty miles inland, by their contrasts added
to the scenic beauty, exhibiting a variety of magnificent views.

