'Pardon me, sir,' resumed the captain of the JUMPING JENNY; 'my handful of Latin, and small
pinch of Greek, were as useless as old junk, to be sure; but my reading, writing and accompting,
stood me in good stead, and brought me forward; I might have been schoolmaster--aye, and master,
in time; but that valiant liquor, rum, made a conquest of me rather too often, and so, make
what sail I could, I always went to leeward. We were four years broiling in that blasted climate,
and I came back at last with a little prize-money. I always had thoughts of putting things
to rights in the Covenant Close, and reconciling myself to my father. I found out Jack Hadaway,
who was TUPTOWING away with a dozen of wretched boys, and a fine string of stories he had ready
to regale my ears withal. My father had lectured on what he called "my falling away," for seven
Sabbaths, when, just as his parishioners began to hope that the course was at an end, he was
found dead in his bed on the eighth Sunday morning. Briefly, Professor Pearson came to the conclusion
that the children of drunken parents are, on the average, superior to those of sober parents
in physique and in intelligence, in sight and in freedom from epilepsy and other diseases.
 Here was a pretty item--well, my tongue clove to my mouth for an hour, and was only
able at last to utter the name of Mrs. Cantrips. Oh, this was a new theme for my Job's comforter.
My sudden departure--my father's no less sudden death--had prevented the payment of the arrears
of my board and lodging--the landlord was a haberdasher, with a heart as rotten as the muslin
wares he dealt in. Without respect to her age or gentle kin, my Lady Kittlebasket was ejected
from her airy habitation--her porridge-pot, silver posset-dish, silver-mounted spectacles,
and Daniel's Cambridge Bible, sold, at the Cross of Edinburgh, to the caddie who would bid
highest for them, and she herself driven to the workhouse, where she got in with difficulty,
but was easily enough lifted out, at the end of the month, as dead as her friends could desire.
Merry tidings this to me, who had been the d----d' (he paused a moment) 'ORIGO MALI--Gad, I
think my confession would sound better in Latin than in English!

'But the best jest was behind--I had just power to stammer out something about Jess--by my
faith he HAD an answer! I had taught Jess one trade, and, like a prudent girl, she had found
out another for herself; unluckily, they were both contraband, and Jess Cantrips, daughter
of the Lady Kittlebasket, had the honour to be transported to the plantations, for street-walking
and pocket-picking, about six months before I touched shore.'

He changed the bitter tone of affected pleasantry into an attempt to laugh, then drew his swarthy
hand across his swarthy eyes, and said in a more natural accent, 'Poor Jess!'

There was a pause--until Fairford, pitying the poor man's state of mind, and believing he saw
something in him that, but for early error and subsequent profligacy, might have been excellent
and noble, helped on the conversation by asking, in a tone of commiseration, how he had been
able to endure such a load of calamity.

'Why, very well,' answered the seaman; 'exceedingly well--like a tight ship in a brisk gale.
Let me recollect. I remember thanking Jack, very composedly, for the interesting and agreeable
communication; I then pulled out my canvas pouch, with my hoard of moidores, and taking out
two pieces, I bid Jack keep the rest till I came back, as I was for a cruise about Auld Reekie.
The poor devil looked anxiously, but I shook him by the hand, and ran downstairs, in such confusion
of mind, that notwithstanding what I had heard, I expected to meet Jess at every turning.

It was market-day, and the usual number of rogues and fools were assembled at the Cross. I
observed everybody looked strange on me, and I thought some laughed. I fancy I had been making
queer faces enough, and perhaps talking to myself, When I saw myself used in this manner, I
held out my clenched fists straight before me, stooped my head, and, like a ram when he makes
his race, darted off right down the street, scattering groups of weatherbeaten lairds and periwigged
burgesses, and bearing down all before me. I heard the cry of "Seize the madman!" echoed, in
Celtic sounds, from the City Guard, with "Ceaze ta matman!"--but pursuit and opposition were
in vain. I pursued my career; the smell of the sea, I suppose, led me to Leith, where, soon
after, I found myself walking very quietly on the shore, admiring the tough round and sound
cordage of the vessels, and thinking how a loop, with a man at the end of one of them, would
look, by way of tassel.

'I was opposite to the rendezvous, formerly my place of refuge--in I bolted--found one or two
old acquaintances, made half a dozen new ones--drank for two days--was put aboard the tender--off
to Portsmouth--then landed at the Haslar hospital in a fine hissing-hot fever. Never mind--I
got better--nothing can kill me--the West Indies were my lot again, for since I did not go
where I deserved in the next world, I had something as like such quarters as can be had in
this--black devils for inhabitants--flames and earthquakes, and so forth, for your element.
Well, brother, something or other I did or said--I can't tell what--How the devil should I,
when I was as drunk as David's sow, you know? But I was punished, my lad--made to kiss the
wench that never speaks but when she scolds, and that's the gunner's daughter, comrade. Yes,
the minister's son of no matter where--has the cat's scratch on his back! This roused me, and
when we were ashore with the boat, I gave three inches of the dirk, after a stout tussle, to
the fellow I blamed most, and took the bush for it. There were plenty of wild lads then along
shore--and, I don't care who knows--I went on the account, look you--sailed under the black
flag and marrow-bones--was a good friend to the sea, and an enemy to all that sailed on it.'

Fairford, though uneasy in his mind at finding himself, a lawyer, so close to a character so
lawless, thought it best, nevertheless, to put a good face on the matter, and asked Mr. Ewart,
with as much unconcern as he could assume, 'whether he was fortunate as a rover?'

'No, no--d--n it, no,' replied Nanty; 'the devil a crumb of butter was ever churned that would
stick upon my bread. There was no order among us--he that was captain to-day, was swabber to-morrow;
and as for plunder--they say old Avery, and one or two close hunks, made money; but in my time,
all went as it came; and reason good, for if a fellow had saved five dollars, his throat would
have been cut in his hammock. And then it was a cruel, bloody work.--Pah,--we'll say no more
about it. I broke with them at last, for what they did on board of a bit of a snow--no matter
what it was bad enough, since it frightened me--I took French leave, and came in upon the proclamation,
so I am free of all that business. And here I sit, the skipper of the JUMPING JENNY--a nutshell
of a thing, but goes through the water like a dolphin. If it were not for yon hypocritical
scoundrel at Annan, who has the best end of the profit, and takes none of the risk, I should
be well enough--as well as I want to be. Here is no lack of my best friend,'--touching his
case-bottle;--'but, to tell you a secret, he and I have got so used to each other, I begin
to think he is like a professed joker, that makes your sides sore with laughing if you see
him but now and then; but if you take up house with him, he can only make your head stupid.
But I warrant the old fellow is doing the best he can for me, after all.'

'And what may that be?' said Fairford.

'He is KILLING me,' replied Nanty Ewart; 'and I am only sorry he is so long about it.'

So saying he jumped on his feet, and, tripping up and down the deck, gave his orders with his
usual clearness and decision, notwithstanding the considerable quantity of spirits which he
had contrived to swallow while recounting his history.

Although far from feeling well, Fairford endeavoured to rouse himself and walk to the head
of the brig, to enjoy the beautiful prospect, as well as to take some note of the course which
the vessel held. To his great surprise, instead of standing across to the opposite shore from
which she had departed, the brig was going down the Firth, and apparently steering into the
Irish Sea. He called to Nanty Ewart, and expressed his surprise at the course they were pursuing,
and asked why they did not stand straight across the Firth for some port in Cumberland.

'Why, this is what I call a reasonable question, now,' answered Nanty; 'as if a ship could
go as straight to its port as a horse to the stable, or a free-trader could sail the Solway
as securely as a King's cutter! Why, I'll tell ye, brother--if I do not see a smoke on Bowness,
that is the village upon the headland yonder, I must stand out to sea for twenty-four hours
at least, for we must keep the weather-gage if there are hawks abroad.'

'And if you do see the signal of safety, Master Ewart, what is to be done then?'

'Why then, and in that case, I must keep off till night, and then run you, with the kegs and
the rest of the lumber, ashore at Skinburness,'

'And then I am to meet with this same laird whom I have the letter for?' continued Fairford.

'That,' said Ewart, 'is thereafter as it may be; the ship has its course--the fair trader has
his port--but it is not easy to say where the laird may be found. But he will be within twenty
miles of us, off or on--and it will be my business to guide you to him.'

Fairford could not withstand the passing impulse of terror which crossed him, when thus reminded
that he was so absolutely in the power of a man, who, by his own account, had been a pirate,
and who was at present, in all probability, an outlaw as well as a contraband trader. Nanty
Ewart guessed the cause of his involuntary shuddering.

'What the devil should I gain,' he said, 'by passing so poor a card as you are? Have I not
had ace of trumps in my hand, and did I not play it fairly? Aye, I say the JUMPING JENNY can
run in other ware as well as kegs. Put SIGMA and TAU to Ewart, and see how that will spell--D'ye
take me now?'

'No indeed,' said Fairford; 'I am utterly ignorant of what you allude to.'

'Now, by Jove!' said Nanty Ewart, 'thou art either the deepest or the shallowest fellow I ever
met with--or you are not right after all. I wonder where Summertrees could pick up such a tender
along-shore. Will you let me see his letter?'

Fairford did not hesitate to gratify his wish, which, he was aware, he could not easily resist.
The master of the JUMPING JENNY looked at the direction very attentively, then turned the letter
to and fro, and examined each flourish of the pen, as if he were judging of a piece of ornamented
manuscript; then handled it back to Fairford, without a single word of remark.

'Am I right now?' said the young lawyer.

'Why, for that matter,' answered Nanty, 'the letter is right, sure enough; but whether you
are right or not, is your own business rather than mine.' And, striking upon a flint with the
back of a knife, he kindled a cigar as thick as his finger, and began to smoke away with great
perseverance.

Alan Fairford continued to regard him with a melancholy feeling, divided betwixt the interest
he took in the unhappy man, and a not unnatural apprehension for the issue of his own adventure.

Ewart, notwithstanding the stupefying nature of his pastime, seemed to guess what was working
in his passenger's mind; for, after they had remained some time engaged in silently observing
each other, he suddenly dashed his cigar on the deck, and said to him, 'Well then, if you are
sorry for me, I am sorry for you. D--n me, if I have cared a button for man or mother's son,
since two years since when I had another peep of Jack Hadaway. 'The fellow was got as fat as
a Norway whale--married to a great Dutch-built quean that had brought him six children. I believe
he did not know me, and thought I was come to rob his house; however, I made up a poor face,
and told him who I was. Poor Jack would have given me shelter and clothes, and began to tell
me of the moidores that were in bank, when I wanted them. Egad, he changed his note when I
told him what my life had been, and only wanted to pay me my cash and get rid of me. I never
saw so terrified a visage. I burst out a-laughing in his face, told him it was all a humbug,
and that the moidores were all his own, henceforth and for ever, and so ran off. I caused one
of our people send him a bag of tea and a keg of brandy, before I left--poor Jack! I think
you are the second person these ten years, that has cared a tobacco-stopper for Nanty Ewart.'

'Perhaps, Mr. Ewart,' said Fairford, 'you live chiefly with men too deeply interested for their
own immediate safety, to think much upon the distress of others?'

'And with whom do you yourself consort, I pray?' replied Nanty, smartly. 'Why, with plotters,
that can make no plot to better purpose than their own hanging; and incendiaries, that are
snapping the flint upon wet tinder. You'll as soon raise the dead as raise the Highlands--you'll
as soon get a grunt from a dead sow as any comfort from Wales or Cheshire. You think because
the pot is boiling, that no scum but yours can come uppermost--I know better, by--. Dynamite may
cause an explosion which buries a hundred men in a living grave, or it may blast the rock which
buries them and set them free. The man of science is false to his creed and his cause if he
declares that there is any order of knowledge or any kind of power
which were better unknown or unavailable.

For many years past we have been told that the power to control parenthood is wicked, flying
in the face of providence, interfering with the order of Nature--as if every act worthy of
the human name were not an interference with the order of Nature, as Nature is conceived by
fools; and even to-day the churches, violently differing from each other in the region of
incomprehensibles, are at least agreed in anathematizing the knowledge
and the power to control parenthood.

 'As to what gentlemen may or may not correspond about,
why we may pretermit the question, as the old professor used to say at the Hall; and as to
Summertrees, I will say nothing, knowing him to be an old fox. But I say that this fellow the
laird is a firebrand in the country; that he is stirring up all the honest fellows who should
be drinking their brandy quietly, by telling them stories about their ancestors and the Forty-five;
and that he is trying to turn all waters into his own mill-dam, and to set his sails to all
winds. And because the London people are roaring about for some pinches of their own, he thinks
to win them to his turn with a wet finger. And he gets encouragement from some, because they
want a spell of money from him; and from others, because they fought for the cause once and
are ashamed to go back; and others, because they have nothing to lose; and others, because
they are discontented fools. But if he has brought you, or any one, I say not whom, into this
scrape, with the hope of doing any good, he's a d--d decoy-duck, and that's all I can say for
him; and you are geese, which is worse than being decoy-ducks, or lame-ducks either. And so
here is to the prosperity of King George the Third, and the true Presbyterian religion, and
confusion to the Pope, the Devil, and the Pretender! I'll tell you what, Mr. Fairbairn, I am
but tenth owner of this bit of a craft, the JUMPING JENNY--but tenth owner and must sail her
by my owners' directions. But if I were whole owner, I would not have the brig be made a ferry-boat
for your Jacobitical, old-fashioned Popish riff-raff, Mr. Fairport--I would not, by my soul;
they should walk the plank, by the gods, as I have seen better men do when I sailed under the
What-d'ye-callum colours. But being contraband goods, and on board my vessel, and I with my
sailing orders in my hand, why, I am to forward them as directed--I say, John Roberts, keep
her up a bit with the helm.--and so, Mr. Fairweather, what I do is--as the d--d villain Turnpenny
says--all in the way of business.'

He had been speaking with difficulty for the last five minutes, and now at length dropped on
the deck, fairly silenced by the quantity of spirits which he had swallowed, but without having
showed any glimpse of the gaiety, or even of the extravagance, of intoxication.

The old sailor stepped forward and flung a sea-cloak over the slumberer's shoulders, and added,
looking at Fairford, 'Pity of him he should have this fault; for without it, he would have
been as clever a fellow as ever trod a plank with ox leather.'

'And what are we to do now?' said Fairford.

'Stand off and on, to be sure, till we see the signal, and then obey orders.'

So saying, the old man turned to his duty, and left the passenger to amuse himself with his
own meditations. Presently afterward a light column of smoke was seen rising from the little
headland.

'I can tell you what we are to do now, master,' said the sailor. 'We'll stand out to sea, and
then run in again with the evening tide, and make Skinburness; or, if there's not light, we
can run into the Wampool river, and put you ashore about Kirkbride or Leaths, with the long-boat.'

Fairford, unwell before, felt this destination condemned him to an agony of many hours, which
his disordered stomach and aching head were ill able to endure. There was no remedy, however,
but patience, and the recollection that he was suffering in the cause of friendship. As the
sun rose high, he became worse; his sense of smell appeared to acquire a morbid degree of acuteness,
for the mere purpose of inhaling and distinguishing all the various odours with which he was
surrounded, from that of pitch to all the complicated smells of the hold. His heart, too, throbbed
under the heat, and he felt as if in full progress towards a high fever.

The seamen, who were civil and attentive considering their calling, observed his distress,
and one contrived to make an awning out of an old sail, while another compounded some lemonade,
the only liquor which their passenger could be prevailed upon to touch. After drinking it off,
he obtained, but could not be said to enjoy, a few hours of troubled slumber.

CHAPTER XV

NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

Alan Fairford's spirit was more ready to encounter labour than his frame was adequate to support
it. In spite of his exertions, when he awoke, after five or six hours' slumber, he found that
he was so much disabled by dizziness in his head and pains in his limbs, that he could not
raise himself without assistance. He heard with some pleasure that they were now running right
for the Wampool river, and that he would be put on shore in a very short time. The vessel accordingly
lay to, and presently showed a weft in her ensign, which was hastily answered by signals from
on shore. Men and horses were seen to come down the broken path which leads to the shore; the
latter all properly tackled for carrying their loading. Twenty fishing barks were pushed afloat
at once, and crowded round the brig with much clamour, laughter, cursing, and jesting. Amidst
all this apparent confusion there was the essential regularity. Nanty Ewart again walked his
quarter-deck as if he had never tasted spirits in his life, issued the necessary orders with
precision, and saw them executed with punctuality. In half an hour the loading of the brig
was in a great measure disposed in the boats; in a quarter of an hour more, it was landed on
the beach, and another interval of about the same duration was sufficient to distribute it
on the various strings of packhorses which waited for that purpose, and which instantly dispersed,
each on its own proper adventure. More mystery was observed in loading the ship's boat with
a quantity of small barrels, which seemed to contain ammunition. This was not done until the
commercial customers had been dismissed; and it was not until this was performed that Ewart
proposed to Alan, as he lay stunned with pain and noise, to accompany him ashore.

It was with difficulty that Fairford could get over the side of the vessel, and he could not
seat himself on the stern of the boat without assistance from the captain and his people. Nanty
Ewart, who saw nothing in this worse than an ordinary fit of sea-sickness, applied the usual
topics of consolation. He assured his passenger that he would be quite well by and by, when
he had been half an hour on terra firma, and that he hoped to drink a can and smoke a pipe
with him at Father Crackenthorp's, for all that he felt a little out of the way for riding
the wooden horse.

'Who is Father Crackenthorp?' said Fairford, though scarcely able to articulate the question.

'As honest a fellow as is of a thousand,' answered Nanty.

'Ah, how much good brandy he and I have made little of in our day! By my soul, Mr. Fairbird,
he is the prince of skinkers, and the father of the free trade--not a stingy hypocritical devil
like old Turnpenny Skinflint, that drinks drunk on other folk's cost, and thinks it sin when
he has to pay for it--but a real hearty old cock;--the sharks have been at and about him this
many a day, but Father Crackenthorp knows how to trim his sails--never a warrant but he hears
of it before the ink's dry. He is BONUS SOCIUS with headborough and constable. The king's exchequer
could not bribe a man to inform against him. If any such rascal were to cast up, why, he would
miss his ears next morning, or be sent to seek them in the Solway. He is a statesman, [A small
landed proprietor.] though he keeps a public; but, indeed, that is only for convenience and
to excuse his having cellarage and folk about him; his wife's a canny woman--and his daughter
Doll too. Gad, you'll be in port there till you get round again; and I'll keep my word with
you, and bring you to speech of the laird.

Gad, the only trouble I shall have is to get you out of the house; for Doll is a rare wench,
and my dame a funny old one, and Father Crackenthorp the rarest companion! He'll drink you
a bottle of rum or brandy without starting, but never wet his lips with the nasty Scottish
stuff that the canting old scoundrel Turnpenny has brought into fashion. He is a gentleman,
every inch of him, old Crackenthorp; in his own way, that is; and besides, he has a share in
the JUMPING JENNY, and many a moonlight outfit besides. He can give Doll a pretty penny, if
he likes the tight fellow that would turn in with her for life.'

In the midst of this prolonged panegyric on Father Crackenthorp, the boat touched the beach,
the rowers backed their oars to keep her afloat, whilst the other fellows lumped into the surf,
and, with the most rapid dexterity, began to hand the barrels ashore.

'Up with them higher on the beach, my hearties,' exclaimed Nanty Ewart--'High and dry--high
and dry--this gear will not stand wetting. Now, out with our spare hand here--high and dry
with him too. What's that?--the galloping of horse! Oh, I hear the jingle of the packsaddles--they
are our own folk.'

