But now, if this rumour were true, there had been positive dishonesty. From whichever source
the man might have got the money first, if the money had been twice got, the second payment
had been fraudulently obtained. Surely if the accusation had been untrue Lopez would have come
to him and declared it to be false, knowing what must otherwise be his thoughts. Lately, in
the daily worry of his life, he had avoided all conversation with the man. He would not allow
his mind to contemplate clearly what was coming. He entertained some irrational, undefined
hope that something would at last save his daughter from the threatened banishment. It might
be, if he held his own hand tight enough, that there would not be money enough even to pay
for her passage out. As for her outfit, Lopez would of course order what he wanted and have
the bills sent to Manchester Square. Whether or not this was being done neither he nor Emily
knew. And thus matters went on without much speech between the two men. But now the old barrister
thought that he was bound to speak. He therefore waited on a certain morning till Lopez had
come down, having previously desired his daughter to leave the room. "Lopez," he asked, "what
is this that the newspapers are saying about your expenses at Silverbridge?"

Lopez had expected the attack and had endeavoured to prepare himself for it. "I should have
thought, sir, that you would not have paid much attention to such statements in a newspaper."

"When they concern myself, I do. I paid your electioneering expenses."

"You certainly subscribed £500 towards them, Mr. Wharton."

"I subscribed nothing, sir. There was no question of a subscription,--by which you intend to
imply contribution from various sources; You told me that the contest cost you £500 and that
sum I handed to you, with the full understanding on your part, as well as on mine, that I was
paying for the whole. Was that so?"

"Have it your own way, sir."

"If you are not more precise, I shall think that you have defrauded me."

"Defrauded you!"

"Yes, sir;--defrauded me, or the Duke of Omnium. The money is gone, and it matters little which.
But if that be so I shall know that either from him or from me you have raised money under
false pretences."

"Of course, Mr. Wharton, from you I must bear whatever you may choose to say."

"Is it true that you have applied to the Duke of Omnium for money on account of your expenses
at Silverbridge, and is it true that he has paid you money on that score?"

"Mr. Wharton, as I said just now, I am bound to hear and to bear from you anything that you
may choose to say. Your connection with my wife and your age alike restrain my resentment.
But I am not bound to answer your questions when they are accompanied by such language as you
have chosen to use, and I refuse to answer any further questions on this subject."

"Of course I know that you have taken the money from the Duke."

"Then why do you ask me?"

"And of course I know that you are as well aware as I am of the nature of the transaction.
That you can brazen it out without a blush only proves to me that you have got beyond the reach
of shame!"

"Very well, sir."

"And you have no further explanation to make?"

"What do you expect me to say? Without knowing any of the facts of the case,--except the one,
that you contributed £500 to my election expenses,--you take upon yourself to tell me that
I am a shameless, fraudulent swindler. And then you ask for a further explanation! In such
a position is it likely that I shall explain anything;--that I can be in a humour to be explanatory?
Just turn it all over in your mind, and ask yourself the question."

"I have turned it over in my own mind, and I have asked myself the question, and I do not think
it probable that you should wish to explain anything. I shall take steps to let the Duke know
that I as your father-in-law had paid the full sum which you had stated that you had spent
at Silverbridge."

"Much the Duke will care about that."

"And after what has passed I am obliged to say that the sooner you leave this house the better
I shall be pleased."

"Very well, sir. Of course I shall take my wife with me."

"That must be as she pleases."

"No, Mr. Wharton. That must be as I please. She belongs to me,--not to you or to herself. Under
your influence she has forgotten much of what belongs to the duty of a wife, but I do not think
that she will so far have forgotten herself as to give me more trouble than to bid her come
with me when I desire it."

"Let that be as it may, I must request that you, sir, will absent yourself. I will not entertain
as my guest a man who has acted as you have done in this matter,--even though he be my son-in-law."

"I can sleep here to-night, I suppose?"

"Or to-morrow if it suits you. As for Emily, she can remain here, if you will allow her to do so."

"That will not suit me," said Lopez.

"In that case, as far as I am concerned, I shall do whatever she may ask me to do. Good morning."

Mr. Wharton left the room, but did not leave the house. Before he did so he would see his daughter;
and, thinking it probable that Lopez would also choose to see his wife, he prepared to wait
in his own room. But, in about ten minutes, Lopez started from the hall door in a cab, and
did so without going upstairs. Mr. Wharton had reason to believe that his son-in-law was almost
destitute of money for immediate purposes. Whatever he might have would at any rate be serviceable
to him before he started. Any home for Emily must be expensive; and no home in their present
circumstances could be so reputable for her as one under her father's roof. He therefore almost
hoped that she might still be left with him till that horrid day should come,--if it ever did
come,--in which she would be taken away from him for ever. "Of course, papa, I shall go if
he bids me," she said, when he told her all that he thought right to tell her of that morning's
interview.

"I hardly know how to advise you," said the father, meaning in truth to bring himself round
to the giving of some advice adverse to her husband's will.

"I want no advice, papa."

"Want no advice! I never knew a woman who wanted it more."

"No, papa. I am bound to do as he tells me. I know what I have done. When some poor wretch
has got himself into perpetual prison by his misdeeds, no advice can serve him then. So it
is with me."

"You can at any rate escape from your prison."

"No;--no. I have a feeling of pride which tells me that as I chose to become the wife of my
husband,--as I insisted on it in opposition to all my friends,--as I would judge for myself,--I
am bound to put up with my choice. If this had come upon me through the authority of others,
if I had been constrained to marry him, I think I could have reconciled myself to deserting
him. But I did it myself, and I will abide by it. When he bids me go, I shall go." Poor Mr.
Wharton went to his chambers, and sat there the whole day without taking a book or a paper
into his hands. Could there be no rescue, no protection, no relief! He turned over in his head
various plans, but in a vague and useless manner. What if the Duke were to prosecute Lopez
for the fraud! What if he could induce Lopez to abandon his wife,--pledging himself by some
deed not to return to her,--for, say, twenty or even thirty thousand pounds! What if he himself
were to carry his daughter away to the continent, half forcing and half persuading her to make
the journey! Surely there might be some means found by which the man might be frightened into
compliance. But there he sat,--and did nothing. And in the evening he ate a solitary mutton
chop at The Jolly Blackbird, because he could not bear to face even his club, and then returned
to his chambers,--to the great disgust of the old woman who had them in charge at nights. And
at about midnight he crept away to his own house, a wretched old man.

Lopez when he left Manchester Square did not go in search of a new home for himself and his
wife, nor during the whole of the day did he trouble himself on that subject. He spent most
of the day at the rooms in Coleman Street of the San Juan Mining Association, of which Mr.
Mills Happerton had once been Chairman. There was now another Chairman and other Directors;
but Mr. Mills Happerton's influence had so far remained with the Company as to enable Lopez
to become well known in the Company's offices, and acknowledged as a claimant for the office
of resident Manager at San Juan in Guatemala. Now the present project was this,--that Lopez
was to start on behalf of the Company early in May, that the Company was to pay his own personal
expenses out to Guatemala, and that they should allow him while there a salary of £1000 a year
for managing the affairs of the mine. As far as this offer went, the thing was true enough.
It was true that Lopez had absolutely secured the place. But he had done so subject to the
burden of one very serious stipulation. He was to become proprietor of 50 shares in the mine,
and to pay up £100 each on those shares. It was considered that the man who was to get £1000
a year in Guatemala for managing the affair, should at any rate assist the affair, and show
his confidence in the affair to an extent as great as that. Of course the holder of these 50
shares would be as fully entitled as any other shareholder to that 20 per cent. which those
who promoted the mine promised as the immediate result of the speculation.

At first Lopez had hoped that he might be enabled to defer the actual payment of the £5000
till after he had sailed. When once out in Guatemala as manager, as manager he would doubtless
remain. But by degrees he found that the payment must actually be made in advance. Now there
was nobody to whom he could apply but Mr. Wharton. He was, indeed, forced to declare at the
office that the money was to come from Mr. Wharton, and had given some excellent but fictitious
reason why Mr. Wharton would not pay the money till February.

And in spite of all that had come and gone he still did hope that if the need to go were actually
there he might even yet get the money from Mr. Wharton. Surely Mr. Wharton would sooner pay
such a sum than be troubled at home with such a son-in-law. Should the worst come to the worst,
of course he could raise the money by consenting to leave his wife at home. But this was not
part of his plan, if he could avoid it. £5000 would be a very low price at which to sell his
wife, and all that he might get from his connection with her. As long as he kept her with him
he was in possession at any rate of all that Mr. Wharton would do for her. He had not therefore
as yet made his final application to his father-in-law for the money, having found it possible
to postpone the payment till the middle of February. His quarrel with Mr. Wharton this morning
he regarded as having little or no effect upon his circumstances. Mr. Wharton would not give
him the money because he loved him, nor yet from personal respect, nor from any sense of duty
as to what he might owe to a son-in-law. It would be simply given as the price by which his
absence might be purchased, and his absence would not be the less desirable because of this
morning's quarrel.

But, even yet, he was not quite resolved as to going to Guatemala. Sexty Parker had been sucked
nearly dry, and was in truth at this moment so violent with indignation and fear and remorse
that Lopez did not dare to show himself in Little Tankard Yard; but still there were, even
yet, certain hopes in that direction from which great results might come. If a certain new
spirit which had just been concocted from the bark of trees in Central Africa, and which was
called Bios, could only be made to go up in the market, everything might be satisfactorily
arranged. The hoardings of London were already telling the public that if it wished to get
drunk without any of the usual troubles of intoxication it must drink Bios. The public no doubt
does read the literature of the hoardings, but then it reads so slowly! This Bios had hardly
been twelve months on the boards as yet! But they were now increasing the size of the letters
in the advertisements and the jocundity of the pictures,--and the thing might be done. There
was, too, another hope,--another hope of instant moneys by which Guatemala might be staved
off, as to which further explanation shall be given in a further chapter.

"I suppose I shall find Dixon a decent sort of a fellow?" said Lopez to the Secretary of the
Association in Coleman Street.

"Rough, you know."

"But honest?"

"Oh, yes;--he's all that."

"If he's honest, and what I call loyal, I don't care a straw for anything else. One doesn't
expect West-end manners in Guatemala. But I shall have a deal to do with him,--and I hate a
fellow that you can't depend on."

"Mr. Happerton used to think a great deal of Dixon."

"That's all right," said Lopez. Mr. Dixon was the underground manager out at the San Juan mine,
and was perhaps as anxious for a loyal and honest colleague as was Mr. Lopez. If so, Mr. Dixon
was very much in the way to be disappointed.

Lopez stayed at the office all the day studying the affairs of the San Juan mine, and then
went to the Progress for his dinner. Hitherto he had taken no steps whatever as to getting
lodgings for himself or for his wife.

CHAPTER LIII

Mr. Hartlepod

When the time came at which Lopez should have left Manchester Square he was still there. Mr.
Wharton, in discussing the matter with his daughter,--when wishing to persuade her that she
might remain in his house even in opposition to her husband,--had not told her that he had
actually desired Lopez to leave it. He had then felt sure that the man would go and would take
his wife with him, but he did not even yet know the obduracy and the cleverness and the impregnability
of his son-in-law. When the time came, when he saw his daughter in the morning after the notice
had been given, he could not bring himself even yet to say to her that he had issued an order
for his banishment. Days went by and Lopez was still there, and the old barrister said no further
word on the subject. The two men never met;--or met simply in the hall or passages. Wharton
himself studiously avoided such meetings, thus denying himself the commonest uses of his own
house. At last Emily told him that her husband had fixed the day for her departure. The next
Indian mail-packet by which they would leave England would start from Southampton on the 2nd
of April, and she was to be ready to go on that day. "How is it to be till then?" the father
asked in a low, uncertain voice.

"I suppose I may remain with you."

"And your husband?"

"He will be here too,--I suppose."

"Such a misery,--such a destruction of everything no man ever heard of before!" said Mr. Wharton.
To this she made no reply, but continued working at some necessary preparation for her final
departure. "Emily," he said, "I will make any sacrifice to prevent it. What can be done? Short
of injuring Everett's interests I will do anything."

"I do not know," she said.

"You must understand something of his affairs."

"Nothing whatever. He has told me nothing of them. In earlier days,--soon after our marriage,--he
bade me get money from you."

"When you wrote to me for money from Italy?"

"And after that. I have refused to do anything;--to say a word. I told him that it must be
between you and him. What else could I say? And now he tells me nothing."

"I cannot think that he should want you to go with him." Then there was again a pause. "Is
it because he loves you?"

"Not that, papa."

"Why then should he burden himself with a companion? His money, whatever he has, would go further
without such impediment."

"Perhaps he thinks, papa, that while I am with him he has a hold upon you."

"He shall have a stronger hold by leaving you. What is he to gain? If I could only know his price."

"Ask him, papa."

"I do not even know how I am to speak to him again."

Then again there was a pause. "Papa," she said after a while, "I have done it myself. Let me
go. You will still have Everett. And it may be that after a time I shall come back to you.
He will not kill me, and it may be that I shall not die."

"By God!" said Mr. Wharton, rising from his chair suddenly, "if there were money to be made
by it, I believe that he would murder you without scruple." Thus it was that within eighteen
months of her marriage the father spoke to his daughter of her husband.

"What am I to take with me?" she said to her husband a few days later.

"You had better ask your father."

"Why should I ask him, Ferdinand? How should he know?"

"And how should I?"

"I should have thought that you would interest yourself about it."

"Upon my word I have enough to interest me just at present, without thinking of your finery.
I suppose you mean what clothes you should have?"

"I was not thinking of myself only."

"You need think of nothing else. Ask him what he pleases to allow you to spend, and then I
will tell you what to get."

"I will never ask him for anything, Ferdinand."

"Then you may go without anything. You might as well do it at once, for you will have to do
it sooner or later. Or, if you please, go to his tradesmen and say nothing to him about it.
They will give you credit. You see how it is, my dear. He has cheated me in a most rascally
manner. He has allowed me to marry his daughter, and because I did not make a bargain with
him as another man would have done, he denies me the fortune I had a right to expect with you.
You know that the Israelites despoiled the Egyptians, and it was taken as a merit on their
part. Your father is an Egyptian to me, and I will despoil him. You can tell him that I say
so if you please."

And so the days went on till the first week of February had passed, and Parliament had met.
Both Lopez and his wife were still living in Manchester Square. Not another word had been said
as to that notice to quit, nor an allusion made to it. It was supposed to be a settled thing
that Lopez was to start with his wife for Guatemala in the first week in April. Mr. Wharton
had himself felt that difficulty as to his daughter's outfit, and had told her that she might
get whatever it pleased her on his credit. "For yourself, my dear."

"Papa, I will get nothing till he bids me."

"But you can't go across the world without anything. What are you to do in such a place as
that unless you have the things you want?"

"What do poor people do who have to go? What should I do if you had cast me off because of
my disobedience?"

"But I have not cast you off."

"Tell him that you will give him so much, and then, if he bids me, I will spend it."

"Let it be so. I will tell him."

Upon that Mr. Wharton did speak to his son-in-law;--coming upon him suddenly one morning in
the dining-room. "Emily will want an outfit if she is to go to this place."

"Like other people she wants many things that she cannot get."

"I will tell my tradesmen to furnish her with what she wants, up to,--well,--suppose I say
£200. I have spoken to her and she wants your sanction."

"My sanction for spending your money? She can have that very quickly."

"You can tell her so;--or I will do so."

Upon that Mr. Wharton was going, but Lopez stopped him. It was now essential that the money
for the shares in the San Juan mine should be paid up, and his father-in-law's pocket was still
the source from which the enterprising son-in-law hoped to procure it. Lopez had fully made
up his mind to demand it, and thought that the time had now come. And he was resolved that
he would not ask it as a favour on bended knee. He was beginning to feel his own power, and
trusted that he might prevail by other means than begging. "Mr. Wharton," he said, "you and
I have not been very good friends lately."

"No, indeed."

"There was a time,--a very short time,--during which I thought that we might hit it off together,
and I did my best. You do not, I fancy, like men of my class."

"Well;--well! You had better go on if there be anything to say."

"I have much to say, and I will go on. You are a rich man, and I am your son-in-law." Mr. Wharton
put his left hand up to his forehead, brushing the few hairs back from his head, but he said
nothing. "Had I received from you during the last most vital year that assistance which I think
I had a right to expect, I also might have been a rich man now. It is no good going back to
that." Then he paused, but still Mr. Wharton said nothing. "Now you know what has come to me
and to your daughter. We are to be expatriated."

"Is that my fault?"

"I think it is, but I mean to say nothing further of that. This Company which is sending me
out, and which will probably be the most thriving thing of the kind which has come up within
these twenty years, is to pay me a salary of £1000 a year as resident manager at San Juan."

"So I understand."

"The salary alone would be a beggarly thing. Guatemala, I take it, is not the cheapest country
in the world in which a man can live. But I am to go out as the owner of fifty shares on which
£100 each must be paid up, and I am entitled to draw another £1000 a year as dividend on the
profit of those shares."

"That will be twenty per cent."

"Exactly."

"And will double your salary."

"Just so. But there is one little ceremony to be perfected before I can be allowed to enter
upon so halcyon a state of existence. The £100 a share must be paid up." Mr. Wharton simply
stared at him. "I must have the £5000 to invest in the undertaking before I can start."

"Well!"

"Now I have not got £5000 myself, nor any part of it. You do not wish, I suppose, to see either
me or your daughter starve. And as for me, I hardly flatter myself when I say that you are
very anxious to be rid of me. £5000 is not very much for me to ask of you, as I regard it."

"Such consummate impudence I never met in my life before!"

"Nor perhaps so much unprevaricating downright truth. At any rate such is the condition of
my affairs. If I am to go the money must be paid this week. I have, perhaps foolishly, put
off mentioning the matter till I was sure that I could not raise the sum elsewhere. Though
I feel my claim on you to be good, Mr. Wharton, it is not pleasant to me to make it."

"You are asking me for £5000 down!"

"Certainly I am."

"What security am I to have?"

"Security?"

"Yes;--that if I pay it I shall not be troubled again by the meanest scoundrel that it has
ever been my misfortune to meet. How am I to know that you will not come back to-morrow? How
am I to know that you will go at all? Do you think it probable that I will give you £5000 on
your own simple word?"

"Then the scoundrel will stay in England,--and will generally find it convenient to live in
Manchester Square."

"I'll be d----d if he does. Look here, sir. Between you and me there can be a bargain, and
nothing but a bargain. I will pay the £5000,--on certain conditions."

"I didn't doubt at all that you would pay it."

"I will go with you to the office of this Company, and will pay for the shares if I can receive
assurance there that the matter is as you say, and that the shares will not be placed in your
power before you have reached Guatemala."

"You can come to-day, sir, and receive all that assurance."

"And I must have a written undertaking from you,--a document which my daughter can show if
it be necessary,--that you will never claim her society again or trouble her with any application."

"You mistake me, Mr. Wharton. My wife goes with me to Guatemala."

"Then I will not pay one penny. Why should I? What is your presence or absence to me except
as it concerns her? Do you think that I care for your threats of remaining here? The police
will set that right."

"Wherever I go, my wife goes."

"We'll see to that too. If you want the money, you must leave her. Good morning."

Mr. Wharton as he went to his chambers thought the matter over. He was certainly willing to
risk the £5000 demanded if he could rid himself and his daughter of this terrible incubus,
even if it were only for a time. If Lopez would but once go to Guatemala, leaving his wife
behind him, it would be comparatively easy to keep them apart should he ever return. The difficulty
now was not in him but in her. The man's conduct had been so outrageous, so bare-faced, so
cruel, that the lawyer did not doubt but that he could turn the husband out of his house, and
keep the wife, even now, were it not that she was determined to obey the man whom she, in opposition
to all her friends, had taken as her master. "I have done it myself, and I will bear it," was
all the answer she would make when her father strove to persuade her to separate herself from
her husband. "You have got Everett," she would say. "When a girl is married she is divided
from her family;--and I am divided." But she would willingly stay if Lopez would bid her stay.
It now seemed that he could not go without the £5000; and, when the pressure came upon him,
surely he would go and leave his wife.

In the course of that day Mr. Wharton went to the offices of the San Juan mine and asked to
see the Director. He was shown up into a half-furnished room, two stories high, in Coleman
Street, where he found two clerks sitting upon stools;--and when he asked for the Director
was shown into the back room in which sat the Secretary. The Secretary was a dark, plump little
man with a greasy face, who had the gift of assuming an air of great importance as he twisted
his chair round to face visitors who came to inquire about the San Juan Mining Company. His
name was Hartlepod; and if the San Juan mine "turned out trumps," as he intended that it should,
Mr. Hartlepod meant to be a great man in the City. To Mr. Hartlepod Mr. Wharton, with considerable
embarrassment, explained as much of the joint history of himself and Lopez as he found to be
absolutely necessary. "He has only left the office about half-an-hour," said Mr. Hartlepod.

"Of course you understand that he is my son-in-law."

"He has mentioned your name to us, Mr. Wharton, before now."

"And he is going out to Guatemala?"

"Oh yes;--he's going out. Has he not told you as much himself?"

"Certainly, sir. And he has told me that he is desirous of buying certain shares in the Company
before he starts."

"Probably, Mr. Wharton."

"Indeed, I believe he cannot go unless he buys them."

"That may be so, Mr. Wharton. No doubt he has told you all that himself."

"The fact is, Mr. Hartlepod, I am willing, under certain stipulations, to advance him the money."
Mr. Hartlepod bowed. "I need not trouble you with private affairs between myself and my son-in-law."
Again the Secretary bowed. "But it seems to be for his interest that he should go."

"A very great opening indeed, Mr. Wharton. I don't see how a man is to have a better opening.
A fine salary! His expenses out paid! One of the very best things that has come up for many
years! And as for the capital he is to embark in the affair, he is as safe to get 20 per cent.
on it,--as safe,--as safe as the Bank of England."

"He'll have the shares?"

"Oh yes;--the scrip will be handed to him at once."

"And,--and--"

"If you mean about the mine, Mr. Wharton, you may take my word that it's all real. It's not
one of those sham things that melt away like snow and leave the shareholders nowhere. There's
the prospectus, Mr. Wharton. Perhaps you have not seen that before. Take it away and cast your
eye over it at your leisure." Mr. Wharton put the somewhat lengthy pamphlet into his pocket.
"Look at the list of Directors. We've three members of Parliament, a baronet, and one or two
City names that are as good--as good as the Bank of England. If that prospectus won't make
a man confident I don't know what will. Why, Mr. Wharton, you don't think that your son-in-law
would get those fifty shares at par unless he was going out as our general local manager. The
shares ain't to be had. It's a large concern as far as capital goes. You'll see if you look.
About a quarter of a million paid up. But it's all in a box as one may say. It's among ourselves.
The shares ain't in the market. Of course it's not for me to say what should be done between
you and your son-in-law. Lopez is a friend of mine, and a man I esteem, and all that. Nevertheless
I shouldn't think of advising you to do this or that,--or not to do it. But when you talk of
safety, Mr. Wharton,--why, Mr. Wharton, I don't scruple to tell you as a man who knows what
these things are, that this is an opportunity that doesn't come in a man's way perhaps twice
in his life."

Mr. Wharton found that he had nothing more to say, and went back to Lincoln's Inn. He knew
very well that Mr. Hartlepod's assurances were not worth much. Mr. Hartlepod himself and his
belongings, the clerks in his office, the look of the rooms, and the very nature of the praises
which he had sung, all of them inspired anything but confidence. Mr. Wharton was a man of the
world; and, though he knew nothing of City ways, was quite aware that no man in his senses
would lay out £5000 on the mere word of Mr. Hartlepod. But still he was inclined to make the
payment. If only he could secure the absence of Lopez,--if he could be sure that Lopez would
in truth go to Guatemala, and if also he could induce the man to go without his wife, he would
risk the money. The money would, of course, be thrown away,--but he would throw it away. Lopez
no doubt had declared that he would not go without his wife, even though the money were paid
for him. But the money was an alluring sum! As the pressure upon the man became greater, Mr.
Wharton thought he would probably consent to leave his wife behind him.

In his emergency the barrister went to his attorney and told him everything. The two lawyers
were closeted together for an hour, and Mr. Wharton's last words to his old friend were as
follows:--"I will risk the money, Walker, or rather I will consent absolutely to throw it away,--as
it will be thrown away,--if it can be managed that he shall in truth go to this place without
his wife."

CHAPTER LIV

Lizzie

It cannot be supposed that Ferdinand Lopez at this time was a very happy man. He had, at any
rate, once loved his wife, and would have loved her still could he have trained her to think
as he thought, to share his wishes, and "to put herself into the same boat with him,"--as he
was wont to describe the unison and sympathy which he required from her. To give him his due,
he did not know that he was a villain. When he was exhorting her to "get round her father"
he was not aware that he was giving her lessons which must shock a well-conditioned girl. He
did not understand that everything that she had discovered of his moral disposition since her
marriage was of a nature to disgust her. And, not understanding all this, he conceived that
he was grievously wronged by her in that she adhered to her father rather than to him. This
made him unhappy, and doubly disappointed him. He had neither got the wife that he had expected
nor the fortune. But he still thought that the fortune must come if he would only hold on to
the wife which he had got.

And then everything had gone badly with him since his marriage. He was apt, when thinking over
his affairs, to attribute all this to the fears and hesitation and parsimony of Sexty Parker.
None of his late ventures with Sexty Parker had been successful. And now Sexty was in a bad
condition, very violent, drinking hard, declaring himself to be a ruined man, and swearing
that if this and that were not done he would have bitter revenge. Sexty still believed in the
wealth of his partner's father-in-law, and still had some hope of salvation from that source.
Lopez would declare to him, and up to this very time persevered in protesting, that salvation
was to be found in Bios. If Sexty would only risk two or three thousand pounds more upon Bios,--or
his credit to that amount, failing the immediate money,--things might still be right. "Bios
be d----," said Sexty, uttering a string of heavy imprecations. On that morning he had been
trusting to native produce rather than to the new African spirit. But now as the Guatemala
scheme really took form and loomed on Lopez's eyesight as a thing that might be real, he endeavoured
to keep out of Sexty's way. But in vain; Sexty too had heard of Guatemala, and in his misery
hunted Lopez about the city. "By G----, I believe you're afraid to come to Little Tankard Yard,"
he said one day, having caught his victim under the equestrian statue in front of the Exchange.

"What is the good of my coming when you will do nothing when I am there?"

"I'll tell you what it is, Lopez,--you're not going out of the country about this mining business,
if I know it."

"Who said I was?"

"I'll put a spoke in your wheel there, my man. I'll give a written account of all the dealings
between us to the Directors. By G----, they shall know their man."

"You're an ass, Sexty, and always were. Look here. If I can carry on as though I were going
to this place, I can draw £5000 from old Wharton. He has already offered it. He has treated
me with a stinginess that I never knew equalled. Had he done what I had a right to expect,
you and I would have been rich men now. But at last I have got a hold upon him up to £5000.
As you and I stand, pretty nearly the whole of that will go to you. But don't you spoil it
all by making an ass of yourself."

Sexty, who was three parts drunk, looked up into his face for a few seconds, and then made
his reply. "I'm d----d if I believe a word of it." Upon this Lopez affected to laugh, and then
made his escape.

All this, as I have said, did not tend to make his life happy. Though he had impudence enough,
and callousness of conscience enough, to get his bills paid by Mr. Wharton as often as he could,
he was not quite easy in his mind while doing so. His ambition had never been high, but it
had soared higher than that. He had had great hopes. He had lived with some high people. He
had dined with lords and ladies. He had been the guest of a Duchess. He had married the daughter
of a gentleman. He had nearly been a member of Parliament. He still belonged to what he considered
to be a first-rate club. From a great altitude he looked down upon Sexty Parker and men of
Sexty's class, because of his social successes, and because he knew how to talk and to look
like a gentleman. It was unpleasant to him, therefore, to be driven to the life he was now
living. And the idea of going out to Guatemala and burying himself in a mine in Central America
was not to him a happy idea. In spite of all that he had done he had still some hope that he
might avoid that banishment. He had spoken the truth to Sexty Parker in saying that he intended
to get the £5000 from Mr. Wharton without that terrible personal sacrifice, though he had hardly
spoken the truth when he assured his friend that the greater portion of that money would go
to him. There were many schemes fluctuating through his brain, and all accompanied by many
doubts. If he could get Mr. Wharton's money by giving up his wife, should he consent to give
her up? In either case should he stay or should he go? Should he run one further great chance
with Bios,--and if so, by whose assistance? And if he should at last decide that he would do
so by the aid of a certain friend that was yet left to him, should he throw himself at that
friend's feet, the friend being a lady, and propose to desert his wife and begin the world
again with her? For the lady in question was a lady in possession, as he believed, of very
large means. Or should he cut his throat and have done at once with all his troubles, acknowledging
to himself that his career had been a failure, and that, therefore, it might be brought with
advantage to an end? "After all," said he to himself, "that may be the best way of winding
up a bankrupt concern."

Our old friend Lady Eustace, in these days, lived in a very small house in a very small street
bordering upon May Fair; but the street, though very small, and having disagreeable relations
with a mews, still had an air of fashion about it. And with her lived the widow, Mrs. Leslie,
who had introduced her to Mrs. Dick Roby, and through Mrs. Roby to Ferdinand Lopez. Lady Eustace
was in the enjoyment of a handsome income, as I hope that some of my readers may remember,--and
this income, during the last year or two, she had learned to foster, if not with much discretion,
at any rate with great zeal. During her short life she had had many aspirations. Love, poetry,
sport, religion, fashion, Bohemianism had all been tried; but in each crisis there had been
a certain care for wealth which had saved her from the folly of squandering what she had won
by her early energies in the pursuit of her then prevailing passion. She had given her money
to no lover, had not lost it on race-courses, or in building churches;--nor even had she materially
damaged her resources by servants and equipages. At the present time she was still young, and
still pretty,--though her hair and complexion took rather more time than in the days when she
won Sir Florian Eustace. She still liked a lover,--or perhaps two,--though she had thoroughly
convinced herself that a lover may be bought too dear. She could still ride a horse, though
hunting regularly was too expensive for her. She could talk religion if she could find herself
close to a well-got-up clergyman,--being quite indifferent as to the denomination of the religion.
But perhaps a wild dash for a time into fast vulgarity was what in her heart of hearts she
liked best,--only that it was so difficult to enjoy that pleasure without risk of losing everything.
And then, together with these passions, and perhaps above them all, there had lately sprung
up in the heart of Lady Eustace a desire to multiply her means by successful speculation. This
was the friend with whom Lopez had lately become intimate, and by whose aid he hoped to extricate
himself from some of his difficulties.

Poor as he was he had contrived to bribe Mrs. Leslie by handsome presents out of Bond Street;--for,
as he still lived in Manchester Square, and was the undoubted son-in-law of Mr. Wharton, his
credit was not altogether gone. In the giving of these gifts no purport was, of course, named,
but Mrs. Leslie was probably aware that her good word with her friend was expected. "I only
know what I used to hear from Mrs. Roby," Mrs. Leslie said to her friend. "He was mixed up
with Hunkey's people, who roll in money; Old Wharton wouldn't have given him his daughter if
he had not been doing well."

"It's very hard to be sure," said Lizzie Eustace.

"He looks like a man who'd know how to feather his own nest," said Mrs. Leslie. "Don't you
think he's very handsome?"

"I don't know that he's likely to do the better for that."

"Well; no; but there are men of whom you are sure, when you look at them, that they'll be successful.
I don't suppose he was anything to begin with, but see where he is now!"

"I believe you are in love with him, my dear," said Lizzie Eustace.

"Not exactly. I don't know that he has given me any provocation. But I don't see why a woman
shouldn't be in love with him if she likes. He is a deal nicer than those fair-haired men who
haven't got a word to say to you, and yet look as though you ought to jump down their mouths;--like
that fellow you were trying to talk to last night;--that Mr. Fletcher. He could just jerk out
three words at a time, and yet he was proud as Lucifer. I like a man who if he likes me is
neither ashamed nor afraid to say so."

"There is a romance there, you know. Mr. Fletcher was in love with Emily Wharton, and she threw
him over for Lopez. They say he has not held up his head since."

"She was quite right," said Mrs. Leslie. "But she is one of those stiff-necked creatures who
are set up with pride though they have nothing to be proud of. I suppose she had a lot of money.
Lopez would never have taken her without."

When, therefore, Lopez called one day at the little house in the little street he was not an
unwelcome visitor. Mrs. Leslie was in the drawing-room, but soon left it after his arrival.
He had of late been often there, and when he at once introduced the subject on which he was
himself intent it was not unexpected. "Seven thousand five hundred pounds!" said Lizzie, after
listening to the proposition which he had come to make. "That is a very large sum of money!"

"Yes;--it's a large sum of money. It's a large affair. I'm in it to rather more than that,
I believe."

"How are you to get people to drink it?" she asked after a pause.

"By telling them that they ought to drink it. Advertise it. It has become a certainty now that
if you will only advertise sufficiently you may make a fortune by selling anything. Only the
interest on the money expended increases in so large a ratio in accordance with the magnitude
of the operation! If you spend a few hundreds in advertising you throw them away. A hundred
thousand pounds well laid out makes a certainty of anything."

"What am I to get to show for my money;--I mean immediately, you know?"

"Registered shares in the Company."

"The Bios Company?"

"No;--we did propose to call ourselves Parker and Co., limited. I think we shall change the
name. They will probably use my name. Lopez and Co., limited."

"But it's all for Bios?"

"Oh yes;--all for Bios."

"And it's to come from Central Africa?"

"It will be rectified in London, you know. Some English spirit will perhaps be mixed. But I
must not tell you the secrets of the trade till you join us. That Bios is distilled from the
bark of the Duffer-tree is a certainty."

"Have you drank any?"

"I've tasted it."

"Is it nice?"

"Very nice;--rather sweet, you know, and will be the better for mixing."

"Gin?" suggested her ladyship.

"Perhaps so,--or whisky. I think I may say that you can't do very much better with your money.
You know I would not say this to you were it not true. In such a matter I treat you just as
if,--as if you were my sister."

"I know how good you are,--but seven thousand five hundred! I couldn't raise so much as that
just at present."

"There are to be six shares," said Lopez, "making £45,000 capital. Would you consent to take
a share jointly with me? That would be three thousand seven hundred and fifty."

"But you have a share already," said Lizzie suspiciously.

"I should then divide that with Mr. Parker. We intend to register at any rate as many as nine
partners. Would you object to hold it with me?" Lopez, as he asked the question, looked at
her as though he were offering her half his heart.

"No," said Lizzie, slowly, "I don't suppose I should object to that."

"I should be doubly eager about the affair if I were in partnership with you."

"It's such a venture."

"Nothing venture nothing have."

"But I've got something as it is, Mr. Lopez, and I don't want to lose it all."

"There's no chance of that if you join us."

"You think Bios is so sure!"

"Quite safe," said Lopez.

"You must give me a little more time to think about it," said Lady Eustace at last, panting
with anxiety, struggling with herself, anxious for the excitement which would come to her from
dealing in Bios, but still fearing to risk her money.

This had taken place immediately after Mr. Wharton's offer of the £5000, in making which he
had stipulated that Emily should be left at home. Then a few days went by, and Lopez was pressed
for his money at the office of the San Juan mine. Did he or did he not mean to take up the
mining shares allotted to him? If he did mean to do so, he must do it at once. He swore by
all his gods that of course he meant to take them up. Had not Mr. Wharton himself been at the
office saying that he intended to pay for them? Was not that sufficient guarantee? They knew
well enough that Mr. Wharton was a man to whom the raising of £5000 could be a matter of no
difficulty. But they did not know, never could know, how impossible it was to get anything
done by Mr. Wharton. But Mr. Wharton had promised to pay for the shares, and when money was
concerned his word would surely suffice. Mr. Hartlepod, backed by two of the Directors, said
that if the thing was to go on at all, the money must really be paid at once. But the conference
was ended by allowing the new local manager another fortnight in which to complete the arrangement.

Lopez allowed four days to pass by, during each of which he was closeted for a time with Lady
Eustace, and then made an attempt to get at Mr. Wharton through his wife. "Your father has
said that he will pay the money for me," said Lopez.

"If he has said so he certainly will do it."

"But he has promised it on the condition that you should remain at home. Do you wish to desert
your husband?" To this she made no immediate answer. "Are you already anxious to be rid of me?"

"I should prefer to remain at home," she said in a very low voice.

"Then you do wish to desert your husband?"

"What is the use of all this, Ferdinand? You do not love me. You did not marry me because I
loved you."

"By heaven I did;--for that and that only."

"And how have you treated me?"

"What have I done to you?"

"But I do not mean to make accusations, Ferdinand. I should only add to our miseries by that.
We should be happier apart."

"Not I. Nor is that my idea of marriage. Tell your father that you wish to go with me, and
then he will let us have the money."

"I will tell him no lie, Ferdinand. If you bid me go, I will go. Where you find a home I must
find one too if it be your pleasure to take me. But I will not ask my father to give you money
because it is my pleasure to go. Were I to say so he would not believe me."

"It is you who have told him to give it me only on the condition of your staying."

"I have told him nothing. He knows that I do not wish to go. He cannot but know that. But he
knows that I mean to go if you require it."

"And you will do nothing for me?"

"Nothing,--in regard to my father." He raised his fist with the thought of striking her, and
she saw the motion. But his arm fell again to his side. He had not quite come to that yet.
"Surely you will have the charity to tell me whether I am to go, if it be fixed," she said.

"Have I not told you so twenty times?"

"Then it is fixed."

"Yes;--it is fixed. Your father will tell you about your things. He has promised you some beggarly
sum,--about as much as a tallow-chandler would give his daughter."

"Whatever he does for me will be sufficient for me. I am not afraid of my father, Ferdinand."

"You shall be afraid of me before I have done with you," said he, leaving the room.

Then as he sat at his club, dining there alone, there came across his mind ideas of what the
world would be like to him if he could leave his wife at home and take Lizzie Eustace with
him to Guatemala. Guatemala was very distant, and it would matter little there whether the
woman he brought with him was his wife or no. It was clear enough to him that his wife desired
no more of his company. What were the conventions of the world to him? This other woman had
money at her own command. He could not make it his own because he could not marry her, but
he fancied that it might be possible to bring her so far under his control as to make the money
almost as good as his own. Mr. Wharton's money was very hard to reach, and would be as hard
to reach,--perhaps harder,--when Mr. Wharton was dead, as now, during his life. He had said
a good deal to the lady since the interview of which a report has been given. She had declared
herself to be afraid of Bios. She did not in the least doubt that great things might be ultimately
done with Bios, but she did not quite see the way with her small capital,--thus humbly did
she speak of her wealth,--to be one of those who should take the initiative in the matter.
Bios evidently required a great deal of advertisement, and Lizzie Eustace had a short-sighted
objection to expend what money she had saved on the hoardings of London. Then he opened to
her the glories of Guatemala, not contenting himself with describing the certainty of the 20
per cent., but enlarging on the luxurious happiness of life in a country so golden, so green,
so gorgeous, and so grand. It had been the very apple of the eye of the old Spaniards. In Guatemala,
he said, Cortez and Pizarro had met and embraced. They might have done so for anything Lizzie
Eustace knew to the contrary. And here our hero took advantage of his name. Don Diego di Lopez
had been the first to raise the banner of freedom in Guatemala when the kings of Spain became
tyrants to their American subjects. All is fair in love and war, and Lizzie amidst the hard
business of her life still loved a dash of romance. Yes, he was about to change the scene and
try his fortune in that golden, green, and gorgeous country. "You will take your wife of course,"
Lady Eustace had said. Then Lopez had smiled, and shrugging his shoulders had left the room.

It was certainly the fact that she could not eat him. Other men before Lopez have had to pick
up what courage they could in their attacks upon women by remembering that fact. She had flirted
with him in a very pleasant way, mixing up her prettiness and her percentages in a manner that
was peculiar to herself. He did not know her, and he knew that he did not know her;--but still
there was the chance. She had thrown his wife more than once in his face, after the fashion
of women when they are wooed by married men since the days of Cleopatra downwards. But he had
taken that simply as encouragement. He had already let her know that his wife was a vixen who
troubled his life. Lizzie had given him her sympathy, and had almost given him a tear. "But
I am not a man to be broken-hearted because I have made a mistake," said Lopez. "Marriage vows
are very well, but they shall never bind me to misery." "Marriage vows are not very well. They
may be very ill," Lizzie had replied, remembering certain passages in her own life.

There was no doubt about her money, and certainly she could not eat him. The fortnight allowed
him by the San Juan Company had nearly gone by when he called at the little house in the little
street, resolved to push his fortune in that direction without fear and without hesitation.
Mrs. Leslie again took her departure, leaving them together, and Lizzie allowed her friend
to go, although the last words that Lopez had spoken had been, as he thought, a fair prelude
to the words he intended to speak to-day. "And what do you think of it?" he said, taking both
her hands in his.

"Think of what?"

"Of our Spanish venture."

"Have you given up Bios, my friend?"

"No; certainly not," said Lopez, seating himself beside her. "I have not taken the other half
share, but I have kept my old venture in the scheme. I believe in Bios, you know."

"Ah;--it is so nice to believe."

"But I believe more firmly in the country to which I am going."

"You are going then?"

"Yes, my friend;--I am going. The allurements are too strong to be resisted. Think of that
climate and of this." He probably had not heard of the mosquitoes of Central America when he
so spoke. "Remember that an income which gives you comfort here will there produce for you
every luxury which wealth can purchase. It is to be a king there, or to be but very common
among commoners here."

"And yet England is a dear old country."

"Have you found it so? Think of the wrongs which you have endured;--of the injuries which you
have suffered."

"Yes, indeed." For Lizzie Eustace had gone through hard days in her time.

"I certainly will fly from such a country to those golden shores on which man may be free and
unshackled."

"And your wife?"

"Oh, Lizzie!" It was the first time that he had called her Lizzie, and she was apparently neither
shocked nor abashed. Perhaps he thought too much of this, not knowing how many men had called
her Lizzie in her time. "Do not you at least understand that a man or a woman may undergo that
tie, and yet be justified in disregarding it altogether?"

"Oh, yes;--if there has been bigamy, or divorce, or anything of that kind." Now Lizzie had
convicted her second husband of bigamy, and had freed herself after that fashion.

"To h---- with their prurient laws," said Lopez, rising suddenly from his chair. "I will neither
appeal to them nor will I obey them. And I expect from you as little subservience as I myself
am prepared to pay.

Will you dare to escape with me from the cold conventionalities, from the miserable thraldom
of this country bound in swaddling cloths? Lizzie Eustace, if you will say the word, I will
take you to that land of glorious happiness."

But Lizzie Eustace had £4000 a year and a balance at her banker's. "Mr. Lopez," she said.

"What answer have you to make me?"

"Mr. Lopez, I think you must be a fool."

He did at last succeed in getting himself into the street, and at any rate she had not eaten him.

CHAPTER LV

Mrs. Parker's Sorrows

The end of February had come, and as far as Mrs. Lopez knew she was to start for Guatemala
in a month's time. And yet there was so much of indecision in her husband's manner, and apparently
so little done by him in regard to personal preparation, that she could hardly bring herself
to feel certain that she would have to make the journey. From day to day her father would ask
her whether she had made her intended purchases, and she would tell him that she had still
postponed the work. Then he would say no more, for he himself was hesitating, doubtful what
he would do, and still thinking that when at last the time should come, he would buy his daughter's
release at any price that might be demanded. Mr. Walker, the attorney, had as yet been able
to manage nothing. He had seen Lopez more than once, and had also seen Mr. Hartlepod. Mr. Hartlepod
had simply told him that he would be very happy to register the shares on behalf of Lopez as
soon as the money was paid. Lopez had been almost insolent in his bearing. "Did Mr. Wharton
think," he asked, "that he was going to sell his wife for £5000?" "I think you'll have to raise
your offer," Mr. Walker had said to Mr. Wharton. That was all very well. Mr. Wharton was willing
enough to raise his offer. He would have doubled his offer could he thereby have secured the
annihilation of Lopez. "I will raise it if he will go without his wife, and give her a written
assurance that he will never trouble her again." But the arrangement was one which Mr. Walker
found it very difficult to carry out. So things went on till the end of February had come.

And during all this time Lopez was still resident in Mr. Wharton's house. "Papa," she said
to him one day, "this is the cruellest thing of all. Why don't you tell him that he must go?"

"Because he would take you with him."

"It would be better so. I could come to see you."

"I did tell him to go,--in my passion. I repented of it instantly, because I should have lost
you. But what did my telling matter to him? He was very indignant, and yet he is still here."

"You told him to go?"

"Yes;--but I am glad that he did not obey me. There must be an end to this soon, I suppose."

"I do not know, papa."

"Do you think that he will not go?"

"I feel that I know nothing, papa. You must not let him stay here always, you know."

"And what will become of you when he goes?"

"I must go with him. Why should you be sacrificed also? I will tell him that he must leave
the house. I am not afraid of him, papa."

"Not yet, my dear;--not yet. We will see."

At this time Lopez declared his purpose one day of dining at the Progress, and Mr. Wharton
took advantage of the occasion to remain at home with his daughter. Everett was now expected,
and there was a probability that he might come on this evening. Mr. Wharton therefore returned
from his chambers early; but when he reached the house he was told that there was a woman in
the dining-room with Mrs. Lopez. The servant did not know what woman. She had asked to see
Mrs. Lopez, and Mrs. Lopez had gone down to her.

The woman in the dining-room was Mrs. Parker. She had called at the house at about half-past
five, and Emily had at once come down when summoned by tidings that a "lady" wanted to see
her. Servants have a way of announcing a woman as a lady, which clearly expresses their own
opinion that the person in question is not a lady. So it had been on the present occasion,
but Mrs. Lopez had at once gone to her visitor. "Oh, Mrs. Parker, I am so glad to see you.
I hope you are well."

"Indeed, then, Mrs. Lopez, I am very far from well. No poor woman, who is the mother of five
children, was ever farther from being well than I am."

"Is anything wrong?"

"Wrong, ma'am! Everything is wrong. When is Mr. Lopez going to pay my husband all the money
he has took from him?"

"Has he taken money?"

"Taken! he has taken everything. He has shorn my husband as bare as a board. We're ruined,
Mrs. Lopez, and it's your husband has done it. When we were at Dovercourt, I told you how it
was going to be. His business has left him, and now there is nothing. What are we to do?" The
woman was seated on a chair, leaning forward with her two hands on her knees. The day was wet,
the streets were half mud and half snow, and the poor woman, who had made her way through the
slush, was soiled and wet. "I look to you to tell me what me and my children is to do. He's
your husband, Mrs. Lopez."

"Yes, Mrs. Parker; he is my husband."

"Why couldn't he let Sexty alone? Why should the like of him be taking the bread out of my
children's mouths? What had we ever done to him? You're rich."

"Indeed I am not, Mrs. Parker."

"Yes, you are. You're living here in a grand house, and your father's made of money. You'll
know nothing of want, let the worst come to the worst. What are we to do, Mrs. Lopez? I'm the
wife of that poor creature, and you're the wife of the man that has ruined him. What are we
to do, Mrs. Lopez?"

"I do not understand my husband's business, Mrs. Parker."

"You're one with him, ain't you? If anybody had ever come to me and said my husband had robbed
him, I'd never have stopped till I knew the truth of it. If any woman had ever said to me that
Parker had taken the bread out of her children's mouths, do you think that I'd sit as you are
sitting? I tell you that Lopez has robbed us,--has robbed us, and taken everything."

"What can I say, Mrs. Parker;--what can I do?"

"Where is he?"

"He is not here. He is dining at his club."

"Where is that? I will go there and shame him before them all. Don't you feel no shame? Because
you've got things comfortable here, I suppose it's all nothing to you. You don't care, though
my children were starving in the gutter,--as they will do."

"If you knew me, Mrs. Parker, you wouldn't speak to me like that."

"Know you! Of course I know you. You're a lady, and your father's a rich man, and your husband
thinks no end of himself. And we're poor people, so it don't matter whether we're robbed and
ruined or not. That's about it."

"If I had anything, I'd give you all that I had."

"And he's taken to drinking that hard that he's never rightly sober from morning to night."
As she told this story of her husband's disgrace, the poor woman burst into tears. "Who's to
trust him with business now? He's that broken-hearted that he don't know which way to turn,--only
to the bottle. And Lopez has done it all,--done it all! I haven't got a father, ma'am, who
has got a house over his head for me and my babies. Only think if you was turned out into the
street with your babby, as I am like to be."

"I have no baby," said the wretched woman through her tears and sobs.

"Haven't you, Mrs. Lopez? Oh dear!" exclaimed the soft-hearted woman, reduced at once to pity.
"How was it then?"

"He died, Mrs. Parker,--just a few days after he was born."

"Did he now? Well, well. We all have our troubles, I suppose."

"I have mine, I know," said Emily, "and very, very heavy they are. I cannot tell you what I
have to suffer."

"Isn't he good to you?"

"I cannot talk about it, Mrs. Parker. What you tell me about yourself has added greatly to
my sorrows. My husband is talking of going away,--to live out of England."

"Yes, at a place they call--I forget what they call it, but I heard it."

"Guatemala,--in America."

"I know. Sexty told me. He has no business to go anywhere, while he owes Sexty such a lot of
money. He has taken everything, and now he's going to Kattymaly!" At this moment Mr. Wharton
knocked at the door and entered the room. As he did so Mrs. Parker got up and curtseyed.

"This is my father, Mrs. Parker," said Emily. "Papa, this is Mrs. Parker. She is the wife of
Mr. Parker, who was Ferdinand's partner. She has come here with bad news."

"Very bad news indeed, sir," said Mrs. Parker, curtseying again. Mr. Wharton frowned, not as
being angry with the woman, but feeling that some further horror was to be told him of his
son-in-law. "I can't help coming, sir," continued Mrs. Parker. "Where am I to go if I don't
come? Mr. Lopez, sir, has ruined us root and branch,--root and branch."

"That at any rate is not my fault," said Mr. Wharton.

"But she is his wife, sir. Where am I to go if not to where he lives? Am I to put up with everything
gone, and my poor husband in the right way to go to Bedlam, and not to say a word about it
to the grand relations of him who did it all?"

"He is a bad man," said Mr. Wharton. "I cannot make him otherwise."

"Will he do nothing for us?"

"I will tell you all I know about him." Then Mr. Wharton did tell her all that he knew, as
to the appointment at Guatemala and the amount of salary which was to be attached to it. "Whether
he will do anything for you, I cannot say;--I should think not, unless he be forced. I should
advise you to go to the offices of the Company in Coleman Street and try to make some terms
there. But I fear,--I fear it will be all useless."

"Then we may starve."

"It is not her fault," said Mr. Wharton, pointing to his daughter. "She has had no hand in
it. She knows less of it all than you do."

"It is my fault," said Emily, bursting out into self-reproach,--"my fault that I married him."

"Whether married or single he would have preyed upon Mr. Parker to the same extent."

"Like enough," said the poor wife. "He'd prey upon anybody as he could get a-hold of. And so,
Mr. Wharton, you think that you can do nothing for me."

"If your want be immediate I can relieve it," said the barrister. Mrs. Parker did not like
the idea of accepting direct charity, but, nevertheless, on going away did take the five sovereigns
which Mr. Wharton offered to her.

After such an interview as that the dinner between the father and the daughter was not very
happy. She was eaten up by remorse. Gradually she had learned how frightful was the thing she
had done in giving herself to a man of whom she had known nothing. And it was not only that
she had degraded herself by loving such a man, but that she had been persistent in clinging
to him though her father and all his friends had told her of the danger which she was running.
And now it seemed that she had destroyed her father as well as herself! All that she could
do was to be persistent in her prayer that he would let her go. "I have done it," she said
that night, "and I could bear it better, if you would let me bear it alone." But he only kissed
her, and sobbed over her, and held her close to his heart with his clinging arms,--in a manner
in which he had never held her in their old happy days.

He took himself to his own rooms before Lopez returned, but she of course had to bear her husband's
presence. As she had declared to her father more than once, she was not afraid of him. Even
though he should strike her,--though he should kill her,--she would not be afraid of him. He
had already done worse to her than anything that could follow. "Mrs. Parker has been here to-day,"
she said to him that night.

"And what had Mrs. Parker to say?"

"That you had ruined her husband."

"Exactly. When a man speculates and doesn't win of course he throws the blame on some one else.
And when he is too much of a cur to come himself, he sends his wife."

"She says you owe him money."

"What business have you to listen to what she says? If she comes again, do not see her. Do
you understand me?"

"Yes, I understand. She saw papa also. If you owe him money, should it not be paid?"

"My dearest love, everybody who owes anything to anybody should always pay it. That is so self-evident
that one would almost suppose that it might be understood without being enunciated. But the
virtue of paying your debts is incompatible with an absence of money. Now, if you please, we
will not say anything more about Mrs. Parker. She is not at any rate a fit companion for you."

"It was you who introduced me to her."

"Hold your tongue about her,--and let that be an end of it. I little knew what a world of torment
I was preparing for myself when I allowed you to come and live in your father's house."

CHAPTER LVI

What the Duchess Thought of Her Husband

When the Session began it was understood in the political world that a very strong opposition
was to be organised against the Government under the guidance of Sir Orlando Drought, and that
the great sin to be imputed to the Cabinet was an utter indifference to the safety and honour
of Great Britain, as manifested by their neglect of the navy. All the world knew that Sir Orlando
had deserted the Coalition because he was not allowed to build new ships, and of course Sir
Orlando would make the most of his grievance. With him was joined Mr. Boffin, the patriotic
Conservative who had never listened to the voice of the seducer, and the staunch remainder
of the old Tory party. And with them the more violent of the Radicals were prepared to act,
not desirous, indeed, that new ships should be built, or that a Conservative Government should
be established,--or, indeed, that anything should be done,--but animated by intense disgust
that so mild a politician as the Duke of Omnium should be Prime Minister. The fight began at
once, Sir Orlando objecting violently to certain passages in the Queen's Speech. It was all
very well to say that the country was at present at peace with all the world; but how was peace
to be maintained without a fleet? Then Sir Orlando paid a great many compliments to the Duke,
and ended his speech by declaring him to be the most absolutely fainéant minister that had
disgraced the country since the days of the Duke of Newcastle. Mr. Monk defended the Coalition,
and assured the House that the navy was not only the most powerful navy existing, but that
it was the most powerful that ever had existed in the possession of this or any other country,
and was probably in absolute efficiency superior to the combined navies of all the world. The
House was not shocked by statements so absolutely at variance with each other, coming from
two gentlemen who had lately been members of the same Government, and who must be supposed
to know what they were talking about, but seemed to think that upon the whole Sir Orlando had
done his duty. For though there was complete confidence in the navy as a navy, and though a
very small minority would have voted for any considerably increased expense, still it was well
that there should be an opposition. And how can there be an opposition without some subject
for grumbling,--some matter on which a minister may be attacked? No one really thought that
the Prussians and French combined would invade our shores and devastate our fields, and plunder
London, and carry our daughters away into captivity. The state of the funds showed very plainly
that there was no such fear. But a good cry is a very good thing,--and it is always well to
rub up the officials of the Admiralty by a little wholesome abuse. Sir Orlando was thought
to have done his business well. Of course he did not risk a division upon the address. Had
he done so he would have been "nowhere." But, as it was, he was proud of his achievement.

The ministers generally would have been indifferent to the very hard words that were said of
them, knowing what they were worth, and feeling aware that a ministry which had everything
too easy must lose its interest in the country, had it not been that their chief was very sore
on the subject. The old Duke's work at this time consisted almost altogether in nursing the
younger Duke. It did sometimes occur to his elder Grace that it might be well to let his brother
retire, and that a Prime Minister, malgré lui, could not be a successful Prime Minister, or
a useful one. But if the Duke of Omnium went the Coalition must go too, and the Coalition had
been the offspring of the old statesman. The country was thriving under the Coalition, and
there was no real reason why it should not last for the next ten years. He continued, therefore,
his system of coddling, and was ready at any moment, or at every moment, to pour, if not comfort,
at any rate consolation into the ears of his unhappy friend. In the present emergency, it was
the falsehood and general baseness of Sir Orlando which nearly broke the heart of the Prime
Minister. "How is one to live," he said, "if one has to do with men of that kind?"

"But you haven't to do with him any longer," said the Duke of St. Bungay.

"When I see a man who is supposed to have earned the name of a statesman, and been high in
the councils of his sovereign, induced by personal jealousy to do as he is doing, it makes
me feel that an honest man should not place himself where he may have to deal with such persons."

"According to that the honest men are to desert their country in order that the dishonest men
may have everything their own way." Our Duke could not answer this, and therefore for the moment
he yielded. But he was unhappy, saturnine, and generally silent except when closeted with his
ancient mentor. And he knew that he was saturnine and silent, and that it behoved him as a
leader of men to be genial and communicative,--listening to counsel even if he did not follow
it, and at any rate appearing to have confidence in his colleagues.

During this time Mr. Slide was not inactive, and in his heart of hearts the Prime Minister
was more afraid of Mr. Slide's attacks than of those made upon him by Sir Orlando Drought.
Now that Parliament was sitting, and the minds of men were stirred to political feeling by
the renewed energy of the House, a great deal was being said in many quarters about the last
Silverbridge election. The papers had taken the matter up generally, some accusing the Prime
Minister and some defending. But the defence was almost as unpalatable to him as the accusation.
It was admitted on all sides that the Duke, both as a peer and as a Prime Minister, should
have abstained from any interference whatever in the election. And it was also admitted on
all sides that he had not so abstained,--if there was any truth at all in the allegation that
he had paid money for Mr. Lopez. But it was pleaded on his behalf that the Dukes of Omnium
had always interfered at Silverbridge, and that no Reform Bill had ever had any effect in reducing
their influence in that borough. Frequent allusion was made to the cautious Dod who, year after
year, had reported that the Duke of Omnium exercised considerable influence in the borough.
And then the friendly newspapers went on to explain that the Duke had in this instance stayed
his hand, and that the money, if paid at all, had been paid because the candidate who was to
have been his nominee had been thrown over, when the Duke at the last moment made up his mind
that he would abandon the privilege which had hitherto been always exercised by the head of
his family, and which had been exercised more than once or twice in his own favour. But Mr.
Slide, day after day, repeated his question, "We want to know whether the Prime Minister did
or did not pay the election expenses of Mr. Lopez at the last Silverbridge election, and if
so, why he paid them. We shall continue to ask this question till it has been answered, and
when asking it we again say that the actual correspondence on the subject between the Duke
and Mr. Lopez is in our own hands." And then, after a while, allusions were made to the Duchess;--for
Mr. Slide had learned all the facts of the case from Lopez himself. When Mr. Slide found how
hard it was "to draw his badger," as he expressed himself concerning his own operations, he
at last openly alluded to the Duchess, running the risk of any punishment that might fall upon
him by action for libel or by severe reprehension from his colleagues of the Press. "We have
as yet," he said, "received no answers to the questions which we have felt ourselves called
upon to ask in reference to the conduct of the Prime Minister at the Silverbridge election.
We are of opinion that all interference by peers with the constituencies of the country should
be put down by the strong hand of the law as thoroughly and unmercifully as we are putting
down ordinary bribery. But when the offending peer is also the Prime Minister of this great
country, it becomes doubly the duty of those who watch over the public safety,"--Mr. Slide
was always speaking of himself as watching over the public safety,--"to animadvert upon his
crime till it has been assoiled, or at any rate repented. From what we now hear we have reason
to believe that the crime itself is acknowledged. Had the payment on behalf of Mr. Lopez not
been made,--as it certainly was made, or the letters in our hand would be impudent forgeries,--the
charge would long since have been denied. Silence in such a matter amounts to confession. But
we understand that the Duke intends to escape under the plea that he has a second self, powerful
as he is to exercise the baneful influence which his territorial wealth unfortunately gives
him, but for the actions of which second self he, as a Peer of Parliament and as Prime Minister,
is not responsible. In other words we are informed that the privilege belonging to the Palliser
family at Silverbridge was exercised, not by the Duke himself, but by the Duchess;--and that
the Duke paid the money when he found that the Duchess had promised more than she could perform.
We should hardly have thought that even a man so notoriously weak as the Duke of Omnium would
have endeavoured to ride out of responsibility by throwing the blame upon his wife; but he
will certainly find that the attempt, if made, will fail.

"Against the Duchess herself we wish to say not a word. She is known as exercising a wide if
not a discriminate hospitality. We believe her to be a kind-hearted, bustling, ambitious lady,
to whom any little faults may easily be forgiven on account of her good-nature and generosity.
But we cannot accept her indiscretion as an excuse for a most unconstitutional act performed
by the Prime Minister of this country."

Latterly the Duchess had taken in her own copy of the "People's Banner." Since she had found
that those around her were endeavouring to keep from her what was being said of her husband
in regard to the borough, she had been determined to see it all. She therefore read the article
from which two or three paragraphs have just been given,--and having read it she handed it
to her friend Mrs. Finn. "I wonder that you trouble yourself with such trash," her friend said
to her.

"That is all very well, my dear, from you; but we poor wretches who are the slaves of the people
have to regard what is said of us in the 'People's Banner.'"

"It would be much better for you to neglect it."

"Just as authors are told not to read the criticisms;--but I never would believe any author
who told me that he didn't read what was said about him. I wonder when the man found out that
I was good-natured. He wouldn't find me good-natured if I could get hold of him."

"You are not going to allow it to torment you!"

"For my own sake, not a moment. I fancy that if I might be permitted to have my own way I could
answer him very easily. Indeed with these dregs of the newspapers, these gutter-slanderers,
if one would be open and say all the truth aloud, what would one have to fear? After all, what
is it that I did? I disobeyed my husband because I thought that he was too scrupulous. Let
me say as much, out loud to the public,--saying also that I am sorry for it, as I am,--and
who would be against me? Who would have a word to say after that? I should be the most popular
woman in England for a month,--and, as regards Plantagenet, Mr. Slide and his articles would
all sink into silence. But even though he were to continue this from day to day for a twelvemonth
it would not hurt me,--but that I know how it scorches him. This mention of my name will make
it more intolerable to him than ever. I doubt that you know him even yet."

"I thought that I did."

"Though in manner he is as dry as a stick, though all his pursuits are opposite to the very
idea of romance, though he passes his days and nights in thinking how he may take a halfpenny
in the pound off the taxes of the people without robbing the revenue, there is a dash of chivalry
about him worthy of the old poets. To him a woman, particularly his own woman, is a thing so
fine and so precious that the winds of heaven should hardly be allowed to blow upon her. He
cannot bear to think that people should even talk of his wife. And yet, Heaven knows, poor
fellow, I have given people occasion enough to talk of me. And he has a much higher chivalry
than that of the old poets. They, or their heroes, watched their women because they did not
want to have trouble about them,--shut them up in castles, kept them in ignorance, and held
them as far as they could out of harm's way."

"I hardly think they succeeded," said Mrs. Finn.

"But in pure selfishness they tried all they could. But he is too proud to watch. If you and
I were hatching treason against him in the dark, and chance had brought him there, he would
stop his ears with his fingers. He is all trust, even when he knows that he is being deceived.
He is honour complete from head to foot. Ah, it was before you knew me when I tried him the
hardest. I never could quite tell you that story, and I won't try it now; but he behaved like
a god. I could never tell him what I felt,--but I felt it."

"You ought to love him."

"I do;--but what's the use of it? He is a god, but I am not a goddess;--and then, though he
is a god, he is a dry, silent, uncongenial and uncomfortable god. It would have suited me much
better to have married a sinner. But then the sinner that I would have married was so irredeemable
a scapegrace."

"I do not believe in a woman marrying a bad man in the hope of making him good."

"Especially not when the woman is naturally inclined to evil herself. It will half kill him
when he reads all this about me. He has read it already, and it has already half killed him.
For myself I do not mind it in the least, but for his sake I mind it much. It will rob him
of his only possible answer to the accusation. The very thing which this wretch in the newspaper
says he will say, and that he will be disgraced by saying, is the very thing that he ought
to say. And there would be no disgrace in it,--beyond what I might well bear for my little
fault, and which I could bear so easily."

"Shall you speak to him about it?"

"No; I dare not. In this matter it has gone beyond speaking. I suppose he does talk it over
with the old Duke; but he will say nothing to me about it,--unless he were to tell me that
he had resigned, and that we were to start off and live in Minorca for the next ten years.
I was so proud when they made him Prime Minister; but I think that I am beginning to regret
it now." Then there was a pause, and the Duchess went on with her newspapers; but she soon
resumed her discourse. Her heart was full, and out of a full heart the mouth speaks. "They
should have made me Prime Minister, and have let him be Chancellor of the Exchequer. I begin
to see the ways of Government now. I could have done all the dirty work. I could have given
away garters and ribbons, and made my bargains while giving them. I could select sleek, easy
bishops who wouldn't be troublesome. I could give pensions or withhold them, and make the stupid
men peers. I could have the big noblemen at my feet, praying to be Lieutenants of Counties.
I could dole out secretaryships and lordships, and never a one without getting something in
return. I could brazen out a job and let the 'People's Banners' and the Slides make their worst
of it. And I think I could make myself popular with my party, and do the high-flowing patriotic
talk for the benefit of the Provinces. A man at a regular office has to work. That's what Plantagenet
is fit for. He wants always to be doing something that shall be really useful, and a man has
to toil at that and really to know things. But a Prime Minister should never go beyond generalities
about commerce, agriculture, peace, and general philanthropy. Of course he should have the
gift of the gab, and that Plantagenet hasn't got. He never wants to say anything unless he
has got something to say. I could do a Mansion House dinner to a marvel!"

"I don't doubt that you could speak at all times, Lady Glen."

"Oh, I do so wish that I had the opportunity," said the Duchess.

Of course the Duke had read the article in the privacy of his own room, and of course the article
had nearly maddened him with anger and grief. As the Duchess had said, the article had taken
from him the very ground on which his friends had told him that he could stand. He had never
consented, and never would consent, to lay the blame publicly on his wife; but he had begun
to think that he must take notice of the charge made against him, and deputize some one to
explain for him in the House of Commons that the injury had been done at Silverbridge by the
indiscretion of an agent who had not fulfilled his employer's intentions, and that the Duke
had thought it right afterwards to pay the money in consequence of this indiscretion. He had
not agreed to this, but he had brought himself to think that he must agree to it. But now,
of course, the question would follow:--Who was the indiscreet agent? Was the Duchess the person
for whose indiscretion he had had to pay £500 to Mr. Lopez? And in this matter did he not find
himself in accord even with Mr. Slide? He read and reread these words till he knew them by
heart. For a few moments it seemed to him to be an evil in the Constitution that the Prime
Minister should not have the power of instantly crucifying so foul a slanderer;--and yet it
was the very truth of the words that crushed him. He was weak,--he told himself;--notoriously
weak, it must be; and it would be most mean in him to ride out of responsibility by throwing
blame upon his wife. But what else was he to do? There seemed to him to be but one course,--to
get up in the House of Lords and declare that he paid the money because he had thought it right
to do so under circumstances which he could not explain, and to declare that it was not his
intention to say another word on the subject, or to have another word said on his behalf.

There was a Cabinet Council held that day, but no one ventured to speak to the Prime Minister
as to the accusation. Though he considered himself to be weak, his colleagues were all more
or less afraid of him. There was a certain silent dignity about the man which saved him from
the evils, as it also debarred him from the advantages, of familiarity. He had spoken on the
subject to Mr. Monk and to Phineas Finn, and, as the reader knows, very often to his old mentor.
He had also mentioned it to his friend Lord Cantrip, who was not in the Cabinet. Coming away
from the Cabinet he took Mr. Monk's arm, and led him away to his own room in the Treasury Chambers.
"Have you happened to see an article in the 'People's Banner' this morning?" he asked.

"I never see the 'People's Banner,'" said Mr. Monk.

"There it is;--just look at that." Whereupon Mr. Monk read the article. "You understand what
people call constitutional practice as well as any one I know. As I told you before, I did
pay that man's expenses. Did I do anything unconstitutional?"

"That would depend, Duke, upon the circumstances. If you were to back a man up by your wealth
in an expensive contest, I think it would be unconstitutional. If you set yourself to work
in that way, and cared not what you spent, you might materially influence the elections, and
buy parliamentary support for yourself."

"But in this case the payment was made after the man had failed, and certainly had not been
promised either by me or by any one on my behalf."

"I think it was unfortunate," said Mr. Monk.

"Certainly, certainly; but I am not asking as to that," said the Duke impatiently. "The man
had been injured by indiscreet persons acting on my behalf and in opposition to my wishes."
He said not a word about the Duchess; but Mr. Monk no doubt knew that her Grace had been at
any rate one of the indiscreet persons. "He applied to me for the money, alleging that he had
been injured by my agents. That being so,--presuming that my story be correct,--did I act unconstitutionally?"

"I think not," said Mr. Monk, "and I think that the circumstances, when explained, will bear
you harmless."

"Thank you; thank you. I did not want to trouble you about that just at present."

CHAPTER LVII

The Explanation

Mr. Monk had been altogether unable to decipher the Duke's purpose in the question he had asked.
About an hour afterwards they walked down to the Houses together, Mr. Monk having been kept
at his office. "I hope I was not a little short with you just now," said the Duke.

"I did not find it out," said Mr. Monk, smiling.

"You read what was in the papers, and you may imagine that it is of a nature to irritate a
man. I knew that no one could answer my question so correctly as you, and therefore I was a
little eager to keep directly to the question. It occurred to me afterwards that I had been--perhaps
uncourteous."

"Not at all, Duke."

"If I was, your goodness will excuse an irritated man. If a question were asked about this
in the House of Commons, who would be the best man to answer it? Would you do it?"

Mr. Monk considered awhile. "I think," he said, "that Mr. Finn would do it with a better grace.
Of course I will do it if you wish it. But he has tact in such matters, and it is known that
his wife is much regarded by her Grace."

"I will not have the Duchess's name mentioned," said the Duke, turning short upon his companion.

"I did not allude to that, but I thought that the intimacy which existed might make it pleasant
to you to employ Mr. Finn as the exponent of your wishes."

"I have the greatest confidence in Mr. Finn, certainly, and am on most friendly personal terms
with him. It shall be so, if I decide on answering any question in your House on a matter so
purely personal to myself."

"I would suggest that you should have the question asked in a friendly way. Get some independent
member, such as Mr. Beverley or Sir James Deering, to ask it. The matter would then be brought
forward in no carping spirit, and you would be enabled, through Mr. Finn, to set the matter
at rest. You have probably spoken to the Duke about it."

"I have mentioned it to him."

"Is not that what he would recommend?"

The old Duke had recommended that the entire truth should be told, and that the Duchess's operations
should be made public. Here was our poor Prime Minister's great difficulty. He and his Mentor
were at variance. His Mentor was advising that the real naked truth should be told, whereas
Telemachus was intent upon keeping the name of the actual culprit in the background. "I will
think it all over," said the Prime Minister as the two parted company at Palace Yard.

That evening he spoke to Lord Cantrip on the subject. Though the matter was so odious to him,
he could not keep his mind from it for a moment. Had Lord Cantrip seen the article in the "People's
Banner"? Lord Cantrip, like Mr. Monk, declared that the paper in question did not constitute
part of his usual morning's recreation. "I won't ask you to read it," said the Duke;--"but
it contains a very bitter attack upon me,--the bitterest that has yet been made. I suppose
I ought to notice the matter?"

"If I were you," said Lord Cantrip, "I should put myself into the hands of the Duke of St.
Bungay, and do exactly what he advises. There is no man in England knows so well as he does
what should be done in such a case as this." The Prime Minister frowned and said nothing. "My
dear Duke," continued Lord Cantrip, "I can give you no other advice. Who is there that has
your personal interest and your honour at heart so entirely as his Grace;--and what man can
be a more sagacious or more experienced adviser?"

"I was thinking that you might ask a question about it in our House."

"I?"

"You would do it for me in a manner that--that would be free from all offence."

"If I did it at all, I should certainly strive to do that. But it has never occurred to me
that you would make such a suggestion. Would you give me a few moments to think about it?"
"I couldn't do it," Lord Cantrip said afterwards. "By taking such a step, even at your request,
I should certainly express the opinion that the matter was one on which Parliament was entitled
to expect that you should make an explanation. But my own opinion is that Parliament has no
business to meddle in the matter. I do not think that every action of a minister's life should
be made matter of inquiry because a newspaper may choose to make allusions to it. At any rate,
if any word is said about it, it should, I think, be said in the other House."

"The Duke of St. Bungay thinks that something should be said."

"I could not myself consent even to appear to desire information on a matter so entirely personal
to yourself." The Duke bowed, and smiled with a cold, glittering, uncomfortable smile which
would sometimes cross his face when he was not pleased, and no more was then said upon the subject.

Attempts were made to have the question asked in a far different spirit by some hostile member
of the House of Commons. Sir Orlando Drought was sounded, and he for a while did give ear to
the suggestion. But, as he came to have the matter full before him, he could not do it. The
Duke had spurned his advice as a minister, and had refused to sanction a measure which he,
as the head of a branch of the Government, had proposed. The Duke had so offended him that
he conceived himself bound to regard the Duke as his enemy. But he knew,--and he could not
escape from the knowledge,--that England did not contain a more honourable man than the Duke.
He was delighted that the Duke should be vexed, and thwarted, and called ill names in the matter.
To be gratified at this discomfiture of his enemy was in the nature of parliamentary opposition.
Any blow that might weaken his opponent was a blow in his favour. But this was a blow which
he could not strike with his own hands. There were things in parliamentary tactics which even
Sir Orlando could not do. Arthur Fletcher was also asked to undertake the task. He was the
successful candidate, the man who had opposed Lopez, and who was declared in the "People's
Banner" to have emancipated that borough by his noble conduct from the tyranny of the House
of Palliser. And it was thought that he might like an opportunity of making himself known in
the House. But he was simply indignant when the suggestion was made to him. "What is it to
me," he said, "who paid the blackguard's expenses?"

This went on for some weeks after Parliament had met, and for some days even after the article
in which direct allusion was made to the Duchess. The Prime Minister could not be got to consent
that no notice should be taken of the matter, let the papers or the public say what they would,
nor could he be induced to let the matter be handled in the manner proposed by the elder Duke.
And during this time he was in such a fever that those about him felt that something must be
done. Mr. Monk suggested that if everybody held his tongue,--meaning all the Duke's friends,--the
thing would wear itself out. But it was apparent to those who were nearest to the minister,
to Mr. Warburton, for instance, and the Duke of St. Bungay, that the man himself would be worn
out first. The happy possessor of a thick skin can hardly understand how one not so blessed
may be hurt by the thong of a little whip! At last the matter was arranged. At the instigation
of Mr. Monk, Sir James Deering, who was really the father of the House, an independent member,
but one who generally voted with the Coalition, consented to ask the question in the House
of Commons. And Phineas Finn was instructed by the Duke as to the answer that was to be given.
The Duke of Omnium in giving these instructions made a mystery of the matter which he by no
means himself intended. But he was so sore that he could not be simple in what he said. "Mr.
Finn," he said, "you must promise me this,--that the name of the Duchess shall not be mentioned."

"Certainly not by me, if you tell me that I am not to mention it."

"No one else can do so. The matter will take the form of a simple question, and though the
conduct of a minister may no doubt be made the subject of debate,--and it is not improbable
that my conduct may do so in this instance,--it is, I think, impossible that any member should
make an allusion to my wife. The privilege or power of returning a member for the borough has
undoubtedly been exercised by our family since as well as previous to both the Reform Bills.
At the last election I thought it right to abandon that privilege, and notified to those about
me my intention. But that which a man has the power of doing he cannot always do without the
interference of those around him. There was a misconception, and among my,--my adherents,--there
were some who injudiciously advised Mr. Lopez to stand on my interest. But he did not get my
interest, and was beaten;--and therefore when he asked me for the money which he had spent,
I paid it to him. That is all. I think the House can hardly avoid to see that my effort was
made to discontinue an unconstitutional proceeding."

Sir James Deering asked the question. "He trusted," he said, "that the House would not think
that the question of which he had given notice and which he was about to ask was instigated
by any personal desire on his part to inquire into the conduct of the Prime Minister. He was
one who believed that the Duke of Omnium was as little likely as any man in England to offend
by unconstitutional practice on his own part. But a great deal had been talked and written
lately about the late election at Silverbridge, and there were those who thought,--and he was
one of them,--that something should be said to stop the mouths of cavillers. With this object
he would ask the Right Honourable Gentleman who led the House, and who was perhaps first in
standing among the noble Duke's colleagues in that House, whether the noble Duke was prepared
to have any statement on the subject made."

The House was full to the very corners of the galleries. Of course it was known to everybody
that the question was to be asked and to be answered. There were some who thought that the
matter was so serious that the Prime Minister could not get over it. Others had heard in the
clubs that Lady Glen, as the Duchess was still called, was to be made the scapegoat. Men of
all classes were open-mouthed in their denunciation of the meanness of Lopez,--though no one
but Mr. Wharton knew half his villainy, as he alone knew that the expenses had been paid twice
over. In one corner of the reporters' gallery sat Mr. Slide, pencil in hand, prepared to revert
to his old work on so momentous an occasion. It was a great day for him. He by his own unassisted
energy had brought a Prime Minister to book, and had created all this turmoil. It might be
his happy lot to be the means of turning that Prime Minister out of office. It was he who had
watched over the nation! The Duchess had been most anxious to be present,--but had not ventured
to come without asking her husband's leave, which he had most peremptorily refused to give.
"I cannot understand, Glencora, how you can suggest such a thing," he had said.

"You make so much of everything," she had replied petulantly; but she had remained at home.
The ladies' gallery was, however, quite full. Mrs. Finn was there, of course, anxious not only
for her friend, but eager to hear how her husband would acquit himself in his task. The wives
and daughters of all the ministers were there,--excepting the wife of the Prime Minister. There
never had been, in the memory of them all, a matter that was so interesting to them, for it
was the only matter they remembered in which a woman's conduct might probably be called in
question in the House of Commons. And the seats appropriated to peers were so crammed that
above a dozen grey-headed old lords were standing in the passage which divides them from the
common strangers. After all it was not, in truth, much of an affair. A very little man indeed
had calumniated the conduct of a minister of the Crown, till it had been thought well that
the minister should defend himself. No one really believed that the Duke had committed any
great offence. At the worst it was no more than indiscretion, which was noticeable only because
a Prime Minister should never be indiscreet. Had the taxation of the whole country for the
next year been in dispute, there would have been no such interest felt. Had the welfare of
the Indian Empire occupied the House, the House would have been empty. But the hope that a
certain woman's name would have to be mentioned, crammed it from the floor to the ceiling.

The reader need not be told that that name was not mentioned. Our old friend Phineas, on rising
to his legs, first apologised for doing so in place of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. But
perhaps the House would accept a statement from him, as the noble Duke at the head of the Government
had asked him to make it. Then he made his statement. "Perhaps," he said, "no falser accusation
than this had ever been brought forward against a minister of the Crown, for it specially charged
his noble friend with resorting to the employment of unconstitutional practices to bolster
up his parliamentary support, whereas it was known by everybody that there would have been
no matter for accusation at all had not the Duke of his own motion abandoned a recognised privilege,
because, in his opinion, the exercise of that privilege was opposed to the spirit of the Constitution.
Had the noble Duke simply nominated a candidate, as candidates had been nominated at Silverbridge
for centuries past, that candidate would have been returned with absolute certainty, and there
would have been no word spoken on the subject. It was not, perhaps, for him, who had the honour
of serving under his Grace, and who, as being a part of his Grace's Government, was for the
time one with his Grace, to expatiate at length on the nobility of the sacrifice here made.
But they all knew there at what rate was valued a seat in that House. Thank God that privilege
could not now be rated at any money price. It could not be bought and sold. But this privilege
which his noble friend had so magnanimously resigned from purely patriotic motives, was, he
believed, still in existence, and he would ask those few who were still in the happy, or, perhaps,
he had better say in the envied, position of being able to send their friends to that House,
what was their estimation of the conduct of the Duke in this matter? It might be that there
were one or two such present, and who now heard him,--or, perhaps, one or two who owed their
seats to the exercise of such a privilege. They might marvel at the magnitude of the surrender.
They might even question the sagacity of the man who could abandon so much without a price.
But he hardly thought that even they would regard it as unconstitutional.

"This was what the Prime Minister had done,--acting not as Prime Minister, but as an English
nobleman, in the management of his own property and privileges. And now he would come to the
gist of the accusation made; in making which, the thing which the Duke had really done had
been altogether ignored. When the vacancy had been declared by the acceptance of the Chiltern
Hundreds by a gentleman whose absence from the House they all regretted, the Duke had signified
to his agents his intention of retiring altogether from the exercise of any privilege or power
in the matter. But the Duke was then, as he was also now, and would, it was to be hoped, long
continue to be, Prime Minister of England. He need hardly remind gentlemen in that House that
the Prime Minister was not in a position to devote his undivided time to the management of
his own property, or even to the interests of the Borough of Silverbridge. That his Grace had
been earnest in his instructions to his agents, the sequel fully proved; but that earnestness
his agents had misinterpreted."

Then there was heard a voice in the House, "What agents?" and from another voice, "Name them."
For there were present some who thought it to be shameful that the excitement of the occasion
should be lowered by keeping back all allusion to the Duchess.

"I have not distinguished," said Phineas, assuming an indignant tone, "the honourable gentlemen
from whom those questions have come, and therefore I have the less compunction in telling them
that it is no part of my duty on this occasion to gratify a morbid and an indecent curiosity."
Then there was a cry of "Order," and an appeal to the Speaker. Certain gentlemen wished to
know whether indecent was parliamentary. The Speaker, with some hesitation, expressed his opinion
that the word, as then used, was not open to objection from him. He thought that it was within
the scope of a member's rights to charge another member with indecent curiosity. "If," said
Phineas, rising again to his legs, for he had sat down for a moment, "the gentleman who called
for a name will rise in his place and repeat the demand, I will recall the word indecent and
substitute another,--or others. I will tell him that he is one who, regardless of the real
conduct of the Prime Minister, either as a man or as a servant of the Crown, is only anxious
to inflict an unmanly wound in order that he may be gratified by seeing the pain which he inflicts."
Then he paused, but as no further question was asked, he continued his statement. "A candidate
had been brought forward," he said, "by those interested in the Duke's affairs. A man whom
he would not name, but who, he trusted, would never succeed in his ambition to occupy a seat
in that House, had been brought forward, and certain tradesmen in Silverbridge had been asked
to support him as the Duke's nominee. There was no doubt about it. The House perhaps could
understand that the local adherents and neighbours of a man so high in rank and wealth as the
Duke of Omnium would not gladly see the privileges of their lord diminished. Perhaps, too,
it occurred to them that a Prime Minister could not have his eye everywhere. There would always
be worthy men in boroughs who liked to exercise some second-hand authority. At any rate it
was the case that this candidate was encouraged. Then the Duke had heard it, and had put his
foot upon the little mutiny, and had stamped it out at once. He might perhaps here," he said,
"congratulate the House on the acquisition it had received by the failure of that candidate.
So far, at any rate," he thought, "it must be admitted that the Duke had been free from blame;--but
now he came to the gravamen of the charge." The gravamen of the charge is so well known to
the reader that the simple account which Phineas gave of it need not be repeated. The Duke
had paid the money, when asked for it, because he felt that the man had been injured by incorrect
representations made to him. "I need hardly pause to stigmatise the meanness of that application,"
said Phineas, "but I may perhaps conclude by saying that whether the last act done by the Duke
in this matter was or was not indiscreet, I shall probably have the House with me when I say
that it savours much more strongly of nobility than of indiscretion."

When Phineas Finn sat down no one arose to say another word on the subject. It was afterwards
felt that it would only have been graceful had Sir Orlando risen and expressed his opinion
that the House had heard the statement just made with perfect satisfaction. But he did not
do so, and after a short pause the ordinary business of the day was recommenced. Then there
was a speedy descent from the galleries, and the ladies trooped out of their cage, and the
grey-headed old peers went back to their own chamber, and the members themselves quickly jostled
out through the doors, and Mr. Monk was left to explain his proposed alteration in the dog
tax to a thin House of seventy or eighty members.

The thing was then over, and people were astonished that so great a thing should be over with
so little fuss. It really seemed that after Phineas Finn's speech there was nothing more to
be said on the matter. Everybody of course knew that the Duchess had been the chief of the
agents to whom he had alluded, but they had known as much as that before. It was, however,
felt by everybody that the matter had been brought to an end. The game, such as it was, had
been played out. Perhaps the only person who heard Mr. Finn's speech throughout, and still
hoped that the spark could be again fanned into a flame, was Quintus Slide. He went out and
wrote another article about the Duchess. If a man was so unable to rule his affairs at home,
he was certainly unfit to be Prime Minister. But even Quintus Slide, as he wrote his article,
felt that he was hoping against hope. The charge might be referred to hereafter as one that
had never been satisfactorily cleared up. That game is always open to the opponents of a minister.
After the lapse of a few months an old accusation can be serviceably used, whether at the time
it was proved or disproved. Mr. Slide published his article, but he felt that for the present
the Silverbridge election papers had better be put by among the properties of the "People's
Banner," and brought out, if necessary, for further use at some future time.

"Mr. Finn," said the Duke, "I feel indebted to you for the trouble you have taken."

"It was only a pleasant duty."

"I am grateful to you for the manner in which it was performed." This was all the Duke said,
and Phineas felt it to be cold. The Duke, in truth, was grateful; but gratitude with him always
failed to exhibit itself readily. From the world at large Phineas Finn received great praise
for the manner in which he had performed his task.

CHAPTER LVIII

"Quite Settled"

The abuse which was now publicly heaped on the name of Ferdinand Lopez hit the man very hard;
but not so hard perhaps as his rejection by Lady Eustace. That was an episode in his life of
which even he felt ashamed, and of which he was unable to shake the disgrace from his memory.
He had no inner appreciation whatsoever of what was really good or what was really bad in a
man's conduct. He did not know that he had done evil in applying to the Duke for the money.
He had only meant to attack the Duke; and when the money had come it had been regarded as justifiable
prey. And when after receiving the Duke's money, he had kept also Mr. Wharton's money, he had
justified himself again by reminding himself that Mr. Wharton certainly owed him much more
than that. In a sense he was what is called a gentleman. He knew how to speak, and how to look,
how to use a knife and fork, how to dress himself, and how to walk. But he had not the faintest
notion of the feelings of a gentleman. He had, however, a very keen conception of the evil
of being generally ill spoken of. Even now, though he was making up his mind to leave England
for a long term of years, he understood the disadvantage of leaving it under so heavy a cloud;--and
he understood also that the cloud might possibly impede his going altogether. Even in Coleman
Street they were looking black upon him, and Mr. Hartlepod went so far as to say to Lopez himself,
that, "by Jove, he had put his foot in it." He had endeavoured to be courageous under his burden,
and every day walked into the offices of the Mining Company, endeavouring to look as though
he had committed no fault of which he had to be ashamed. But after the second day he found
that nothing was said to him of the affairs of the Company, and on the fourth day Mr. Hartlepod
informed him that the time allowed for paying up his shares had passed by, and that another
local manager would be appointed. "The time is not over till to-morrow," said Lopez angrily.
"I tell you what I am told to tell you," said Mr. Hartlepod. "You will only waste your time
by coming here any more."

He had not once seen Mr. Wharton since the statement made in Parliament, although he had lived
in the same house with him. Everett Wharton had come home, and they two had met;--but the meeting
had been stormy. "It seems to me, Lopez, that you are a scoundrel," Everett said to him one
day after having heard the whole story,--or rather many stories,--from his father. This took
place not in Manchester Square, but at the club, where Everett had endeavoured to cut his brother-in-law.
It need hardly be said that at this time Lopez was not popular at his club. On the next day
a meeting of the whole club was to be held that the propriety of expelling him might be discussed.
But he had resolved that he would not be cowed, that he would still show himself, and still
defend his conduct. He did not know, however, that Everett Wharton had already made known to
the Committee of the club all the facts of the double payment.

He had addressed Everett in that solicitude to which a man should never be reduced of seeking
to be recognised by at any rate one acquaintance,--and now his brother-in-law had called him
a scoundrel in the presence of other men. He raised his arm as though to use the cane in his
hands, but he was cowed by the feeling that all there were his adversaries. "How dare you use
that language to me!" he said very weakly.

"It is the language that I must use if you speak to me."

"I am your brother-in-law, and that restrains me."

"Unfortunately you are."

"And am living in your father's house."

"That, again, is a misfortune which it appears difficult to remedy. You have been told to go,
and you won't go."

"Your ingratitude, sir, is marvellous! Who saved your life when you were attacked in the park,
and were too drunk to take care of yourself? Who has stood your friend with your close-fisted
old father when you have lost money at play that you could not pay? But you are one of those
who would turn away from any benefactor in his misfortune."

"I must certainly turn away from a man who has disgraced himself as you have done," said Everett,
leaving the room. Lopez threw himself into an easy-chair, and rang the bell loudly for a cup
of coffee, and lit a cigar. He had not been turned out of the club as yet, and the servant
at any rate was bound to attend to him.

That night he waited up for his father-in-law in Manchester Square. He would certainly go to
Guatemala now,--if it were not too late. He would go though he were forced to leave his wife
behind him, and thus surrender any further hope for money from Mr. Wharton beyond the sum which
he would receive as the price of his banishment. It was true that the fortnight allowed to
him by the Company was only at an end that day, and that, therefore, the following morning
might be taken as the last day named for the payment of the money. No doubt, also, Mr. Wharton's
bill at a few days' date would be accepted if that gentleman could not at the moment give a
cheque for so large a sum as was required. And the appointment had been distinctly promised
to him with no other stipulation than that the money required for the shares should be paid.
He did not believe in Mr. Hartlepod's threat. It was impossible, he thought, that he should
be treated in so infamous a manner merely because he had had his election expenses repaid him
by the Duke of Omnium! He would, therefore, ask for the money, and--renounce the society of
his wife.

As he made this resolve something like real love returned to his heart, and he became for a
while sick with regret. He assured himself that he had loved her, and that he could love her
still;--but why had she not been true to him? Why had she clung to her father instead of clinging
to her husband? Why had she not learned his ways,--as a wife is bound to learn the ways of
the man she marries? Why had she not helped him in his devices, fallen into his plans, been
regardful of his fortunes, and made herself one with him? There had been present to him at
times an idea that if he could take her away with him to that distant country to which he thought
to go, and thus remove her from the upas influence of her father's roof-tree, she would then
fall into his views and become his wife indeed. Then he would again be tender to her, again
love her, again endeavour to make the world soft to her. But it was too late now for that.
He had failed in everything as far as England was concerned, and it was chiefly by her fault
that he had failed. He would consent to leave her;--but, as he thought of it in his solitude,
his eyes became moist with regret.

In these days Mr. Wharton never came home till about midnight, and then passed rapidly through
the hall to his own room,--and in the morning had his breakfast brought to him in the same
room, so that he might not even see his son-in-law. His daughter would go to him when at breakfast,
and there, together for some half-hour, they would endeavour to look forward to their future
fate. But hitherto they had never been able to look forward in accord, as she still persisted
in declaring that if her husband bade her to go with him,--she would go. On this night Lopez
sat up in the dining-room, and as soon as he heard Mr. Wharton's key in the door, he placed
himself in the hall. "I wish to speak to you to-night, sir," he said. "Would you object to
come in for a few moments?" Then Mr. Wharton followed him into the room. "As we live now,"
continued Lopez, "I have not much opportunity of speaking to you, even on business."

"Well, sir; you can speak now,--if you have anything to say."

"The £5000 you promised me must be paid to-morrow. It is the last day."

"I promised it only on certain conditions. Had you complied with them the money would have
been paid before this."

"Just so. The conditions are very hard, Mr. Wharton. It surprises me that such a one as you
should think it right to separate a husband from his wife."

"I think it right, sir, to separate my daughter from such a one as you are. I thought so before,
but I think so doubly now. If I can secure your absence in Guatemala by the payment of this
money, and if you will give me a document that shall be prepared by Mr. Walker and signed by
yourself, assuring your wife that you will not hereafter call upon her to live with you, the
money shall be paid."

"All that will take time, Mr. Wharton."

"I will not pay a penny without it. I can meet you at the office in Coleman Street to-morrow,
and doubtless they will accept my written assurance to pay the money as soon as those stipulations
shall be complied with."

"That would disgrace me in the office, Mr. Wharton."

"And are you not disgraced there already? Can you tell me that they have not heard of your
conduct in Coleman Street, or that hearing it they disregard it?" His son-in-law stood frowning
at him, but did not at the moment say a word. "Nevertheless, I will meet you there if you please,
at any time that you may name, and if they do not object to employ such a man as their manager,
I shall not object on their behalf."

"To the last you are hard and cruel to me," said Lopez;--"but I will meet you in Coleman Street
at eleven to-morrow." Then Mr. Wharton left the room, and Lopez was there alone amidst the
gloom of the heavy curtains and the dark paper. A London dining-room at night is always dark,
cavernous, and unlovely. The very pictures on the walls lack brightness, and the furniture
is black and heavy. This room was large, but old-fashioned and very dark. Here Lopez walked
up and down after Mr. Wharton had left him, trying to think how far Fate and how far he himself
were responsible for his present misfortunes. No doubt he had begun the world well. His father
had been little better than a travelling pedlar, but had made some money by selling jewellery,
and had educated his son. Lopez could on no score impute blame to his father for what had happened
to him. And, when he thought of the means at his disposal in his early youth, he felt that
he had a right to boast of some success. He had worked hard, and had won his way upwards, and
had almost lodged himself securely among those people with whom it had been his ambition to
live. Early in life he had found himself among those who were called gentlemen and ladies.
He had been able to assume their manners, and had lived with them on equal terms. When thinking
of his past life he never forgot to remind himself that he had been a guest at the house of
the Duke of Omnium! And yet how was it with him now? He was penniless. He was rejected by his
father-in-law. He was feared, and, as he thought, detested by his wife. He was expelled from
his club. He was cut by his old friends. And he had been told very plainly by the Secretary
in Coleman Street that his presence there was no longer desired. What should he do with himself
if Mr. Wharton's money were now refused, and if the appointment in Guatemala were denied to
him? And then he thought of poor Sexty Parker and his family. He was not naturally an ill-natured
man. Though he could upbraid his wife for alluding to Mrs. Parker's misery, declaring that
Mrs. Parker must take the rubs of the world just as others took them, still the misfortunes
which he had brought on her and on her children did add something to the weight of his own
misfortunes. If he could not go to Guatemala, what should he do with himself;--where should
he go? Thus he walked up and down the room for an hour. Would not a pistol or a razor give
him the best solution for all his difficulties?

On the following morning he kept his appointment at the office in Coleman Street, as did Mr.
Wharton also. The latter was there first by some minutes, and explained to Mr. Hartlepod that
he had come there to meet his son-in-law. Mr. Hartlepod was civil, but very cold. Mr. Wharton
saw at the first glance that the services of Ferdinand Lopez were no longer in request by the
San Juan Mining Company; but he sat down and waited. Now that he was there, however painful
the interview would be, he would go through it. At ten minutes past eleven he made up his mind
that he would wait till the half-hour,--and then go, with the fixed resolution that he would
never willingly spend another shilling on behalf of that wretched man. But at a quarter past
eleven the wretched man came,--swaggering into the office, though it had not, hitherto, been
his custom to swagger. But misfortune masters all but the great men, and upsets the best-learned
lesson of even a long life. "I hope I have not kept you waiting, Mr. Wharton. Well, Hartlepod,
how are you to-day? So this little affair is to be settled at last, and now these shares shall
be bought and paid for." Mr. Wharton did not say a word, not even rising from his chair, or
greeting his son-in-law by a word. "I dare say Mr. Wharton has already explained himself,"
said Lopez.

"I don't know that there is any necessity," said Mr. Hartlepod.

"Well,--I suppose it's simple enough," continued Lopez. "Mr. Wharton, I believe I am right
in saying that you are ready to pay the money at once."

"Yes;--I am ready to pay the money as soon as I am assured that you are on your route to Guatemala.
I will not pay a penny till I know that as a fact."

Then Mr. Hartlepod rose from his seat and spoke. "Gentlemen," he said, "the matter within the
last few days has assumed a different complexion."

"As how?" exclaimed Lopez.

"The Directors have changed their mind as to sending out Mr. Lopez as their local manager.
The Directors intend to appoint another gentleman. I had already acquainted Mr. Lopez with
the Directors' intention."

"Then the matter is settled?" said Mr. Wharton.

"Quite settled," said Mr. Hartlepod.

As a matter of course Lopez began to fume and to be furious. What!--after all that had been
done did the Directors mean to go back from their word? After he had been induced to abandon
his business in his own country, was he to be thrown over in that way? If the Company intended
to treat him like that, the Company would very soon hear from him. Thank God there were laws
in the land. "Yesterday was the last day fixed for the payment of the money," said Mr. Hartlepod.

"It is at any rate certain that Mr. Lopez is not to go to Guatemala?" asked Mr. Wharton.

"Quite certain," said Mr. Hartlepod. Then Mr. Wharton rose from his chair and quitted the room.

"By G----, you have ruined me among you," said Lopez;--"ruined me in the most shameful manner.
There is no mercy, no friendship, no kindness, no forbearance anywhere! Why am I to be treated
in this manner?"

"If you have any complaint to make," said Mr. Hartlepod, "you had better write to the Directors.
I have nothing to do but my duty."

"By heavens, the Directors shall hear of it!" said Lopez as he left the office.

Mr. Wharton went to his chambers and endeavoured to make up his mind what step he must now
take in reference to this dreadful incubus. Of course he could turn the man out of his house,
but in so doing it might well be that he would also turn out his own daughter. He believed
Lopez to be utterly without means, and a man so destitute would generally be glad to be relieved
from the burden of his wife's support. But this man would care nothing for his wife's comfort;
nothing even, as Mr. Wharton believed, for his wife's life. He would simply use his wife as
best he might as a means for obtaining money. There was nothing to be done but to buy him off,
by so much money down, and by so much at stated intervals as long as he should keep away. Mr.
Walker must manage it, but it was quite clear to Mr. Wharton that the Guatemala scheme was
altogether at an end. In the meantime a certain sum must be offered to the man at once, on
condition that he would leave the house and do so without taking his wife with him.

So far Mr. Wharton had a plan, and a plan that was at least feasible. Wretched as he was, miserable,
as he thought of the fate which had befallen his daughter,--there was still a prospect of some
relief. But Lopez as he walked out of the office had nothing to which he could look for comfort.
He slowly made his way to Little Tankard Yard, and there he found Sexty Parker balancing himself
on the back legs of his chair, with a small decanter of public-house sherry before him. "What;
you here?" he said.

"Yes;--I have come to say good-bye."

"Where are you going then? You shan't start to Guatemala if I know it."

"That's all over, my boy," said Lopez, smiling.

"What is it you mean?" said Sexty, sitting square on his chair and looking very serious.

"I am not going to Guatemala or anywhere else. I thought I'd just look in to tell you that
I'm just done for,--that I haven't a hope of a shilling now or hereafter. You told me the other
day that I was afraid to come here. You see that as soon as anything is fixed, I come and tell
you everything at once."

"What is fixed?"

"That I am ruined. That there isn't a penny to come from any source."

"Wharton has got money," said Sexty.

"And there is money in the Bank of England,--but I cannot get at it."

"What are you going to do, Lopez?"

"Ah; that's the question. What am I going to do? I can say nothing about that, but I can say,
Sexty, that our affairs are at an end. I'm very sorry for it, old boy. We ought to have made
fortunes, but we didn't. As far as the work went, I did my best. Good-bye, old fellow. You'll
do well some of these days yet, I don't doubt. Don't teach the bairns to curse me. As for Mrs.
P. I have no hope there, I know." Then he went, leaving Sexty Parker quite aghast.

CHAPTER LIX

"The First and the Last"

When Mr. Wharton was in Coleman Street, having his final interview with Mr. Hartlepod, there
came a visitor to Mrs. Lopez in Manchester Square. Up to this date there had been great doubt
with Mr. Wharton whether at last the banishment to Guatemala would become a fact. From day
to day his mind had changed. It had been an infinite benefit that Lopez should go, if he could
be got to go alone, but as great an evil if at last he should take his wife with him. But the
father had never dared to express these doubts to her, and she had taught herself to think
that absolute banishment with a man whom she certainly no longer loved, was the punishment
she had to pay for the evil she had done. It was now March, and the second or third of April
had been fixed for her departure. Of course, she had endeavoured from time to time to learn
all that was to be learned from her husband. Sometimes he would be almost communicative to
her; at other times she could get hardly a word from him. But, through it all, he gave her
to believe that she would have to go. Nor did her father make any great effort to turn his
mind the other way. If it must be so, of what use would be such false kindness on his part?
She had therefore gone to work to make her purchases, studying that economy which must henceforth
be the great duty of her life, and reminding herself as to everything she bought that it would
have to be worn with tears and used in sorrow.

And then she sent a message to Arthur Fletcher. It so happened that Sir Alured Wharton was
up in London at this time with his daughter Mary. Sir Alured did not come to Manchester Square.
There was nothing that the old baronet could say in the midst of all this misery,--no comfort
that he could give. It was well-known now to all the Whartons and all the Fletchers that this
Lopez, who had married her who was to have been the pearl of the two families, had proved himself
to be a scoundrel. The two old Whartons met no doubt at some club, or perhaps in Stone Buildings,
and spoke some few bitter words to each other; but Sir Alured did not see the unfortunate young
woman who had disgraced herself by so wretched a marriage. But Mary came, and by her a message
was sent to Arthur Fletcher. "Tell him that I am going," said Emily. "Tell him not to come;
but give him my love. He was always one of my kindest friends."

"Why,--why,--why did you not take him?" said Mary, moved by the excitement of the moment to
suggestions which were quite at variance with the fixed propriety of her general ideas.

"Why should you speak of that?" said the other. "I never speak of him,--never think of him.
But, if you see him, tell him what I say." Arthur Fletcher was of course in the Square on the
following day,--on that very day on which Mr. Wharton learned that, whatever might be his daughter's
fate, she would not, at any rate, be taken to Guatemala. They two had never met since the day
on which they had been brought together for a moment at the Duchess's party at Richmond. It
had of course been understood by both of them that they were not to be allowed to see each
other. Her husband had made a pretext of an act of friendship on his part to establish a quarrel,
and both of them had been bound by that quarrel. When a husband declares that his wife shall
not know a man, that edict must be obeyed,--or, if disobeyed, must be subverted by intrigue.
In this case there had been no inclination to intrigue on either side. The order had been obeyed,
and as far as the wife was concerned, had been only a small part of the terrible punishment
which had come upon her as the result of her marriage. But now, when Arthur Fletcher sent up
his name, she did not hesitate as to seeing him. No doubt she had thought it probable that
she might see him when she gave her message to her cousin.

"I could not let you go without coming to you," he said.

"It is very good of you. Yes;--I suppose we are going. Guatemala sounds a long way off, Arthur,
does it not? But they tell me it is a beautiful country." She spoke with a cheerful voice,
almost as though she liked the idea of her journey; but he looked at her with beseeching, anxious,
sorrow-laden eyes. "After all, what is a journey of a few weeks? Why should I not be as happy
in Guatemala as in London? As to friends, I do not know that it will make much difference,--except
papa."

"It seems to me to make a difference," said he.

"I never see anybody now,--neither your people, nor the Wharton Whartons. Indeed, I see nobody.
If it were not for papa I should be glad to go. I am told that it is a charming country. I
have not found Manchester Square very charming. I am inclined to think that all the world is
very much alike, and that it does not matter very much where one lives,--or, perhaps, what
one does. But at any rate I am going, and I am very glad to be able to say good-bye to you
before I start." All this she said rapidly, in a manner unlike herself. She was forcing herself
to speak so that she might save herself, if possible, from breaking down in his presence.

"Of course I came when Mary told me."

"Yes;--she was here. Sir Alured did not come. I don't wonder at that, however. And your mother
was in town some time ago,--but I didn't expect her to come. Why should they come? I don't
know whether you might not have better stayed away. Of course I am a Pariah now; but Pariah
as I am, I shall be as good as any one else in Guatemala. You have seen Everett since he has
been in town, perhaps?"

"Yes;--I have seen him."

"I hope they won't quarrel with Everett because of what I have done. I have felt that more
than all,--that both papa and he have suffered because of it. Do you know, I think people are
hard. They might have thrown me off without being unkind to them. It is that that has killed
me, Arthur;--that they should have suffered." He sat looking at her, not knowing how to interrupt
her, or what to say. There was much that he meant to say, but he did not know how to begin
it, or how to frame his words. "When I am gone, perhaps, it will be all right," she continued.
"When he told me that I was to go, that was my comfort. I think I have taught myself to think
nothing of myself, to bear it all as a necessity, to put up with it, whatever it may be, as
men bear thirst in the desert. Thank God, Arthur, I have no baby to suffer with me. Here,--here,
it is still very bad. When I think of papa creeping in and out of his house, I sometimes feel
that I must kill myself. But our going will put an end to all that. It is much better that
we should go. I wish we might start to-morrow." Then she looked up at him, and saw that the
tears were running down his face, and as she looked she heard his sobs. "Why should you cry,
Arthur? He never cries,--nor do I. When baby died I cried,--but very little. Tears are vain,
foolish things. It has to be borne, and there is an end of it. When one makes up one's mind
to that, one does not cry. There was a poor woman here the other day whose husband he had ruined.
She wept and bewailed herself till I pitied her almost more than myself;--but then she had
children."

"Oh, Emily!"

"You mustn't call me by my name, because he would be angry. I have to do, you know, as he tells
me. And I do so strive to do it! Through it all I have an idea that if I do my duty it will
be better for me. There are things, you know, which a husband may tell you to do, but you cannot
do. If he tells me to rob, I am not to rob;--am I? And now I think of it, you ought not to
be here. He would be very much displeased. But it has been so pleasant once more to see an
old friend."

"I care nothing for his anger," said Arthur moodily.

"Ah, but I do. I have to care for it."

"Leave him! Why don't you leave him?"

"What!"

"You cannot deceive me. You do not try to deceive me. You know that he is altogether unworthy
of you."

"I will hear nothing of the kind, sir."

"How can I speak otherwise when you yourself tell me of your own misery? Is it possible that
I should not know what he is? Would you have me pretend to think well of him?"

"You can hold your tongue, Arthur."

"No;--I cannot hold my tongue. Have I not held my tongue ever since you married? And if I am
to speak at all, must I not speak now?"

"There is nothing to be said that can serve us at all."

"Then it shall be said without serving. When I bid you leave him, it is not that you may come
to me. Though I love you better than all the world put together, I do not mean that."

"Oh, Arthur, Arthur!"

"But let your father save you. Only tell him that you will stay with him, and he will do it.
Though I should never see you again, I could hope to protect you. Of course, I know,--and you
know. He is--a scoundrel!"

"I will not hear it," said she, rising from her seat on the sofa with her hands up to her forehead,
but still coming nearer to him as she moved.

"Does not your father say the same thing? I will advise nothing that he does not advise. I
would not say a word to you that he might not hear. I do love you. I have always loved you.
But do you think that I would hurt you with my love?"

"No;--no;--no!"

"No, indeed;--but I would have you feel that those who loved you of old are still anxious for
your welfare. You said just now that you had been neglected."

"I spoke of papa and Everett. For myself,--of course I have separated myself from everybody."

"Never from me. You may be ten times his wife, but you cannot separate yourself from me. Getting
up in the morning and going to bed at night I still tell myself that you are the one woman
that I love. Stay with us, and you shall be honoured,--as that man's wife of course, but still
as the dearest friend we have."

"I cannot stay," she said. "He has told me that I am to go, and I am in his hands. When you
have a wife, Arthur, you will wish her to do your bidding. I hope she will do it for your sake,
without the pain I have in doing his. Good-bye, dear friend."

She put her hand out and he grasped it, and stood for a moment looking at her. Then he seized
her in his arms and kissed her brow and her lips. "Oh, Emily, why were you not my wife? My
darling, my darling!"

She had hardly extricated herself when the door opened, and Lopez stood in the room. "Mr. Fletcher,"
he said, very calmly, "what is the meaning of this?"

"He has come to bid me farewell," said Emily. "When going on so long a journey one likes to
see one's old friends,--perhaps for the last time." There was something of indifference to
his anger in her tone, and something also of scorn.

Lopez looked from one to the other, affecting an air of great displeasure. "You know, sir,"
he said, "that you cannot be welcome here."

"But he has been welcome," said his wife.

"And I look upon your coming as a base act. You are here with the intention of creating discord
between me and my wife."

"I am here to tell her that she has a friend to trust to if she ever wants a friend," said
Fletcher.

"And you think that such trust as that would be safer than trust in her husband? I cannot turn
you out of this house, sir, because it does not belong to me, but I desire you to leave at
once the room which is occupied by my wife." Fletcher paused a moment to say good-bye to the
poor woman, while Lopez continued with increased indignation, "If you do not go at once you
will force me to desire her to retire. She shall not remain in the same room with you."

"Good-bye, Mr. Fletcher," she said, again putting out her hand.

But Lopez struck it up, not violently, so as to hurt her, but still with eager roughness. "Not
in my presence," he said. "Go, sir, when I desire you."

"God bless you, my friend," said Arthur Fletcher. "I pray that I may live to see you back in
the old country."

"He was--kissing you," said Lopez, as soon as the door was shut.

"He was," said Emily.

"And you tell me so to my face, with such an air as that!"

"What am I to tell you when you ask me? I did not bid him kiss me."

"But afterwards you took his part as his friend."

"Why not? I should lie to you if I pretended that I was angry with him for what he did."

"Perhaps you will tell me that you love him."

"Of course I love him. There are different kinds of love, Ferdinand. There is that which a
woman gives to a man when she would fain mate with him. It is the sweetest love of all, if
it would only last. And there is another love,--which is not given, but which is won, perhaps
through long years, by old friends. I have none older than Arthur Fletcher, and none who are
dearer to me."

"And you think it right that he should take you in his arms and kiss you?"

"On such an occasion I could not blame him."

"You were ready enough to receive it, perhaps."

"Well; I was. He has loved me well, and I shall never see him again. He is very dear to me,
and I was parting from him for ever. It was the first and the last, and I did not grudge it
to him. You must remember, Ferdinand, that you are taking me across the world from all my friends."

"Psha," he said, "that is all over. You are not going anywhere that I know of,--unless it be
out into the streets when your father shuts his door on you." And so saying he left the room
without another word.

CHAPTER LX

The Tenway Junction

And thus the knowledge was conveyed to Mrs. Lopez that her fate in life was not to carry her
to Guatemala. At the very moment in which she had been summoned to meet Arthur Fletcher she
had been busy with her needle preparing that almost endless collection of garments necessary
for a journey of many days at sea. And now she was informed, by a chance expression, by a word
aside, as it were, that the journey was not to be made. "That is all over," he had said,--and
then had left her, telling her nothing further. Of course she stayed her needle. Whether the
last word had been true or false, she could not work again, at any rate till it had been contradicted.
If it were so, what was to be her fate? One thing was certain to her;--that she could not remain
under her father's roof. It was impossible that an arrangement so utterly distasteful as the
present one, both to her father and to herself, should be continued. But where then should
they live,--and of what nature would her life be if she should be separated from her father?

That evening she saw her father, and he corroborated her husband's statement. "It is all over
now," he said,--"that scheme of his of going to superintend the mines. The mines don't want
him, and won't have him. I can't say that I wonder at it."

"What are we to do, papa?"

"Ah;--that I cannot say. I suppose he will condescend still to honour me with his company.
I do not know why he should wish to go to Guatemala or elsewhere. He has everything here that
he can want."

"You know, papa, that that is impossible."

"I cannot say what with him is possible or impossible. He is bound by none of the ordinary
rules of mankind."

That evening Lopez returned to his dinner in Manchester Square, which was still regularly served
for him and his wife, though the servants who attended upon him did so under silent and oft-repeated
protest. He said not a word more as to Arthur Fletcher, nor did he seek any ground of quarrel
with his wife. But that her continued melancholy and dejection made anything like good-humour
impossible, even on his part, he would have been good-humoured. When they were alone she asked
him as to their future destiny. "Papa tells me you are not going," she began by saying.

"Did I not tell you so this morning?"

"Yes;--you said so. But I did not know you were earnest. Is it all over?"

"All over,--I suppose."

"I should have thought that you would have told me with more--more seriousness."

"I don't know what you would have. I was serious enough. The fact is, that your father has
delayed so long the payment of the promised money that the thing has fallen through of necessity.
I do not know that I can blame the Company."

Then there was a pause. "And now," she said, "what do you mean to do?"

"Upon my word I cannot say. I am quite as much in the dark as you can be."

"That is nonsense, Ferdinand."

"Thank you! Let it be nonsense if you will. It seems to me that there is a great deal of nonsense
going on in the world; but very little of it as true as what I say now."

"But it is your duty to know. Of course you cannot stay here."

"Nor you, I suppose,--without me."

"I am not speaking of myself. If you choose, I can remain here."

"And--just throw me overboard altogether."

"If you provide another home for me, I will go to it. However poor it may be I will go to it,
if you bid me. But for you,--of course you cannot stay here."

"Has your father told you to say so to me?"

"No;--but I can say so without his telling me. You are banishing him from his own house. He
has put up with it while he thought that you were going to this foreign country; but there
must be an end of that now. You must have some scheme of life?"

"Upon my soul I have none."

"You must have some intentions for the future?"

"None in the least. I have had intentions, and they have failed;--from want of that support
which I had a right to expect. I have struggled and I have failed, and now I have got no intentions.
What are yours?"

"It is not my duty to have any purpose, as what I do must depend on your commands." Then again
there was a silence, during which he lit a cigar, although he was sitting in the drawing-room.
This was a profanation of the room on which even he had never ventured before, but at the present
moment she was unable to notice it by any words. "I must tell papa," she said after a while,
"what our plans are."

"You can tell him what you please. I have literally nothing to say to him. If he will settle
an adequate income on us, payable of course to me, I will go and live elsewhere. If he turns
me into the street without provision, he must turn you too. That is all that I have got to
say. It will come better from you than from me. I am sorry, of course, that things have gone
wrong with me. When I found myself the son-in-law of a very rich man I thought that I might
spread my wings a bit. But my rich father-in-law threw me over, and now I am helpless. You
are not very cheerful, my dear, and I think I'll go down to the club."

He went out of the house and did go down to the Progress. The committee which was to be held
with the view of judging whether he was or was not a proper person to remain a member of that
assemblage had not yet been held, and there was nothing to impede his entrance to the club,
or the execution of the command which he gave for tea and buttered toast. But no one spoke
to him; nor, though he affected a look of comfort, did he find himself much at his ease. Among
the members of the club there was a much divided opinion whether he should be expelled or not.
There was a strong party who declared that his conduct socially, morally, and politically,
had been so bad that nothing short of expulsion would meet the case. But there were others
who said that no act had been proved against him which the club ought to notice. He had, no
doubt, shown himself to be a blackguard, a man without a spark of honour or honesty. But then,--as
they said who thought his position in the club to be unassailable,--what had the club to do
with that? "If you turn out all the blackguards and all the dishonourable men, where will the
club be?" was a question asked with a great deal of vigour by one middle-aged gentleman who
was supposed to know the club-world very thoroughly. He had committed no offence which the
law could recognise and punish, nor had he sinned against the club rules. "He is not required
to be a man of honour by any regulation of which I am aware," said the middle-aged gentleman.
The general opinion seemed to be that he should be asked to go, and that, if he declined, no
one should speak to him. This penalty was already inflicted on him, for on the evening in question
no one did speak to him.

He drank his tea and ate his toast and read a magazine, striving to look as comfortable and
as much at his ease as men at their clubs generally are. He was not a bad actor, and those
who saw him and made reports as to his conduct on the following day declared that he had apparently
been quite indifferent to the disagreeable incidents of his position. But his indifference
had been mere acting. His careless manner with his wife had been all assumed. Selfish as he
was, void as he was of all principle, utterly unmanly and even unconscious of the worth of
manliness, still he was alive to the opinions of others. He thought that the world was wrong
to condemn him,--that the world did not understand the facts of his case, and that the world
generally would have done as he had done in similar circumstances. He did not know that there
was such a quality as honesty, nor did he understand what the word meant. But he did know that
some men, an unfortunate class, became subject to evil report from others who were more successful,
and he was aware that he had become one of those unfortunates. Nor could he see any remedy
for his position. It was all blank and black before him. It may be doubted whether he got much
instruction or amusement from the pages of the magazine which he turned.

At about twelve o'clock he left the club and took his way homewards. But he did not go straight
home. It was a nasty cold March night, with a catching wind, and occasional short showers of
something between snow and rain,--as disagreeable a night for a gentleman to walk in as one
could well conceive. But he went round by Trafalgar Square, and along the Strand, and up some
dirty streets by the small theatres, and so on to Holborn and by Bloomsbury Square up to Tottenham
Court Road, then through some unused street into Portland Place, along the Marylebone Road,
and back to Manchester Square by Baker Street. He had more than doubled the distance,--apparently
without any object. He had been spoken to frequently by unfortunates of both sexes, but had
answered a word to no one. He had trudged on and on with his umbrella over his head, but almost
unconscious of the cold and wet. And yet he was a man sedulously attentive to his own personal
comfort and health, who had at any rate shown this virtue in his mode of living, that he had
never subjected himself to danger by imprudence. But now the working of his mind kept him warm,
and, if not dry, at least indifferent to the damp. He had thrown aside with affected nonchalance
those questions which his wife had asked him, but still it was necessary that he should answer
them. He did not suppose that he could continue to live in Manchester Square in his present
condition. Nor, if it was necessary that he should wander forth into the world, could he force
his wife to wander with him. If he would consent to leave her, his father-in-law would probably
give him something,--some allowance on which he might exist. But then of what sort would be
his life?

He did not fail to remind himself over and over again that he had nearly succeeded. He had
been the guest of the Prime Minister, and had been the nominee chosen by a Duchess to represent
her husband's borough in Parliament. He had been intimate with Mills Happerton who was fast
becoming a millionaire. He had married much above himself in every way. He had achieved a certain
popularity and was conscious of intellect. But at the present moment two or three sovereigns
in his pocket were the extent of his worldly wealth and his character was utterly ruined. He
regarded his fate as does a card-player who day after day holds sixes and sevens when other
men have the aces and kings. Fate was against him. He saw no reason why he should not have
had the aces and kings continually, especially as fate had given him perhaps more than his
share of them at first. He had, however, lost rubber after rubber,--not paying his stakes for
some of the last rubbers lost,--till the players would play with him no longer. The misfortune
might have happened to any man;--but it had happened to him. There was no beginning again.
A possible small allowance and some very retired and solitary life, in which there would be
no show of honour, no flattery coming to him, was all that was left to him.

He let himself in at the house, and found his wife still awake. "I am wet to the skin," he
said. "I made up my mind to walk, and I would do it;--but I am a fool for my pains." She made
him some feeble answer, affecting to be half asleep, and merely turned in her bed. "I must
be out early in the morning. Mind you make them dry my things. They never do anything for my
telling."

"You don't want them dried to-night?"

"Not to-night, of course;--but after I am gone to-morrow. They'll leave them there without
putting a hand to them, if you don't speak. I must be off before breakfast to-morrow."

"Where are you going? Do you want anything packed?"

"No; nothing. I shall be back to dinner. But I must go down to Birmingham, to see a friend
of Happerton's on business. I will breakfast at the station. As you said to-day, something
must be done. If it's to sweep a crossing, I must sweep it."

As she lay awake while he slept, she thought that those last words were the best she had heard
him speak since they were married. There seemed to be some indication of a purpose in them.
If he would only sweep a crossing as a man should sweep it, she would stand by him, and at
any rate do her duty to him, in spite of all that had happened. Alas! she was not old enough
to have learned that a dishonest man cannot begin even to sweep a crossing honestly till he
have in very truth repented of his former dishonesty. The lazy man may become lazy no longer,
but there must have been first a process through his mind whereby laziness has become odious
to him. And that process can hardly be the immediate result of misfortune arising from misconduct.
Had Lopez found his crossing at Birmingham he would hardly have swept it well.

Early on the following morning he was up, and before he left his room he kissed his wife. "Good-bye,
old girl," he said; "don't be down-hearted."

"If you have anything before you to do, I will not be down-hearted," she said.

"I shall have something to do before night, I think. Tell your father, when you see him, that
I will not trouble him here much longer. But tell him, also, that I have no thanks to give
him for his hospitality."

"I will not tell him that, Ferdinand."

"He shall know it, though. But I do not mean to be cross to you. Good-bye, love." Then he stooped
over her and kissed her again;--and so he took his leave of her.

It was raining hard, and when he got into the street he looked about for a cab, but there was
none to be found. In Baker Street he got an omnibus which took him down to the underground
railway, and by that he went to Gower Street. Through the rain he walked up to the Euston Station,
and there he ordered breakfast. Could he have a mutton chop and some tea? And he was very particular
that the mutton chop should be well cooked. He was a good-looking man, of fashionable appearance,
and the young lady who attended him noticed him and was courteous to him. He condescended even
to have a little light conversation with her, and, on the whole, he seemed to enjoy his breakfast.
"Upon my word, I should like to breakfast here every day of my life," he said. The young lady
assured him that, as far as she could see, there was no objection to such an arrangement. "Only
it's a bore, you know, coming out in the rain when there are no cabs," he said. Then there
were various little jokes between them, till the young lady was quite impressed with the gentleman's
pleasant affability.

After a while he went back into the hall and took a first-class return ticket, not for Birmingham,
but for the Tenway Junction. It is quite unnecessary to describe the Tenway Junction, as everybody
knows it. From this spot, some six or seven miles distant from London, lines diverge east,
west, and north, north-east, and north-west, round the metropolis in every direction, and with
direct communication with every other line in and out of London. It is a marvellous place,
quite unintelligible to the uninitiated, and yet daily used by thousands who only know that
when they get there, they are to do what some one tells them. The space occupied by the convergent
rails seems to be sufficient for a large farm. And these rails always run one into another
with sloping points, and cross passages, and mysterious meandering sidings, till it seems to
the thoughtful stranger to be impossible that the best trained engine should know its own line.
Here and there and around there is ever a wilderness of waggons, some loaded, some empty, some
smoking with close-packed oxen, and others furlongs in length black with coals, which look
as though they had been stranded there by chance, and were never destined to get again into
the right path of traffic. Not a minute passes without a train going here or there, some rushing
by without noticing Tenway in the least, crashing through like flashes of substantial lightning,
and others stopping, disgorging and taking up passengers by the hundreds. Men and women,--especially
the men, for the women knowing their ignorance are generally willing to trust to the pundits
of the place,--look doubtful, uneasy, and bewildered. But they all do get properly placed and
unplaced, so that the spectator at last acknowledges that over all this apparent chaos there
is presiding a great genius of order. From dusky morn to dark night, and indeed almost throughout
the night, the air is loaded with a succession of shrieks. The theory goes that each separate
shriek,--if there can be any separation where the sound is so nearly continuous,--is a separate
notice to separate ears of the coming or going of a separate train. The stranger, as he speculates
on these pandemoniac noises, is able to realise the idea that were they discontinued the excitement
necessary for the minds of the pundits might be lowered, and that activity might be lessened,
and evil results might follow. But he cannot bring himself to credit that theory of individual
notices.

At Tenway Junction there are half-a-dozen long platforms, on which men and women and luggage
are crowded. On one of these for a while Ferdinand Lopez walked backwards and forwards as though
waiting for the coming of some especial train. The crowd is ever so great that a man might
be supposed to walk there from morning to night without exciting special notice. But the pundits
are very clever, and have much experience in men and women. A well-taught pundit, who has exercised
authority for a year or two at such a station as that of Tenway, will know within a minute
of the appearance of each stranger what is his purpose there,--whether he be going or has just
come, whether he is himself on the way or waiting for others, whether he should be treated
with civility or with some curt command,--so that if his purport be honest all necessary assistance
may be rendered him. As Lopez was walking up and down, with smiling face and leisurely pace,
now reading an advertisement and now watching the contortions of some amazed passenger, a certain
pundit asked him his business. He was waiting, he said, for a train from Liverpool, intending,
when his friend arrived, to go with him to Dulwich by a train which went round the west of
London. It was all feasible, and the pundit told him that the stopping train from Liverpool
was due there in six minutes, but that the express from the north would pass first. Lopez thanked
the pundit and gave him sixpence,--which made the pundit suspicious. A pundit hopes to be paid
when he handles luggage, but has no such expectation when he merely gives information.

The pundit still had his eye on our friend when the shriek and the whirr of the express from
the north was heard. Lopez walked quickly up towards the edge of the platform, when the pundit
followed him, telling him that this was not his train. Lopez then ran a few yards along the
platform, not noticing the man, reaching a spot that was unoccupied;--and there he stood fixed.
And as he stood the express flashed by. "I am fond of seeing them pass like that," said Lopez
to the man who had followed him.

"But you shouldn't do it, sir," said the suspicious pundit. "No one isn't allowed to stand
near like that. The very hair of it might take you off your legs when you're not used to it."

"All right, old fellow," said Lopez, retreating. The next train was the Liverpool train; and
it seemed that our friend's friend had not come, for when the Liverpool passengers had cleared
themselves off, he was still walking up and down the platform. "He'll come by the next," said
Lopez to the pundit, who now followed him about and kept an eye on him.

"There ain't another from Liverpool stopping here till the 2.20," said the pundit. "You had
better come again if you mean to meet him by that."

"He has come on part of the way, and will reach this by some other train," said Lopez.

"There ain't nothing he can come by," said the pundit. "Gentlemen can't wait here all day,
sir. The horders is against waiting on the platform."

"All right," said Lopez, moving away as though to make his exit through the station.

Now Tenway Junction is so big a place, and so scattered, that it is impossible that all the
pundits should by any combined activity maintain to the letter that order of which our special
pundit had spoken. Lopez, departing from the platform which he had hitherto occupied, was soon
to be seen on another, walking up and down, and again waiting. But the old pundit had had his
eye upon him, and had followed him round. At that moment there came a shriek louder than all
the other shrieks, and the morning express down from Euston to Inverness was seen coming round
the curve at a thousand miles an hour. Lopez turned round and looked at it, and again walked
towards the edge of the platform. But now it was not exactly the edge that he neared, but a
descent to a pathway,--an inclined plane leading down to the level of the rails, and made there
for certain purposes of traffic. As he did so the pundit called to him, and then made a rush
at him,--for our friend's back was turned to the coming train. But Lopez heeded not the call,
and the rush was too late. With quick, but still with gentle and apparently unhurried steps,
he walked down before the flying engine--and in a moment had been knocked into bloody atoms.

CHAPTER LXI

The Widow and Her Friends

The catastrophe described in the last chapter had taken place during the first week in March.
By the end of that month old Mr. Wharton had probably reconciled himself to the tragedy, although
in fact it had affected him very deeply. In the first days after the news had reached him he
seemed to be bowed to the ground. Stone Buildings were neglected, and the Eldon saw nothing
of him. Indeed, he barely left the house from which he had been so long banished by the presence
of his son-in-law. It seemed to Everett, who now came to live with him and his sister, as though
his father were overcome by the horror of the affair. But after awhile he recovered himself,
and appeared one morning in court with his wig and gown, and argued a case,--which was now
unusual with him,--as though to show the world that a dreadful episode in his life was passed,
and should be thought of no more. At this period, three or four weeks after the occurrence,--he
rarely spoke to his daughter about Lopez; but to Everett the man's name would be often on his
tongue. "I do not know that there could have been any other deliverance," he said to his son
one day. "I thought it would have killed me when I first heard it, and it nearly killed her.
But, at any rate, now there is peace."

But the widow seemed to feel it more as time went on. At first she was stunned, and for a while
absolutely senseless. It was not till two days after the occurrence that the fact became known
to her,--nor known as a certainty to her father and brother. It seemed as though the man had
been careful to carry with him no record of identity, the nature of which would permit it to
outlive the crash of the train. No card was found, no scrap of paper with his name; and it
was discovered at last that when he left the house on the fatal morning he had been careful
to dress himself in shirt and socks, with handkerchief and collar that had been newly purchased
for his proposed journey and which bore no mark. The fragments of his body set identity at
defiance, and even his watch had been crumpled into ashes. Of course the fact became certain
with no great delay. The man himself was missing, and was accurately described both by the
young lady from the refreshment room, and by the suspicious pundit who had actually seen the
thing done. There was first belief that it was so, which was not communicated to Emily,--and
then certainty.

There was an inquest held of course,--well, we will say on the body,--and, singularly enough,
great difference of opinion as to the manner, though of course none as to the immediate cause
of the death. Had it been accidental, or premeditated? The pundit, who in the performance of
his duties on the Tenway platforms was so efficient and valuable, gave half-a-dozen opinions
in half-a-dozen minutes when subjected to the questions of the Coroner. In his own mind he
had not the least doubt in the world as to what had happened. But he was made to believe that
he was not to speak his own mind. The gentleman, he said, certainly might have walked down
by accident. The gentleman's back was turned, and it was possible that the gentleman did not
hear the train. He was quite certain the gentleman knew of the train; but yet he could not
say. The gentleman walked down before the train o' purpose; but perhaps he didn't mean to do
himself an injury. There was a deal of this, till the Coroner, putting all his wrath into his
brow, told the man that he was a disgrace to the service, and expressed a hope that the Company
would no longer employ a man so evidently unfit for his position. But the man was in truth
a conscientious and useful railway pundit, with a large family, and evident capabilities for
his business. At last a verdict was given,--that the man's name was Ferdinand Lopez, that he
had been crushed by an express train on the London and North Western Line, and that there was
no evidence to show how his presence on the line had been occasioned. Of course Mr. Wharton
had employed counsel, and of course the counsel's object had been to avoid a verdict of felo
de se. Appended to the verdict was a recommendation from the jury that the Railway Company
should be advised to signalise their express trains more clearly at the Tenway Junction Station.

When these tidings were told to the widow she had already given way to many fears. Lopez had
gone, purporting,--as he said,--to be back to dinner. He had not come then, nor on the following
morning; nor had he written. Then she remembered all that he had done and said;--how he had
kissed her, and left a parting malediction for her father. She did not at first imagine that
he had destroyed himself, but that he had gone away, intending to vanish as other men before
now have vanished. As she thought of this something almost like love came back upon her heart.
Of course he was bad. Even in her sorrow, even when alarmed as to his fate, she could not deny
that. But her oath to him had not been to love him only while he was good. She had made herself
a part of him, and was she not bound to be true to him, whether good or bad? She implored her
father and she implored her brother to be ceaseless in their endeavours to trace him,--sometimes
seeming almost to fear that in this respect she could not fully trust them. Then she discerned
from their manner a doubt as to her husband's fate. "Oh, papa, if you think anything, tell
me what you think," she said late on the evening of the second day. He was then nearly sure
that the man who had been killed at Tenway was Ferdinand Lopez;--but he was not quite sure,
and he would not tell her. But on the following morning, somewhat before noon, having himself
gone out early to Euston Square, he came back to his own house,--and then he told her all.
For the first hour she did not shed a tear or lose her consciousness of the horror of the thing;--but
sat still and silent, gazing at nothing, casting back her mind over the history of her life,
and the misery which she had brought on all who belonged to her. Then at last she gave way,
fell into tears, hysteric sobbings, convulsions so violent as for a time to take the appearance
of epileptic fits, and was at last exhausted and, happily for herself, unconscious.

After that she was ill for many weeks,--so ill that at times both her father and her brother
thought that she would die. When the first month or six weeks had passed by she would often
speak of her husband, especially to her father, and always speaking of him as though she had
brought him to his untimely fate. Nor could she endure at this time that her father should
say a word against him, even when she obliged the old man to speak of one whose conduct had
been so infamous. It had all been her doing! Had she not married him there would have been
no misfortune! She did not say that he had been noble, true, or honest,--but she asserted that
all the evils which had come upon him had been produced by herself. "My dear," her father said
to her one evening, "it is a matter which we cannot forget, but on which it is well that we
should be silent."

"I shall always know what that silence means," she replied.

"It will never mean condemnation of you by me," said he.

"But I have destroyed your life,--and his. I know I ought not to have married him, because
you bade me not. And I know that I should have been gentler with him, and more obedient, when
I was his wife. I sometimes wish that I were a Catholic, and that I could go into a convent,
and bury it all amidst sackcloths and ashes."

"That would not bury it," said her father.

"But I should at least be buried. If I were out of sight, you might forget it all."

She once stirred Everett up to speak more plainly than her father ever dared to do, and then
also she herself used language that was very plain. "My darling," said her brother once, when
she had been trying to make out that her husband had been more sinned against than sinning,--"he
was a bad man. It is better that the truth should be told."

"And who is a good man?" she said, raising herself in her bed and looking him full in the face
with her deep-sunken eyes. "If there be any truth in our religion, are we not all bad? Who
is to tell the shades of difference in badness? He was not a drunkard, or a gambler. Through
it all he was true to his wife." She, poor creature, was of course ignorant of that little
scene in the little street near May Fair, in which Lopez had offered to carry Lizzie Eustace
away with him to Guatemala. "He was industrious. His ideas about money were not the same as
yours or papa's. How was he worse than others? It happened that his faults were distasteful
to you--and so, perhaps, were his virtues."

"His faults, such as they were, brought all these miseries."

"He would have been successful now if he had never seen me. But why should we talk of it? We
shall never agree. And you, Everett, can never understand all that has passed through my mind
during the last two years."

There were two or three persons who attempted to see her at this period, but she avoided them
all. First came Mrs. Roby, who, as her nearest neighbour, as her aunt, and as an aunt who had
been so nearly allied to her, had almost a right to demand admittance. But she would not see
Mrs. Roby. She sent down word to say that she was too ill. And when Mrs. Roby wrote to her,
she got her father to answer the notes. "You had better let it drop," the old man said at last
to his sister-in-law. "Of course she remembers that it was you who brought them together."

"But I didn't bring them together, Mr. Wharton. How often am I to tell you so? It was Everett
who brought Mr. Lopez here."

"The marriage was made up in your house, and it has destroyed me and my child. I will not quarrel
with my wife's sister if I can help it, but at present you had better keep apart." Then he
had left her abruptly, and Mrs. Roby had not dared either to write or to call again.

At this time Arthur Fletcher saw both Everett and Mr. Wharton frequently, but he did not go
to the Square, contenting himself with asking whether he might be allowed to do so. "Not yet,
Arthur," said the old man. "I am sure she thinks of you as one of her best friends, but she
could not see you yet."

"She would have nothing to fear," said Arthur. "We knew each other when we were children, and
I should be now only as I was then."

"Not yet, Arthur;--not yet," said the barrister.

Then there came a letter, or rather two letters, from Mary Wharton;--one to Mr. Wharton and
the other to Emily. To tell the truth as to these letters, they contained the combined wisdom
and tenderness of Wharton Hall and Longbarns. As soon as the fate of Lopez had been ascertained
and thoroughly discussed in Herefordshire, there went forth an edict that Emily had suffered
punishment sufficient and was to be forgiven. Old Mrs. Fletcher did not come to this at once,--having
some deep-seated feeling which she did not dare to express even to her son, though she muttered
it to her daughter-in-law, that Arthur would be disgraced for ever were he to marry the widow
of such a man as Ferdinand Lopez. But when this question of receiving Emily back into family
favour was mooted in the Longbarns Parliament no one alluded to the possibility of such a marriage.
There was the fact that she whom they had all loved had been freed by a great tragedy from
the husband whom they had all condemned,--and also the knowledge that the poor victim had suffered
greatly during the period of her married life. Mrs. Fletcher had frowned, and shaken her head,
and made a little speech about the duties of women, and the necessarily fatal consequences
when those duties are neglected. There were present there, with the old lady, John Fletcher
and his wife, Sir Alured and Lady Wharton, and Mary Wharton. Arthur was not in the county,
nor could the discussion have been held in his presence. "I can only say," said John, getting
up and looking away from his mother, "that she shall always find a home at Longbarns when she
chooses to come here, and I hope Sir Alured will say the same as to Wharton Hall." After all,
John Fletcher was king in these parts, and Mrs. Fletcher, with many noddings and some sobbing,
had to give way to King John. The end of all this was that Mary Wharton wrote her letters.
In that to Mr. Wharton she asked whether it would not be better that her cousin should change
the scene and come at once into the country. Let her come and stay a month at Wharton, and
then go on to Longbarns. She might be sure that there would be no company in either house.
In June the Fletchers would go up to town for a week, and then Emily might return to Wharton
Hall. It was a long letter, and Mary gave many reasons why the poor sufferer would be better
in the country than in town. The letter to Emily herself was shorter but full of affection.
"Do, do, do come. You know how we all love you. Let it be as it used to be. You always liked
the country. I will devote myself to try and comfort you." But Emily could not as yet submit
to receive devotion even from her cousin Mary. Through it all, and under it all,--though she
would ever defend her husband because he was dead,--she knew that she had disgraced the Whartons
and brought a load of sorrow upon the Fletchers, and she was too proud to be forgiven so quickly.

Then she received another tender of affection from a quarter whence she certainly did not expect
it. The Duchess of Omnium wrote to her. The Duchess, though she had lately been considerably
restrained by the condition of the Duke's mind, and by the effects of her own political and
social mistakes, still from time to time made renewed efforts to keep together the Coalition
by giving dinners, balls, and garden parties, and by binding to herself the gratitude and worship
of young parliamentary aspirants. In carrying out her plans, she had lately showered her courtesies
upon Arthur Fletcher, who had been made welcome even by the Duke as the sitting member for
Silverbridge. With Arthur she had of course discussed the conduct of Lopez as to the election
bills, and had been very loud in condemning him. And from Arthur also she had heard something
of the sorrows of Emily Lopez. Arthur had been very desirous that the Duchess, who had received
them both at her house, should distinguish between the husband and the wife. Then had come
the tragedy, to which the notoriety of the man's conduct of course gave additional interest.
It was believed that Lopez had destroyed himself because of the disgrace which had fallen upon
him from the Silverbridge affair. And for much of that Silverbridge affair the Duchess herself
was responsible. She waited till a couple of months had gone by, and then, in the beginning
of May, sent to the widow what was intended to be, and indeed was, a very kind note. The Duchess
had heard the sad story with the greatest grief. She hoped that Mrs. Lopez would permit her
to avail herself of a short acquaintance to express her sincere sympathy. She would not venture
to call as yet, but hoped that before long she might be allowed to come to Manchester Square.

This note touched the poor woman to whom it was written, not because she herself was solicitous
to be acquainted with the Duchess of Omnium, but because the application seemed to her to contain
something like an acquittal, or at any rate a pardon, of her husband. His sin in that measure
of the Silverbridge election,--a sin which her father had been loud in denouncing before the
wretch had destroyed himself,--had been especially against the Duke of Omnium. And now the
Duchess came forward to say that it should be forgiven and forgotten. When she showed the letter
to her father, and asked him what she should say in answer to it, he only shook his head. "It
is meant for kindness, papa."

"Yes;--I think it is. There are people who have no right to be kind to me. If a man stopped
me in the street and offered me half-a-crown it might be kindness;--but I don't want the man's
half-crown."

"I don't think it is the same, papa. There is a reason here."

"Perhaps so, my dear; but I do not see the reason."

She became very red, but even to him she would not explain her ideas. "I think I shall answer it."

"Certainly answer it. Your compliments to the Duchess and thank her for her kind inquiries."

"But she says she will come here."

"I should not notice that."

"Very well, papa. If you think so, of course I will not. Perhaps it would be an inconvenience,
if she were really to come." On the next day she did write a note, not quite so cold as that
which her father proposed, but still saying nothing as to the offered visit. She felt, she
said, very grateful for the Duchess's kind remembrance of her. The Duchess would perhaps understand
that at present her sorrow overwhelmed her.

And there was one other tender of kindness which was more surprising than even that from the
Duchess. The reader may perhaps remember that Ferdinand Lopez and Lady Eustace had not parted
when they last saw each other on the pleasantest terms. He had been very affectionate, but
when he had proposed to devote his whole life to her and to carry her off to Guatemala she
had simply told him that he was--a fool. Then he had escaped from her house and had never again
seen Lizzie Eustace. She had not thought very much about it. Had he returned to her the next
day with some more tempting proposition for making money she would have listened to him,--and
had he begged her pardon for what had taken place on the former day she would have merely laughed.
She was not more offended than she would have been had he asked her for half her fortune instead
of her person and her honour. But, as it was, he had escaped and had never again shown himself
in the little street near May Fair. Then she had the tidings of his death, first seeing the
account in a very sensational article from the pen of Mr. Quintus Slide himself. She was immediately
filled with an intense interest which was infinitely increased by the fact that the man had
but a few days before declared himself to be her lover. It was bringing her almost as near
to the event as though she had seen it! She was, perhaps, entitled to think that she had caused
it! Nay;--in one sense she had caused it, for he certainly would not have destroyed himself
had she consented to go with him to Guatemala or elsewhere. And she knew his wife. An uninteresting,
dowdy creature she had called her. But, nevertheless, they had been in company together more
than once. So she presented her compliments, and expressed her sorrow, and hoped that she might
be allowed to call. There had been no one for whom she had felt more sincere respect and esteem
than for her late friend Mr. Ferdinand Lopez. To this note there was sent an answer written
by Mr. Wharton himself.

   MADAM,

   My daughter is too ill to see even her own friends.

   I am, Madam,
   Your obedient servant,

   ABEL WHARTON.

After this, life went on in a very quiet way at Manchester Square for many weeks. Gradually
Mrs. Lopez recovered her capability of attending to the duties of life. Gradually she became
again able to interest herself in her brother's pursuits and in her father's comforts, and
the house returned to its old form as it had been before these terrible two years, in which
the happiness of the Wharton and Fletcher families had been marred, and scotched, and almost
destroyed for ever by the interference of Ferdinand Lopez. But Mrs. Lopez never for a moment
forgot that she had done the mischief,--and that the black enduring cloud had been created
solely by her own perversity and self-will. Though she would still defend her late husband
if any attack were made upon his memory, not the less did she feel that hers had been the fault,
though the punishment had come upon them all.

CHAPTER LXII

Phineas Finn Has a Book to Read

The sensation created by the man's death was by no means confined to Manchester Square, but
was very general in the metropolis, and, indeed, throughout the country. As the catastrophe
became the subject of general conversation, many people learned that the Silverbridge affair
had not, in truth, had much to do with it. The man had killed himself, as many other men have
done before him, because he had run through his money and had no chance left of redeeming himself.
But to the world at large, the disgrace brought upon him by the explanation given in Parliament
was the apparent cause of his self-immolation, and there were not wanting those who felt and
expressed a sympathy for a man who could feel so acutely the effect of his own wrong-doing.
No doubt he had done wrong in asking the Duke for the money. But the request, though wrong,
might almost be justified. There could be no doubt, these apologists said, that he had been
ill-treated between the Duke and the Duchess. No doubt Phineas Finn, who was now described
by some opponents as the Duke's creature, had been able to make out a story in the Duke's favour.
But all the world knew what was the worth and what was the truth of ministerial explanations!
The Coalition was very strong; and even the question in the House, which should have been hostile,
had been asked in a friendly spirit. In this way there came to be a party who spoke and wrote
of Ferdinand Lopez as though he had been a martyr.

Of course Mr. Quintus Slide was in the front rank of these accusers. He may be said to have
led the little army which made this matter a pretext for a special attack upon the Ministry.
Mr. Slide was especially hostile to the Prime Minister, but he was not less hotly the enemy
of Phineas Finn. Against Phineas Finn he had old grudges, which, however, age had never cooled.
He could, therefore, write with a most powerful pen when discussing the death of that unfortunate
man, the late candidate for Silverbridge, crushing his two foes in the single grasp of his
journalistic fist. Phineas had certainly said some hard things against Lopez, though he had
not mentioned the man's name. He had congratulated the House that it had not been contaminated
by the presence of so base a creature, and he had said that he would not pause to stigmatise
the meanness of the application for money which Lopez had made. Had Lopez continued to live
and to endure "the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune," no one would have ventured to
say that these words would have inflicted too severe a punishment. But death wipes out many
faults, and a self-inflicted death caused by remorse will, in the minds of many, wash a blackamoor
almost white. Thus it came to pass that some heavy weapons were hurled at Phineas Finn, but
none so heavy as those hurled by Quintus Slide. Should not this Irish knight, who was so ready
with his lance in the defence of the Prime Minister, asked Mr. Slide, have remembered the past
events of his own rather peculiar life? Had not he, too, been poor, and driven in his poverty
to rather questionable straits? Had not he been abject in his petition for office,--and in
what degree were such petitions less disgraceful than a request for money which had been hopelessly
expended on an impossible object, attempted at the instance of the great Croesus who, when
asked to pay it, had at once acknowledged the necessity of doing so? Could not Mr. Finn remember
that he himself had stood in danger of his life before a British jury, and that, though he
had been, no doubt properly, acquitted of the crime imputed to him, circumstances had come
out against him during the trial which, if not as criminal, were at any rate almost as disgraceful?
Could he not have had some mercy on a broken political adventurer who, in his aspirations for
public life, had shown none of that greed by which Mr. Phineas Finn had been characterised
in all the relations of life? As for the Prime Minister, "We," as Mr. Quintus Slide always
described himself,--"We do not wish to add to the agony which the fate of Mr. Lopez must have
brought upon him. He has hounded that poor man to his death in revenge for the trifling sum
of money which he was called on to pay for him. It may be that the first blame lay not with
the Prime Minister himself, but with the Prime Minister's wife. With that we have nothing to
do. The whole thing lies in a nutshell. The bare mention of the name of her Grace the Duchess
in Parliament would have saved the Duke, at any rate as effectually as he has been saved by
the services of his man-of-all-work, Phineas Finn, and would have saved him without driving
poor Ferdinand Lopez to insanity. But rather than do this he allowed his servant to make statements
about mysterious agents, which we are justified in stigmatizing as untrue, and to throw the
whole blame where but least of the blame was due. We all know the result. It was found in those
gory shreds and tatters of a poor human being with which the Tenway Railway Station was bespattered."

Of course such an article had considerable effect. It was apparent at once that there was ample
room for an action for libel against the newspaper, on the part of Phineas Finn if not on that
of the Duke. But it was equally apparent that Mr. Quintus Slide must have been very well aware
of this when he wrote the article. Such an action, even if successful, may bring with it to
the man punished more of good than of evil. Any pecuniary penalty might be more than recouped
by the largeness of the advertisement which such an action would produce. Mr. Slide no doubt
calculated that he would carry with him a great body of public feeling by the mere fact that
he had attacked a Prime Minister and a Duke. If he could only get all the publicans in London
to take his paper because of his patriotic and bold conduct, the fortune of the paper would
be made. There is no better trade than that of martyrdom, if the would-be martyr knows how
far he may judiciously go, and in what direction. All this Mr. Quintus Slide was supposed to
have considered very well.

And Phineas Finn knew that his enemy had also considered the nature of the matters which he
would have been able to drag into Court if there should be a trial. Allusions, very strong
allusions, had been made to former periods of Mr. Finn's life. And though there was but little,
if anything, in the past circumstances of which he was ashamed,--but little, if anything, which
he thought would subject him personally to the odium of good men, could they be made accurately
known in all their details,--it would, he was well aware, be impossible that such accuracy
should be achieved. And the story if told inaccurately would not suit him. And then, there
was a reason against any public proceeding much stronger even than this. Whether the telling
of the story would or would not suit him, it certainly would not suit others. As has been before
remarked, there are former chronicles respecting Phineas Finn, and in them may be found adequate
cause for this conviction on his part. To no outsider was this history known better than to
Mr. Quintus Slide, and therefore Mr. Quintus Slide could dare almost to defy the law.

But not the less on this account were there many who told Phineas that he ought to bring the
action. Among these none were more eager than his old friend Lord Chiltern, the Master of the
Brake hounds, a man who really loved Phineas, who also loved the abstract idea of justice,
and who could not endure the thought that a miscreant should go unpunished. Hunting was over
for the season in the Brake country, and Lord Chiltern rushed up to London, having this object
among others of a very pressing nature on his mind. His saddler had to be seen,--and threatened,--on
a certain matter touching the horses' backs. A draught of hounds were being sent down to a
friend in Scotland. And there was a Committee of Masters to sit on a moot question concerning
a neutral covert in the XXX country, of which Committee he was one. But the desire to punish
Slide was almost as strong in his indignant mind as those other matters referring more especially
to the profession of his life. "Phineas," he said, "you are bound to do it. If you will allow
a fellow like that to say such things of you, why, by heaven, any man may say anything of anybody."

Now Phineas could hardly explain to Lord Chiltern his objection to the proposed action. A lady
was closely concerned, and that lady was Lord Chiltern's sister. "I certainly shall not," said
Phineas.

"And why?"

"Just because he wishes me to do it. I should be falling into the little pit that he has dug
for me."

"He couldn't hurt you. What have you got to be afraid of? Ruat coelum."

"There are certain angels, Chiltern, living up in that heaven which you wish me to pull about
our ears, as to whom, if all their heart and all their wishes and all their doings could be
known, nothing but praise could be spoken; but who would still be dragged with soiled wings
through the dirt if this man were empowered to bring witness after witness into court. My wife
would be named. For aught I know, your wife."

"By G----, he'd find himself wrong there."

"Leave a chimney-sweep alone when you see him, Chiltern. Should he run against you, then remember
that it is one of the necessary penalties of clean linen that it is apt to be soiled."

"I'm d----d if I'd let him off."

"Yes you would, old fellow. When you come to see clearly what you would gain and what you would
lose, you would not meddle with him."

His wife was at first inclined to think that an action should be taken, but she was more easily
convinced than Lord Chiltern. "I had not thought," she said, "of poor Lady Laura. But is it
not horrible that a man should be able to go on like that, and that there should be no punishment?"
In answer to this he only shrugged his shoulders.

But the greatest pressure came upon him from another source. He did not in truth suffer much
himself from what was said in the "People's Banner." He had become used to the "People's Banner"
and had found out that in no relation of life was he less pleasantly situated because of the
maledictions heaped upon him in the columns of that newspaper. His position in public life
did not seem to be weakened by them. His personal friends did not fall off because of them.
Those who loved him did not love him less. It had not been so with him always, but now, at
last, he was hardened against Mr. Quintus Slide. But the poor Duke was by no means equally
strong. This attack upon him, this denunciation of his cruelty, this assurance that he had
caused the death of Ferdinand Lopez, was very grievous to him. It was not that he really felt
himself to be guilty of the man's blood, but that any one should say that he was guilty. It
was of no use to point out to him that other newspapers had sufficiently vindicated his conduct
in that respect, that it was already publicly known that Lopez had received payment for those
election expenses from Mr. Wharton before the application had been made to him, and that therefore
the man's dishonesty was patent to all the world. It was equally futile to explain to him that
the man's last act had been in no degree caused by what had been said in Parliament, but had
been the result of his continued failures in life and final absolute ruin. He fretted and fumed
and was very wretched,--and at last expressed his opinion that legal steps should be taken
to punish the "People's Banner." Now it had been already acknowledged, on the dictum of no
less a man than Sir Gregory Grogram, the Attorney-General, that the action for libel, if taken
at all, must be taken, not on the part of the Prime Minister, but on that of Phineas Finn.
Sir Timothy Beeswax had indeed doubted, but it had come to be understood by all the members
of the Coalition that Sir Timothy Beeswax always did doubt whatever was said by Sir Gregory
Grogram. "The Duke thinks that something should be done," said Mr. Warburton, the Duke's private
Secretary, to Phineas Finn.

"Not by me, I hope," said Phineas.

"Nobody else can do it. That is to say it must be done in your name. Of course it would be
a Government matter, as far as expense goes, and all that."

"I am sorry the Duke should think so."

"I don't see that it could hurt you."

"I am sorry the Duke should think so," repeated Phineas,--"because nothing can be done in my
name. I have made up my mind about it. I think the Duke is wrong in wishing it, and I believe
that were any action taken, we should only be playing into the hands of that wretched fellow,
Quintus Slide. I have long been conversant with Mr. Quintus Slide, and have quite made up my
mind that I will never play upon his pipe. And you may tell the Duke that there are other reasons.
The man has referred to my past life, and in seeking to justify those remarks he would be enabled
to drag before the public circumstances and stories, and perhaps persons, in a manner that
I personally should disregard, but which, for the sake of others, I am bound to prevent. You
will explain all this to the Duke?"

"I am afraid you will find the Duke very urgent."

"I must then express my great sorrow that I cannot oblige the Duke. I trust I need hardly say
that the Duke has no colleague more devoted to his interest than I am. Were he to wish me to
change my office, or to abandon it, or to undertake any political duty within the compass of
my small powers, he would find me ready to obey his behests. But in this matter others are
concerned, and I cannot make my judgment subordinate to his." The private Secretary looked
very serious, and simply said that he would do his best to explain these objections to his Grace.

That the Duke would take his refusal in bad part Phineas felt nearly certain. He had been a
little surprised at the coldness of the Minister's manner to him after the statement he had
made in the klouse, and had mentioned the matter to his wife. "You hardly know him," she had
said, "as well as I do."

"Certainly not. You ought to know him very intimately, and I have had but little personal friendship
with him. But it was a moment in which the man might, for the moment, have been cordial."

"It was not a moment for his cordiality. The Duchess says that if you want to get a really
genial smile from him you must talk to him about cork soles. I know exactly what she means.
He loves to be simple, but he does not know how to show people that he likes it. Lady Rosina
found him out by accident."

"Don't suppose that I am in the least aggrieved," he had said. And now he spoke again to his
wife in the same spirit. "Warburton clearly thinks that he will be offended, and Warburton,
I suppose, knows his mind."

"I don't see why he should. I have been reading it longer, and I still find it very difficult.
Lady Glen has been at the work for the last fifteen years, and sometimes owns that there are
passages she has not mastered yet. I fancy Mr. Warburton is afraid of him, and is a little
given to fancy that everybody should bow down to him. Now if there is anything certain about
the Duke it is this,--that he doesn't want any one to bow down to him. He hates all bowing down."

"I don't think he loves those who oppose him."

"It is not the opposition he hates, but the cause in the man's mind which may produce it. When
Sir Orlando opposed him, and he thought that Sir Orlando's opposition was founded on jealousy,
then he despised Sir Orlando. But had he believed in Sir Orlando's belief in the new ships,
he would have been capable of pressing Sir Orlando to his bosom, although he might have been
forced to oppose Sir Orlando's ships in the Cabinet."

"He is a Sir Bayard to you," said Phineas, laughing.

"Rather a Don Quixote, whom I take to have been the better man of the two. I'll tell you what
he is, Phineas, and how he is better than all the real knights of whom I have ever read in
story. He is a man altogether without guile, and entirely devoted to his country. Do not quarrel
with him, if you can help it."

Phineas had not the slightest desire to quarrel with his chief; but he did think it to be not
improbable that his chief would quarrel with him. It was notorious to him as a member of the
Cabinet,--as a colleague living with other colleagues by whom the Prime Minister was coddled,
and especially as the husband of his wife, who lived almost continually with the Prime Minister's
wife,--that the Duke was cut to the quick by the accusation that he had hounded Ferdinand Lopez
to his death. The Prime Minister had defended himself in the House against the first charge
by means of Phineas Finn, and now required Phineas to defend him from the second charge in
another way. This he was obliged to refuse to do. And then the Minister's private Secretary
looked very grave, and left him with the impression that the Duke would be much annoyed, if
not offended. And already there had grown up an idea that the Duke would have on the list of
his colleagues none who were personally disagreeable to himself. Though he was by no means
a strong Minister in regard to political measures, or the proper dominion of his party, still
men were afraid of him. It was not that he would call upon them to resign, but that, if aggrieved,
he would resign himself. Sir Orlando Drought had rebelled and had tried a fall with the Prime
Minister,--and had greatly failed. Phineas determined that if frowned upon he would resign,
but that he certainly would bring no action for libel against the "People's Banner."

A week passed after he had seen Warburton before he by chance found himself alone with the
Prime Minister. This occurred at the house in Carlton Gardens, at which he was a frequent visitor,--and
could hardly have ceased to be so without being noticed, as his wife spent half her time there.
It was evident to him then that the occasion was sought for by the Duke. "Mr. Finn," said the
Duke, "I wanted to have a word or two with you."

"Certainly," said Phineas, arresting his steps.

"Warburton spoke to you about that--that newspaper."

"Yes, Duke. He seemed to think that there should be an action for libel."

"I thought so too. It was very bad, you know."

"Yes;--it was bad. I have known the 'People's Banner' for some time, and it is always bad."

"No doubt;--no doubt. It is bad, very bad. Is it not sad that there should be such dishonesty,
and that nothing can be done to stop it? Warburton says that you won't hear of an action in
your name."

"There are reasons, Duke."

"No doubt;--no doubt. Well;--there's an end of it. I own I think the man should be punished.
I am not often vindictive, but I think that he should be punished. However, I suppose it cannot
be."

"I don't see the way."

"So be it. So be it. It must be entirely for you to judge. Are you not longing to get into
the country, Mr. Finn?"

"Hardly yet," said Phineas, surprised. "It's only June, and we have two months more of it.
What is the use of longing yet?"

"Two months more!" said the Duke. "Two months certainly. But even two months will come to an
end. We go down to Matching quietly,--very quietly,--when the time does come. You must promise
that you'll come with us. Eh? I make a point of it, Mr. Finn."

Phineas did promise, and thought that he had succeeded in mastering one of the difficult passages
in that book.

CHAPTER LXIII

The Duchess and Her Friend

But the Duke, though he was by far too magnanimous to be angry with Phineas Finn because Phineas
would not fall into his views respecting the proposed action, was not the less tormented and
goaded by what the newspaper said. The assertion that he had hounded Ferdinand Lopez to his
death, that by his defence of himself he had brought the man's blood on his head, was made
and repeated till those around him did not dare to mention the name of Lopez in his hearing.
Even his wife was restrained and became fearful, and in her heart of hearts began almost to
wish for that retirement to which he had occasionally alluded as a distant Elysium which he
should never be allowed to reach. He was beginning to have the worn look of an old man. His
scanty hair was turning grey, and his long thin cheeks longer and thinner. Of what he did when
sitting alone in his chamber, either at home or at the Treasury Chamber, she knew less and
less from day to day, and she began to think that much of his sorrow arose from the fact that
among them they would allow him to do nothing. There was no special subject now which stirred
him to eagerness and brought upon herself explanations which were tedious and unintelligible
to her, but evidently delightful to him. There were no quints or semi-tenths now, no aspirations
for decimal perfection, no delightfully fatiguing hours spent in the manipulation of the multiplication
table. And she could not but observe that the old Duke now spoke to her much less frequently
of her husband's political position than had been his habit. Through the first year and a half
of the present ministerial arrangement he had been constant in his advice to her, and had always,
even when things were difficult, been cheery and full of hope. He still came frequently to
the house, but did not often see her. And when he did see her he seemed to avoid all allusion
either to the political successes or the political reverses of the Coalition. And even her
other special allies seemed to labour under unusual restraint with her. Barrington Erle seldom
told her any news. Mr. Rattler never had a word for her. Warburton, who had ever been discreet,
became almost petrified by discretion. And even Phineas Finn had grown to be solemn, silent,
and uncommunicative. "Have you heard who is the new Prime Minister?" she said to Mrs. Finn one day.

"Has there been a change?"

"I suppose so. Everything has become so quiet that I cannot imagine that Plantagenet is still
in office. Do you know what anybody is doing?"

"The world is going on very smoothly, I take it."

"I hate smoothness. It always means treachery and danger. I feel sure that there will be a
great blow up before long. I smell it in the air. Don't you tremble for your husband?"

"Why should I? He likes being in office because it gives him something to do; but he would
never be an idle man. As long as he has a seat in Parliament, I shall be contented."

"To have been Prime Minister is something after all, and they can't rob him of that," said
the Duchess, recurring again to her own husband. "I half fancy sometimes that the charm of
the thing is growing upon him."

"Upon the Duke?"

"Yes. He is always talking of the delight he will have in giving it up. He is always Cincinnatus,
going back to his peaches and his ploughs. But I fear he is beginning to feel that the salt
would be gone out of his life if he ceased to be the first man in the kingdom. He has never
said so, but there is a nervousness about him when I suggest to him the name of this or that
man as his successor which alarms me. And I think he is becoming a tyrant with his own men.
He spoke the other day of Lord Drummond almost as though he meant to have him whipped. It isn't
what one expected from him;--is it?"

"The weight of the load on his mind makes him irritable."

"Either that, or having no load. If he had really much to do he wouldn't surely have time to
think so much of that poor wretch who destroyed himself. Such sensitiveness is simply a disease.
One can never punish any fault in the world if the sinner can revenge himself upon us by rushing
into eternity. Sometimes I see him shiver and shudder, and then I know that he is thinking
of Lopez."

"I can understand all that, Lady Glen."

"It isn't as it should be, though you can understand it. I'll bet you a guinea that Sir Timothy
Beeswax has to go out before the beginning of next Session."

"I've no objection. But why Sir Timothy?"

"He mentioned Lopez' name the other day before Plantagenet. I heard him. Plantagenet pulled
that long face of his, looking as though he meant to impose silence on the whole world for
the next six weeks. But Sir Timothy is brass itself, a sounding cymbal of brass that nothing
can silence. He went on to declare with that loud voice of his that the death of Lopez was
a good riddance of bad rubbish. Plantagenet turned away and left the room and shut himself
up. He didn't declare to himself that he'd dismiss Sir Timothy, because that's not the way
of his mind. But you'll see that Sir Timothy will have to go."

"That, at any rate, will be a good riddance of bad rubbish," said Mrs. Finn, who did not love
Sir Timothy Beeswax.

Soon after that the Duchess made up her mind that she would interrogate the Duke of St. Bungay
as to the present state of affairs. It was then the end of June, and nearly one of those long
and tedious months had gone by of which the Duke spoke so feelingly when he asked Phineas Finn
to come down to Matching. Hope had been expressed in more than one quarter that this would
be a short Session. Such hopes are much more common in June than in July, and, though rarely
verified, serve to keep up the drooping spirits of languid senators. "I suppose we shall be
early out of town, Duke," she said one day.

"I think so. I don't see what there is to keep us. It often happens that ministers are a great
deal better in the country than in London, and I fancy it will be so this year."

"You never think of the poor girls who haven't got their husbands yet."

"They should make better use of their time. Besides, they can get their husbands in the country."

"It's quite true that they never get to the end of their labours. They are not like you members
of Parliament who can shut up your portfolios and go and shoot grouse. They have to keep at
their work spring and summer, autumn and winter,--year after year! How they must hate the men
they persecute!"

"I don't think we can put off going for their sake."

"Men are always selfish, I know. What do you think of Plantagenet lately?" The question was
put very abruptly, without a moment's notice, and there was no avoiding it.

"Think of him!"

"Yes;--what do you think of his condition;--of his happiness, his health, his capacity of endurance?
Will he be able to go on much longer? Now, my dear Duke, don't stare at me like that. You know,
and I know, that you haven't spoken a word to me for the last two months. And you know, and
I know, how many things there are of which we are both thinking in common. You haven't quarrelled
with Plantagenet?"

"Quarrelled with him! Good heavens, no."

"Of course I know you still call him your noble colleague, and your noble friend, and make
one of the same team with him and all that. But it used to be so much more than that."

"It is still more than that;--very much more."

"It was you who made him Prime Minister."

"No, no, no;--and again no. He made himself Prime Minister by obtaining the confidence of the
House of Commons. There is no other possible way in which a man can become Prime Minister in
this country."

"If I were not very serious at this moment, Duke, I should make an allusion to the--Marines."
No other human being could have said this to the Duke of St. Bungay, except the young woman
whom he had petted all his life as Lady Glencora. "But I am very serious," she continued, "and
I may say not very happy. Of course the big wigs of a party have to settle among themselves
who shall be their leader, and when this party was formed they settled, at your advice, that
Plantagenet should be the man."

"My dear Lady Glen, I cannot allow that to pass without contradiction."

"Do not suppose that I am finding fault, or even that I am ungrateful. No one rejoiced as I
rejoiced. No one still feels so much pride in it as I feel. I would have given ten years of
my life to make him Prime Minister, and now I would give five to keep him so. It is like it
was to be king, when men struggled among themselves who should be king. Whatever he may be,
I am ambitious. I love to think that other men should look to him as being above them, and
that something of this should come down upon me as his wife. I do not know whether it was not
the happiest moment of my life when he told me that the Queen had sent for him."

"It was not so with him."

"No, Duke,--no! He and I are very different. He only wants to be useful. At any rate, that
was all he did want."

"He is still the same."

"A man cannot always be carrying a huge load up a hill without having his back bent."

"I don't know that the load need be so heavy, Duchess."

"Ah, but what is the load? It is not going to the Treasury Chambers at eleven or twelve in
the morning, and sitting four or five times a week in the House of Lords till seven or eight
o'clock. He was never ill when he would remain in the House of Commons till two in the morning,
and not have a decent dinner above twice in the week. The load I speak of isn't work."

"What is it then?" said the Duke, who in truth understood it all nearly as well as the Duchess
herself.

"It is hard to explain, but it is very heavy."

"Responsibility, my dear, will always be heavy."

"But it is hardly that;--certainly not that alone. It is the feeling that so many people blame
him for so many things, and the doubt in his own mind whether he may not deserve it. And then
he becomes fretful, and conscious that such fretfulness is beneath him and injurious to his
honour. He condemns men in his mind, and condemns himself for condescending to condemn them.
He spends one quarter of an hour in thinking that as he is Prime Minister he will be Prime
Minister down to his fingers' ends, and the next in resolving that he never ought to have been
Prime Minister at all." Here something like a frown passed across the old man's brow, which
was, however, no indication, of anger. "Dear Duke," she said, "you must not be angry with me.
Who is there to whom I can speak but you?"

"Angry, my dear! No, indeed!"

"Because you looked as though you would scold me." At this he smiled. "And of course all this
tells upon his health."

"Do you think he is ill?"

"He never says so. There is no special illness. But he is thin and wan and careworn. He does
not eat and he does not sleep. Of course I watch him."

"Does his doctor see him?"

"Never. When I asked him once to say a word to Sir James Thorax,--for he was getting hoarse,
you know,--he only shook his head and turned on his heels. When he was in the other House,
and speaking every night, he would see Thorax constantly, and do just what he was told. He
used to like opening his mouth and having Sir James to look down it. But now he won't let any
one touch him."

"What would you have me do, Lady Glen?"

"I don't know."

"Do you think that he is so far out of health that he ought to give it up?"

"I don't say that. I don't dare to say it. I don't dare to recommend anything. No consideration
of health would tell with him at all. If he were to die to-morrow as the penalty of doing something
useful to-night, he wouldn't think twice about it. If you wanted to make him stay where he
is, the way to do it would be to tell him that his health was failing him. I don't know that
he does want to give up now."

"The autumn months will do everything for him;--only let him be quiet."

"You are coming to Matching, Duke?"

"I suppose so,--if you ask me,--for a week or two."

"You must come. I am quite nervous if you desert us. I think he becomes more estranged every
day from all the others. I know you won't do a mischief by repeating what I say."

"I hope not."

"He seems to me to turn his nose up at everybody. He used to like Mr. Monk; but he envies Mr.
Monk, because Mr. Monk is Chancellor of the Exchequer. I asked him whether we shouldn't have
Lord Drummond at Matching, and he told me angrily that I might ask all the Government if I liked."

"Drummond contradicted him the other day."

"I knew there was something. He has got to be like a bear with a sore head, Duke. You should
have seen his face the other day, when Mr. Rattler made some suggestion to him about the proper
way of dividing farms."

"I don't think he ever liked Rattler."

"What of that? Don't I have to smile upon men whom I hate like poison;--and women too, which
is worse? Do you think that I love old Lady Ramsden, or Mrs. MacPherson? He used to be so fond
of Lord Cantrip."

"I think he likes Lord Cantrip," said the Duke.

"He asked his lordship to do something, and Lord Cantrip declined."

"I know all about that," said the Duke.

"And now he looks gloomy at Lord Cantrip. His friends won't stand that kind of thing, you know,
for ever."

"He is always courteous to Finn," said the Duke.

"Yes;--just now he is on good terms with Mr. Finn. He would never be harsh to Mr. Finn, because
he knows that Mrs. Finn is the one really intimate female friend whom I have in the world.
After all, Duke, besides Plantagenet and the children, there are only two persons in the world
whom I really love. There are only you and she. She will never desert me;--and you must not
desert me either." Then he put his hand behind her waist, and stooped over her and kissed her
brow, and swore to her that he would never desert her.

But what was he to do? He knew, without being told by the Duchess, that his colleague and chief
was becoming, from day to day, more difficult to manage. He had been right enough in laying
it down as a general rule that Prime Ministers are selected for that position by the general
confidence of the House of Commons;--but he was aware at the same time that it had hardly been
so in the present instance. There had come to be a dead-lock in affairs, during which neither
of the two old and well-recognised leaders of parties could command a sufficient following
for the carrying on of the Government. With unusual patience these two gentlemen had now for
the greater part of three Sessions sat by, offering but little opposition to the Coalition,
but of course biding their time. They, too, called themselves,--perhaps thought themselves,--Cincinnatuses.
But their ploughs and peaches did not suffice to them, and they longed again to be in every
mouth, and to have, if not their deeds, then even their omissions blazoned in every paragraph.
The palate accustomed to Cayenne pepper can hardly be gratified by simple salt. When that dead-lock
had come, politicians who were really anxious for the country had been forced to look about
for a Premier,--and in the search the old Duke had been the foremost. The Duchess had hardly
said more than the truth when she declared that her husband's promotion had been effected by
their old friend. But it is sometimes easier to make than to unmake. Perhaps the time had now
in truth come, in which it would be better for the country that the usual state of things should
again exist. Perhaps,--nay, the Duke now thought that he saw that it was so,--Mr. Gresham might
again have a Liberal majority at his back if the Duke of Omnium could find some graceful mode
of retiring. But who was to tell all this to the Duke of Omnium? There was only one man in
all England to whom such a task was possible, and that was the old Duke himself,--who during
the last two years had been constantly urgent with his friend not to retire! How often since
he had taken office had the conscientious and timid Minister begged of his friend permission
to abandon his high office! But that permission had always been refused, and now, for the last
three months, the request had not been repeated. The Duchess probably was right in saying that
her husband "didn't want to give it up now."

But he, the Duke of St. Bungay, had brought his friend into the trouble, and it was certainly
his duty to extricate him from it. The admonition might come in the rude shape of repeated
minorities in the House of Commons. Hitherto the number of votes at the command of the Ministry
had not been very much impaired. A few always fall off as time goes on. Aristides becomes too
just, and the mind of man is greedy of novelty. Sir Orlando, also, had taken with him a few,
and it may be that two or three had told themselves that there could not be all that smoke
raised by the "People's Banner" without some fire below it. But there was a good working majority,--very
much at Mr. Monk's command,--and Mr. Monk was moved by none of that feeling of rebellion which
had urged Sir Orlando on to his destruction. It was difficult to find a cause for resignation.
And yet the Duke of St. Bungay, who had watched the House of Commons closely for nearly half
a century, was aware that the Coalition which he had created had done its work, and was almost
convinced that it would not be permitted to remain very much longer in power. He had seen symptoms
of impatience in Mr. Daubeny, and Mr. Gresham had snorted once or twice, as though eager for
the battle.

CHAPTER LXIV

The New K.G.

Early in June had died the Marquis of Mount Fidgett. In all England there was no older family
than that of the Fichy Fidgetts, whose baronial castle of Fichy Fellows is still kept up, the
glory of archaeologists and the charm of tourists. Some people declare it to be the most perfect
castle residence in the country. It is admitted to have been completed in the time of Edward
VI, and is thought to have been commenced in the days of Edward I. It has always belonged to
the Fichy Fidgett family, who with a persistence that is becoming rarer every day, has clung
to every acre that it ever owned, and has added acre to acre in every age. The consequence
has been that the existing Marquis of Mount Fidgett has always been possessed of great territorial
influence, and has been flattered, cajoled, and revered by one Prime Minister after another.
Now the late Marquis had been, as was the custom with the Fichy Fidgetts, a man of pleasure.
If the truth may be spoken openly, it should be admitted that he had been a man of sin. The
duty of keeping together the family property he had performed with a perfect zeal. It had always
been acknowledged on behalf of the existing Marquis, that in whatever manner he might spend
his money, however base might be the gullies into which his wealth descended, he never spent
more than he had to spend. Perhaps there was but little praise in this, as he could hardly
have got beyond his enormous income unless he had thrown it away on race-courses and roulette
tables. But it had long been remarked of the Mount Fidgett marquises that they were too wise
to gamble. The family had not been an honour to the country, but had nevertheless been honoured
by the country. The man who had just died had perhaps been as selfish and as sensual a brute
as had ever disgraced humanity;--but nevertheless he had been a Knight of the Garter. He had
been possessed of considerable parliamentary interest, and the Prime Minister of the day had
not dared not to make him a Knight of the Garter. All the Marquises of Mount Fidgett had for
many years past been Knights of the Garter. On the last occasion a good deal had been said
about it. A feeling had even then begun to prevail that the highest personal honour in the
gift of the Crown should not be bestowed upon a man whose whole life was a disgrace, and who
did indeed seem to deserve every punishment which human or divine wrath could inflict. He had
a large family, but they were all illegitimate. Wives generally he liked, but of his own wife
he very soon broke the heart. Of all the companies with which he consorted he was the admitted
king, but his subjects could do no man any honour. The Castle of Fichy Fellows was visited
by the world at large, but no man or woman with a character to lose went into any house really
inhabited by the Marquis. And yet he had become a Knight of the Garter, and was therefore,
presumably, one of those noble Englishmen to whom the majesty of the day was willing to confide
the honour, and glory, and safety of the Crown. There were many who disliked this. That a base
reprobate should become a Marquis and a peer of Parliament was in accordance with the constitution
of the country. Marquises and peers are not as a rule reprobates, and the misfortune was one
which could not be avoided. He might have ill-used his own wife and other wives' husbands without
special remark, had he not been made a Knight of the Garter. The Minister of the day, however,
had known the value of the man's support, and, being thick-skinned, had lived through the reproaches
uttered without much damage to himself. Now the wicked Marquis was dead, and it was the privilege
and the duty of the Duke of Omnium to select another Knight.

There was a good deal said about it at the time. There was a rumour,--no doubt a false rumour,--that
the Crown insisted in this instance on dictating a choice to the Duke of Omnium. But even were
it so, the Duke could not have been very much aggrieved, as the choice dictated was supposed
to be that of himself. The late Duke had been a Knight, and when he had died, it was thought
that his successor would succeed also to the ribbon. The new Duke had been at that time in
the Cabinet, and had remained there, but had accepted an office inferior in rank to that which
he had formerly filled. The whole history of these things has been written, and may be read
by the curious. The Duchess, newly a duchess then and very keen in reference to her husband's
rank, had instigated him to demand the ribbon as his right. This he had not only declined to
do, but had gone out of the way to say that he thought it should be bestowed elsewhere. It
had been bestowed elsewhere, and there had been a very general feeling that he had been passed
over because his easy temperament in such matters had been seen and utilised. Now, whether
the Crown interfered or not,--a matter on which no one short of a writer of newspaper articles
dares to make a suggestion till time shall have made mellow the doings of sovereigns and their
ministers,--the suggestion was made. The Duke of St. Bungay ventured to say to his friend that
no other selection was possible.

"Recommend her Majesty to give it to myself!" said the Prime Minister.

"You will find it to be her Majesty's wish. It has been very common. Sir Robert Walpole had it."

"I am not Sir Robert Walpole." The Duke named other examples of Prime Ministers who had been
gartered by themselves. But our Prime Minister declared it to be out of the question. No honour
of that description should be conferred upon him as long as he held his present position. The
old Duke was much in earnest, and there was a great deal said on the subject,--but at last
it became clear, not only to him, but to the members of the Cabinet generally, and then to
the outside world, that the Prime Minister would not consent to accept the vacant honour.

For nearly a month after this the question subsided. A Minister is not bound to bestow a Garter
the day after it becomes vacant. There are other Knights to guard the throne, and one may be
spared for a short interval. But during that interval many eyes were turned towards the stall
in St. George's Chapel. A good thing should be given away like a clap of thunder if envy, hatred,
and malice are to be avoided. A broad blue ribbon across the chest is of all decorations the
most becoming, or, at any rate, the most desired. And there was, I fear, an impression on the
minds of some men that the Duke in such matters was weak and might be persuaded. Then there
came to him an application in the form of a letter from the new Marquis of Mount Fidgett,--a
man whom he had never seen, and of whom he had never heard. The new Marquis had hitherto resided
in Italy, and men only knew of him that he was odious to his uncle. But he had inherited all
the Fichy Fidgett estates, and was now possessed of immense wealth and great honour. He ventured,
he said, to represent to the Prime Minister that for generations past the Marquises of Mount
Fidgett had been honoured by the Garter. His political status in the country was exactly that
enjoyed by his late uncle; but he intended that his political career should be very different.
He was quite prepared to support the Coalition. "What is he that he should expect to be made
a Knight of the Garter?" said our Duke to the old Duke.

"He is the Marquis of Mount Fidgett, and next to yourself, perhaps, the richest peer of Great
Britain."

"Have riches anything to do with it?"

"Something certainly. You would not name a pauper peer."

"Yes;--if he was a man whose career had been highly honourable to the country. Such a man,
of course, could not be a pauper, but I do not think his want of wealth should stand in the
way of his being honoured by the Garter."

"Wealth, rank, and territorial influence have been generally thought to have something to do
with it."

"And character nothing!"

"My dear Duke, I have not said so."

"Something very much like it, my friend, if you advocate the claim of the Marquis of Mount
Fidgett. Did you approve of the selection of the late Marquis?"

"I was in the Cabinet at the time, and will therefore say nothing against it. But I have never
heard anything against this man's character."

"Nor in favour of it. To my thinking he has as much claim, and no more, as that man who just
opened the door. He was never seen in the Lower House."

"Surely that cannot signify."

"You think, then, that he should have it?"

"You know what I think," said the elder statesman thoughtfully. "In my opinion there is no
doubt that you would best consult the honour of the country by allowing her Majesty to bestow
this act of grace upon a subject who has deserved so well from her Majesty as yourself."

"It is quite impossible."

"It seems to me," said the Duke, not appearing to notice the refusal of his friend, "that in
this peculiar position you should allow yourself to be persuaded to lay aside your own feeling.
No man of high character is desirous of securing to himself decorations which he may bestow
upon others."

"Just so."

"But here the decoration bestowed upon the chief whom we all follow, would confer a wider honour
upon many than it could do if given to any one else."

"The same may be said of any Prime Minister."

"Not so. A commoner, without high permanent rank or large fortune, is not lowered in the world's
esteem by not being of the Order. You will permit me to say--that a Duke of Omnium has not
reached that position which he ought to enjoy unless he be a Knight of the Garter." It must
be borne in mind that the old Duke, who used this argument, had himself worn the ribbon for
the last thirty years. "But if--"

"Well;--well."

"But if you are,--I must call it obstinate."

"I am obstinate in that respect."

"Then," said the Duke of St. Bungay, "I should recommend her Majesty to give it to the Marquis."

"Never," said the Prime Minister, with very unaccustomed energy. "I will never sanction the
payment of such a price for services which should never be bought or sold."

"It would give no offence."

"That is not enough, my friend. Here is a man of whom I only know that he has bought a great
many marble statues. He has done nothing for his country, and nothing for his sovereign."

"If you are determined to look to what you call desert alone, I would name Lord Drummond."
The Prime Minister frowned and looked unhappy. It was quite true that Lord Drummond had contradicted
him, and that he had felt the injury grievously. "Lord Drummond has been very true to us."

"Yes;--true to us! What is that?"

"He is in every respect a man of character, and well looked upon in the country. There would
be some enmity and a good deal of envy--which might be avoided by either of the courses I have
proposed; but those courses you will not take. I take it for granted that you are anxious to
secure the support of those who generally act with Lord Drummond."

"I don't know that I am." The old Duke shrugged his shoulders. "What I mean is, that I do not
think that we ought to pay an increased price for their support. His lordship is very well
as the Head of an Office; but he is not nearly so great a man as my friend Lord Cantrip."

"Cantrip would not join us. There is no evil in politics so great as that of seeming to buy
the men who will not come without buying. These rewards are fairly given for political support."

"I had not, in truth, thought of Lord Cantrip."

"He does not expect it any more than my butler."

"I only named him as having a claim stronger than any that Lord Drummond can put forward. I
have a man in my mind to whom I think such an honour is fairly due. What do you say to Lord
Earlybird?" The old Duke opened his mouth and lifted up his hands in unaffected surprise.

The Earl of Earlybird was an old man of a very peculiar character. He had never opened his
mouth in the House of Lords and had never sat in the House of Commons. The political world
knew him not at all. He had a house in town, but very rarely lived there. Early Park, in the
parish of Bird, had been his residence since he first came to the title forty years ago, and
had been the scene of all his labours. He was a nobleman possessed of a moderate fortune, and,
as men said of him, of a moderate intellect. He had married early in life and was blessed with
a large family. But he had certainly not been an idle man. For nearly half a century he had
devoted himself to the improvement of the labouring classes, especially in reference to their
abodes and education, and had gradually, without any desire on his own part, worked himself
up into public notice. He was not an eloquent man, but he would take the chair at meeting after
meeting, and sit with admirable patience for long hours to hear the eloquence of others. He
was a man very simple in his tastes, and had brought up his family to follow his habits. He
had therefore been able to do munificent things with moderate means, and in the long course
of years had failed in hiding his munificence from the public. Lord Earlybird, till after middle
life, had not been much considered, but gradually there had grown up a feeling that there were
not very many better men in the country. He was a fat, bald-headed old man, who was always
pulling his spectacles on and off, nearly blind, very awkward, and altogether indifferent to
appearance. Probably he had no more idea of the Garter in his own mind than he had of a Cardinal's
hat. But he had grown into fame, and had not escaped the notice of the Prime Minister.

"Do you know anything against Lord Earlybird?" asked the Prime Minister.

"Certainly nothing against him, Duke."

"Nor anything in his favour?"

"I know him very well,--I think I may say intimately. There isn't a better man breathing."

"An honour to the peerage!" said the Prime Minister.

"An honour to humanity rather," said the other, "as being of all men the least selfish and
most philanthropical."

"What more can be said of a man?"

"But according to my view he is not the sort of person whom one would wish to see made a Knight
of the Garter. If he had the ribbon he would never wear it."

"The honour surely does not consist in its outward sign. I am entitled to wear some kind of
coronet, but I do not walk about with it on my head. He is a man of a great heart and of many
virtues. Surely the country, and her Majesty on behalf of the country, should delight to honour
such a man."

"I really doubt whether you look at the matter in the right light," said the ancient statesman,
who was in truth frightened at what was being proposed. "You must not be angry with me if I
speak plainly."

"My friend, I do not think that it is within your power to make me angry."

"Well then,--I will get you for a moment to listen to my view on the matter. There are certain
great prizes in the gift of the Crown and of the Ministers of the Crown,--the greatest of which
are now traditionally at the disposal of the Prime Minister. These are always given to party
friends. I may perhaps agree with you that party support should not be looked to alone. Let
us acknowledge that character and services should be taken into account. But the very theory
of our Government will be overset by a reversal of the rule which I have attempted to describe.
You will offend all your own friends, and only incur the ridicule of your opponents. It is
no doubt desirable that the high seats of the country should be filled by men of both parties.
I would not wish to see every Lord-Lieutenant of a county a Whig." In his enthusiasm the old
Duke went back to his old phraseology. "But I know that my opponents when their turn comes
will appoint their friends to the Lieutenancies, and that so the balance will be maintained.
If you or I appoint their friends, they won't appoint ours. Lord Earlybird's proxy has been
in the hands of the Conservative Leader of the House of Lords ever since he succeeded his father."
Then the old man paused, but his friend waited to listen whether the lecture were finished
before he spoke, and the Duke of St. Bungay continued. "And, moreover, though Lord Earlybird
is a very good man,--so much so that many of us may well envy him,--he is not just the man
fitted for this destination. A Knight of the Garter should be a man prone to show himself,
a public man, one whose work in the country has brought him face to face with his fellows.
There is an aptness, a propriety, a fitness in these things which one can understand perhaps
better than explain."

"Those fitnesses and aptnesses change, I think, from day to day. There was a time when a knight
should be a fighting man."

"That has gone by."

"And the aptnesses and fitnesses in accordance with which the sovereign of the day was induced
to grace with the Garter such a man as the late Marquis of Mount Fidgett have, I hope, gone
by. You will admit that?"

"There is no such man proposed."

"And other fitnesses and aptnesses will go by, till the time will come when the man to be selected
as Lieutenant of a county will be the man whose selection will be most beneficial to the county,
and Knights of the Garter will be chosen for their real virtues."

"I think you are Quixotic. A Prime Minister is of all men bound to follow the traditions of
his country, or, when he leaves them, to leave them with very gradual steps."

"And if he break that law and throw over all that thraldom;--what then?"

"He will lose the confidence which has made him what he is."

"It is well that I know the penalty. It is hardly heavy enough to enforce strict obedience.
As for the matter in dispute, it had better stand over yet for a few days." When the Prime
Minister said this the old Duke knew very well that he intended to have his own way.

And so it was. A week passed by, and then the younger Duke wrote to the elder Duke saying that
he had given to the matter all the consideration in his power, and that he had at last resolved
to recommend her Majesty to bestow the ribbon on Lord Earlybird. He would not, however, take
any step for a few days so that his friend might have an opportunity of making further remonstrance
if he pleased. No further remonstrance was made, and Lord Earlybird, much to his own amazement,
was nominated to the vacant Garter.

The appointment was one certainly not popular with any of the Prime Minister's friends. With
some, such as Lord Drummond, it indicated a determination on the part of the Duke to declare
his freedom from all those bonds which had hitherto been binding on the Heads of Government.
Had the Duke selected himself, certainly no offence would have been given. Had the Marquis
of Mount Fidgett been the happy man, excuses would have been made. But it was unpardonable
to Lord Drummond that he should have been passed over and that the Garter should have been
given to Lord Earlybird. To the poor old Duke the offence was of a different nature. He had
intended to use a very strong word when he told his friend that his proposed conduct would
be Quixotic. The Duke of Omnium would surely know that the Duke of St. Bungay could not support
a Quixotic Prime Minister. And yet the younger Duke, the Telemachus of the last two years,--after
hearing that word,--had rebelled against his Mentor, and had obstinately adhered to his Quixotism!
The greed of power had fallen upon the man,--so said the dear old Duke to himself,--and the
man's fall was certain. Alas, alas; had he been allowed to go before the poison had entered
his veins, how much less would have been his suffering!

CHAPTER LXV

"There Must Be Time"

At the end of the third week in July, when the Session was still sitting, and when no day had
been absolutely as yet fixed for the escape of members, Mr. Wharton received a letter from
his friend Arthur Fletcher which certainly surprised him very much, and which left him for
a day or two unable to decide what answer ought to be given. It will be remembered that Ferdinand
Lopez destroyed himself in March, now three months since. The act had been more than a nine
days' wonder, having been kept in the memory of many men by the sedulous efforts of Quintus
Slide, and by the fact that the name of so great a man as the Prime Minister was concerned
in the matter. But gradually the feeling about Ferdinand Lopez had died away, and his fate,
though it had outlived the nominal nine days, had sunk into general oblivion before the end
of the ninth week. The Prime Minister had not forgotten the man, nor had Quintus Slide. The
name was still common in the columns of the "People's Banner," and was never mentioned without
being read by the unfortunate Duke. But others had ceased to talk of Ferdinand Lopez.

To the mind, however, of Arthur Fletcher the fact of the man's death was always present. A
dreadful incubus had come upon his life, blighting all his prospects, obscuring all his sun
by a great cloud, covering up all his hopes, and changing for him all his outlook into the
world. It was not only that Emily Wharton should not have become his wife, but that the woman
whom he loved with so perfect a love should have been sacrificed to so vile a creature as this
man. He never blamed her,--but looked upon his fate as Fate. Then on a sudden he heard that
the incubus was removed. The man who had made him and her wretched had by a sudden stroke been
taken away and annihilated. There was nothing now between him and her,--but a memory. He could
certainly forgive, if she could forget.

Of course he had felt at the first moment that time must pass by. He had become certain that
her mad love for the man had perished. He had been made sure that she had repented her own
deed in sackcloth and ashes. It had been acknowledged to him by her father that she had been
anxious to be separated from her husband, if her husband would consent to such a separation.
And then, remembering as he did his last interview with her, having in his mind as he did every
circumstance of that caress which he had given her,--down to the very quiver of the fingers
he had pressed,--he could not but flatter himself that at last he had touched her heart. But
there must be time! The conventions of the world operate on all hearts, especially on the female
heart, and teach that new vows, too quickly given, are disgraceful. The world has seemed to
decide that a widow should take two years before she can bestow herself on a second man without
a touch of scandal. But the two years is to include everything, the courtship of the second
as well as the burial of the first,--and not only the courtship, but the preparation of the
dresses and the wedding itself. And then this case was different from all others. Of course
there must be time, but surely not here a full period of two years! Why should the life of
two young persons be so wasted, if it were the case that they loved each other? There was horror
here, remorse, pity, perhaps pardon; but there was no love,--none of that love which is always
for a time increased in its fervour by the loss of the loved object; none of that passionate
devotion which must at first make the very idea of another man's love intolerable. There had
been a great escape,--an escape which could not but be inwardly acknowledged, however little
prone the tongue might be to confess it. Of course there must be time;--but how much time?
He argued it in his mind daily, and at each daily argument the time considered by him to be
appropriate was shortened. Three months had passed and he had not yet seen her. He had resolved
that he would not even attempt to see her till her father should consent. But surely a period
had passed sufficient to justify him in applying for that permission. And then he bethought
himself that it would be best in applying for that permission to tell everything to Mr. Wharton.
He well knew that he would be telling no secret. Mr. Wharton knew the state of his feelings
as well as he knew it himself. If ever there was a case in which time might be abridged, this
was one; and therefore he wrote his letter,--as follows:--

   3, ---- Court, Temple, 24th July, 187--.

   MY DEAR MR. WHARTON,

   It is a matter of great regret to me that we should see
   so little of each other,--and especially of regret that I
   should never now see Emily.

   I may as well rush into the matter at once. Of course this
   letter will not be shown to her, and therefore I may write
   as I would speak if I were with you. The wretched man whom
   she married is gone, and my love for her is the same as
   it was before she had ever seen him, and as it has always
   been from that day to this. I could not address you
   or even think of her as yet, did I not know that that
   marriage had been unfortunate. But it has not altered her
   to me in the least. It has been a dreadful trouble to us
   all,--to her, to you, to me, and to all connected with us.
   But it is over, and I think that it should be looked back
   upon as a black chasm which we have bridged and got over,
   and to which we need never cast back our eyes.

   I have no right to think that, though she might some day
   love another man, she would, therefore, love me; but I
   think that I have a right to try, and I know that I should
   have your good-will. It is a question of time, but if I
   let time go by, some one else may slip in. Who can tell?
   I would not be thought to press indecently, but I do feel
   that here the ordinary rules which govern men and women
   are not to be followed. He made her unhappy almost from
   the first day. She had made a mistake which you and she
   and all acknowledged. She has been punished; and so have
   I,--very severely I can assure you. Wouldn't it be a good
   thing to bring all this to an end as soon as possible,--if
   it can be brought to an end in the way I want?

   Pray tell me what you think. I would propose that you
   should ask her to see me, and then say just as much as you
   please. Of course I should not press her at first. You
   might ask me to dinner, and all that kind of thing, and so
   she would get used to me. It is not as though we had not
   been very, very old friends. But I know you will do the
   best. I have put off writing to you till I sometimes think
   that I shall go mad over it if I sit still any longer.

   Your affectionate friend,

   ARTHUR FLETCHER.

When Mr. Wharton got this letter he was very much puzzled. Could he have had his wish, he too
would have left the chasm behind him as proposed by his young friend, and have never cast an
eye back upon the frightful abyss. He would willingly have allowed the whole Lopez incident
to be passed over as an episode in their lives, which, if it could not be forgotten, should
at any rate never be mentioned. They had all been severely punished, as Fletcher had said,
and if the matter could end there he would be well content to bear on his own shoulders all
that remained of that punishment, and to let everything begin again. But he knew very well
it could not be so with her. Even yet it was impossible to induce Emily to think of her husband
without regret. It had been only too manifest during the last year of their married life that
she had felt horror rather than love towards him. When there had been a question of his leaving
her behind, should he go to Central America, she had always expressed herself more than willing
to comply with such an arrangement. She would go with him should he order her to do so, but
would infinitely sooner remain in England. And then, too, she had spoken of him while alive
with disdain and disgust, and had submitted to hear her father describe him as infamous. Her
life had been one long misery, under which she had seemed gradually to be perishing. Now she
was relieved, and her health was re-established. A certain amount of unjoyous cheerfulness
was returning to her. It was impossible to doubt that she must have known that a great burden
had fallen from her back. And yet she would never allow his name to be mentioned without giving
some outward sign of affection for his memory. If he was bad, so were others bad. There were
many worse than he. Such were the excuses she made for her late husband. Old Mr. Wharton, who
really thought that in all his experience he had never known any one worse than his son-in-law,
would sometimes become testy, and at last resolved that he would altogether hold his tongue.
But he could hardly hold his tongue now.

He, no doubt, had already formed his hopes in regard to Arthur Fletcher. He had trusted that
the man whom he had taught himself some years since to regard as his wished-for son-in-law,
might be constant and strong enough in his love to forget all that was past, and to be still
willing to redeem his daughter from misery. But as days had crept on since the scene at the
Tenway Junction, he had become aware that time must do much before such relief would be accepted.
It was, however, still possible that the presence of the man might do something. Hitherto,
since the deed had been done, no stranger had dined in Manchester Square. She herself had seen
no visitor. She had hardly left the house except to go to church, and then had been enveloped
in the deepest crape. Once or twice she had allowed herself to be driven out in a carriage,
and, when she had done so, her father had always accompanied her. No widow, since the seclusion
of widows was first ordained, had been more strict in maintaining the restraints of widowhood
as enjoined. How then could he bid her receive a new lover,--or how suggest to her that a lover
was possible? And yet he did not like to answer Arthur Fletcher without naming some period
for the present mourning,--some time at which he might at least show himself in Manchester Square.

"I have had a letter from Arthur Fletcher," he said to his daughter a day or two after he had
received it. He was sitting after dinner, and Everett was also in the room.

"Is he in Herefordshire?" she asked.

"No;--he is up in town, attending to the House of Commons, I suppose. He had something to say
to me, and as we are not in the way of meeting he wrote. He wants to come and see you."

"Not yet, papa."

"He talked of coming and dining here."

"Oh yes; pray let him come."

"You would not mind that?"

"I would dine early and be out of the way. I should be so glad if you would have somebody sometimes.
I shouldn't think then that I was such a--such a restraint to you."

But this was not what Mr. Wharton desired. "I shouldn't like that, my dear. Of course he would
know that you were in the house."

"Upon my word, I think you might meet an old friend like that," said Everett.

She looked at her brother, and then at her father, and burst into tears. "Of course you shall
not be pressed if it would be irksome to you," said her father.

"It is the first plunge that hurts," said Everett. "If you could once bring yourself to do
it, you would find afterwards that you were more comfortable."

"Papa," she said slowly, "I know what it means. His goodness I shall always remember. You may
tell him I say so. But I cannot meet him yet." Then they pressed her no further. Of course
she had understood. Her father could not even ask her to say a word which might give comfort
to Arthur as to some long distant time.

He went down to the House of Commons the next day, and saw his young friend there. Then they
walked up and down Westminster Hall for nearly an hour, talking over the matter with the most
absolute freedom. "It cannot be for the benefit of any one," said Arthur Fletcher, "that she
should immolate herself like an Indian widow,--and for the sake of such a man as that! Of course
I have no right to dictate to you,--hardly, perhaps, to give an opinion."

"Yes, yes, yes."

"It does seem to me, then, that you ought to force her out of that kind of thing. Why should
she not go down to Herefordshire?"

"In time, Arthur,--in time."

"But people's lives are running away."

"My dear fellow, if you were to see her you would know how vain it would be to try to hurry
her. There must be time."

CHAPTER LXVI

The End of the Session

The Duke of St. Bungay had been very much disappointed. He had contradicted with a repetition
of noes the assertion of the Duchess that he had been the Warwick who had placed the Prime
Minister's crown on the head of the Duke of Omnium, but no doubt he felt in his heart that
he had done so much towards it that his advice respecting the vacant Garter, when given with
so much weight, should have been followed. He was an old man, and had known the secrets of
Cabinet Councils when his younger friend was a little boy. He had given advice to Lord John,
and had been one of the first to congratulate Sir Robert Peel when that statesman became a
free-trader. He had sat in conclave with THE Duke, and had listened to the bold Liberalism
of old Earl Grey, both in the Lower and the Upper House. He had been always great in council,
never giving his advice unasked, nor throwing his pearls before swine, and cautious at all
times to avoid excesses on this side or on that. He had never allowed himself a hobby horse
of his own to ride, had never been ambitious, had never sought to be the ostensible leader
of men. But he did now think that when, with all his experience, he spoke very much in earnest,
some attention should be paid to what he said. When he had described a certain line of conduct
as Quixotic he had been very much in earnest. He did not usually indulge in strong language,
and Quixotic, when applied to the conduct of a Prime Minister, was, to his ideas, very strong.
The thing described as Quixotic had now been done, and the Duke of St. Bungay was a disappointed
man.

For an hour or two he thought that he must gently secede from all private councils with the
Prime Minister. To resign, or to put impediments in the way of his own chief, did not belong
to his character. That line of strategy had come into fashion since he had learnt his political
rudiments, and was very odious to him. But in all party compacts there must be inner parties,
peculiar bonds, and confidences stricter, stronger, and also sweeter than those which bind
together the twenty or thirty gentlemen who form a Government. From those closer ties which
had hitherto bound him to the Duke of Omnium he thought, for a while, that he must divorce
himself. Surely on such a subject as the nomination of a Knight of the Garter his advice might
have been taken,--if only because it had come from him! And so he kept himself apart for a
day or two, and even in the House of Lords ceased to whisper kindly, cheerful words into the
ears of his next neighbour.

But various remembrances crowded in upon him by degrees, compelling him to moderate and at
last to abandon his purpose. Among these the first was the memory of the kiss which he had
given the Duchess. The woman had told him that she loved him, that he was one of the very few
whom she did love,--and the word had gone straight into his old heart. She had bade him not
to desert her; and he had not only given her his promise, but he had converted that promise
to a sacred pledge by a kiss. He had known well why she had exacted the promise. The turmoil
in her husband's mind, the agony which he sometimes endured when people spoke ill of him, the
aversion which he had at first genuinely felt to an office for which he hardly thought himself
fit, and now the gradual love of power created by the exercise of power, had all been seen
by her, and had created that solicitude which had induced her to ask for the promise. The old
Duke had known them both well, but had hardly as yet given the Duchess credit for so true a
devotion to her husband. It now seemed to him that though she had failed to love the man, she
had given her entire heart to the Prime Minister. He sympathised with her altogether, and,
at any rate could not go back from his promise.

And then he remembered, too, that if this man did anything amiss in the high office which he
had been made to fill, he who had induced him to fill it was responsible. What right had he,
the Duke of St. Bungay, to be angry because his friend was not all-wise at all points? Let
the Droughts and the Drummonds and the Beeswaxes quarrel among themselves or with their colleagues.
He belonged to a different school, in the teachings of which there was less perhaps of excitement
and more of long-suffering;--but surely, also, more of nobility. He was, at any rate, too old
to change, and he would therefore be true to his friend through evil and through good. Having
thought this all out he again whispered some cheery word to the Prime Minister, as they sat
listening to the denunciations of Lord Fawn, a Liberal lord, much used to business, but who
had not been received into the Coalition. The first whisper and the second whisper the Prime
Minister received very coldly. He had fully appreciated the discontinuance of the whispers,
and was aware of the cause. He had made a selection on his own unassisted judgment in opposition
to his old friend's advice, and this was the result. Let it be so! All his friends were turning
away from him and he would have to stand alone. If so, he would stand alone till the pendulum
of the House of Commons had told him that it was time for him to retire. But gradually the
determined good-humour of the old man prevailed. "He has a wonderful gift of saying nothing
with second-rate dignity," whispered the repentant friend, speaking of Lord Fawn.

"A very honest man," said the Prime Minister in return.

"A sort of bastard honesty,--by precept out of stupidity. There is no real conviction in it,
begotten by thought." This little bit of criticism, harsh as it was, had the effect, and the
Prime Minister became less miserable than he had been.

But Lord Drummond forgave nothing. He still held his office, but more than once he was seen
in private conference with both Sir Orlando and Mr. Boffin. He did not attempt to conceal his
anger. Lord Earlybird! An old woman! One whom no other man in England would have thought of
making a Knight of the Garter! It was not, he said, personal disappointment in himself. There
were half-a-dozen peers whom he would willingly have seen so graced without the slightest chagrin.
But this must have been done simply to show the Duke's power, and to let the world understand
that he owed nothing and would pay nothing to his supporters. It was almost a disgrace, said
Lord Drummond, to belong to a Government the Head of which could so commit himself! The Session
was nearly at an end, and Lord Drummond thought that no step could be conveniently taken now.
But it was quite clear to him that this state of things could not be continued. It was observed
that Lord Drummond and the Prime Minister never spoke to each other in the House, and that
the Secretary of State for the Colonies,--that being the office which he held,--never rose
in his place after Lord Earlybird's nomination, unless to say a word or two as to his own peculiar
duties. It was very soon known to all the world that there was war to the knife between Lord
Drummond and the Prime Minister.

And, strange to say, there seemed to be some feeling of general discontent on this very trifling
subject. When Aristides has been much too just the oyster-shells become numerous. It was said
that the Duke had been guilty of pretentious love of virtue in taking Lord Earlybird out of
his own path of life and forcing him to write K.G. after his name. There came out an article,
of course in the "People's Banner," headed, "Our Prime Minister's Good Works," in which poor
Lord Earlybird was ridiculed in a very unbecoming manner, and in which it was asserted that
the thing was done as a counterpoise to the iniquity displayed in "hounding Ferdinand Lopez
to his death." Whenever Ferdinand Lopez was mentioned he had always been hounded. And then
the article went on to declare that either the Prime Minister had quarrelled with all his colleagues,
or else that all his colleagues had quarrelled with the Prime Minister. Mr. Slide did not care
which it might be, but, whichever it might be, the poor country had to suffer when such a state
of things was permitted. It was notorious that neither the Duke of St. Bungay nor Lord Drummond
would now even speak to their own chief, so thoroughly were they disgusted with his conduct.
Indeed it seemed that the only ally the Prime Minister had in his own Cabinet was the Irish
adventurer, Mr. Phineas Finn. Lord Earlybird never read a word of all this, and was altogether
undisturbed as he sat in his chair in Exeter Hall,--or just at this time of the year more frequently
in the provinces. But the Duke of Omnium read it all. After what had passed he did not dare
to show it to his brother Duke. He did not dare to tell his friend that it was said in the
newspapers that they did not speak to each other. But every word from Mr. Slide's pen settled
on his own memory, and added to his torments. It came to be a fixed idea in the Duke's mind
that Mr. Slide was a gadfly sent to the earth for the express purpose of worrying him.

And as a matter of course the Prime Minister in his own mind blamed himself for what he had
done. It is the chief torment of a person constituted as he was that strong as may be the determination
to do a thing, fixed as may be the conviction that that thing ought to be done, no sooner has
it been perfected than the objections of others, which before had been inefficacious, become
suddenly endowed with truth and force. He did not like being told by Mr. Slide that he ought
not to have set his Cabinet against him, but when he had in fact done so, then he believed
what Mr. Slide told him. As soon almost as the irrevocable letter had been winged on its way
to Lord Earlybird, he saw the absurdity of sending it. Who was he that he should venture to
set aside all the traditions of office? A Pitt or a Peel or a Palmerston might have done so,
because they had been abnormally strong. They had been Prime Ministers by the work of their
own hands, holding their powers against the whole world. But he,--he told himself daily that
he was only there by sufferance, because at the moment no one else could be found to take it.
In such a condition should he not have been bound by the traditions of office, bound by the
advice of one so experienced and so true as the Duke of St. Bungay? And for whom had he broken
through these traditions and thrown away this advice? For a man who had no power whatever to
help him or any other Minister of the Crown;--for one whose every pursuit in life was at variance
with the acquisition of such honours as that now thrust upon him! He could see his own obstinacy,
and could even hate the pretentious love of virtue which he had himself displayed.

"Have you seen Lord Earlybird with his ribbon?" his wife said to him.

"I do not know Lord Earlybird by sight," he replied angrily.

"Nor any one else either. But he would have come and shown himself to you, if he had had a
spark of gratitude in his composition. As far as I can learn you have sacrificed the Ministry
for his sake."

"I did my duty as best I knew how to do it," said the Duke, almost with ferocity, "and it little
becomes you to taunt me with any deficiency."

"Plantagenet!"

"I am driven," he said, "almost beyond myself, and it kills me when you take part against me."

"Take part against you! Surely there was very little in what I said." And yet, as she spoke,
she repented bitterly that she had at the moment allowed herself to relapse into the sort of
badinage which had been usual with her before she had understood the extent of his sufferings.
"If I trouble you by what I say, I will certainly hold my tongue."

"Don't repeat to me what that man says in the newspaper."

"You shouldn't regard the man, Plantagenet. You shouldn't allow the paper to come into your hands."

"Am I to be afraid of seeing what men say of me? Never! But you need not repeat it, at any
rate if it be false." She had not seen the article in question or she certainly would not have
repeated the accusation which it contained. "I have quarrelled with no colleague. If such a
one as Lord Drummond chooses to think himself injured, am I to stoop to him? Nothing strikes
me so much in all this as the ill-nature of the world at large. When they used to bait a bear
tied to a stake, every one around would cheer the dogs and help to torment the helpless animal.
It is much the same now, only they have a man instead of a bear for their pleasure."

"I will never help the dogs again," she said, coming up to him and clinging within the embrace
of his arm.

He knew that he had been Quixotic, and he would sit in his chair repeating the word to himself
aloud, till he himself began to fear that he would do it in company. But the thing had been
done and could not be undone. He had had the bestowal of one Garter, and he had given it to
Lord Earlybird! It was,--he told himself, but not correctly,--the only thing that he had done
on his own undivided responsibility since he had been Prime Minister.

The last days of July had passed, and it had been at last decided that the Session should close
on the 11th of August. Now the 11th of August was thought to be a great deal too near the 12th
to allow of such an arrangement being considered satisfactory. A great many members were very
angry at the arrangement. It had been said all through June and into July that it was to be
an early Session, and yet things had been so mismanaged that when the end came everything could
not be finished without keeping members of Parliament in town up to the 11th of August! In
the memory of present legislators there had never been anything so awkward. The fault, if there
was a fault, was attributable to Mr. Monk. In all probability the delay was unavoidable. A
minister cannot control long-winded gentlemen, and when gentlemen are very long-winded there
must be delay. No doubt a strong minister can exercise some control, and it is certain that
long-winded gentlemen find an unusual scope for their breath when the reigning dynasty is weak.
In that way Mr. Monk and the Duke may have been responsible, but they were blamed as though
they, for their own special amusement, detained gentlemen in town. Indeed the gentlemen were
not detained. They grumbled and growled and then fled,--but their grumblings and growlings
were heard even after their departure.

"Well;--what do you think of it all?" the Duke said one day to Mr. Monk, at the Treasury, affecting
an air of cheery good-humour.

"I think," said Mr. Monk, "that the country is very prosperous. I don't know that I ever remember
trade to have been more evenly satisfactory."

"Ah, yes. That's very well for the country, and ought, I suppose, to satisfy us."

"It satisfies me," said Mr. Monk.

"And me, in a way. But if you were walking about in a very tight pair of boots, in an agony
with your feet, would you be able just then to relish the news that agricultural wages in that
parish had gone up sixpence a week?"

"I'd take my boots off, and then try," said Mr. Monk.

"That's just what I'm thinking of doing. If I had my boots off all that prosperity would be
so pleasant to me! But you see you can't take your boots off in company. And it may be that
you have a walk before you, and that no boots will be worse for your feet even than tight ones."

