The first volume to appear in this series is:

THE BUSINESS CAREER. By Albert Shaw, Ph.D.

Paul Elder and Company San Francisco

THE BUSINESS CAREER IN ITS PUBLIC RELATIONS

BY

ALBERT SHAW, PH.D.

EDITOR OF THE AMERICAN REVIEW OF REVIEWS

It is the positive and aggressive attitude toward life, the ethics of action, rather than the
ethics of negation, that must control the modern business world, and that may make our modern
business man the most potent factor for good in this, his own, industrial period.

PAUL ELDER AND COMPANY PUBLISHERS, SAN FRANCISCO

Copyright, 1904 by PAUL ELDER AND COMPANY San Francisco

The Tomoyé Press

The cultivation of public spirit, in the broad sense, and the determination to be an all-round
good and efficient citizen and member of the community, will often help a man amazingly to
discern the opportunities for usefulness that lie in the direct line of his business life.

THE FOUNDER'S PREFACE

Despite all that can still be said against trade practices, against the business lies that
are told, the false weights and measures that are used, the trade frauds to which the public
is subjected, we are nearer a high commercial standard than ever before in the world's history.

Man's confidence in man is greater than ever before, the commercial loss through fraud and
dishonesty is constantly diminishing and standards are slowly but surely moving upward. The
honest man's chances for success in business are better than ever before, and the dishonest
man's chances for lasting commercial success are less than ever before. To grow rich by failing
in business is no longer regarded as an act of cleverness. The professional bankrupt finds
it more and more difficult to get credit. He soon discovers that even his cash will not win
for him the attention that his poorer neighbor commands simply by his character.

Education has done splendid service in raising commercial standards. As a rule, the high-toned
business man is enlightened, and, as a rule, the dishonest, unscrupulous man in business is
ignorant. Great aid in the direction of raising commercial standards may be rendered by the
further spreading of knowledge and enlightenment. There are still many misguided men in business
who imagine that there can be no success without false weights and measures, without lies and
deceit. It is the duty of every man in business, who loves the work in which he is engaged,
to do whatever he can to correct this mistaken notion, and to arouse the same sense of honor
in the circles of commerce that, as a rule, is found in professional life. 

When any friend of mine is in trouble I always make a point of writing and asking if there
is anything I can do.

As a rule, there isn't, but it is a satisfaction to me to know I have made the offer. When
I heard that Filmer was leaving his spacious house and grounds at
Hampstead, selling half his furniture and moving into a third storey
flat at Battersea, I wrote at once.

I received in reply one of his usual barely decipherable scrawls: "Yes, old dear, you might
find a home for my raven; it's ancient and a bit rusty, but lots of life in it yet. I'm parting
with all my garden things."

I busied myself about the matter at once. When a man you have known and respected for years is driven
by high prices and income-tax to vacate a beautiful home and asks
such a simple thing of you as to find a shelter for his bird, you
like to do your best.

Personally I knew nothing of ravens, but I recognized the inadequacy of my garden for the accommodation
of a bird of any kind, therefore I could not think of taking it.

But I had a surface acquaintance with the owner of a carriage drive, and I approached him without
delay.

He was cold in his manner and said with so many calls upon him he could not see his way to contribute
towards the expense of Filmer's move, although he had no doubt, from my representation, that
it was a deserving case.

The misunderstanding arose from my leading up to the object of my
visit gradually instead of coming to the point at once and asking
him to give a comfortable home to a raven.

When I explained further he unbent and said he would think it over.

Later he wrote:--

Re RAVEN.

"DEAR SIR,--I have consulted an authority on this bird and find that its bad character has brought
about its practical extinction in this country save in the mountain
fastnesses of Wales and the craggy moors of Yorkshire. I also learn
that its extended wings measure thirty-six inches on an average. I
must decline to provide an asylum for such an extensive mass of depravity."

I
confess I was discouraged and also somewhat shocked. I felt Filmer
should have enlightened me more on the characteristics of his protégé.
The episode taught me to avoid preamble in my next quest for a domicile.
Also I thought it only right to express myself with absolute frankness.
 They might, on the other hand, only too readily clothe
themselves in cant phrases and assume the hortatory tone. I shall try to avoid dialectic or
theory on the one hand, and preaching on the other. I take it that what I am to say is addressed
chiefly to young men, and that it ought to serve a practical object.

In the universities the spirit of idealism dominates. The academic point of view is not merely
an intellectual one, but it is also ethical and altruistic. In the business world, on the other
hand, we are told that no success is possible except that which is based upon the motive of
money-getting by any means, however ruthless. We are told that the standards of business life
are in conflict irreconcilable with true idealistic aims. It is this situation that I wish
to analyze and discuss; for it concerns the student in a very direct way.

Our moralists point out the dangerous prevalence of those low standards of personal life and
conduct summed up in the term "commercialism." We are warned by some of our foremost teachers
and ethical leaders against commercialism in politics and commercialism in society. So bitterly
reprobated indeed is the influence of commercialism that it might be inferred that commerce
itself is at best a necessary evil and a thing to be apologized for. But if we are to accept
this point of view without careful discrimination, we may well be alarmed; for we live in a
world given over as never before to the whirl of industry and the rush and excitement of the
market-place.

This, of all ages, is the age of the business man. The heroic times when warfare was the chief
concern of nations, have long since passed by. So too the ages of faith,--when theology was
the mainspring of action, when whole peoples went on long crusades, and when building cathedrals
and burning heretics were typical of men's efforts and convictions--have fallen far into the
historic background. Further, we would seem in the main to have left behind us that period
of which the French Revolution is the most conspicuous landmark, when the gaining of political
liberty for the individual seemed the one supreme good, and the object for which nations and
communities were ready to sacrifice all else.

Through these and other periods characterized by their own especial aims and ideals, we have
come to an age when commercialism is the all-absorbing thing; and we are told by pessimists
that these dominant conditions are hopelessly incompatible with academic idealism or with the
maintenance of high ethical standards, whether for the guidance of the individual himself or
for the acceptance and control of the community. It is precisely this state of affairs, then,
that I desire briefly to consider. And I shall keep in mind those bearings of it that might
seem to have some relation to the views and aims of students who are soon to go out from the
sheltered life of the university,--under the necessity, whether they shrink from it or not,
of becoming part and parcel of this organism of business and trade that has invaded almost
every sphere of modern activity.

I have only recently heard a great and eloquent teacher of morals, himself an exponent of the
highest and finest culture to which we have attained, speak in terms of the utmost doubt and
anxiety regarding the drift of the times. To his mind, the evils and dangers accompanying the
stupendous developments of our day are such as to set what he called commercialism in direct
antagonism to all that in his mind represented the higher good, which he termed idealism. The
impression that he left upon his audience was that the forces of our present-day business life
are inherently opposed to the achievement of the best results in statecraft and in the general
life of the community. He could propose no remedy for the evils he deplored except education,
and the saving of the old ideals through the remnant of the faithful who had not bowed the
knee in the temple of Mammon. But he pointed out no way by which to protect the tender blossoms
of academic idealism, when they meet their inevitable exposure in due time to the blighting
and withering blasts of the commercialism that to him seemed so little reconcilable with the
good, the true, and the beautiful.

To all this the practical man can only reply, that if, indeed, commercialism itself cannot
be made to furnish a soil and an atmosphere in which idealism can grow, bud, blossom, and bear
glorious fruit,--then idealism is hopelessly a lost cause. If it be not possible to promote
things ideally good through these very forces of commercial and industrial life, then the outlook
is a gloomy one for the social moralist and the political purist.

It is not a defensive position that I propose to take. I should not think it needful at this
time even so much as briefly to reflect any of those timorous and painful arguments pro and
con that one finds at times running through the columns of the press, particularly of the religious
weeklies, on such a question as, for example, whether nowadays a man can at the same time be
a true Christian and a successful business man; or whether the observance of the principles
of common honesty is at all compatible with a winning effort to make a decent living.

I am well aware that the thoughtful and intellectual founder of this lectureship, under which
I have been invited to speak, takes no such narrow view either of morality on the one hand
or of the function of business life on the other. His definition of morality in business would
demand something very different from the mere avoidance of certain obvious transgressions of
the accepted rules of conduct, particularly of that commandment which says: "Thou shalt not
steal." Nor, on the other hand, would his definition of the functions of business life be in
any manner bounded by the notion that business is a pursuit having for its sole object the
getting of the largest possible amount of money.

Those people who are content to apply negative moral standards to the carrying on of business
life remind one of the little boy's familiar definition of salt: "Salt," said he, "is what
makes potatoes taste bad when you don't put any on." According to that sort of definition,
morality in business would be defined as that quality which makes the grocer good and respectable
when he resists temptation and does not put sand in the sugar. The smug maxim that honesty
is the best policy, while doubtless true enough as a verdict of human experience under normal
conditions, is not fitted to arouse much enthusiasm as a statement of ultimate ethical aims
and ideals.

If it were admitted that the sole or guiding motive in a business career must needs be the
accumulation of money, I should certainly not think it worth while, in the name of trade morals,
to urge young men who are to enter business life that they play the game according to safe
and well-recognized rules. I would not take the trouble to advise them to study the penal code
and to familiarize themselves with the legal definitions of grand and petit larceny, of embezzlement,
or fraud, or arson, in order that they might escape certain hazards that beset a too narrow
kind of devotion to business success. It is true, doubtless, that a business career affords
peculiar opportunities, and is therefore subject to its own characteristic temptations, as
respects the purely private and personal standards of conduct.

The magnitude of our economic movement, the very splendor of the opportunities that the swift
development of a vast young country like ours affords, must inevitably in some cases upset
at once the sober business judgment of men, and in some cases the standard of personal honor
and good faith, in the temptation to get rich quickly; so that wrong is done thereby to a man's
associates or to those whose interests are in his hands, while still greater wrong is done
to his own character.

But, even against this dangerous greed for wealth and the unscrupulousness and ruthlessness
which it engenders, it is no part of my present object to warn any young man. I take it that
the negative standards of private conduct are usually not much affected by a man's choice of
a pursuit in life. If any man's honor could be filched from him by a merely pecuniary reward,
whether greater or less, I should not think it likely that he would be much safer in the long
run if he chose the clerical profession, for example, than if he went into business.

Sooner or later his character would disclose itself. It is not, then, of the private and negative
standards of conduct that I wish to speak,--except by way of such allusions as these. And even
these allusions are only for the sake of making more distinct the positive and active phases
of business ethics that I should like to present in such a way as to fasten them upon the attention.

Many young men, to whom these views are addressed, will doubtless choose, or have already chosen,
what is commonly known as a professional career. The ministry, law, and medicine are the oldest
and best recognized of the so-called liberal or learned professions. Now what are the distinctive
marks of professional life? Are the men who practice these professions not also business men?
And if so, how are they different from those business men who are considered laymen, or non-professional?
Obviously the distinctions that are to be drawn, if any, are in the nature of marked tendencies.
We shall not expect to find any hard and fast lines. Many lawyers, some doctors, and a few
clergymen are clearly enough business men, in the sense that they attach more importance to
the economic bearings of the part they play in the social organism than to the higher ethical
or intellectual aspects of their work.

I have read and heard many definitions of what really constitutes a professional man. Whatever
else, however, may characterize the nature of his calling, it seems to me plain that no man
can be thought a true or worthy member of a profession who does not admit, both in theory and
in the rules and practices of his life, that he has a public function to serve, and that he
must frequently be at some discomfort or disadvantage because of the calls of professional
duty. The laborer is worthy of his hire; and the professional man is entitled to obtain, if
he can, a competence for himself and his family from the useful and productive service he is
rendering to his fellow men. He may even, through genius or through the great confidence his
character and skill inspire, gain considerable wealth in the practice of his profession. But
if he is a true professional man he does not derive his incentive to effort solely or chiefly
from the pecuniary gains that his profession brings him. Nor is the amount of his income regarded
among the fellow members of his profession as the true test or measure of his success.

Thus the lawyer, in the theory of his profession, bears an important public relation to the
dispensing of justice and to the protection of the innocent and the feeble. He is not a private
person, but a part of the system for supporting the reign of law and of right in the community.
Historically, in this country, the lawyer has also borne a great part in the making and administering
of our institutions of government. If, as some of us think, the ethical code of that profession
needs to be somewhat revised in view of present-day conditions, and needs also to be more sternly
applied to some of the members of the profession, it is true, none the less, that there clearly
belongs to this great calling a series of duties of a public nature, some of them imposed by
the laws of the land, and others inherent in the very nature of the occupation itself.

It is true in an even more marked and undeniable fashion that the profession of medicine, by
virtue of its public and social aspects, is distinguished in a marked way from a calling in
life in which a man might feel that what he did was strictly his own business, subject to nobody's
scrutiny, or inquiry, or interference. Mr. REA, as the father, was of course competent, but surely
a little overplacid throughout. He accepted the blow of his daughter's dishonour with scarcely a sign
that submission caused him any serious pang--a seeming indifference shared by Miss MAIRE O'NEILL
(Hannah's mother), who appeared quite untroubled a few minutes after the harrowing relation,
and indeed seemed throughout to be playing too easily. Mr. RAYMOND VALENTINE had a "fat" part
as the villain, and well and fatly he played it. Nor is it a mere consideration of his possible earnings that would deter him from seeking
comfort and safety by taking his family to Europe at a time when an epidemic had broken out
in his own neighborhood.

I need not allude to the unselfish devotion to the good of the community that in so high a
degree marks the lives of most of the members of the clerical profession, for this is evident
to all observant persons.

On the other hand, it cannot be too clearly perceived that there is nothing in the disinterestedness,
and in the obligation to render public service characterizing professional life that amounts
to unnatural self-denial or painful renunciation,--unless in some extreme and individual cases.
On the contrary, professional life at its best offers a great advantage in so far as it permits
a man to think first of the work he is doing and the social service he is rendering, rather
than of pecuniary reward. I have myself on more than one occasion pointed out to young men
the greater prospect for happiness in life that comes with the choice of a calling in which
the work itself primarily focuses the attention, and in which the pecuniary reward comes as
an incident rather than as the conscious and direct result of a given effort.

The greatest pleasure in work is that which comes from the trained and regulated exercise of
the faculty of imagination. In the conduct of every law case this faculty has abundant opportunity,
as it also has in the efforts of the physician to aid nature in the restoration of health and
vigor in the individual, or in the sanitary protection of the community. I hope I have made
clear this point: that pecuniary success, even in large measure, in the work of a professional
man, may be entirely compatible with disinterested devotion to a kind of work that makes for
the public weal, while it is also worthy of pursuit for its own sake, and brings content and
even happiness in the doing. And it is clear enough, in the case of a professional man, that
he is false to his profession and to his plain obligations if he shows himself to be ruled
by the anti-social spirit; that is to say, if he considers himself absolved from any duties
towards the community about him; thinks that the practice of his profession is a private affair
for his own profit and advantage, and holds that he has done his whole duty when he has escaped
liability for malpractice or disbarment.

But the three oldest and best recognized professions no longer stand alone, in the estimation
of our higher educational authorities and of the intelligent public. In a democracy like ours,
with a constantly advancing conception of what is involved in education for citizenship and
for participation in every individual function of the social and economic life, the work of
the teacher comes to be recognized as professional in the highest sense. Teaching, indeed,
seems destined in the near future to become the very foremost of all the professions. This
recognition will come when the idea takes full possession of the public mind that the chief
task of each generation is to train the next one, and to transmit such stores of knowledge
and useful experience as it has received from its predecessors or has evolved for itself.

It is obvious enough that the work of the teacher gives room for the play of the loftiest ideals,
and that its functions are essentially public and disinterested. But there are other callings,
such as those of the architect and engineer, which have also come to be spoken of as professional
in their nature. Their kinship to the older professions has been more readily recognized by
the men of conservative university traditions, because much of the preparation for these callings
can advantageously be of an academic sort. Architecture in its historical aspects is closely
associated with the study of classical periods; while the profession of the engineer relates
itself to the immemorial university devotion to mathematics. And in like manner the man who
for practical purposes becomes a chemist or an electrician would be easily admitted by President
Eliot, for example, to the favored fellowship of the professional classes for the reason, first,
of the disciplinary and liberalizing nature of the studies that underlie his calling, and,
in the second place, of the public and social aspects of the functions he fulfils in the pursuit
of his vocation.

The architect, the civil or mechanical or electrical engineer, and the chemist, as well as
the professional teacher, the trained librarian, or the journalist who carries on his work
with due sense of its almost unequaled public duties and responsibilities,--all these are now
admitted by dicta of our foremost authorities to a place equal with the law, medicine, and
the ministry in the list of the professions; that is to say, in the group of callings which,
under my definition, are distinguished especially by their public character. Old Poppington, for
instance, might have a--might wear an--I mean there might be something or other on his coat
in red or green or blue to indicate the nature and scope of his secretarial activities and give
a fellow the right lead. And to think that every week dozens and dozens of new Poppingtons
are springing up like crocuses about me! It was a bewildering thought.

They were becoming perhaps the most numerous and influential class in the community. I had visions
of mass meetings of "well-known" men--"well-known" men marching in procession with flags to Downing
Street to demand State recognition, statues and pensions, and insisting that it should be made
a penal offence not to recognise their well-known features in the street.


The man of public spirit is he who is able at a given moment, under certain conditions, to
set the public welfare before his own. Furthermore, he is a man who is trained and habituated
to that point of view, so that he is not aware of any pangs of martyrdom or even of any exercise
of self-denial when he is concerning himself about the public good even to his own momentary
inconvenience or disadvantage. Public spirit is that state or habit of mind which leads a man
to care greatly for the general welfare. It is this ethical quality that to my mind should
be the great aim and object of training.

On its best side, what we term the professional spirit is, then, very closely related to this
commendable quality in men of a right intellectual and moral development that we call public
spirit. The chief difference lies in this: that whereas all professional men may be public-spirited
in a general sense, each professional man should, in addition, manifest a special and technical
sort of public spirit that pertains to the nature of his calling. The lawyer should have a
particularly keen regard for the equitable administration of justice. The doctor should truly
care for the physical wholesomeness and well-being of the community. The clergyman should be
alive to those things that concern the rectitude and purity of life. The journalist should
be willing to make sacrifices for the sake of the enlightenment of public opinion; and so on.
Without either the general or the technical manifestations of public spirit, in short, the
so-called professional man is a reproach to his guild and a failure in his neighborhood.

Now, what has all this to do with the moral standards that belong to the business career as
distinguished from the professional life? My answer must be very clear and very direct if I
am to justify so long an analysis of the ethical characteristics of the professions themselves.
I have merely used the time-honored method of trying to lead you by way of familiar, admitted
points of view to certain points of view that, if not wholly new, are at least less familiar
and less widely recognized. The whole thesis that I wish to develop is simply this: that however
it may have been in business life in times past and gone, there has been such a tremendous
change in the organization and methods of the business world and also in the relative importance
of the functions of the business man in the community, that the distinctions which have hitherto
set apart the professional classes have become obsolete for all practical purposes in many
branches and departments of the business world. 

The police are, with good reason, very popular with the House. In vain the HOME SECRETARY pointed
out that the Government even in this cause did not feel justified in "out-running the constable."
Forgetting all their recent zeal for economy Members trooped into the Bobbies' Lobby and beat
the Government by 123 to 57.

The idea that Irishmen, however much they may dislike British rule, never miss an opportunity
of raiding the British Treasury, has received a rude shock. Captain REDMOND, inquiring about
the allocation of a sum of a quarter-of-a-million for reconstruction in Ireland, was surprised
to learn that ten thousand pounds had been allotted to his own constituency,
but not claimed.

I hold, then, that the young man of education and opportunity who proposes to go into a business
career enters it not merely with a low and unworthy standard if his sole motive and object
be to acquire wealth, but he also enters it in disregard of the ideas that fill the minds of
the best modern business leaders. He shows a pitiable lack of appreciation of the elements
that are to constitute real business success in the period within which his own career must fall.

Let us consider, briefly, the evolution of our present-day economic or business life, and then
take note of the necessary place that particular classes of business men must hold in the structure
of our society. I, for my part, look upon this last century of economic progress,--under the
sway of what is often called "capitalism" as a term of reproach,--as an immeasurable boon to
mankind. It began with the practical utilization of several great inventions, notably that
of steam power, which broke up the old household and village industries, gave us the modern
factory system, and along with the development of railroads gave us the modern industrial city.
This new and revolutionizing system of industry and business forced its way into a world of
poverty, of disease, of depraved public life, of low morals in the main pervading the community,--a
world for the most part of class distinctions in which the lot even of the privileged few was
not a very noble or enviable one, while the state of the vast majority was little better than
that of serfs.

Many writers have sought to throw a charm and a glamour over that old condition of economic
life and society that followed the break-up of feudalism and that preceded the creation of
our new political and industrial institutions. But with some mitigations it was for most people
a period, as I have said, of squalor, disease, and degradation. The fundamental trouble could
be summed up in the one word, poverty. The mission of the new industrial system, for the most
part unconscious and unrecognized, was to transform the world by abolishing the reign of poverty.
Doubtless it would be desirable if the improvement of conditions, material and spiritual, could
make progress with exactly even pace on some perfectly symmetrical plan. But history shows
us that the forward social movement has proceeded first in one aspect, then in another, on
lines so tangential, often so zigzag, that it is difficult until one gets distance enough for
perspective, to see that any true progress has been made at all.

Thus, the modern industrial system, which found the conditions of poverty, disease, and hardship
prevalent, seemed for quite a long time, in its rude breaking up of old relations and its ruthless
adherence to certain newly proclaimed principles, to have brought matters from bad to worse.
The squalor and poverty of the village of hand-loom weavers seemed only intensified in the
new industrial towns to which the weavers flocked from their deserted hamlets. Manufacturers
were doing business under the fiercest and most unregulated competition. Economists were demonstrating
their "law of supply and demand" and their "iron law of wages" as capable in themselves of
regulating all the conditions and relations of business life. Epidemics raged and depravity
prevailed in the new factory centers.

But things were not, in reality, going from bad to worse. The beginnings of a better order
had to be based upon two things: first and foremost, the sheer creation of capital; second,
the discipline and training of workers. In the first phases, the new modern business period
had to be a period of production. There had got to be developed the instrumentalities for the
creation of wealth. Until the industrial system had raised up its class of efficient workers
and had created its great mass of capital for productive purposes, there could be no supply
of cheap goods; and without an abundant and cheap output there could be no possible diffusion
of economic benefits; in other words, no marked amelioration of the prevailing poverty.

It required some development of wealth to lift our modern peoples out of a poverty too grinding
and too debasing for intellectual or moral progress. It is true that the factory towns, created
as they have all been by modern industrial conditions during the past century, brought their
distinctive evils. By chance I ran across Timberley, a man brimful of resource and suggestion.
"You want a brewery," he said; "that's the milieu for a raven. To my mind no brewery is artistically
complete without one. A raven hopping about the casks gives a je ne sais quoi, a cachet, to
the premises. You should get an introduction to a manager."

With some difficulty I did, and I waited upon him in his private office. He seemed immersed in
business and asked me to be seated in such a brusque manner that I had no alternative but to remain
standing.
"I must apologise for trespassing upon your valuable time, but it
has been suggested to me that no brewery is complete without a raven--"
I began, stammering slightly from nervousness.

"Well, we've got one. Moreover, with the progress of industry and the development of railroads and steam
navigation, production and trade took on an ever-increasing volume.

Then the world began to be less poor. There had been no rich men in the modern sense, and of
course no such thing as capitalized corporations for production. The richest man in the United
States at the time of his death, a little more than a hundred years ago, was George Washington,
with his land and his slaves; and so in England and France there were no rich men in the modern
sense--that is to say, no men who controlled great masses of productive capital. The men of
wealth were those who held landed estates. The chief business of all countries was agriculture.
The capitalistic system in industry and trade existed in its rudiments and in limited measure;
but all its great achievements were yet to be wrought.

All modern business life, then, is the result of this growth of productive capital, and its
application and constant reapplication to the production of wealth. It made its way by virtue
of an intense individual initiative and a fierce competitive struggle. But unlovely as were
these things, many of their phases were necessary at a certain stage. It was this fierce competition
that compelled capital to pay the lowest possible wages in order to market cheap goods. But
the same situation stimulated the use, one after another, of new labor-saving inventions in
order to increase the per capita productivity. This process was attended by the higher efficiency
of the worker and an increase in his earning capacity. As his position began to improve, the
worker gained some hope and cheer; and he and his fellows began to organize, with the result
that both wages and conditions of labor were steadily improved, and the workman began to attain
approximately his share of benefits.

All this is a familiar story, although the depth of its significance is beyond the compass
of any living human intelligence. It is easy to say in a glib sentence that the amount of wealth
produced every few years nowadays is equal to all the accumulated wealth of all the centuries
down to the early part of the nineteenth; but the social meaning of so great a change baffles
all attempt at full comprehension.

The competitive system, which had been essential to the launching of this modern period of
production, and which had given to it so much of its irresistible momentum, at length brought
the economic organization to a point of development where, in some fields of production, it
was no longer a benefit. The accumulation of capital had become so large,--and with new inventions
the possible output had become so abundant, that it was well nigh impossible to trust to the
blind working of demand and supply to regulate things in a beneficial way. It began to dawn
on men's minds that a successful period of competitive economic life might lead to a period
largely dominated by non-competitive and coöperative principles.

