To all which Mr Whittlestaff turned a deaf ear. She should find that there was no maundering
softness with him now. He felt within his own bosom that it behoved him to learn to become
stern and cruel. He knew that the key was in his pocket, and found that there was a certain
satisfaction in being stern and cruel. Mrs Baggett might sob her heart out after her box, and
he would decline to be moved.

"What'll I do about Baggett, sir?" said the poor woman, coming back. "He's a lying there at
the gate, and the perlice doesn't like to touch him because of you, sir. He says as how if
you could take him into the stables, he'd sleep it off among the straw. But then he'd be just
as bad after this first go, to-morrow."

To this, however, Mr Whittlestaff at once acceded. He saw a way out of the immediate difficulty.
He therefore called Hayonotes to him, and succeeded in explaining his immediate meaning. Hayonotes
and the policeman between them lifted Baggett, and deposited the man in an empty stall, where
he was accommodated with ample straw. And an order was given that as soon as he had come to
himself, he should be provided with something to eat.

"Summat to eat!" said Mrs Baggett, in extreme disgust. "Provide him with a lock-up and plenty
of cold water!"

CHAPTER XII.

MR BLAKE'S GOOD NEWS.

In the afternoon, after lunch had been eaten, there came a ring at the back-door, and Mr Montagu
Blake was announced. There had been a little contretemps or misadventure. It was Mr Blake's
habit when he called at Croker's Hall to ride his horse into the yard, there to give him up
to Hayonotes, and make his way in by the back entrance. On this occasion Hayonotes had been
considerably disturbed in his work, and was discussing the sad condition of Mr Baggett with
Thornybush over the gate of the kitchen-garden. Consequently, Mr Blake had taken his own horse
into the stable, and as he was about to lead the beast up to the stall, had been stopped and
confused by Sergeant Baggett's protruding wooden leg.

"'Alloa! what's up now?" said a voice, addressing Mr Blake from under the straw. "Do you go
down, old chap, and get us three-penn'orth of cream o' the valley from the Cock."

Then Mr Blake had been aware that this prior visitor was not in a condition to be of much use
to him, and tied up his own horse in another stall. But on entering the house, Mr Blake announced
the fact of there being a stranger in the stables, and suggested that the one-legged gentleman
had been looking at somebody taking a glass of gin. Then Mrs Baggett burst out into a loud
screech of agony. "The nasty drunken beast! he ought to be locked up into the darkest hole
they've got in all Alresford."

"But who is the gentleman?" said Mr Blake.

"My husband, sir; I won't deny him. He is the cross as I have to carry, and precious heavy
he is. You must have heard of Sergeant Baggett;--the most drunkenest, beastliest, idlest scoundrel
as ever the Queen had in the army, and the most difficultest for a woman to put up with in
the way of a husband! Let a woman be ever so decent, he'd drink her gowns and her petticoats,
down to her very underclothing. How would you like, sir, to have to take up with such a beast
as that, after living all your life as comfortable as any lady in the land? Wouldn't that be
a come-down, Mr Blake? And then to have your box locked up, and be told that the key of your
bedroom door is in the master's pocket." Thus Mrs Baggett continued to bewail her destiny.

Mr Blake having got rid of the old woman, and bethinking himself of the disagreeable incidents
to which a gentleman with a larger establishment than his own might be liable, made his way
into the sitting-room, where he found Mary Lawrie alone; and having apologised for the manner
of his intrusion, and having said something intended to be jocose as to the legs of the warrior
in the stable, at once asked a question as to John Gordon.

"Mr Gordon!" said Mary. "He was here this morning with Mr Whittlestaff, but I know nothing
of him since."

"He hasn't gone back to London?"

"I don't know where he has gone. He slept in Alresford last night, but I know nothing of him
since."

"He sent his bag by the boy at the inn down to the railway station when he came up here. I
found his bag there, but heard nothing of him. They told me at the inn that he was to come
up here, and I thought I should either find him here or meet him on the road."

"Do you want to find him especially?"

"Well, yes."

"Do you know Mr Gordon?"

"Well, yes; I do. That is to say, he dined with me last night. We were at Oxford together,
and yesterday evening we got talking about our adventures since."

"He told you that he had been at the diamond-fields?"

"Oh, yes; I know all about the diamond-fields. But Mr Hall particularly wants to see him up
at the Park." (Mr Hall was the squire with four daughters who lived at Little Alresford.) "Mr
Hall says that he knew his father many years ago, and sent me out to look for him. I shall
be wretched if he goes away without coming to Little Alresford House. He can't go back to London
before four o'clock, because there is no train. You know nothing about his movements?"

"Nothing at all. For some years past Mr Gordon has been altogether a stranger to me." Mr Blake
looked into her face, and was aware that there was something to distress her. He at once gathered
from her countenance that Mr Whittlestaff had been like the dog that stuck to his bone, and
that John Gordon was like the other dog--the disappointed one--and had been turned out from
the neighbourhood of the kennel. "I should imagine that Mr Gordon has gone away, if not to
London, then in some other direction." It was clear that the young lady intended him to understand
that she could say nothing and knew nothing as to Mr Gordon's movements.

"I suppose I must go down to the station and leave word for him there," said Mr Blake. Miss
Lawrie only shook her head. "Mr Hall will be very sorry to miss him. And then I have some special
good news to tell him."

"Special good news!" Could it be that something had happened which would induce Mr Whittlestaff
to change his mind. That was the one subject which to her, at the present moment, was capable
of meaning specially good tidings.

"Yes, indeed, Miss Lawrie; double good news, I may say. Old Mr Harbottle has gone at last at
San Remo." Mary did know who Mr Harbottle was,--or had been. Mr Harbottle had been the vicar
at Little Alresford, for whose death Mr Blake was waiting, in order that he might enter in
together upon the good things of matrimony and the living. He was a man so contented, and talked
so frequently of the good things which Fortune was to do for him, that the tidings of his luck
had reached even the ears of Mary Lawrie. "That's an odd way of putting it, of course," continued
Mr Blake; "but then he was quite old and very asthmatic, and couldn't ever come back again.
Of course I'm very sorry for him,--in one way; but then I'm very glad in another. It is a good
thing to have the house in my own hands, so as to begin to paint at once, ready for her coming.
Her father wouldn't let her be married till I had got the living, and I think he was right,
because I shouldn't have liked to spend money in painting and such like on an uncertainty.
As the old gentleman had to die, why shouldn't I tell the truth? Of course I am glad, though
it does sound so terrible."

"But what are the double good news?"

"Oh, I didn't tell you. Miss Forrester is to come to the Park. She is not coming because Mr
Harbottle is dead. That's only a coincidence. We are not going to be married quite at once,--straight
off the reel, you know. I shall have to go to Winchester for that. But now that old Harbottle
has gone, I'll get the day fixed; you see if I don't. But I must really be off, Miss Lawrie.
Mr Hall will be terribly vexed if I don't find Gordon, and there's no knowing where he may
go whilst I'm talking here." Then he made his adieux, but returned before he had shut the door
after him. "You couldn't send somebody with me, Miss Lawrie? I shall be afraid of that wooden-legged
man in the stables, for fear he should get up and abuse me. He asked me to get him some gin,--which
was quite unreasonable." But on being assured that he would find the groom about the place,
he went out, and the trot of his horse was soon heard upon the road.

He did succeed in finding John Gordon, who was listlessly waiting at the Claimant's Arms for
the coming of the four o'clock train which was to take him back to London, on his way, as he
told himself, to the diamond-fields. He had thrown all his heart, all the energy of which he
was the master, into the manner in which he had pleaded for himself and for Mary with Mr Whittlestaff.
But he felt the weakness of his position in that he could not remain present upon the ground
and see the working of his words. Having said what he had to say, he could only go; and it
was not to be expected that the eloquence of an absent man, of one who had declared that he
was about to start for South Africa, should be regarded. He knew that what he had said was
true, and that, being true, it ought to prevail; but, having declared it, there was nothing
for him to do but to go away. He could not see Mary herself again, nor, if he did so, would
she be so likely to yield to him as was Mr Whittlestaff. He could have no further excuse for
addressing himself to the girl who was about to become the wife of another man. Therefore he
sat restless, idle, and miserable in the little parlour at the Claimant's Arms, thinking that
the long journey which he had made had been taken all in vain, and that there was nothing left
for him in the world but to return to Kimberley, and add more diamonds to his stock-in-trade.

"Oh, Gordon!" said Blake, bursting into the room, "you're the very man I want to find. You
can't go back to London to-day."

"Can't I?"

"Quite out of the question. Mr Hall knew your father intimately when you were only a little chap."

"Will that prevent my going back to London?"

"Certainly it will. He wants to renew the acquaintance. He is a most hospitable, kind-hearted
man; and who knows, one of the four daughters might do yet."

"Who is Mr Hall?" No doubt he had heard the name on the previous evening; but Hall is common,
and had been forgotten.

"Who is Mr Hall? Why, he is the squire of Little Alresford, and my patron. I forget you haven't
heard that Mr Harbottle is dead at last. Of course I am very sorry for the old gentleman in
one sense; but it is such a blessing in another. I'm only just thirty, and it's a grand thing
my tumbling into the living in this way."

"I needn't go back because Mr Harbottle is dead."

"But Kattie Forrester is coming to the Park. I told you last night, but I daresay you've forgotten
it; and I couldn't tell then that Mr Hall was acquainted with you, or that he would be so anxious
to be hospitable. He says that I'm to tell you to take your bag up to the house at once. There
never was anything more civil than that. Of course I let him know that we had been at Oxford
together. That does go for something."

"The university and your society together," suggested Gordon.

"Don't chaff, because I'm in earnest. Kattie Forrester will be in by the very train that was
to take you on to London, and I'm to wait and put her into Mr Hall's carriage. One of the daughters,
I don't doubt, will be there, and you can wait and see her if you like it. If you'll get your
bag ready, the coachman will take it with Kattie's luggage. There's the Park carriage coming
down the street now. I'll go out and stop old Steadypace the coachman; only don't you keep
him long, because I shouldn't like Kattie to find that there was no one to look after her at
the station."

There seemed to be an opening in all this for John Gordon to remain at any rate a day longer
in the neighbourhood of Mary Lawrie, and he determined that he would avail himself of the opportunity.
He therefore, together with his friend Blake, saw the coachman, and gave instructions as to
finding the bag at the station, and prepared himself to walk out to the Park. "You can go down
to the station," he said to Blake, "and can ride back with the carriage."

"Of course I shall see you up at the house," said Blake. "Indeed I've been asked to stay there
whilst Kattie is with them. Nothing can be more hospitable than Mr Hall and his four daughters.
I'd give you some advice, only I really don't know which you'd like the best. There is a sort
of similarity about them; but that wears off when you come to know them. I have heard people
say that the two eldest are very much alike. If that be so, perhaps you'll like the third the
best. The third is the nicest, as her hair may be a shade darker than the others. I really
must be off now, as I wouldn't for worlds that the train should come in before I'm on the platform."
With that he went into the yard, and at once trotted off on his cob.

Gordon paid his bill, and started on his walk to Little Alresford Park. Looking back into his
early memories, he could just remember to have heard his father speak of Mr Hall. But that
was all. His father was now dead, and, certainly, he thought, had not mentioned the name for
many years. But the invitation was civil, and as he was to remain in the neighbourhood, it
might be that he should again have an opportunity of seeing Mary Lawrie or Mr Whittlestaff.
He found that Little Alresford Park lay between the town and Mr Blake's church, so that he
was at the gate sooner than he expected. He went in, and having time on his hands, deviated
from the road and went up a hill, which was indeed one of the downs, though between the park
paling. Here he saw deer feeding, and he came after a while to a beech grove. He had now gone
down the hill on the other side, and found himself close to as pretty a labourer's cottage
as he remembered ever to have seen. It was still June, and it was hot, and he had been on his
legs nearly the whole morning. Then he began to talk, or rather to think to himself. "What
a happy fellow is that man Montagu Blake! He has every thing,--not that he wants, but that
he thinks that he wants. The work of his life is merely play. He is going to marry a wife,--not
who is, but whom he thinks to be perfection. He looks as though he were never ill a day in
his life. How would he do if he were grubbing for diamonds amidst the mud and dust of Kimberley?
Instead of that, he can throw himself down on such a spot as this, and meditate his sermon
among the beech-trees." Then he began to think whether the sermon could be made to have some
flavour of the beech-trees, and how much better in that case it would be, and as he so thought
he fell asleep.

He had not been asleep very long, perhaps not five minutes, when he became aware in his slumbers
that an old man was standing over him. One does thus become conscious of things before the
moment of waking has arrived, so positively as to give to the sleeper a false sense of the
reality of existence. "I wonder whether you can be Mr Gordon," said the old man.

"But I am," said Gordon. "I wonder how you know me."

"Because I expect you." There was something very mysterious in this,--which, however, lost
all mystery as soon as he was sufficiently awake to think of things. "You are Mr Blake's friend."

"Yes; I am Mr Blake's friend."

