Picture: Cover of book]

                        [Picture: Charles Dickens]

The pages of this little book were in type and about to be sent for correction to my sister—who
had been for some months in very delicate health—when she suddenly became still more gravely
ill.  The hand which had traced the words of love and veneration dedicated to our father’s
memory grew too feeble to hold a pen, and before the proofs of her little volume could be submitted
to her for revision, my dear sister died.

                                                                     K. P.

                         [Picture: Mamie Dickens]

                        MY FATHER AS I RECALL HIM.

                                    BY
                              MAMIE DICKENS.

                                   THE
                            ROXBURGHE PRESS,
                        FIFTEEN, VICTORIA STREET,
                               WESTMINSTER.

THIS WORK, AND ALL THE PUBLICATIONS OF THE ROXBURGHE PRESS, ARE SUPPLIED TO THE TRADE BY MESSRS.
SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & COMPANY, LIMITED, AND CAN BE OBTAINED THROUGH ANY BOOKSELLER.

CONTENTS.

                                                                     PAGE.

CHAPTER I.                                                               7

Seeing “Gad’s Hill” as a child.—His domestic side and home love.—His love of children.—His
neatness and punctuality.—At the table, and as host.—The original of “Little Nell.”

CHAPTER II.                                                             25

Buying Christmas presents.—In the dance.—The merriest of them all.—As a conjurer.—Christmas
at “Gad’s Hill.”—Our Christmas dinners.—A New Year’s Eve frolic.—New Year on the Green.—Twelfth
Night festivities.

CHAPTER III.                                                            46

My father at his work.—Rooms in which he wrote.—Love for his child characters.—Genius for character
drawing.—Nicholas Nickleby.—His writing hours.—His only amanuensis.—“Pickwick” and “Boz.”—Death
of Mr. Thackeray.

CHAPTER IV.                                                             69

Fondness for Athletic Sports.—His love of bathing.—His study of the raven.—Calling the doctor
in.—My father with our dogs.—The cats of “Gad’s Hill.”—”Bumble” and “Mrs. Bouncer.”—A strange
friendship.

CHAPTER V.                                                              88

Interest in London birds.—Our pet bird “Dick.”—Devotion of his dogs.—Decision to visit America.—His
arrival in New York.—Comments on American courtesies.—Farewell public appearances.

CHAPTER VI.                                                            103

Last words spoken in public.—A railroad accident in 1865.—At home after his American visit.—”Improvements”
at “Gad’s Hill.”—At “Gad’s Hill” once more.—The closing day of his life.—Burial at Westminster.

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.

A great many writers have taken it upon themselves to write lives of my father, to tell anecdotes
of him, and to print all manner of things about him.  Of all these published books I have read
but one, the only genuine “Life” thus far written of him, the one sanctioned by my father himself,
namely: “The Life of Charles Dickens,” by John Forster. 

The last years of the 17th century, at any rate, saw the commencement of a spirited rivalry
among various makers of Anderson's Scots Pills that was long to continue. One of them was Mrs. Isabella
Inglish, an enterprising woman who sealed her pill boxes in black wax bearing a lion rampant,
three mallets argent, and the bust of Dr. Anderson.

Another was a man named Gray who sealed his boxes in red wax with his coat of arms and a motto strangely
chosen for a medicine, "Remember you must die."

Competition already had begun when Godfrey's Cordial appeared in the record in a London newspaper
advertisement during December 1721.

John Fisher of Hertfordshire, "Physician and Chymist," claimed to have gotten the true formula
from its originator, the late Dr. Thomas Godfrey of the same county. But there is an alternate
explanation.

Perhaps the Cordial had its origin in the apothecary shop established about 1660 by Ambroise
(Hanckowitz) Godfrey in Southampton Street, London.[2] According to a handbill issued during
the late 17th century, Ambroise Godfrey prepared "Good Cordials as Royal English Drops."

[2] "How the patent medicine industry came into its own," American Druggist, October 1933,
vol. 88, pp. 84-87, 232, 234, 236, 238.

With respect to his rivals, the 18th-century Hertfordshire vendor of the Cordial warned in the
Weekly Journal (London), December 23, 1721: "I do advise all Persons, for their own Safety,
not to meddle with the said Cordial prepared by illiterate and ignorant Persons, as Bakers,
Malsters, [sic] and Goldsmiths, that shall pretend to make it, it being beyond their reach;
so that by their Covetousness and Pretensions, many Men, Women, and especially Infants, may
fall as Victims, whose Slain may exceed Herod's Cruelty...."

In
1726 King George I granted a patent for the making and selling of
Dr. Bateman's Pectoral Drops. The patent was given not to a doctor,
but to a business man named Benjamin Okell. In the words of the patent,[3]
Okell is lauded for having "found out and brought to Perfection, a
new Chymicall Preparacion and Medicine..., working chiefly by Moderate
Sweat and Urine, exceeding all other Medicines yet found out for the
Rheumatism, which is highly useful under the Afflictions of the Stone,
Gravell, Pains, Agues, and Hysterias...."

But let this single reference to his earlier years suffice, so that I may write of him during
those years when I remember him among us and around us in our home.

From his earliest childhood, throughout his earliest married life to the day of his death,
his nature was home-loving.  He was a “home man” in every respect.  When he became celebrated
at a very early age, as we know, all his joys and sorrows were taken home; and he found there
sympathy and the companionship of his “own familiar friends.”  In his letters to these latter,
in his letters to my mother, to my aunt, and, later on, to us his children, he never forgot
anything that he knew would be of interest about his work, his successes, his hopes or fears.
And there was a sweet simplicity in his belief that such news would most certainly be acceptable
to all, that is wonderfully touching and child-like coming from a man of genius.

His care and thoughtfulness about home matters, nothing being deemed too small or trivial to
claim his attention and consideration, were really marvellous when we remember his active,
eager, restless, working brain. No man was so inclined naturally to derive his happiness from
home affairs.  He was full of the kind of interest in a house which is commonly confined to
women, and his care of and for us as wee children did most certainly “pass the love of women!”
His was a tender and most affectionate nature.

For many consecutive summers we used to be taken to Broadstairs.  This little place became
a great favorite with my father.  He was always very happy there, and delighted in wandering
about the garden of his house, generally accompanied by one or other of his children.  In later
years, at Boulogne, he would often have his youngest boy, “The Noble Plorn,” trotting by his
side.  These two were constant companions in those days, and after these walks my father would
always have some funny anecdote to tell us.  And when years later the time came for the boy
of his heart to go out into the world, my father, after seeing him off, wrote: “Poor Plorn
has gone to Australia.  It was a hard parting at the last.  He seemed to become once more my
youngest and favorite little child as the day drew near, and I did not think I could have been
so shaken.  We can see by the different child characters in his books what a wonderful knowledge
he had of children, and what a wonderful and truly womanly sympathy he had with them in all
their childish joys and griefs.  I can remember with us, his own children, how kind, considerate
and patient he always was.  But we were never afraid to go to him in any trouble, and never
had a snub from him or a cross word under any circumstances.  He was always glad to give us
“treats,” as he called them, and used to conceive all manner of those “treats” for us, and
if any favor had to be asked we were always sure of a favorable answer.  On these occasions
my sister “Katie” was generally our messenger, we others waiting outside the study door to
hear the verdict. She and I used to have delightful treats in those summer evenings, driving
up to Hampstead in the open carriage with him, our mother, and “Auntie,” {15} and getting out
for a long walk through the lovely country lanes, picking wild roses and other flowers, or
walking hand in hand with him listening to some story.

There never existed, I think, in all the world, a more thoroughly tidy or methodical creature
than was my father.  He was tidy in every way—in his mind, in his handsome and graceful person,
in his work, in keeping his writing table drawers, in his large correspondence, in fact in
his whole life.

I remember that my sister and I occupied a little garret room in Devonshire Terrace, at the
very top of the house.  He had taken the greatest pains and care to make the room as pretty
and comfortable for his two little daughters as it could be made.  He was often dragged up
the steep staircase to this room to see some new print or some new ornament which we children
had put up, and he always gave us words of praise and approval.  He encouraged us in every
possible way to make ourselves useful, and to adorn and beautify our rooms with our own hands,
and to be ever tidy and neat.  I remember that the adornment of this garret was decidedly primitive,
the unframed prints being fastened to the wall by ordinary black or white pins, whichever we
could get.  But, never mind, if they were put up neatly and tidily they were always “excellent,”
or “quite slap-up” as he used to say.  Even in those early days, he made a point of visiting
every room in the house once each morning, and if a chair was out of its place, or a blind
not quite straight, or a crumb left on the floor, woe betide the offender.

And then his punctuality!  It was almost frightful to an unpunctual mind! This again was another
phase of his extreme tidiness; it was also the outcome of his excessive thoughtfulness and
consideration for others. His sympathy, also, with all pain and suffering made him quite invaluable
in a sick room.  Quick, active, sensible, bright and cheery, and sympathetic to a degree, he
would seize the “case” at once, know exactly what to do and do it.  In all our childish ailments
his visits were eagerly looked forward to; and our little hearts would beat a shade faster,
and our aches and pains become more bearable, when the sound of his quick footstep was heard,
and the encouraging accents of his voice greeted the invalid.  I can remember now, as if it
were yesterday, how the touch of his hand—he had a most sympathetic touch—was almost too much
sometimes, the help and hope in it making my heart full to overflowing. He believed firmly
in the power of mesmerism, as a remedy in some forms of illness, and was himself a mesmerist
of no mean order; I know of many cases, my own among the number, in which he used his power
in this way with perfect success.

And however busy he might be, and even in his hours of relaxation, he was still, if you can
understand me, always busy; he would give up any amount of time and spare himself no fatigue
if he could in any way alleviate sickness and pain.

In very many of my father’s books there are frequent references to delicious meals, wonderful
dinners and more marvellous dishes, steaming bowls of punch, etc, which have led many to believe
that he was a man very fond of the table.  And yet I think no more abstemious man ever lived.

In the “Gad’s Hill” days, when the house was full of visitors, he had a peculiar notion of
always having the menu for the day’s dinner placed on the sideboard at luncheon time.  And
then he would discuss every item in his fanciful, humorous way with his guests, much to this
effect: “Cock-a-leekie?  Good, decidedly good; fried soles with shrimp sauce? Good again; croquettes
of chicken?  Weak, very weak; decided want of imagination here,” and so on, and he would apparently
be so taken up with the merits or demerits of a menu that one might imagine he lived for nothing
but the coming dinner.  He had a small but healthy appetite, but was remarkably abstemious
both in eating and drinking.

He was delightful as a host, caring individually for each guest, and bringing the special qualities
of each into full notice and prominence, putting the very shyest at his or her ease, making
the best of the most humdrum, and never thrusting himself forward.

But when he was most delightful, was alone with us at home and sitting over dessert, and when
my sister was with us especially—I am talking now of our grownup days—for she had great power
in “drawing him out.”  At such times although he might sit down to dinner in a grave or abstracted
mood, he would, invariably, soon throw aside his silence and end by delighting us all with
his genial talk and his quaint fancies about people and things.  He was always, as I have said,
much interested in mesmerism, and the curious influence exercised by one personality over another.
One illustration I remember his using was, that meeting someone in the busy London streets,
he was on the point of turning back to accost the supposed friend, when finding out his mistake
in time he walked on again until he actually met the real friend, whose shadow, as it were,
but a moment ago had come across his path.

And then the forgetting of a word or a name.  “Now into what pigeon-hole of my brain did that
go, and why do I suddenly remember it now?”  And as these thoughts passed through his mind
and were spoken dreamily, so they also appeared in his face.  Another instant, perhaps, and
his eyes would be full of fun and laughter.

At the beginning of his literary career he suffered a great sorrow in the death—a very sudden
death—of my mother’s sister, Mary Hogarth.  She was of a most charming and lovable disposition,
as well as being personally very beautiful.  Soon after my parents married, Aunt Mary was constantly
with them.  As her nature developed she became my father’s ideal of what a young girl should
be.  And his own words show how this great affection and the influence of the girl’s loved
memory were with him to the end of his life.  The shock of her sudden death so affected and
prostrated him that the publication of “Pickwick” was interrupted for two months.  I would
fain believe, sometimes, that her spirit may have some influence over them, but their perpetual
repetition is extraordinary.”

In the course of years there came changes in our home, inevitable changes.  But no changes
could ever alter my father’s home-loving nature. As he wrote to Mr. Forster, as a young man,
so it was with him to the time of his death: “We shall soon meet, please God, and be happier
than ever we were in all our lives.  Oh! home—home—home!!!”

CHAPTER II.

                      [Picture: Mr. Pickwick slides]

Christmas was always a time which in our home was looked forward to with eagerness and delight,
and to my father it was a time dearer than any other part of the year, I think.  He loved Christmas
for its deep significance as well as for its joys, and this he demonstrates in every allusion
in his writings to the great festival, a day which he considered should be fragrant with the
love that we should bear one to another, and with the love and reverence of his Saviour and
Master.  Even in his most merry conceits of Christmas, there are always subtle and tender touches
which will bring tears to the eyes, and make even the thoughtless have some special veneration
for this most blessed anniversary.

In our childish days my father used to take us, every twenty-fourth day of December, to a toy
shop in Holborn, where we were allowed to select our Christmas presents, and also any that
we wished to give to our little companions.  Although I believe we were often an hour or more
in the shop before our several tastes were satisfied, he never showed the least impatience,
was always interested, and as desirous as we, that we should choose exactly what we liked best.
As we grew older, present giving was confined to our several birthdays, and this annual visit
to the Holborn toy shop ceased.

When we were only babies my father determined that we should be taught to dance, so as early
as the Genoa days we were given our first lessons. “Our oldest boy and his sisters are to be
waited upon next week by a professor of the noble art of dancing,” he wrote to a friend at
this time.  And again, in writing to my mother, he says: “I hope the dancing lessons will be
a success.  Don’t fail to let me know.”

Our progress in the graceful art delighted him, and his admiration of our success was evident
when we exhibited to him, as we were perfected in them, all the steps, exercises and dances
which formed our lessons.  He always encouraged us in our dancing, and praised our grace and
aptness, although criticized quite severely in some places for allowing his children to expend
so much time and energy upon the training of their feet.

When “the boys” came home for the holidays there were constant rehearsals for the Christmas
and New Year’s parties; and more especially for the dance on Twelfth Night, the anniversary
of my brother Charlie’s birthday. Just before one of these celebrations my father insisted
that my sister Katie and I should teach the polka step to Mr. Leech and himself.  My father
was as much in earnest about learning to take that wonderful step correctly, as though there
were nothing of greater importance in the world.  Often he would practice gravely in a corner,
without either partner or music, and I remember one cold winter’s night his awakening with
the fear that he had forgotten the step so strong upon him that, jumping out of bed, by the
scant illumination of the old-fashioned rushlight, and to his own whistling, he diligently
rehearsed its “one, two, three, one, two, three” until he was once more secure in his knowledge.

                        [Picture: Mr. John Leech]

No one can imagine our excitement and nervousness when the evening came on which we were to
dance with our pupils.  Katie, who was a very little girl was to have Mr. Leech, who was over
six feet tall, for her partner, while my father was to be mine.  My heart beat so fast that
I could scarcely breathe, I was so fearful for the success of our exhibition. But my fears
were groundless, and we were greeted at the finish of our dance with hearty applause, which
was more than compensation for the work which had been expended upon its learning.

My father was certainly not what in the ordinary acceptation of the term would be called “a
good dancer.”  I doubt whether he had ever received any instruction in “the noble art” other
than that which my sister and I gave him.  In later years I remember trying to teach him the
Schottische, a dance which he particularly admired and desired to learn.  But although he was
so fond of dancing, except at family gatherings in his own or his most intimate friends’ homes,
I never remember seeing him join in it himself, and I doubt if, even as a young man, he ever
went to balls. Graceful in motion, his dancing, such as it was, was natural to him. Dance music
was delightful to his cheery, genial spirit; the time and steps of a dance suited his tidy
nature, if I may so speak.  The action and the exercise seemed to be a part of his abundant
vitality.

While I am writing of my father’s fondness for dancing, a characteristic anecdote of him occurs
to me.  While he was courting my mother, he went one summer evening to call upon her.  The
Hogarths were living a little way out of London, in a residence which had a drawing-room opening
with French windows on to a lawn.  In this room my mother and her family were seated quietly
after dinner on this particular evening, when suddenly a young sailor jumped through one of
the open windows into the apartment, whistled and danced a hornpipe, and before they could
recover from their amazement jumped out again.  A few minutes later my father walked in at
the door as sedately as though quite innocent of the prank, and shook hands with everyone;
but the sight of their amazed faces proving too much for his attempted sobriety, his hearty
laugh was the signal for the rest of the party to join in his merriment.  But judging from
his slight ability in later years, I fancy that he must have taken many lessons to secure his
perfection in that hornpipe.

His dancing was at its best, I think, in the “Sir Roger de Coverly”—and in what are known as
country dances.  In the former, while the end couples are dancing, and the side couples are
supposed to be still, my father would insist upon the sides keeping up a kind of jig step,
and clapping his hands to add to the fun, and dancing at the backs of those whose enthusiasm
he thought needed rousing, was himself never still for a moment until the dance was over. 
He was very fond of a country dance which he learned at the house of some dear friends at Rockingham
Castle, which began with quite a stately minuet to the tune of “God save the Queen,” and then
dashed suddenly into “Down the Middle and up Again.” His enthusiasm in this dance, I remember,
was so great that, one evening after some of our Tavistock House theatricals, when I was thoroughly
worn out with fatigue, being selected by him as his partner, I caught the infection of his
merriment, and my weariness vanished.  As he himself says, in describing dear old “Fezziwig’s”
Christmas party, we were “people who would dance and had no notion of walking.”  His enjoyment
of all our frolics was equally keen, and he writes to an American friend, à propos of one of
our Christmas merry-makings: “Forster is out again; and if he don’t go in again after the manner
in which we have been keeping Christmas, he must be very strong indeed. To keep the Chuzzlewit
going, and to do this little book the Carol, in the odd times between two parts of it, was,
as you may suppose, pretty tight work.  But when it was done I broke out like a madman, and
if you could have seen me at a children’s party at Macready’s the other night going down a
country dance with Mrs. M. you would have thought I was a country gentleman of independent
property residing on a tip-top farm, with the wind blowing straight in my face every day.”

At our holiday frolics he used sometimes to conjure for us, the equally “noble art” of the
prestidigitateur being among his accomplishments.  He writes of this, which he included in
the list of our Twelfth Night amusements, to another American friend: “The actuary of the national
debt couldn’t calculate the number of children who are coming here on Twelfth Night, in honor
of Charlie’s birthday, for which occasion I have provided a magic lantern and divers other
tremendous engines of that nature.  And if you could see me conjuring the company’s watches
into impossible tea-caddies and causing pieces of money to fly, and burning pocket handkerchiefs
without burning ’em, and practising in my own room without anybody to admire, you would never
forget it as long as you live.”

One of these conjuring tricks comprised the disappearance and reappearance of a tiny doll,
which would announce most unexpected pieces of news and messages to the different children
in the audience; this doll was a particular favorite, and its arrival eagerly awaited and welcomed.

That he loved to emphasize Christmas in every possible way, the following extract from a note
which he sent me in December, 1868, will evidence.  Our house was always filled with guests,
while a cottage in the village was reserved for the use of the bachelor members of our holiday
party.  My father himself, always deserted work for the week, and that was almost our greatest
treat.  He was the fun and life of those gatherings, the true Christmas spirit of sweetness
and hospitality filling his large and generous heart.  Long walks with him were daily treats
to be remembered.  Games passed our evenings merrily.  “Proverbs,” a game of memory, was very
popular, and it was one in which either my aunt or myself was apt to prove winner.  Father’s
annoyance at our failure sometimes was very amusing, but quite genuine.  “Dumb Crambo” was
another favorite, and one in which my father’s great imitative ability showed finely.  I remember
one evening his dumb showing of the word “frog” was so extremely laughable that the memory
of it convulsed Marcus Stone, the clever artist, when he tried some time later to imitate it.

One very severe Christmas, when the snow was so deep as to make outdoor amusement or entertainment
for our guests impossible, my father suggested that he and the inhabitants of the “bachelors’
cottage” should pass the time in unpacking the French chalet, which had been sent to him by
Mr. Fetcher, and which reached Higham Station in a large number of packing cases.  Unpacking
these and fitting the pieces together gave them interesting employment, and some topics of
conversation for our luncheon party.

Our Christmas Day dinners at “Gad’s Hill” were particularly bright and cheery, some of our
nearest neighbours joining our home party.  The Christmas plum pudding had its own special
dish of coloured “repoussé” china, ornamented with holly.  The pudding was placed on this with
a sprig of real holly in the centre, lighted, and in this state placed in front of my father,
its arrival being always the signal for applause.  A prettily decorated table was his special
pleasure, and from my earliest girlhood the care of this devolved upon me.  When I had everything
in readiness, he would come with me to inspect the result of my labors, before dressing for
dinner, and no word except of praise ever came to my ears.

He was a wonderfully neat and rapid carver, and I am happy to say taught me some of his skill
in this.  I used to help him in our home parties at “Gad’s Hill” by carving at a side table,
returning to my seat opposite him as soon as my duty was ended.  On Christmas Day we all had
our glasses filled, and then my father, raising his, would say: “Here’s to us all.  God bless
us!” a toast which was rapidly and willingly drunk.  His conversation, as may be imagined,
was often extremely humorous, and I have seen the servants, who were waiting at table, convulsed
often with laughter at his droll remarks and stories.  Now, as I recall these gatherings, my
sight grows blurred with the tears that rise to my eyes. But I love to remember them, and to
see, if only in memory, my father at his own table, surrounded by his own family and friends—a
beautiful Christmas spirit.

“It is good to be children sometimes, and never better than at Christmas, when its Mighty Founder
was a child himself,” was his own advice, and advice which he followed both in letter and spirit.

One morning—it was the last day of the year, I remember—while we were at breakfast at “Gad’s
Hill,” my father suggested that we should celebrate the evening by a charade to be acted in
pantomime.  The suggestion was received with acclamation, and amid shouts and laughing we were
then and there, guests and members of the family, allotted our respective parts. My father
went about collecting “stage properties,” rehearsals were “called” at least four times during
the morning, and in all our excitement no thought was given to that necessary part of a charade,
the audience, whose business it is to guess the pantomime.  At luncheon someone asked suddenly:
“But what about an audience?”  “Why, bless my soul,” said my father, “I’d forgotten all about
that.”  Invitations were quickly dispatched to our neighbours, and additional preparations
made for supper.  In due time the audience came, and the charade was acted so successfully
that the evening stands out in my memory as one of the merriest and happiest of the many merry
and happy evenings in our dear old home.  My father was so extremely funny in his part that
the rest of us found it almost impossible to maintain sufficient control over ourselves to
enable the charade to proceed as it was planned to do.  It wound up with a country dance, which
had been invented that morning and practised quite a dozen times through the day, and which
was concluded at just a few moments before midnight.  Then leading us all, characters and audience,
out into the wide hall, and throwing wide open the door, my father, watch in hand, stood waiting
to hear the bells ring in the New Year.  All was hush and silence after the laughter and merriment!
Suddenly the peal of bells sounded, and turning he said: “A happy New Year to us all!  God
bless us.”  Kisses, good wishes and shaking of hands brought us again back to the fun and gaiety
of a few moments earlier. Supper was served, the hot mulled wine drunk in toasts, and the maddest
and wildest of “Sir Roger de Coverlys” ended our evening and began our New Year.

One New year’s day my father organized some field sports in a meadow which was at the back
of our house.  The likelihood of things going wrong was anticipated, and despite the general
prejudice of the neighbours against the undertaking, my father’s belief and trust in his guests
was not disappointed.  But you shall have his own account of his success.

My father was again in his element at the Twelfth Night parties to which I have before alluded.
For many consecutive years, Miss Coutts, now the Baroness Burdett Coutts, was in the habit
of sending my brother, on this his birthday anniversary, the most gorgeous of Twelfth-cakes,
with an accompanying box of bonbons and Twelfth Night characters.  The cake was cut, and the
favors and bonbons distributed at the birthday supper, and it was then that my father’s kindly,
genial nature overflowed in merriment.  He would have something droll to say to everyone, and
under his attentions the shyest child would brighten and become merry.  No one was overlooked
or forgotten by him; like the young Cratchits, he was “ubiquitous.”  Supper was followed by
songs and recitations from the various members of the company, my father acting always as master
of ceremonies, and calling upon first one child, then another for his or her contribution to
the festivity.  I can see now the anxious faces turned toward the beaming, laughing eyes of
their host.  How attentively he would listen, with his head thrown slightly back, and a little
to one side, a happy smile on his lips.  O, those merry, happy times, never to be forgotten
by any of his own children, or by any of their guests. Those merry, happy times!

“So may the New Year be a happy one to you, happy to many more whose happiness depends on you!
So may each year be happier than the last, and not the meanest of our brethren or sisterhood
debarred their rightful share in what our great Creator formed them to enjoy.”

               [Picture: Mr. Pickwick under the Mistletoe]

CHAPTER III.

When at work my father was almost always alone, so that, with rare exceptions, save as we could
see the effect of the adventures of his characters upon him in his daily moods, we knew but
little of his manner of work.  Absolute quiet under these circumstances was essential, the
slightest sound making an interruption fatal to the success of his labors, although, oddly
enough, in his leisure hours the bustle and noise of a great city seemed necessary to him.
For a week or fortnight I can write prodigiously in a retired place, a day in London setting
and starting me up again.  But the toil and labor of writing day after day without that magic
lantern is immense!”

As I have said, he was usually alone when at work, though there were, of course, some occasional
exceptions, and I myself constituted such an exception.  During our life at Tavistock House,
I had a long and serious illness, with an almost equally long convalescence.  During the latter,
my father suggested that I should be carried every day into his study to remain with him, and,
although I was fearful of disturbing him, he assured me that he desired to have me with him.
On one of these mornings, I was lying on the sofa endeavouring to keep perfectly quiet, while
my father wrote busily and rapidly at his desk, when he suddenly jumped from his chair and
rushed to a mirror which hung near, and in which I could see the reflection of some extraordinary
facial contortions which he was making.  He returned rapidly to his desk, wrote furiously for
a few moments, and then went again to the mirror.  The facial pantomime was resumed, and then
turning toward, but evidently not seeing, me, he began talking rapidly in a low voice.  Ceasing
this soon, however, he returned once more to his desk, where he remained silently writing until
luncheon time.  It was a most curious experience for me, and one of which, I did not until
later years, fully appreciate the purport.  Then I knew that with his natural intensity he
had thrown himself completely into the character that he was creating, and that for the time
being he had not only lost sight of his surroundings, but had actually become in action, as
in imagination, the creature of his pen.

His “studies” were always cheery, pleasant rooms, and always, like himself, the personification
of neatness and tidiness.  On the shelf of his writing table were many dainty and useful ornaments,
gifts from his friends or members of his family, and always, a vase of bright and fresh flowers.
The first study that I remember is the one in our Devonshire Terrace home, a pretty room, with
steps leading directly into the garden from it, and with an extra baize door to keep out all
sounds and noise. The study at Tavistock House was more elaborate; a fine large room, opening
into the drawing-room by means of sliding doors.  When the rooms were thrown together they
gave my father a promenade of considerable length for the constant indoor walking which formed
a favorite recreation for him after a hard day’s writing.

At “Gad’s Hill” he first made a study from one of the large spare sleeping rooms of the house,
as the windows there overlooked a beautiful and favorite view of his.  His writing table was
always placed near a window looking out into the open world which he loved so keenly. Afterwards
he occupied for years a smaller room overlooking the back garden and a pretty meadow, but this
he eventually turned into a miniature billiard room, and then established himself, finally,
in the room on the right side of the entrance hall facing the front garden.  It is this room
which Mr. Luke Fildes, the great artist and our own esteemed friend, made famous in his picture
“The Empty Chair,” which he sketched for “The Graphic” after my father’s death.  The writing
table, the ornaments, the huge waste paper basket, which “the master” had made for his own
use, are all there, and, alas, the empty chair!

That he was always in earnest, that he lived with his creations, that their joys and sorrows
were his joys and sorrows, that at times his anguish, both of body and spirit, was poignant
and heart-breaking, I know.  It is ever amazing to me that the hand which drew the pathetic
and beautiful creations, the kindly humored men, the lovely women, the unfortunate little ones,
could portray also with such marvellous accuracy the villainy and craftiness of such characters
as Bumble, Bill Sykes, Pecksniff, Uriah Heep and Squeers. Undoubtedly from his earliest childhood
he had possessed the quick perception, the instinct, which could read in people’s characters
their tendencies toward good and evil, and throughout his life he valued this ability above
literary skill and finish.  Your notices make me very grateful, but very proud, so have a care.”

The impressions which were later converted into motives and plots for his stories he imbibed
often in his earliest childhood.  The crusade against the Yorkshire schools which is waged
in “Nicholas Nickleby,” is the working out of some of these childish impressions.  While he
was at work upon “Nicholas Nickleby,” he sent one of his characteristic letters in reply to
a little boy—Master Hasting Hughes—who wrote to ask him to make some changes in the story.
As some of you may not have read this letter, and as it is so extremely amusing, I shall quote
part of it:

                                                  “DOUGHTY STREET, LONDON.  You
    will say the same, I know—at least I think you will.”

The amount of work which he could accomplish varied greatly at certain times, though in its
entirety it was so immense.  When he became the man of letters, and ceased the irregular, unmethodical
life of the reporter, his mornings were invariably spent at his desk.  The time between breakfast
and luncheon, with an occasional extension of a couple of hours into the afternoon, were given
over to his creations.  The exceptions were when he was taking a holiday or resting, though
even when ostensibly employed in the latter, cessation from story writing meant the answering
of letters and the closer attention to his business matters, so that but little of real rest
ever came into his later life.

While in Italy he gave a fragmentary diary of his daily life in a letter to a friend, and the
routine was there very much what it was at home.

Despite his regularity of working hours, as I have said, the amount of work which my father
accomplished varied greatly.  His manuscripts were usually written upon white “slips,” though
sometimes upon blue paper, and there were many mornings when it would be impossible for him
to fill one of these.  He writes on one occasion: “I am sitting at home, patiently waiting
for Oliver Twist, who has not yet arrived.”  And, indeed, “Oliver” gave him considerable trouble,
in the course of his adventures, by his disinclination to be put upon paper easily.  This slowness
in writing marked more prominently the earlier period of my father’s literary career, though
these “blank days,” when his brain refused to work, were of occasional occurrence to the end.
He was very critical of his own labors, and would bring nothing but the best of his brain to
the art which he so dearly loved—his venerated mistress.  But, on the other hand, the amount
of work which he would accomplish at other times was almost incredible.  During a long sojourn
at Lausanne he writes: “I have not been idle since I have been here.  The history was being
written for ‘Household Words,’ and ‘Bleak House’ also as a serial, so he had both weekly and
monthly work on hand at the same time.”  The history was dedicated: “To my own dear children,
whom I hope it will help, by-and-by, to read with interest larger and better books upon the
same subject.”

My father wrote always with a quill pen and blue ink, and never, I think, used a lead pencil.
His handwriting was considered extremely difficult to read by many people, but I never found
it so.  In his manuscripts there were so many erasures, and such frequent interlineations that
a special staff of compositors was used for his work, but this was not on account of any illegibility
in his handwriting.  The manuscripts are most of them, exhibited at the South Kensington Museum
in “the Forster Collection,” and they all show I think, the extreme care and fastidiousness
of the writer, and his ever-constant desire to improve upon and simplify his original sentence.
His objection to the use of a lead pencil was so great that even his personal memoranda, such
as his lists of guests for dinner parties, the arrangement of tables and menus, were always
written in ink.  For his personal correspondence he used blue note paper, and signed his name
in the left-hand corner of the envelope. After a morning’s close work he was sometimes quite
pre-occupied when he came into luncheon.  Often, when we were only our home party at “Gad’s
Hill,” he would come in, take something to eat in a mechanical way—he never ate but a small
luncheon—and would return to his study to finish the work he had left, scarcely having spoken
a word in all this time. Again, he would come in, having finished his work, but looking very
tired and worn.  Our talking at these times did not seem to disturb him, though any sudden
sound, as the dropping of a spoon, or the clinking of a glass, would send a spasm of pain across
his face.

The sudden, almost instantaneous, popularity of “Pickwick” was known to the world long before
it was realized by its anxious young author.  All the business transactions concerning its
publication were modest to a degree, and the preparations for such a success as came to it
were none.  As he left the room he heard the sick man ejaculate: “Well thank God, Pickwick
will be out in ten days, anyway!”  No young author ever sprang into more sudden and brilliant
fame than “Boz,” and none could have remained more thoroughly unspoiled, or so devoid of egotism
under success.  Our guests, naturally, were full of the sad news, and there was a gloom cast
over everything. We all thought of the sorrow of his two daughters, who were so devoted to
him, and whom his sudden taking away would leave so desolate.  In “The Cornhill Magazine” of
the February following, my father wrote: “I saw Mr. Thackeray for the first time nearly twenty-eight
years ago, when he proposed to become the illustrator of my earliest book.

As a child my father was prevented from any active participation in the sports and amusements
of his boyish companions by his extreme delicacy and frequent illnesses, so that until his
manhood his knowledge of games was gained merely from long hours of watching others while lying
upon the grass.  With manhood, however, came the strength and activity which enabled him to
take part in all kinds of outdoor exercise and sports, and it seemed that in his passionate
enjoyment and participation in those later years he was recompensed for the weary childhood
years of suffering and inability.  Athletic sports were a passion with him in his manhood,
as I have said.  Always fond, in his leisure hours, of companions, he seemed to find his rides
and walks quite incomplete if made alone.

But walking was, perhaps, his chiefest pleasure, and the country lanes and city streets alike
found him a close observer of their beauties and interests.  He was a rapid walker, his usual
pace being four miles an hour, and to keep step with him required energy and activity similar
to his own.  In many of his letters he speaks with most evident enjoyment of this pastime.
In one he writes: “What a brilliant morning for a country walk!  Battledore and shuttlecock
was played constantly in the garden at Devonshire Terrace, though I do not remember my father
ever playing it elsewhere.  The American game of bowls pleased him, and rounders found him
more than expert.  Croquet he disliked, but cricket he enjoyed intensely as a spectator, always
keeping one of the scores during the matches at “Gad’s Hill.”

He was a firm believer in the hygiene of bathing, and cold baths, sea baths and shower baths
were among his most constant practices.  In those days scientific ablution was not very generally
practised, and I am sure that in many places during his travels my father was looked upon as
an amiable maniac with a penchant for washing.  Nobody bothers him, unless they know he is
disposed to be talked to; and I am told he is very comfortable, indeed.”

During the hottest summer months of our year’s residence in Italy, we lived at a little seaport
of the Mediterranean called Albaro.  The bathing here was of the most primitive kind, one division
of the clear, dark-blue pools among the rocks being reserved for women, the other for men,
and as we children were as much at home in the water as any known variety of fish, we used
to look with wonder at the so-called bathing of the Italian women.  They would come in swarms,
beautifully dressed, and with most elaborately arranged heads of hair, but the slightest of
wettings with them was the equivalent of a bath.  In the open bay at Albaro the current was
very strong, and the bathing most dangerous to even an experienced swimmer.  I remember one
morning the terrible fright we were given by an uncle of ours; he swam out into the bay, was
caught by the current of an ebb tide and borne out of reach of our eyes.  A fishing boat picked
him up still alive, though greatly exhausted.  “It was a world of horror and anguish crowded
into four or five minutes of dreadful agitation,” wrote my father, “and to complete the terror
of it the entire family, including the children, were on the rock in full view of it all, crying
like mad creatures.”

He loved animals, flowers and birds, his fondness for the latter being shown nowhere more strongly
than in his devotion to his ravens at Devonshire Terrace. His night was peaceful.  Were they
ravens who took manna to somebody in the wilderness?  At times I hope they were, and at others
I fear they were not, or they would certainly have stolen it by the way. Kate is as well as
can be expected.  The children seem rather glad of it. He bit their ankles, but that was in
play.”  As my father was writing “Barnaby Rudge” at this time, and wished to continue his study
of raven nature, another and a larger “Grip” took the place of “our friend” but it was he whose
talking tricks and comical ways gave my father the idea of making a raven one of the characters
in this book.  My father’s fondness for “Grip” was, however, never transferred to any other
raven, and none of us ever forgave the butcher whom we all held in some way responsible for
his untimely taking off.

But I think his strongest love, among animals, was for dogs.  I remember on one occasion when
she had presented us with a family of kittens, she selected a corner of father’s study for
their home.  She brought them one by one from the kitchen and deposited them in her chosen
corner.  My father called to me to remove them, saying that he could not allow the kittens
to remain in his room.  I did so, but Williamina brought them back again, one by one.  Again
they were removed. The third time, instead of putting them in the corner, she placed them all,
and herself beside them, at my father’s feet, and gave him such an imploring glance that he
could resist no longer, and they were allowed to remain.  As the kittens grew older they became
more and more frolicsome, swarming up the curtains, playing about on the writing table and
scampering behind the book shelves.  But they were never complained of and lived happily in
the study until the time came for finding them other homes.  One of these kittens was kept,
who, as he was quite deaf, was left unnamed, and became known by the servants as “the master’s
cat,” because of his devotion to my father.  He was always with him, and used to follow him
about the garden like a dog, and sit with him while he wrote.  One evening we were all, except
father, going to a ball, and when we started, left “the master” and his cat in the drawing-room
together. “The master” was reading at a small table, on which a lighted candle was placed.
Suddenly the candle went out.  My father, who was much interested in his book, relighted the
candle stroked the cat, who was looking at him pathetically he noticed, and continued his reading.
A few minutes later, as the light became dim, he looked up just in time to see puss deliberately
put out the candle with his paw, and then look appealingly toward him.  This second and unmistakable
hint was not disregarded, and puss was given the petting he craved.  Father was full of this
anecdote when all met at breakfast the next morning.

Among our dogs were “Turk” and “Linda,” the former a beautiful mastiff and the latter a soft-eyed,
gentle, good-tempered St. Bernard.  “Mrs. Bouncer,” a Pomeranian, came next, a tiny ball of
white fluffy fur, who came as a special gift to me, and speedily won her way by her grace and
daintiness into the affections of every member of the household.  My father became her special
slave, and had a peculiar voice for her—as he had for us, when we were children—to which she
would respond at once by running to him from any part of the house when she heard his call.

For a short time I had the care of a mongrel called “Gipsy.”  She was not allowed to enter
any of the family rooms, and used to spend her time lying contentedly on the rug outside the
drawing-room.  One afternoon a friend came from Chatham bringing with him a wonderful poodle
who had been specially invited to perform all his tricks for my father’s enjoyment.  On his
arrival, “Mrs. Bouncer” became furious, and when he began his tricks she went deliberately
into the hall and escorted “Gipsy” into the drawing-room, as much as to say: “I can’t stand
this.  If strange dogs are to be made much of, surely the dogs in the house may be at least
permitted to enter the room.”  She would not look at “Fosco,” the poodle, but sat throughout
his performance with her back toward him, the picture of offended dignity.  Just as soon, however,
as he was fairly out of the house, and not until then, she escorted “Gipsy” back to her rug.
My father was intensely amused by this behaviour of “Bouncer’s” and delighted in telling this
story about her.

“Mrs. Bouncer” was honored by many messages from her master during his absences from home.
There lived in a cottage on the street which led from our house to the town, a cobbler who
used to sit at his window working all day with his dog—a Pomeranian—on the table beside him.
The cobbler, in whom my father became very much interested because of the intelligence of his
Pomeranian companion, was taken ill, and for many months was unable to work.  My father writes:
“The cobbler has been ill these many months.  I remember, however, one pretty pony which was
our delight, and dear old “Toby,” the good sturdy horse which for many years we used at “Gad’s
Hill.”  My father, however, was very fond of horses, and I recall hearing him comment on the
strange fact that an animal “so noble in its qualities should be the cause of so much villainy.”

                                * * * * *

          [Picture: To Miss Dickens’ Pomeranian “Mrs. Bouncer”]

To Miss Dickens’ Pomeranian. “MRS. BOUNCER.”

    Furry, lazy, warm and bright,
    Peeing from her fringe of white,
    She blinks and sleeps both day and night,

                                                            A happy Spitz!

    She need not fear the cruel stick,
    Nor has she learnt a single trick—
    Just deigns her mistress’ hand to lick,

                                                             As she knits.

    She eats, and drinks, and eats again,
    Is never out in wind or rain,—
    Takes many a journey in the train,

                                                           And her admits.

    She has her own coquettish charms,
    Knows no sorrows, no alarms,
    And dozes in her mistress’ arms—

                                                           A sleepy Spitz.

    How small and piquant are her feet—
    Ben Allen’s sister had as neat—
    She looks so saucy, one could beat

                                                            Her into fits.

    Quite ravishing when neat and clean,
    Her cars seem lined with crinoline:
    She rules the house, a haughty queen,

                                                            A saucy Spitz!

    Just tolerates the frequent hug—
    Snoozing all day upon the rug,
    Complacent, philosophic—snug,

                                                       Her paws like mits.

    At dinner—ah! that pleasant Babel!
    Touch her paw beneath the table,
    She’d bite your foot—were she but able—

                                                          A naughty Spitz.

    To find her mistress how she flew!
    Faithful the coming step she knew
    Let others be as brave and true—

                                                            Lords or Wits!

    When SULTAN, TURK, and LINDA fleet
    The lost lov’d Master rushed to meet,
    His kindly voice would always greet

                                                         The little Spitz!

    Alas! so furry, warm, and white,
    From this cold world she took her flight,
    No more on rug, by fireside bright,

                                                        Dear BOUNCER sits.

    PERCY FITZGERALD.

The warm affection which was so characteristic of my father toward people was also directed,
as I have already told, towards animals and birds.  A few further anecdotes occur to me, and
I have ventured to give them here, before proceeding to tell of his visit to America, his readings,
and the, to me, sad story of his last public appearance.

My father’s quick and amusing observation of London birds and their habits, and of their fondness
for “low company,” is full of charm and quaint oddity.  And thus he passes his life. But not
a thing would the little bird do, not a trick would he perform when he got to his new home
in Doughty Street, and would only draw up water in the dark or when he thought no one was looking.
“Dick,” who was only a few weeks old when he came to us, grew to be a very king of birds, and
became in time a most important member of the household.  When I came down first I came to
Gravesend, five miles off. The meadow near our home was a favorite place, and people passing
through the lane, not knowing who he was, or what doing, must have thought him a madman from
his reciting and gesticulation.  The great success of these readings led to many tempting offers
from the United States, which, as time went on, and we realized how much the fatigue of the
readings together with his other work were sapping his strength, we earnestly opposed his even
considering.

                                * * * * *

A farewell banquet was given him in London on the second of November, and on the ninth he sailed.
A large party of us went to Liverpool to see him sail, and with heavy hearts to bid him farewell.
In those days a journey to America was a serious matter, and we felt in our hearts that he
was about to tax his health and strength too cruelly.  And so he did.

Soon after reaching the United States, my father contracted a severe cold which never left
him during his visit, and which caused him the greatest annoyance.  I will give you a few quotations
from his letters to show how pluckily he fought against his ailment and under what a strain
he continued his work. Part I.--Being a Guide to SOUTHERN TUSCANY and the PAPAL STATES. With Maps
and Plans. Post 8vo. 7s.

III.
HANDBOOK FOR CENTRAL ITALY, Part II.--Being a Guide to ROME and its
Environs. With Plan, Post 8vo. (Nearly Ready.)

IV.  He was much impressed on his second visit, as on his first, I remember, with the beauty
of the American women.  “The ladies are remarkably handsome,” he wrote.

                        [Picture: The Empty Chair]

In the autumn of 1869 he began a series of farewell readings, which were another heavy tax
upon his health and strength.  The trouble in his feet increased, and his sufferings from this
cause were very great.  It became necessary at one time for him to have a physician in attendance
upon him at every reading.  But in spite of his perseverance, he became so ill that the readings
had to be stopped.

My father gave his last reading in St. James’ Hall, London, on the fifteenth of March.  The
programme included “The Christmas Carol” and the “Trial” from “Pickwick.”  The hall was packed
by an enormous audience, and he was greeted with all the warmth which the personal affection
felt for the reader inspired.  We all felt very anxious for him, fearing that the excitement
and emotion which must attend upon his public farewell would have a bad effect upon him.  But
it had no immediate result, at any rate, much to our relief.

I do not think that my father ever—and this is saying a great deal—looked handsomer nor read
with more ability than on this, his last appearance.  He returned with us all to “Gad’s Hill,”
very happy and hopeful, under the temporary improvement which the rest and peace of his home
brought him, and he settled down to his new book, “Edwin Drood,” with increased pleasure and
interest.

His last public appearances were in April.  On the fifth he took the chair at the News-venders’
dinner.  On the thirtieth he returned thanks for “Literature” at the Royal Academy banquet.

About 1865 my dear father’s health began to give way, a peculiar affection of the foot which
frequently caused him the greatest agony and suffering, appearing about this time.  Its real
cause—overwork—was not suspected either by his physicians or himself, his vitality seeming
something which could not wear out; but, although he was so active and full of energy, he was
never really strong, and found soon that he must take more in the way of genuine recreation.
It occurred on the ninth of June, a date which five years later was the day of his death.

He wrote describing his experiences: “I was in the only carriage which did not go over into
the stream.  I am keeping very quiet here.”

This letter was written from “Gad’s Hill” four days after the accident. We were spared any
anxiety about our father, as we did not hear of the accident until after we were with him in
London.  With his usual care and thoughtfulness he had telegraphed to his friend Mr. Wills,
to summon us to town to meet him.  How calmly and tenderly he cared for the suffering ones
about him!

But he never recovered entirely from the shock.  More than a year later he writes: “It is remarkable
that my watch (a special chronometer) has never gone quite correctly since, and to this day
there sometimes comes over me, on a railway and in a hansom-cab, or any sort of conveyance,
for a few seconds, a vague sense of dread that I have no power to check.  It comes and passes,
but I cannot prevent its coming.”

I have often seen this dread come upon him, and on one occasion, which I especially recall,
while we were on our way from London to our little country station “Higham,” where the carriage
was to meet us, my father suddenly clutched the arms of the railway carriage seat, while his
face grew ashy pale, and great drops of perspiration stood upon his forehead, and though he
tried hard to master the dread, it was so strong that he had to leave the train at the next
station. He hasn't paid what he owes me."

"Ay, don't mention that or you'll be taken for an accomplice. I've
already burnt the book [61] you lent me. There might be a search and
it would be found. Be careful!"

"Did you say that Isagani is a prisoner?"


Early in May of 1868, we had him safely back with us, greatly strengthened and invigorated
by his ocean journey home, and I think he was never happier at “Gad’s Hill” than during his
last two years there.

During that time he had a succession of guests, and none were more honored, nor more heartily
welcomed, than his American friends.  The first of these to come, if I remember rightly, was
Mr. Longfellow, with his daughters.  My father writes describing a picnic which he gave them;
“I turned out a couple of postilions in the old red jacket of the old Royal red for our ride,
and it was like a holiday ride in England fifty years ago.  Of course we went to look at the
old houses in Rochester, and the old Cathedral, and the old castle, and the house for the six
poor travellers.

“Nothing can surpass the respect paid to Longfellow here, from the Queen downward.  He is everywhere
received and courted, and finds the working men at least as well acquainted with his books
as the classes socially above them.”

Between the comings and goings of visitors there were delightfully quiet evenings at home,
spent during the summer in our lovely porch, or walking about the garden, until “tray time,”
ten o’clock.  When the cooler nights came we had music in the drawing-room, and it is my happiness
now to remember on how many evenings I played and sang all his favorite songs and tunes to
my father during these last winters while he would listen while he smoked or read, or, in his
more usual fashion, paced up and down the room.  I never saw him more peacefully contented
than at these times.

There were always “improvements”—as my father used to call his alterations—being made at “Gad’s
Hill,” and each improvement was supposed to be the last.  As each was completed, my sister—who
was always a constant visitor, and an exceptionally dear one to my father—would have to come
down and inspect, and as each was displayed, my father would say to her most solemnly: “Now,
Katie, you behold your parent’s latest and last achievement.”  These “last improvements” became
quite a joke between them.  I remember so well, on one such occasion, after the walls and doors
of the drawing-room had been lined with mirrors, my sister’s laughing speech to “the master”:
“I believe papa, that when you become an angel your wings will be made of looking-glass and
your crown of scarlet geraniums.”

And here I would like to correct an error concerning myself.  I have been spoken of as my father’s
“favorite daughter.”  If he had a favorite daughter—and I hope and believe that the one was
as dear to him as the other—my dear sister must claim that honor.  I say this ungrudgingly,
for during those last two years my father and I seemed to become more closely united, and I
know how deep was the affectionate intimacy at the time of his death.

The “last improvement”—in truth, the very last—was the building of a conservatory between the
drawing and dining rooms.  My father was more delighted with this than with any previous alteration,
and it was certainly a pretty addition to the quaint old villa.  The châlet, too, which he
used in summer as his study, was another favorite spot at his favorite “Gad’s Hill.”

In the early months of 1870 we moved up to London, as my father had decided to give twelve
farewell readings there.  He had the sanction of the late Sir Thomas Watson to this undertaking,
on condition that there should be no railway journeys in connection with them.  While we were
in London he made many private engagements, principally, I know, on my account, as I was to
be presented that spring.

During this last visit to London, my father was not, however, in his usual health, and was
so quickly and easily tired that a great number of our engagements had to be cancelled.  He
dined out very seldom, and I remember that on the last occasion he attended a very large dinner
party the effort was too much for him, and before the gentlemen returned to the drawing-room,
he sent me a message begging me to come to him at once, saying that he was in too great pain
to mount the stairs.  No one who had watched him throughout the dinner, seeing his bright,
animated face, and listening to his cheery conversation, could have imagined him to be suffering
acute pain. 

7. St. Martin's Place, Trafalgar Square, London.

PARTIES desirous of INVESTING MONEY are requested to examine the Plan
of this Institution, by which a high rate of Interest may be obtained
with perfect Security.

Interest payable in January and July.  He was out with the dogs for the last time on the
afternoon of the sixth of June, when he walked into Rochester for the “Daily Mail.”  My sister,
who had come to see the latest “improvement,” was visiting us, and was to take me with her
to London on her return, for a short visit.  The conservatory—the “improvement” which Katie
had been summoned to inspect—had been stocked, and by this time many of the plants were in
full blossom.  Everything was at its brightest and I remember distinctly my father’s pleasure
in showing my sister the beauties of his “improvement.”

We had been having most lovely weather, and in consequence, the outdoor plants were wonderfully
forward in their bloom, my father’s favorite red geraniums making a blaze of color in the front
garden.  The syringa shrubs filled the evening air with sweetest fragrance as we sat in the
porch and walked about the garden on this last Sunday of our dear father’s life.  My aunt and
I retired early and my dear sister sat for a long while with my father while he spoke to her
most earnestly of his affairs.

As I have already said my father had such an intense dislike for leave-taking that he always,
when it was possible, shirked a farewell, and we children, knowing this dislike, used only
to wave our hands or give him a silent kiss when parting.  But on this Monday morning, the
seventh, just as we were about to start for London, my sister suddenly said: “I must say good-bye
to papa,” and hurried over to the châlet where he was busily writing.  As a rule when he was
so occupied, my father would hold up his cheek to be kissed, but this day he took my sister
in his arms saying: “God bless you, Katie,” and there, “among the branches of the trees, among
the birds and butterflies and the scent of flowers,” she left him, never to look into his eyes
again.

In the afternoon, feeling fatigued, and not inclined to much walking, he drove with my aunt
into Cobham.  There he left the carriage and walked home through the park.  After dinner he
remained seated in the dining-room, through the evening, as from that room he could see the
effect of some lighted Chinese lanterns, which he had hung in the conservatory during the day,
and talked to my aunt about his great love for “Gad’s Hill,” his wish that his name might become
more associated with the place, and his desire to be buried near it.

On the morning of the eighth he was in excellent spirits, speaking of his book, at which he
intended working through the day and in which he was most intensely interested.  He smoked
a cigar in his beloved conservatory, and went back to the châlet.

                                * * * * *

It was not until they were seated at the dinner-table that a striking change in the color and
expression of his face startled my aunt.  Upon her asking him if he were ill, he answered “Yes,
very ill; I have been very ill for the last hour.”  But when she said that she would send for
a physician he stopped her, saying that he would go on with dinner, and afterward to London.

He made an earnest effort to struggle against the seizure which was fast coming over him, and
continued to talk, but incoherently and very indistinctly.  It being now evident that he was
in a serious condition, my aunt begged him to go to his room before she sent for medical aid.
“Come and lie down,” she entreated.  “Yes, on the ground,” he answered indistinctly.  These
were the last words that he uttered.  As he spoke, he fell to the floor.  A couch was brought
into the dining-room, on which he was laid, a messenger was dispatched for the local physician,
telegrams were sent to all of us and to Mr. Beard.  This was at a few minutes after six o’clock.
I was dining at a house some little distance from my sister’s home.  Dinner was half over when
I received a message that she wished to speak to me.  I found her in the hall with a change
of dress for me and a cab in waiting.  Quickly I changed my gown, and we began the short journey
which brought us to our so sadly-altered home. Our dear aunt was waiting for us at the open
door, and when I saw her face I think the last faint hope died within me.

All through the night we watched him—my sister on one side of the couch, my aunt on the other,
and I keeping hot bricks to the feet which nothing could warm, hoping and praying that he might
open his eyes and look at us, and know us once again.  But he never moved, never opened his
eyes, never showed a sign of consciousness through all the long night.  On the afternoon of
the ninth the celebrated London physician, Dr. Russell Reynolds, (recently deceased), was summoned
to a consultation by the two medical men in attendance, but he could only confirm their hopeless
verdict.  Later, in the evening of this day, at ten minutes past six, we saw a shudder pass
over our dear father, he heaved a deep sigh, a large tear rolled down his face and at that
instant his spirit left us.  As we saw the dark shadow pass from his face, leaving it so calm
and beautiful in the peace and majesty of death, I think there was not one of us who would
have wished, could we have had the power, to recall his spirit to earth.

                                * * * * *

I made it my duty to guard the beloved body as long as it was left to us. The room in which
my dear father reposed for the last time was bright with the beautiful fresh flowers which
were so abundant at this time of the year, and which our good neighbours sent to us so frequently.
The birds were singing all about and the summer sun shone brilliantly.

    “And may there be no sadness of farewell
             When I embark.

                                * * * * *

On the morning after he died, we received a very kind visit from Sir John Millais, then Mr.
Millais, R.A. and Mr. Woolner, R.A.  Sir John made a beautiful pencil drawing of my father,
and Mr. Woolner took a cast of his head, from which he afterwards modelled a bust.  The drawing
belongs to my sister, and is one of her greatest treasures.  It is, like all Sir John’s drawings,
most delicate and refined, and the likeness absolutely faithful to what my father looked in death.

                                * * * * *

You remember that when he was describing the illustrations of Little Nell’s death-bed he wrote:
“I want it to express the most beautiful repose and tranquillity, and to have something of
a happy look, if death can.”  Surely this was what his death-bed expressed—infinite happiness
and rest.

As my father had expressed a wish to be buried in the quiet little church-yard at Shorne, arrangements
were made for the interment to take place there.  This intention was, however, abandoned, in
consequence of a request from the Dean and chapter of Rochester Cathedral that his bones might
repose there. Padre Salvi (she grabbed him), were the serenity and sang-froid of heroes, inured to
danger in the performance of their duties, beside whom the Roman senators surprised by the
Gallic invaders were nervous schoolgirls frightened at painted cockroaches.
  To such a tribute to our dear father’s memory we could
make no possible objection, although it was with great regret that we relinquished the plan
to lay him in a spot so closely identified with his life and works.

At midday on the fourteenth of June a few friends and ourselves saw our dear one laid to rest
in the grand old cathedral.  Our small group in that vast edifice seemed to make the beautiful
words of our beautiful burial service even more than usually solemn and touching.  Later in
the day, and for many following days, hundreds of mourners flocked to the open grave, and filled
the deep vault with flowers.  And every year beautiful bright-coloured leaves are sent to us
from across the Atlantic, to be placed with our own flowers on that dear grave; and it is twenty-six
years now since my father died!

                   [Picture: Ex Libris Roxburghe Press]

Footnotes:

{15}  When I write about my aunt, or “Auntie,” as no doubt I may often have occasion to do,
it is of the aunt par excellence, Georgina Hogarth.  She has been to me ever since I can remember
anything, and to all of us, the truest, best and dearest friend, companion and counsellor.
To quote my father’s own words: “The best and truest friend man ever had.”

