[172] This dialogue is not in the least more absurd and selfish than the discourse of many
who now attend on the preaching of the Gospel. If worldly lucre be the honey, they imitate
the bee, and only attend to religion when they can gain by it; they determine to keep what
they have at any rate, and to get more, if it can be done without open scandal-(Scott).

[173] There is a fund of satirical humour in the supposed case here very gravely stated; and
if the author, in his accurate observations on mankind, selected his example from among the
mercenaries that are the scandal of the Established Church, her most faithful friends will
not greatly resent this conduct of a dissenter-(Scott). Dr. Paley would have done well to have
read this chapter in Bunyan before composing some of the chapters in his Moral Philosophy,
and his Sermon on the Utility of Distinctions in the Ministry-(Cheever).

[174] Here is worldly wisdom, infernal logic, and the sophistry of Satan. We hear this language
daily, from money-loving professors, who are destitute of the power of faith. But in opposition
to all this, the Holy Ghost testifies, "The love of money is the root of all evil" (1 Tim.
6:10), and a covetous man is an idolater (Col. 3:5). Hear this, and tremble, ye avaricious
professors. Remember, ye followers of the Lamb, ye are called to "let your conversation be
without covetousness" (Heb, 13:5); your Lord testifies, "Ye cannot serve God and Mammon" (Luke
16:13)--(Mason).

[175] How doth this commend itself to those who make merchandise of souls. What swarms of such
locusts are there in this day!-(J.B.).

[176] If thou art one who tradeth in both ways: God's now, the devil's then; or if delays Thou
mak'st of coming to thy God for life; Or if thy light and lusts are at a strife About who should
be master of thy soul, And lovest one, the other dost control; These prophets tell thee can
which way thou bendest, On which thou frown'st, to which a hand thou lendest.--(Titus 1:16.
See vol. 2, p. 582). O the millstone that God will shortly hang about your neck, when the time
is come that you must be drowned in the sea and deluge of God's wrath!"-(See vol. 2, p. 539).
The answer of Christian, though somewhat rough, is so conclusive as to fortify every honest
mind against all the arguments which the whole tribe of time-serving professors ever did, or
ever can adduce, in support of their ingenious schemes and insidious efforts to reconcile religion
with covetousness and the love of the world, or to render it subservient to their secular interests-(Scott).

[178] Here see the blessedness of being mighty in the Scripture, and the need of that exhortation,
"Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly" (Col. 3:16). For the Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than a two-edged sword; it pierces through all the subtle devices of
Satan, and the cunning craftiness of carnal professors; and divideth asunder the carnal reasonings
of the flesh, and the spiritual wisdom which cometh from above.

Teach me, my God and King, In all things THEE to see,  And what I do in any thing To do it
as for THEE--(Mason).

[179] The Hill Lucre stands somewhat out of the way, but temptingly near. They that will profit
by the mine must turn aside for it (Prov. 28:20, 22). Sir J. Mandeville, in his Travels, says,
that in the Vale Perilous is plenty of gold and silver, and many Christian men go in for the
treasure, but few come out again, for this are strangled of the devil. But good Christian men,
that are stable in the faith, enter without peril-(ED).

[180] Eve expected some sweet and pleasant sight, that would tickle and delight her deluded
fancy; but, behold sin, and the wrath of God, appear to the shaking of her heart; and thus,
even to this day, doth the devil delude the world. His temptations are gilded with sweet and
fine pretences, that men shall be wiser, richer, more in favour, live merrier, fare better,
or something; and by such like things the fools are easily allured. But when their eyes are
opened, instead of seeing what the devil falsely told them, they see themselves involved in
wrath-(Bunyan on Genesis, vol. 2. p. 431).

[181] Here you see the end of double-minded men, who vainly attempt to temper the love of money
with the love of Christ. They go on with their art for a season, but the end makes it manifest
what they were. Take David's advice, "Fret not thyself because of evil-doers" (Psa. 37:1) "Be
not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased" (Psa. 49:16).
But go thou into the sanctuary of thy God, read His Word, and understand the end of these men-(Mason).
Often, as the motley reflexes of my experience move in long processions of manifold groups
before me, the distinguished and world-honoured company of Christian mammonists appear to the
eye of my imagination as a drove of camels heavily laden, yet all at full speed; and each in
the confident expectation of passing through the eye of the needle, without stop or halt, both
beasts and baggage-(Coleridge).

[182] I have sometimes wondered at Lot. His wife looked behind her, and died immediately; but
he would not so much as look behind him to see her. We do not read that he did so much as once
look where she was, or what was become of her. His heart was set upon his journey; and well
it might. There were the mountains before him, and the fire and brimstone behind him. His life
lay at stake; and had he looked behind him he had lost it. Do thou so run, and "remember Lot's
wife"-(Bunyan's Heavenly Footman).

[183] In former times, the purse was carried hanging to a girdle round the waist, and great
dexterity was requisite to cut and carry it away without the knowledge of the owner. Public
executions for theft had so little effect in repressing crime, that thefts were committed in
sight of, or even under the gallows-(ED).

[184] Alas! poor pilgrims, like Peter, you soon forgot the judgment, although your sight of
Lot's wife had so affected your spirits. How soon yon went into By-path Meadow! "wherefore,
let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall" (1 Cor. 10:12)-(ED). (Rev. 22:1),
we may understand clear and comfortable views of God's everlasting love and electing grace.
They could see in it God's glory shining in the face of Jesus Christ, and view their own faces
in it, to their inexpressible joy. This is the river "the streams whereof make glad the city
of God" (Psa. 46:4). The stream which flow from this river of electing love, are vocation to
Christ, justification by Christ, sanctification in Christ, perseverance through Christ, glorification
with Christ, and all joy and peace in believing on Christ. All this these pilgrims now enjoyed,
and all this every fellow-citizen of the saints is called to enjoy in his pilgrimage to Zion.
God hath chosen us in Christ, and blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Him. O how happy,
peaceful, and joyful are pilgrims, when the Spirit takes of the things of Christ, shows them
to us, and blesses us with a sense of interest in all the love of God, and finished salvation
of Jesus!-(Mason).

[186] Blessed state indeed, but of short duration! Too often these desirable consolations of
the Spirit render the Christian careless and unwatchful-(Burder).

[187] A scene to soothe and calm a mind fretted and harassed with the cares and turmoils of
this every-day world; a sunny vista into the future, welcome in a weary hour to the worn spirit,
which longs, as for the wings of the dove, that it may flee away, and be at rest; a glimpse
of Sabbath quietness on earth, given as a pledge and foretaste of the more glorious and eternal
Sabbath of Heaven-(Bernard Barton).

[188] Now had I an evidence, as I thought, of my salvation from Heaven, with many golden seals
thereon, all hanging in my sight. Now could I remember the manifestations of grace with comfort;
and longed that the last day were come, that I might forever be inflamed with the sight, and
joy, and communion with Him, whose soul was made an offering for my sins. Before this I lay
trembling at the mouth of hell; now I had got so far therefrom that I could scarce discern
it. O, thought I, that I were fourscore years old, that I might die quickly, and my soul be
gone to rest--(Grace Abounding, No. 128).

[189] They should have said, It is true this way is not so pleasant as the meadow, but it is
the Lord's way, and the best, doubtless, for us to travel in. A man speedily enters into temptation
when he becomes discontented with God's allotments; then Satan presents allurements, and from
wishing for a better way, the soul goes into a worse. The discontented wish is father to a
sinful will; I wish for a better is followed by, I will have a better, and so the soul goes
astray-(Cheever).

[190] The transition into the by-path is easy, for it lies close to the right way; only you
must get over a stile, that is, you must quit Christ's imputed righteousness, and trust in
your own inherent righteousness; and then you are in By-path Meadow directly-(Mason).

[191] The best caution I can give to others, or take myself, is, not to be guided in matters
of faith by men, but to make the Scriptures our only rule-to look to God for the teaching of
His blessed Spirit, that He may keep our feet from the ways of death-(J.B.).

[192] "There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death"
(Prov. 14:12). Vain confidence is this very way. O how easy do professors get into it! yea,
real pilgrims are prone also to take up with it, owing to that legality, pride, and self-righteousness,
which work in their fallen mature. See the end of it, and tremble; for it leads to darkness,
and ends in death. Lord, humble our proud hearts, and empty us of self-righteousness, pride,
and vain confidence-(Mason).

[193] So, sometimes, real pilgrims take counsel and example of strangers, of worldly men, and
of presumptuous careless persons. Vain confidence is a sad guide anywhere, but especially when
one has wandered out of the way--(Cheever).

[194] If thou be prying into God's secret decrees, or entertain questions about nice curiosities,
thou mayest stumble and fall to thine eternal ruin. Take heed of that lofty spirit, that, devil-like,
cannot be content with its own station--(Heavenly Footman).

[195] The thunder and lightning plainly show that this by-path leads to Sinai, not to Zion.
One step over the stile, by giving way to a self-righteous spirit, and you enter the territories
of despair-(J. B.).

[196] How varied is the experience of a Christian! he had just before overcome Demas, and conquered
By-ends and his companions; is warned by Lot's wife, and now elated with the strength of his
principles; boldness takes the place of caution; he ventures upon an easier path, and is involved
in misery-(ED).

[197] When Bunyan pleaded, so energetically, for the communion of saints, irrespective of water-baptism,
one of his arguments was, "The strongest may sometimes be out of the way." "Receive ye one
another as Christ also received us"-(Vol. 2, p. 610).

[198] Here see, that as Christians are made helpful, so also, through prevailing corruptions,
they are liable to prove hurtful to each other. But observe how grace works: it humbles, it
makes the soul confess and be sorry for its misfortunes. Here is no reviling one another; but
a tender sympathy and feeling concern for each other. O the mighty power of that grace and
truth which came by Jesus Christ! How does it cement souls in the fellowship of love!--(Mason).

[199] How easy it is to trace the path that led the pilgrims astray! To avoid the roughness
of the way, they entered the by-path, that by measures of carnal policy they might avoid afflictions.
Guided by Vain-confidence, they were led from the road, and when this Vain-confidence was destroyed,
they were involved in distress and danger-(Ivimey).

[200] The personification of Despair is one of the most instructive and beautiful portions
of Bunyan's allegory. It appeals either to every man's experience, or to every man's sense
of what may come upon him, on account of sin. It is at once, in some respects, the very gloomiest
and very brightest part of the "Pilgrim's Progress"; for it shows at once to what a depth of
misery sin may plunge the Christian, and also to what a depth the mercy of God in Christ may
reach. The colouring of the picture is extremely vivid, the remembrance of it can never pass
from the mind; and, as in a gallery of beautiful paintings, there may often be one that so
strongly reminds you of your own experience, or that in itself is so remarkably beautiful as
to keep you dwelling upon it with unabated interest; so it is with this delineation of Giant
Despair, among the many admirable sketches of Bunyan's piety and genius. It is so full of deep
life and meaning that you cannot exhaust it, and it is of such exquisite propriety and beauty
that you are never tired with examining it-(Cheever).

[201] Sooner or later Doubting Castle will be the prison, and Giant Despair the keeper of all
those who turn aside from Christ and His righteousness, to trust in any wise in themselves,
and to their righteousness. "Our God is a jealous God," ever jealous of His own glory, and
of the honour of His beloved Son-(Mason). So under the old cut, illustrating the Pilgrims in
Doubting Castle, are these lines--"The pilgrims now, to gratify the flesh, Will seek its ease;
but O! how they afresh Do thereby plunge themselves new griefs into! Who seek to please the
flesh, themselves undo."

[202] Blessed sorrow! how many are there who never tasted the bread of Heaven, nor the water
of life from the wells of salvation; who are strangers to the communion of saints, but do not
feel themselves to be "in evil case," nor have wept under a sense of their wretched state-(ED).

[203] What! such highly-favoured Christians in Doubting Castle? After having traveled so far
in the way of salvation, seen so many glorious things in the way, experienced so much of the
grace and love of their Lord, and having so often proved His faithfulness? Is not this strange?
No; it is common-the strongest Christians are liable to err and get out of the way, and then
to be beset with very great and distressing doubts-(Mason). Despair, like a tremendous giant,
will at last seize on the souls of all unbelievers; and when Christians conclude, from some
misconduct, that they belong to that company, they are exposed to be taken captive by him.
They do not, indeed, fall and perish with Vain-confidence; but for a season they find it impossible
to rise superior to prevailing gloomy doubts bordering on despair, or to obtain the least comfortable
hope of deliverance, or encouragement to use the proper means of seeking it-(Scott).

[204] The wife of Despair is Diffidence, or a distrust of God's faithfulness, and a want of
confidence in His mercy. When a Christian follows such counsels, gloom and horror of mind will
be produced, and life become a burden--(Ivimey).

[205] Bunyan, in one of his delightful treatises of comfort against despair, introduces the
following striking colloquy-"Says Satan, Dost thou not know that thou art one of the vilest
in all the pack of professors? Yes, says the soul, I do. Says Satan, Dost thou not know that
thou hast horribly sinned? Yes, says the soul, I do. Well, saith Satan, now will I come upon
thee with my appeals. Art thou not a graceless wretch? Yes. Hast thou an heart to be sorry
for this wickedness? No, not as I should. And albeit, saith Satan, thou prayest sometimes,
yet is not thy heart possessed with a belief that God will not regard thee? Yes, says the sinner.
Why, then, despair, and go hang thyself, saith the devil. And now we are at the end of the
thing designed and driven at by Satan. But what shall I now do, saith the sinner? I answer,
take up the words of the text against him, "That ye may be able to comprehend the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge-(Saints'
Knowledge of Christ's Love, vol. 2, p. 37).

[206] Giant Despair, it seems, has fits in sunshiny weather; that is, a gleam of hope, from
Christ the Sun of righteousness, sometimes darted into their minds-(Burder).

[207] Satan and his angels will not be wanting to help forward the calamity of the man, who,
in coming to Christ, is beat out of breath, out of heart, out of courage, by wind that blows
him backward. They will not be wanting to throw up his heels in their dirty places, nor to
trouble his head with the fumes of their foul breath. And now it is hard coming to God; Satan
has the art of making the most of every sin; he can make every hair on the head as big as a
cedar. But, soul, Christ can save unto the uttermost! come, man, come. He can do exceeding
abundantly above all we can ask or think!-(Bunyan's Complete Saviour, vol. 1, p. 209). Poor
Christian! What! tempted to destroy thyself? Lord, what is man! But see, despairing souls,
mark the truth of that word, "There hath no temptation taken you but such as is common to man;
but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will,
with the temptation, also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it" (1 Cor. 10:13)-(Mason).

[208] Bunyan had an acute sense of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and no saint had suffered
more severely from despair. One of his great objects, in most of his works, is to arm poor
pilgrims against desponding fears. Thus, in his first treatise on Gospel Truths-"He (the devil)
will be sure to present to thy conscience the most sad sentences of the Scripture; yea, and
set them home with such cunning arguments, that if it be possible he will make thee despair,
and make away thyself as did Judas"-(Vol. 2, p.132). Sin, when seen in its colours, and when
appearing in its monstrous shape and hue, frighteth all mortals out of their wits, away from
God, and, if He stops them not, also out of the world. This is manifest by Cain, Judas, Saul,
and others. They fly from before God, one to one fruit of despair, and one to another-(Pharisee
and Publican, vol. 2, p. 260).

[209] An admirable chain of reasoning, pointing out the evils of despair, is to be found in
the Jerusalem Sinner Saved (vol. 1, pp. 91, 92), under the head Fifthly. "It will make a man
his own tormentor, and flounce and fling like a wild bull in a net (Isa. 51:20). Despair! it
drives a man to the study of his own ruin, and brings him at last to be his own executioner"
(2 Sam. 17:3-5)-(ED).

[210] Alas, how chang'd! Expressive of his mind, His eyes are sunk, arms folded, head reclin'd;
Those awful syllables, hell, death, and sin, Though whisper'd, plainly tell what works within.--(Cowper's
Hope).

"A wounded spirit who can bear?"

[211] To bring the state of Christian's mind before us, read the lamentations of the Psalmist,
when he was a prisoner in Doubting Castle, under Giant Despair, in Psalm 88; and Bunyan's experience,
as narrated in No. 163 of Grace Abounding. Despair swallowed him up, and that passage fell
like a hot thunderbolt upon his conscience, "He was rejected, for he found no place for repentance"-(Ivimey).

[212] Dr. Donne, the celebrated Dean of St. Paul's, had recently published a thesis, to prove
that suicide, under some circumstances, was justifiable. Hopeful answers all his arguments,
and proves it to be the foulest of murders. Bunyan, in his treatise on Justification, volume
1, page 314, thus notices the jailer's intent to commit suicide, when the doors of the prison
in which Paul was confined were thrown open-"Even now, while the earthquake shook the prison,
he had murder in his heart-murder, I say, and that of a high nature, even to have killed his
own body and soul at once"-(ED).

[213] Here is the blessing of a hopeful companion; here is excellent counsel. Let vain professors
say what they may against looking back to past experiences, it is most certainly good and right
so to do; not to encourage present sloth and presumption, but to excite fresh confidence of
hope in the Lord. (1 Sam. 17:37); and says Paul, "We had the sentence of death in ourselves,
that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God which raiseth the dead" (2 Cor. 1:9)-(Mason).

[214] It is a curious picture which Bunyan has drawn of the intercourse between the giant and
his wife Diffidence. They form a very loving couple in their way; and the giant takes no new
step in the treatment of the pilgrims without consulting Mrs. Diffidence over night, so that
the curtain lectures to which we listen are very curious. But Mrs. Diffidence ought rather
to have been called Dame Desperation, or Desperate Resolution; for she seems, if anything,
the more stubborn genius of the two-(Cheever). By these conversations between Diffidence and
Despair, after they had retired to bed, Bunyan perhaps designed to intimate that, as melancholy
persons seldom get rest at night, the gloominess of the season contributes to the distress
of their minds. So Asaph complains: "My sore ran in the night, and ceased not: my soul refused
to be comforted" (Psa. 67:2)-(Ivimey).

[215] How would the awful lesson of the man in the iron cage, at the Interpreter's house, now
recur to poor Christian's mind: "I cannot get out, O now I cannot! I left off to watch, and
am shut up in this iron cage, nor can all the men in the world let me out." Christian's answer
to the despairing pilgrim now soon broke upon his memory: "The Son of the Blessed is very pitiful"-(ED).

[216] What! Pray in the custody of Giant Despair, in the midst of Doubting Castle, and when
their own folly brought them there too? Yes; mind this, ye pilgrims, ye are exhorted, "I will
that men pray everywhere, without doubting" (1 Tim. 2:8). We can be in no place but God can
hear, nor in any circumstance but God is able to deliver us from. And be assured, that when
the spirit of prayer comes, deliverance is nigh at hand-(Mason). Perhaps the author selected
Saturday at midnight for the precise time when the prisoners began to pray, in order to intimate
that the preparation for the Lord's day, which serious persons are reminded to make for its
sacred services, are often the happy means of recovering those that have fallen into sin and
despondency-(Scott).

[217] All at once, by a new revelation, which none but the Saviour could make, Christian finds
the promises. Christ had been watching over his erring disciples-He kept back the hand of Despair
from destroying them-He binds up the broken heart, and healeth all their wounds-(Cheever).
As a key enters all the intricate wards of a lock, and throws back its bolts, so the precious
promises of God in his Word, if turned by the strong hand of faith, will open all the doors
which unbelief and despair have shut upon us-(Burder).

[218] Bunyan was a plain-spoken man, and feared not to offend delicate ears when truth required
honest dealing. In his treatise on the Law and Grace, he says: "And therefore, my brethren,
seeing God, our Father, hath sent us, damnable traitors, a pardon from Heaven, even all the
promises of the Gospel, and hath also sealed to the certainty of it with the heart-blood of
His dear Son, let us not be daunted"-(Vol. 1, p. 562).

[219] Precious promise! The promises of God in Christ are the life of faith, and the quickeners
of prayer. O how oft do we neglect God's great and precious promises in Christ Jesus, while
doubts and despair keep us prisoners! So it was with these pilgrims; they were kept under hard
bondage of soul for four days. Hence see what it is to grieve the Spirit of God: for He only
is the Comforter: and if He withdraws His influences, who or what can comfort us? Though precious
promises are revealed in the Word, yet we can get no comfort from them but by the grace of
the Spirit-(Mason).

[220] It was Sabbath morning. The sun was breaking over the hills, and fell upon their pale,
haggard countenances, it was to them a new creation; they breathed the fresh, reviving air,
and brushed, with hasty steps, the dew from the untrodden grass, and fled the nearest way to
the stile, over which they had wandered. They had learned a lesson by suffering, which nothing
else could have taught them, and which would remain with them to the day of their death--(Cheever).
The experience of these "three or four" dreadful days is specially recorded in Grace Abounding,
(Nos. 261-263). The key which opened the doors in Doubting Castle was these words, applied
with power to his soul, "I must go to Jesus," in connection with Hebrews 12:22-24. Of the first
night of his deliverance he says, "I could scarcely lie in my bed for joy and peace, and triumph
through Christ"-(ED).

[221] They fell to devising what soldiers, and how many, Diabolus should go against Mansoul
with, to take it; and after some debate, it was concluded that none were more fit for that
expedition than an army of terrible DOUBTERS. They therefore concluded to send against Mansoul
an army of sturdy doubters. Diabolus was to beat up his drum for 20 or 30,000 men in the Land
of Doubting, which land lieth upon the confines of a place called Hell-gate Hill. Captain Rage
was over the election doubters; his were the red colours; his standard-bearer was Mr. Destructive;
and the great red dragon he had for his scutcheon. Captain Fury was over the vocation doubters;
his standard-bearer was darkness; his colours were pale; and his scutcheon the fiery flying
serpent. Captain Damnation was over the grace doubters; his were the red colours; Mr. No-life
bore them; his scutcheon was the Black Den, &c.-(Holy War).

[222] When offending Christians are brought to deep repentance, renewed exercises of lively
faith, and willing obedience in those self-denying duties which they had declined, the Lord
"restores to them the joy of His salvation," and their former comforts become more abundant
and permanent. The Delectable Mountains seem intended to represent those calm seasons of peace
and comfort-(Scott).

[223] O how many professors grow weary of the way, fall short, and fail of coming to the end!
Though the way be too far, too strait, and too narrow for many who set out, and never hold
out to the end; yet all who are begotten by the Word of grace, and born of the Spirit of truth,
shall persevere to the end, being kept by the mighty power of God, through faith, unto eternal
salvation (1 Peter 1:5)-(Mason).

[224] There is in this laconic description of the homely dreamer a richness of beauty which
no efforts of the artist can adequately portray; and in the concise dialogue of the speakers,
a simple sublimity of eloquence which any commentary could only weaken. While our feelings
are excited by this description, we cannot but remember that "eye hath not seen nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man: the things which God hath prepared for them that
love Him"-(Bernard Barton).

[225] Precious names! What is a pilgrim without knowledge? What is head-knowledge without heart-experience?
And watchfulness and sincerity ought to attend us every step. When these graces are in us and
abound, they make delectable mountains indeed-(Mason).

[226] Fine-spun speculations and curious reasonings lead men from simple truth and implicit
faith into many dangerous and destructive errors-(Mason).

[227] It is well for us to be much on this mount. We have constant need of caution. Take heed
and beware, says our Lord.

[228] O the unthought-of imaginations, frights, fears, and terrors, that are effected by a
thorough application of guilt, yielding to desperation! This is the man that hath his dwelling
among the tombs with the dead, that is always crying out, and cutting himself with stones (Mark
5:3). But all in vain; desperation will not comfort him, the old covenant will not save him-(Grace
Abounding, No. 185).

[229] Some retain the name of Christ, and the notion of Him as a Saviour; but cast Him off
in the very things wherein the essential parts of His sacrifice, merits, and priesthood consist.
In this lies the mystery of their iniquity. They dare not altogether deny that Christ doth
save His people, as a Priest; but then their art is to confound His offices, until they jostle
out of doors the merit of His blood and the perfection of His justifying righteousness. Such
draw away the people from the cross (put out their eyes), and lead them among the infidels-(Bunyan's
Israel's Hope, vol. 1, p. 615).

[230] Probably to guard pilgrims against the Popish doctrine of auricular confession-(ED).

[231] Those seem to shun the common broad road; but having only the mark of religion, while
their hearts are not right with God, are as effectually ruined as the most profligate and open
offenders-(Burder). 6:6). It is hard to say how far or how long a person may carry on a profession,
and yet fall away, and come short of the kingdom at last. This should excite to diligence,
humility, and circumspection, ever looking to Jesus to keep us from falling-(Mason).

[233] It reflects the highest credit on the diffidence of Bunyan's genius-a genius as rich
in its inventions, and as aspiring in its imaginative flights, as ever poet could possess or
lay claim to-that, after such an exordium, he should have made no effort minutely to describe
what was in its own splendour of glory indescribable. How beautifully, without exciting any
disappointment in a reader of taste, feeling, and judgment, does he, by a few artless words,
render most impressive and sublime, what more elaborate description could only have made confused
and unsatisfactory. Nothing can be more admirable than this brief and indistinct report of
the perspective glass, it cannot offend the most fastidious taste, yet leaves scope for the
exercise of the most ardent and aspiring imagination-(Bernard Barton). [234] Such mountains
round about this house do stand. As one from thence may see the Holy Land.--(Bunyan's House
of God, vol. 2, p. 579).

[235] After going through the conflict with Apollyon, the Valley of the Shadow of Death, the
scenes in Vanity Fair, and the dread experience of the pilgrims in Giant Despair's Castle,
it is well to note what a gallery of solemn REALITIES is here, what a system of Divine truth,
commending itself to all men's consciences. It is not so much the richness of imagination,
nor the tenderness of feeling here exhibited, nor the sweetness and beauty of the imagery,
with which this book is filled, as it is the presence of these REALITIES that constitutes the
secret of its unbounded power over the soul. Walk up and down in this rich and solemn gallery.
How simple are its ornaments! How grave, yet beautiful, its architecture! Amidst all this deep,
serene beauty to the imagination, by how much deeper a tone do these pictures speak to the
inner spiritual being of the soul! When you have admired the visible beauty of the paintings,
turn again to seek their meaning in that light from eternity by which the artist painted them,
and by which he would have all men examine their lessons, and receive and feel the full power
of their colouring. In this light, the walls of this gallery seem moving with celestial figures
speaking to the soul. They are acting the drama of a life which, by most men, is only dreamed
of; but the drama is the reality, and it is the spectators only who are walking in a vain show-(Cheever).

[236] This is the first break in the dream, and, doubtless, had an important meaning. Perhaps
the pilgrimage may be divided into four parts: 1. The convert flying from the wrath to come;
instructed at the Interpreter's house; relieved of his burden at the cross; ascends the Hill
Difficulty; overcomes his timidity; and, 2. Enters a church at the House Beautiful; and, as
a private member, continues his journey, until, 3. He meets Evangelist, near Vanity Fair, and
is found fit to become an itinerant preacher; in which calling he suffers persecution, and
obtains that fitness which enables him, 4. On the Delectable Mountains, to enter upon the responsible
duties of a ministering elder or pastor of a church, and is ordained by Knowledge, Experience,
Watchful, and Sincere. Is this commencement of his public labours the important point when
the author "awoke from his dream"?-(ED).

[237] This country we are all born in; all are ignoramuses by nature. Some live long in the
country of Conceit, and many end their days in it. Are you come out of it? So was Ignorance;
but he breathed his native air. So long as a sinner thinks he can do anything towards making
himself righteous before God, his name is Ignorance; he is full of self-conceit, and destitute
of the faith of Christ-(Mason).

[238] Now, is it not very common to hear professors talk at this rate? Yes, and many who make
a very high profession too; their hopes are plainly grounded upon what they are in themselves,
and how they differ from their former selves and other sinners, instead of what Christ is to
us and what we are in Christ. But the profession of such is begun with an ignorant, whole,
self-righteous heart; it is continued in pride, self-seeking, and self-exalting, and ends in
awful disappointment. For such are called by our Lord thieves and robbers; they rob Him of
the glory of His grace and the gift of His imputed righteousness-(Mason).

[239] It is best not to converse much at once with persons of this character, but, after a
few warnings, to leave them to their reflections; for their self-conceit is often cherished
by altercations, in which they deem themselves very expert, however disgusting their discourse
may prove to others-(Scott).

[240] An awful scene was beheld by the pilgrims. A professor, named Turn-away, bound with seven
cords, was led by devils to the by-way to hell. Let everyone inquire, Who is this wanton professor?-He
who discovers a trifling, worldly, wanton spirit, dreads not the appearance of evil, complies
with the fashions of the carnal world, and associates with the enemies of our Lord; and, in
time, becomes a damnable apostate. Lord, keep us from such a beginning and such an end!-(Burder).

[241] The "very dark lane" in which "Turn-away" was met by the pilgrims, represents the total
darkness of the minds of such wicked professors; for "if the light that is in them be darkness,
how great is that darkness!" When their characters are made manifest, they are ashamed to look
their former pious friends in the face. "The wicked shall be holden with the cords of his sins"
(Prov. 5:22)-(Ivimey).

[242] O beware of a light trifling spirit and a wanton behaviour. It is often the forerunner
of apostasy from God. It makes one tremble to hear those who profess to follow Christ in the
regeneration, crying, What harm is there in this game and the other diversion? The warmth of
love is gone, and they are become cold, dead, and carnal. O how many instances of these abound!-(Mason).

[243] In times of persecution, loose professors are driven down Dead Man's Lane to Broad-way
Gate; thus Satan murders the souls of men, by threatening to kill their bodies. Believers that
are weak in faith are betrayed into sinful compliances; they sleep when they ought to watch,
they conceal or deny their profession, and thus contract guilt; Faint-heart assaults them,
Mistrust plunders them, and Guilt beats them down-(Scott).

[244] The fly in the spider's net is the emblem of the soul in such a condition. If the soul
struggleth, Satan laboureth to hold it down. If it make a noise, he bites it with blasphemous
mouth; insomuch that it must needs die at last in the net, if the Lord Jesus help not. Believing
is sure sweating work. Only strong faith can make Satan flee. O the toil of a gracious heart
in this combat, if faith be weak! The man can get no higher than his knees, till an arm from
Heaven help him up-(Bunyan's Holy City).

[245] When Bunyan was imprisoned, his sentence was-To be transported, if he did not conform
in three months; and then, if found as a Nonconformist, in this country, he should be hung.
Determined at all hazards not to be a traitor to his God, he anticipated being hung; and was
anxious, in such a cause, to meet death with firmness. When his fears prevailed, he dreaded
lest he should make but a scrabbling shift to clamber up the ladder-(See Grace Abounding, No. 334).

[246] Where there is a faint heart in God's cause, and mistrust of God's truths, there will
be guilt in the conscience, and but little faith. These rogues will prevail over, and rob such
souls of the comforts of God's love and of Christ's salvation. By his jewels, we may understand
those radical graces of the Spirit-faith, hope, and love. By his spending-money, the sealing
and earnest of the Spirit in his heart (2 Cor. 1:22). Of this Divine assurance, and the sense
of the peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, he was robbed; so that, though he still went on in
the ways of the Lord, yet he dragged on but heavily and uncomfortably-(Mason).

[247] Bunyan throws great light upon this subject in his Christ a Complete Saviour, (vol. 1,
p. 215)-"We are saved by Christ; brought to glory by Christ; and all our works are no otherwise
made acceptable to God, but by the person and excellencies of Christ. Therefore, whatever the
jewels are, and the bracelets and the pearls that thou shalt be adorned with, as a reward of
service done to God in this world, for them thou must thank Christ, and, before all, confess
that He was the meritorious cause thereof."

[248] What was this good thing? His precious faith, whose author, finisher, and object is precious
Jesus. And where he gives this precious gift of faith, though it be but little, even as a grain
of mustard-seed, not all the powers of earth and hell can rob the heart of it. Christ prayed
for His disciple that his faith should not fail, or be totally lost; therefore, though Peter
lost his comforts for a season, yet not his faith totally, not his soul eternally; for, says
Jesus, of all his dear flock, yea, of those of little faith too, None shall pluck them out
of My hand. There is one blessed security, not in ourselves, but in our Lord-(Mason).

[249] Hope, love, humility, meekness, patience, longsuffering, compassion, and mercy, are gracious
dispositions wrought in the heart by the Holy Ghost. These are the believer's jewels; and it
is his duty to keep them clean, that their beauty and lustre may be apparent-(Andronicus).

[250] Little-faith cannot come all the way without crying. So long as its holy boldness lasts,
so long it can come with peace, but it will go the rest of the way with crying-(Bunyan's Come
and Welcome, vol. 1, p. 288).

[251] Bunyan shows the difference between "his spending-money," or that treasure which the
Christian carries in his earthen vessel, and his jewels, in Grace Abounding (No. 232)-"It was
glorious to me to see His [Christ's] exaltation. Now I could look from myself to Him, and should
reckon that all those graces of God that now were green in me, were yet but like those cracked
groats and fourpence-halfpennies, (Irish sixpences, which, in the dearth of silver coin in
England, were made current at fourpence-halfpenny-ED), that rich men carry in their purses,
when their GOLD is in their trunks at home. Oh! I saw that my gold was in my trunk at home,
in Christ my Lord and Saviour. Now, Christ was all; all my wisdom, all my righteousness, all
my sanctification, and all my redemption."

[252] Hopeful was not the first pilgrim who has been "almost made angry" while holding a friendly
debate upon that highly-important subject, the doctrine of the saints' final perseverance.
Pilgrims ought to debate upon those subjects without being angry-(ED).

[253] Hopeful here expresses himself as if he had read Bunyan on Christ's Love-"But to fear
man is to forget God. He taketh part with them that fear HIM; so that we may boldly say, "The
Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me" (Heb. 13:6). Would it not
be amazing to see a man encompassed with chariots, and horses, and weapons of defence, yet
afraid of being sparrow-blasted, or overrun by a grasshopper?"-(Vol. 2, p. 13).

[254] Who can stand in the evil day of temptation, when beset with Faint-heart, Mistrust, and
Guilt, backed by the power of their master, Satan? No one, unless armed with the whole armour
of God; and even then, the power of such infernal foes makes it a hard fight to the Christian.
But this is our glory, the Lord shall fight for us, and we shall hold our peace. We shall be
silent as to ascribing any glory to ourselves, knowing our very enemies are part of ourselves,
and that we are more than conquerors over all these (only) through HIM who loved us (Rom. 8:37)-(Mason).

[255] "One Great-grace"; a believer, or minister, who having honourably stood his ground, endeavours
to restore the fallen. The remembrance of such, helps to drive away despondency, and inspires
the trembling penitent with hope of mercy-(Scott).

[256] "I trow"; I imagine or believe: nearly obsolete-(ED).

[257] Now here you see what is meant by Great-grace, who is so often mentioned in this book,
and by whom so many valiant things were done. We read, "With great power the apostles gave
witness of the resurrection of Jesus." Why was it? Because "great grace was upon them all"
(Acts 4:33). So you see all is of grace, from first to last, in salvation. If we do great things
for Christ, yet, not unto us, but unto the great grace of our Lord, be all the glory-(Mason).

[258] If we saw our own weakness, we should never court dangers, nor run in the way of temptation;
yet, if our temptations be ever so sharp and strong, and our dangers ever so great, if the
Lord is our strength, we need not fear-(J. B.).

[259] From this sweet and edifying conversation, learn not to think more highly of yourself
than you ought to think; but to think soberly, according to the measure of faith which God
hath dealt to you (Rom. 12:3). Now, it is of the very essence of faith to lead us out of all
self-confidence and vain vaunting. For we know not how soon Faint-heart, Mistrust, and Guilt
may spring up in us, and rob us of our comforts, and spoil our joys-(Mason).

[260] Instead of saying, "Though all men deny thee, yet will not I," it behooves us to use
all means of grace diligently, and to be instant in prayer, that the Lord Himself may protect
us by His power, and animate us by His presence, and then only shall we be enabled to overcome
both the fear of man and the temptations of the devil-(Scott).

[261] But how contrary to this is the walk and conduct of some who profess to be pilgrims,
and yet can willfully and deliberately go upon the devil's ground, and indulge themselves in
carnal pleasures and sinful diversions! Such evidently declare in plain language, that they
desire not the presence of God, but that He should depart from them; but a day will come which
will bring on terrible reflections of mind for such things-(Mason).

[262] Mr. Ivimey's opinion is, that this "way which put itself into their way," and the flatterer,
relates to Antinomianism. Of this I can form no accurate judgment, never having met with an
Antinomian, or one who professed to be against the law of God. I have met with those who consider
that believers are bound to prefer the law of God as revealed by Jesus Christ, in Matthew 22:37-40,
to be their rule of life, instead of limiting themselves to the law of God as given by Moses,
in Exodus 20; but it has been for this reason, that the law proclaimed by Christ unites in
it the law given by Moses, and ALL the law and the prophets. This law, as given by Christ,
is in a few words of beautiful simplicity, which can neither be misunderstood nor be forgotten.
Mason says, "It is plain the author means the way of self-righteousness," into which the flatterer
enticed the pilgrims, out of the Scripture highway to Heaven, in the righteousness of Christ.
When ministers differ, private Christians must think for themselves. My judgment goes with
Mr. Mason-(ED). This way, which seemed as straight as the right way, and in entering on which
there was no stile to be passed, must denote some very plausible and gradual deviation from
the simplicity of the Gospel, in doctrine or practice. If, in such a case, instead of a personal
prayerful searching the Scripture, we rely upon the opinion of our friends, and listen to the
flatterer, we shall certainly be misled-(Scott).

[263] Luther was wont to caution against the white devil as much as the black one; for Satan
transforms himself into an angel of light, and his ministers as ministers of righteousness
(2 Cor. 11:14, 15). And how do they deceive souls? By flattery. Leading poor sinners into a
fine notion of some righteous character they have in themselves, what great advances they have
made, and what high attainments they have arrived to, even to be perfect in themselves, to
be free from sin, and full of nothing but love. These are black men clothed in white-(Mason).

[264] By this shining one understand the loving Lord the Holy Ghost, the leader and guide of
Christ's people. When they err and stray from Jesus the way, and are drawn from Him as the
truth, the Spirit comes with His rod of convic-tion and chastisement, to whip souls for their
self-righteous pride and folly, back to Christ, to trust wholly in Him, to rely only on Him,
and to walk in sweet fellowship with Him. So he acted by the Galatian church, which was flattered
into a notion of self-righteousness, and self-justification. So David, when he found himself
nearly lost, cries out, "He restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the paths of righteousness
for His name's sake" (Psa. 23:3)-(Mason). The devil, in his attempts after our destruction,
maketh use of the most suitable means. The serpent, Adam knew, was subtle, therefore Satan
useth him, thereby to catch this goodly creature, man. Hereby the devil least appeared [this
fine-spoken man], and least appearing, the temptation soonest took the tinder-(Bunyan on Genesis,
vol. 2, p. 428).

[265] The backsliding of a Christian comes through the overmuch persuading of Satan and lust;
that the man was mistaken, and that there was no such horror in the things from which he fled;
nor so much good in the things to which he hosted. Turn again, fool, says the devil. I wonder
what frenzy it was that drove thee to thy heels, and that made thee leave so much good behind
thee as other men find in the lusts of the flesh and the good of the world. As for the law,
and death, and the day of judgment, they are but mere scarecrows, set up by politic heads,
to keep the ignorant in subjection. Well, he goes back, fool as he is, conscience sleeps, and
flesh is sweet; but, behold, he again sees his own nakedness-he sees the law whetting his axe-the
world is a bubble. He also smells the brimstone which begins to burn within him. Oh! saith
he, I am deluded! "Have mercy upon me, O God!"-(Christ a Complete Saviour, vol. 1, p. 223).

[266] A wicked man, though he may hector it at times with his proud heart, as though he feared
neither God nor hell; yet again, at times, his soul is even drowned with terrors. If one knew
the wicked, when they are under warm convic-tions, then the bed shakes on which they be; then
the proud tongue doth falter in their mouth, and their knees knock one against another. Then
their conscience stares, and roars, and tears, and arraigns them. O! none can imagine what
fearful plights a wicked man is in at times!-(Bunyan's Desires of the Righteous, vol. 1, p. 746).

[267] On the Delectable Mountains, the pilgrims had a sight of the Celestial City. No matter
if it were but a glimpse; still they saw it, they really saw it, and the remembrance of that
sight never left them. There it was in glory! Their hands trembled, their eyes were dim with
tears, but still that vision was not to be mistaken. There, through the rifted clouds, for
a moment, the gates of pearl were shining, the jasper walls, the endless domes, the jeweled
battlements! The splendour of the city seemed to pour, like a river of light, down upon the
spot where they were standing--(Cheever).

[268] See how we are surrounded with different enemies! No sooner have they escaped the self-righteous
flatterer, but they meet with the openly profane and licentious mocker-aye, and he set out,
and went far too; yea, further than they. But, behold, he has turned his back upon all; and
though he had been 20 years a seeker, yet now he proves, that he has neither faith nor hope,
but ridicules all as delusion. Awful to think of! O what a special mercy to be kept believing
and persevering, and not regarding the ridicule of apostates!-(Mason).

[269] "To round"; to be open, sincere, candid. "Maister Bland answered flatly and roundly"-(Fox's
Book of Martyrs).

[270] Upon the declaration for liberty of conscience, the church for a season was free from
persecution. It was like enchanted ground; and some, who had been watchful in the storm, became
careless and sleepy in this short deceitful calm-(ED).

[271] Ah, these short naps for pilgrims! The sleep of death, in the enchanted air of this world,
usually begins with one of these short naps-(Cheever).

[272] The Enchanted Ground may represent worldly prosperity; agreeable dispensations succeeding
long-continued difficulties. This powerfully tends to produce a lethargic frame of mind; the
man attends to religious duties more from habit, than from delight in the service of God. No
situation requires so much watchfulness. Other experiences resemble storms, which keep a man
awake; this is a treacherous calm, which lulls him to sleep-(Scott).

[273] O Christian, beware of sleeping on this enchanted ground! When all things go easy, smooth,
and well, we are prone to grow drowsy in soul. How many are the calls in the Word against spiritual
slumber! and yet how many professors, through the enchanting air of this world, are fallen
into the deep sleep of formality! Be warned by them to cry to thy Lord to keep thee awake to
righteousness, and vigorous in the ways of thy Lord-(Mason).

[274] Here you see, as our Lord says, "It is the Spirit who quickeneth, the flesh profiteth
nothing" (John 6:63). Our carnal nature is so far from profiting in the work of conversion
to Christ, that it is at enmity against Him, and opposes the Spirit's work in showing us our
want of Him, and bringing us to Him. Man's nature and God's grace are two direct opposites.
Nature opposes, but grace subdues nature, and brings it to submission and subjection. Are we
truly convinced of sin, and converted to Christ? This is a certain and sure evidence of it-we
shall say from our hearts, Not unto us, nor unto any yieldings and compliances of our nature,
free-will, and power, but unto Thy name, O Lord, be all the glory. For it is by Thy free, sovereign,
efficacious grace, we are what we are. Hence, see the ignorance, folly, and pride of those
who exalt free-will, and nature's power, &c. Verily they do not know themselves, even as they
are known-(Mason).

[275] Not the evil of sin in the sight of God, but the remorse and fear of wrath, with which
the convinced sinner is oppressed, and from which he, at times, seeks relief by means which
exceedingly increase his actual guilt. Nothing but a free pardon, by faith in the atoning sacrifice
of Christ, can take away guilt; but the uneasiness of a man's conscience may be for a time
removed by various expedients-(Scott).

[276] In modern editions, this has been altered to "sin enough in one day." But in any period
of time, selecting that duty in the discharge of which we have felt the most pure, there has
been a mixture of sin. "For there is not a day, nor a duty; not a day that thou livest, nor
a duty that thou dost, but will need that mercy should come after to take away thy iniquity"-(Bunyan's
Saints' Privilege, vol. 1, p. 679). These are solemn and humbling reflections-(ED).

[277] Thus, you see, in conversion, the Lord does not act upon us as though we were mere machines.
No, we have understanding; He enlightens it. Then we come to a sound mind; we think right,
and reason justly. We have wills; what the understanding judges best, the will approves, and
then the affections follow after; and thus we choose Christ for our Saviour, and glory only
in His righteousness and salvation. When the heavenly light of truth makes manifest what we
are, and the danger we are in, then we rationally flee from the wrath to come, to Christ the
refuge set before us-(Mason).

[278] Pray mind this. The grand object of a sensible sinner is righteousness. He has it not
in himself; this he knows. Where is it to be found? In Christ only. This is a revealed truth;
and without faith in this, every sinner must be lost. Consider, it is at the peril of your
soul that you reject the righteousness of Christ; and do not believe that God imputeth it without
works for the justification of the ungodly. O ye stout-hearted, self-righteous sinners, ye
who are far from righteousness, know this and tremble!-(Mason).

[279] The true nature of faith is to believe and rest upon the Word of truth, and wait for
the promised comfort. That faith which is the gift of God leads the soul to wait upon and cry
to God, and not to rest till it has some blessed testimony from God of interest in the love
and favour of God in Christ Jesus. But O how many professors rest short of this!-(Mason).

[280] As I thought my case most sad and fearful, these words did with great power suddenly
break in upon me, "My grace is sufficient for thee," three times together. O! methought every
word was a mighty word for me; as My, and grace, and sufficient, and for thee; they were then,
and sometimes are still, far bigger than others be-(Grace Abounding, No. 206).

[281] The Lord's dealings with his children are various, but all lead to the same end; some
are shaken with terror, while others are more gently drawn, as with cords of love. In these
things believers should not make their experiences standards one for another; still there is
a similarity in their being brought to the same point of rejecting both sinful and righteous
self, and believing on the Lord Jesus Christ as their complete salvation-(Andronicus).

[282] Christ did not appear to Hopeful's senses, but to his understanding; and the words spoken
are no other than texts of Scripture taken in their genuine meaning-not informing him, as by
a new revelation, that his sins were pardoned, but encouraging him to apply for this mercy,
and all other blessings of salvation-(Scott).

[283] Since the dear hour that brought me to Thy foot, And cut up all my follies by the root,
I never trusted in an arm but Thine, Nor hoped, but in Thy righteousness Divine. My prayers
and alms, imperfect and defiled, Were but the feeble efforts of a child. Howe'er perform'd,
it was their brightest part That they proceeded from a grateful heart. Cleans'd in Thine own
all-purifying blood, Forgive their evil, and accept their good. I cast them at Thy feet--my
only plea Is what it was, DEPENDENCE UPON THEE!--(Cowper).

[284] Not governed by the Word of God, but by his own will, his grounds of confidence for salvation
unfitted him for Christian fellowship, unless he happened to fall in with a man who had imbibed
his own notions-(ED).

[285] The desire of Heaven-when its nature is not understood, the proper means of obtaining
it are neglected, other objects are preferred to it-is no proof that a man will be saved. The
expression, "The desire of grace is grace," is very fallacious. But to hunger and thirst for
God, and His righteousness, His favour, image, and service, as the supreme good, so that no
other object can satisfy the heart, is grace indeed, and shall be completed in glory-(Scott).

[286] Real Christians are often put to a stand, while they find and feel the workings of all
corruptions and sins in their nature; and when they hear others talk so highly of themselves,
how full their hearts are of love to God, and of good motions, without any complainings of
their hearts. But all this is from the ignorance of their own hearts; and pride and self-righteousness
harden them against feeling its desperate wickedness-(Mason).

[287] I saw that it was not my good frame of heart that made my righteousness better, nor yet
my bad frame that made my righteousness worse; for my righteousness was Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday, and today, and forever (Heb. 13:8)-(Grace Abounding, No. 229).

[288] Here we see how naturally the notion of man's righteousness blinds his eyes to, and keeps
his heart from believing, that Christ's personal righteousness alone justifies a sinner in
the sight of God; and yet such talk bravely of believing, but their faith is only fancy. They
do not believe unto righteousness; but imagine they have now, or shall get, a righteousness
of their own, some how or other. Awful delusion!-(Mason).

[289] Here is the very essence of that delusion which works by a lie, and so much prevails,
and keeps up an unscriptural hope in the hearts of so many professors. Do, reader, study this
point well; for here seems to be a show of scriptural truth, while the rankest poison lies
concealed in it. For it is utterly subversive of, and contrary to, the faith and hope of the
Gospel-(Mason).

[290] The way of being justified by faith for which Ignorance pleads may well be called "fanatical,"
as well as "false"; for it is nowhere laid down in Scripture; and it not only changes the way
of acceptance, but it takes away the rule and standard of righteousness, and substitutes a
vague notion, called sincerity, in its place, which never was, nor can be, defined with precision-(Scott).

[291] Justification before God comes, not by imitating Christ as exemplary in morals, but through
faith in His precious blood. To feed on Jesus is by respecting Him as made of God a curse for
our sin. I have been pleased with observing, that none of the signs and wonders in Egypt could
deliver the children of Israel thence, until the lamb was slain--(Bunyan on Justification,
vol. 2, p. 330).

[292] Under these four heads, we have a most excellent detection of a presumptive and most
dangerous error which now greatly prevails, as well as a scriptural view of the nature of true
faith, and the object it flies on wholly and solely for justification before God, and acceptance
with God. Reader, for thy soul's sake, look to thy foundation. See that thou build upon nothing
in self, but all upon that sure foundation which God hath laid, even his beloved Son, and his
perfect righteousness-(Mason).

[293] This, by all natural men, is deemed the very height of enthusiasm; but a spiritual man
knows its blessedness, and rejoices in its comfort. It is a close question. What may we understand
by it? Doubtless, what Paul means when he says, "It pleased God to reveal His Son in me," (Gal.
1:15, 16): that is, he had such an internal, spiritual, experimental sight, and knowledge of
Christ, and of salvation by Him, that his heart embraced Him, his soul cleaved to Him, his
spirit rejoiced in Him; his whole man was swallowed up with the love of Him, so that he cried
out in the joy of his soul, This is my Beloved and my Friend-my Saviour, my God, and my Salvation.
He is the chief of ten thousand, and altogether lovely. We know nothing of Christ savingly,
comfortably, and experimentally, till He is pleased thus to reveal Himself to us (Matt. 11:27).
This spiritual revelation of Christ to the heart is a blessing and comfort agreeable to, and
consequent upon, believing on Christ, as revealed outwardly in the Word. Therefore, every believer
should wait, and look, and long, and pray for it. Beware you do not despise it; if you do,
you will betray your ignorance of spiritual things, as Ignorance did-(Mason).

[294] Many of these revelations appear in the Grace Abounding, as "that scripture fastened
on my heart" (No. 201); "that sentence darted in upon me" (No. 204); "these words did with
great power break in upon me" (No. 206); "suddenly this sentence fell upon my soul" (No. 229);
and many others-(ED).

[295] That sinner is not thoroughly awakened, who does not see his need of Christ's righteousness
to be imputed to him. Nor is he quickened, who has not fled to Christ as "the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believeth" (Rom. 10:4)-(Mason).

[296] Ignorant professors cannot keep pace with spiritual pilgrims, nor can they relish the
doctrine of making Christ all in all, in the matter of justification and salvation, and making
the sinner nothing at all, as having no hand in the work, nor getting any glory to himself
by what he is able to do of himself. Free grace and free will; Christ's imputed righteousness,
and the notion of man's personal righteousness, cannot accord-(Mason).

[297] Take heed of hardening thy heart at any time, against convictions or judgments. I bid
you before to beware of a hard heart; now I bid you beware of hardening your soft heart. The
fear of the Lord is the pulse of the soul. Pulses that beat best are the best signs of life;
but the worst show that life is present. Intermitting pulses are dangerous. David and Peter
had an intermitting pulse, in reference to this fear-(Bunyan on the Fear of God, vol. 1, pp.
487, 489). [298] Mark well Christian's definition of "fear." It is one of those precious passages
in which our author gives us the subject matter of a whole treatise in a few short and plain
sentences. Treasure it up in your heart, and often ponder it there. It will prove, through
the blessing of the Spirit, a special means of enlivening, when spiritual langour, in consequence
of worldly ease, is creeping upon your soul-(Andronicus).

[299] "Pitiful old self-holiness." Mind this phrase. Far was it from the heart of good Mr.
Bunyan to decry personal holiness. It is nothing but self-holiness, or the holiness of the
old man of sin; for true holiness springs from the belief of the truth, and love to the truth.
All besides this only tends to self-confidence, and self-applause-(Mason).

[300] It is good to call to mind one's own ignorance, when in our natural estate, to excite
humility of heart, and thankfulness to God, who made us to differ, and to excite pity towards
those who are walking in nature's pride, self-righteousness, and self-confidence-(Mason).

[301] "Temporary"; one who is doctrinally acquainted with the Gospel, but a stranger to its
sanctifying power. The reasons and manner of such men's declensions and apostasy are very justly
and emphatically stated-(Scott).

[302] In Hoffman's poetical version of the "Pilgrim," this sentence is, "And nature will return,
like Pope, to pork"; alluding to one of the Popes, who used daily to have a dish of pork; but,
being sick, his physicians forbade it, when the Pope, in a rage, cried out, "Give me my pork,
in spite of God"-(ED).

[303] A true description of the state of some professors. Here see the reason why so many saints,
as they are called, fall away. From hence, some take occasion to deny the scriptural, soul-comforting
doctrine, of the certain perseverance of God's saints unto eternal glory. So they display the
pride of their own hearts, their ignorance of God's Word, while they make God's promises of
no effect, and the Gospel of his grace, only much ado about nothing-(Mason).

[304] Three young fellows, Mr. Tradition, Mr. Human-wisdom, and Mr. Man's-invention, proffered
their services to Shaddai. The captains told them not to be rash; but, at their entreaty, they
were listed into Boanerges' company, and away they went to the war. Being in the rear, they
were taken prisoners. Then Diabolus asked them if they were willing to serve against Shaddai.
They told him, that as they did not so much live by religion as by the fates of fortune, they
would serve him. So he made two of them sergeants; but he made Mr. Man's-invention his ancient-bearer
[standard-bearer]-(Bunyan's Holy War).

[305] See how gradually, step by step, apostates go back. It begins in the unbelief of the
heart, and ends in open sins in the life. Why is the love of this world so forbidden? Why is
covetousness called idolatry? Because, whatever draws away the heart from God, and prevents
enjoying close fellowship with him, naturally tends to apostasy from him. Look well to your
hearts and affections. "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life" (Prov. 4:23). If you neglect to watch, you will be sure to smart under the sense of sin
on earth, or its curse in hell. "See then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil" (Eph. 5:15, 16)-(Mason).

[306] O what a blessed state! what a glorious frame of soul is this! Job speaks of it as the
candle of the Lord shining upon his head (29:3). (Isa. 49:13). Paul calls this, "The fullness
of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ" (Rom. 15:29). O rest not short of enjoying the full
blaze of Gospel peace and spiritual joy-(Mason). During the last days of that eminent man of
God, Dr. Payson, he once said, "When I formerly read Bunyan's description of the Land of Beulah,
where the sun shines and the birds sing day and night, I used to doubt whether there was such
a place; but now my own experience has convinced me of it, and it infinitely transcends all
my previous conceptions." The best possible commentary on the glowing descriptions in Bunyan
is to be found in that very remarkable letter dictated by Dr. Payson to his sister, a few weeks
before his death-"Were I to adopt the figurative language of Bunyan, I might date this letter
from the Land Beulah, of which I have been for some weeks a happy inhabitant. The Celestial
City is full in my view. Its glories have been upon me, its breezes fan me, its odours are
wafted to me, its sounds strike upon my ears, and its spirit is breathed into my heart. Nothing
separates me from it but the River of Death, which now appears but as an insignificant rill,
that may be crossed at a single step, whenever God shall give permission. The Sun of Righteousness
has been gradually drawing nearer and nearer, appearing larger and brighter as He approached,
and now He fills the whole hemisphere, pouring forth a flood of glory, in which I seem to float,
like an insect in the beams of the sun; exulting, yet almost trembling, while I gaze on this
excessive brightness, and wondering, with unutterable wonder, why God should deign thus to
shine upon a sinful worm"-(Cheever). [307] In the immediate view of heavenly felicity, Paul
"desired to depart hence, and be with Christ, as far better" than life. David "fainted for
God's salvation." In the lively exercise of holy affections, the believer grows weary of this
sinful world, longs to have his faith changed for sight, his hope swallowed up in enjoyment,
and his love perfected--(Scott).

[308] No other language than that of Bunyan himself, perused in the pages of his own sweet
book, could be successful in portraying this beauty and glory; for now he seems to feel that
all the dangers of the pilgrimage are almost over, and he gives up himself without restraint
so entirely to the sea of bliss that surrounds him, and to the gales of Heaven that are wafting
him on, and to the sounds of melody that float in the whole air around him, that nothing in
the English language can be compared with this whole closing part of the "Pilgrim's Progress,"
for its entrancing splendour, yet serene and simple loveliness. The colouring is that of Heaven
in the soul; and Bunyan has poured his own Heaven-entranced soul into it. With all its depth
and power, there is nothing exaggerated, and it is made up of the simplest and most scriptural
materials and images. We seem to stand in a flood of light, poured on as from the open gates
of paradise. It falls on every leaf and shrub by the way-side; it is reflected from the crystal
streams that, between grassy banks, wind amidst groves of fruit-trees into vineyards and flower-gardens.
These fields of Beulah are just below the gate of Heaven; and with the light of Heaven there
come floating down the melodies of Heaven, so that here there is almost an open revelation
of the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him--(Cheever).

[309] This is the place, this is the state, Of all that fear the Lord; Which men nor angels
may relate With tongue, or pen, or word. No night is here for to eclipse Its spangling rays
so bright; Nor doubt, nor fear, to shut the lips Of those within this light.

The strings of music here are timed For heavenly harmony, And every spirit here perfumed With
perfect sanctity. Here run the crystal streams of life, Quite thorow all our veins; And here
by love we do unite With glory's golden chains.--(Bunyan's One Thing Needful).

[310] Mr. Flavel, being on a journey, set himself to improve the time by meditation; when his
mind grew intent, till at length he had such ravishing tastes of heavenly joys, and such full
assurance of his interest therein, that he utterly lost the sight and sense of this world and
all its concerns, so that for hours he knew not where he was. At last, perceiving himself faint,
he alighted from his horse and sat down at a spring, where he refreshed himself, earnestly
desiring, if it were the will of God, that he might there leave the world. His spirit reviving,
he finished his journey in the same delightful frame; and all that night passed without a wink
of sleep, the joy of the Lord still overflowing him, so that he seemed an inhabitant of the
other world-(Pneumatologia, 4to, 2d edit. p. 210).

[311] Who are these ministering spirits, that the author calls "men"? Are they the glorified
inhabitants of the Celestial City? Moses and Elias appeared at the transfiguration; so the
spirit who spake with John (Rev. 20:10), was his fellow-servant. Are these "spirits of just
men made perfect"-the angel-ministering spirits which are sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation? (Heb. 1:14; 12:22, 23)-(ED).

[312] What are these two difficulties? Are they not death without, and unbelief within? It
is through the latter that the former is all-distressing to us. O for a strong, world-conquering,
sin-subduing, death-overcoming faith, in life and death! Jesus, Master, speak the word, unbelief
shall flee, our faith shall not fail, and our hope shall be steady-(Mason).

[313] Well, now the pilgrims must meet with, and encounter, their last enemy, death. When he
stares them in the face, their fears arise. Through the river they must go. What have they
to look at? What they are in themselves, or what they have done and been? No. Only the same
Jesus who conquered death for us, and can overcome the fear of death in us-(Mason).

[314] But tim'rous mortals start and shrink To cross this narrow sea; They linger, shivering
on the brink, And fear to launch away-(Watts). Evodias could not join in the petition of the
Liturgy-"From sudden death, good Lord, deliver us." He had his wish; and expired suddenly on
a Lord's-day morning, while thousands were assembling to hear him preach-(Andronicus).

[315] Bunyan died in perfect peace, though it is probable that he expected darkness in the
trying hour. Thus he says, in his treatise on Paul's Departure, "Aye, this will make thee cry,
though thou be as good as David. Wherefore learn by his sorrows to serve thy generation, by
the will of God, before falling asleep. God can pardon thy sins, and yet make them a bitter
thing and a burden at death. It is easy to HIM to pardon, and yet break all thy bones; or show
Himself in such dreadful majesty, that Heaven and earth shall tremble at His presence. Let
the thoughts of this prevail with thee to manage thy time and work in wisdom, while thou art
well" (Vol. 1, p. 730)-(ED).

[316] Satan is suffered to be very busy with God's people in their last moments, but he too,
like death, is a conquered enemy by our Jesus; therefore, amidst all his attacks, they are
safe. He cannot destroy them whom Jesus hath redeemed, for He is faithful to them, and almighty
to save-(Mason).

[317] Hopeful, agreeably to his name, was not only preserved from terror, but enabled to encourage
his trembling companion telling him the welcome news that "he felt the bottom, and it was good."
Blessed experience! If Christ is our foundation, we have nothing to fear, even in the swellings
of Jordan, for death itself cannot separate us from the love of Christ-(Burder).

[318] When you visit a sick or death bed, be sure that you take God's Word with you, in your
heart and in your mouth. It is from that only that you may expect a blessing upon, and to the
soul of, the sick or the dying; for it is by the Word of God faith came at the first; it is
by that, faith is strengthened at the last; and Jesus is the sum and substance of the Scriptures-(Mason).

[319] Jesus Christ, He is indeed the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning
of our hope, and the end of our confidence. We begin and end the Christian pilgrimage with
Him; and all our temptations and trials speak loudly, and fully confirm to us that truth of
our Lord, "Without Me ye can do nothing" (John 15:5)-(Mason).

[320] The temporary distresses of dying believers often arise from bodily disease, which interrupt
the free exercise of their intellectual powers. Of this Satan will be sure to take advantage,
as far as he is permitted, and will suggest gloomy imaginations, not only to distress them,
but to dishearten others by their example. Generally they who, for a time, have been most distressed,
have at length died most triumphantly-(Scott).

[321] I cannot trust myself to read the account of Christian going up to the Celestial Gate,
after his passage though the River of Death-(Arnold).

[322] Bunyan, in his Saint's Knowledge of Christ's Love, describes the feelings of the pilgrim,
while clothed with mortality, looking up to the heights of Heaven. Christ could mount up-Elijah
had a chariot of fire-Enoch was taken by God. But I, poor I, how shall I get thither? How often
are considering thoughts wanting in professors! The question is happily solved in Christian
and Hopeful's experience; they left all their mortal garments and burdens behind them in the
river, and their free spirits for the first time felt the sweets of liberty in their perfection-(ED).

[323] I know that all who go to paradise, are conducted thither by these holy ones; but yet,
for all that, such as die under the cloud, for unchristian walking with God, may meet with
darkness on that day, and go heavily hence. But as for those who have been faithful to their
God, they shall see before them, or from earth see glory-(Bunyan's Paul's Departure, vol. 1,
p. 741).

[324] Ah, Christian! None can conceive or describe what it is to live in a state separate from
a body of sin and death. Surely in some happy, highly-favoured moments, we have had a glimpse,
a foretaste of this, and could realize it by faith. O for more and more of this, till we possess
and enjoy it in all its fullness! If Jesus be so sweet to faith below, who can tell what He
is in full fruition above? This we must die to know-(Mason).

[325] Bunyan has, with great beauty and probability, brought in the ministry of angels, and
regions of the air, to be passed through in their company, rising, and still rising, higher
and higher, before they come to that mighty mount on which He has placed the gates of the Celestial
City. The angels receive His pilgrims as they come up from the River of Death, and form for
them a bright, glittering, seraphic, loving convoy, whose conversation prepares them gradually
for that exceeding and eternal weight of glory which is to be theirs as they enter in at the
gate. Bunyan has thus, in this blissful passage from the river to the gate, done what no other
devout writer, or dreamer, or speculator, that we are aware of, has ever done; he has filled
what perhaps in most minds is a mere blank, a vacancy, or at most a bewilderment and mist of
glory, with definite and beatific images, with natural thoughts, and with the sympathizing
communion of gentle spirits, who form, as it were, an outer porch and perspective of glory,
through which the soul passes into uncreated light. Bunyan has thrown a bridge, as it were,
for the imagination, over the deep, sudden, open space of an untried spiritual existence; where
it finds, ready to receive the soul that leaves the body, ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister unto them who are to be heirs of salvation-(Cheever).

[326] Glory beyond all glory ever seen By waking sense, or by the dreaming soul! The appearance,
instantaneously disclosed, Was of a mighty City-boldly say A wilderness of building, sinking
far, And self-withdrawn into a wondrous depth, Far sinking into splendour without end! Fabric
it seemed of diamond and of gold, With alabaster domes and silver spires, And blazing terrace
upon terrace, high Uplifted: here, serene pavilions bright, In avenues disposed; there, towers
begirt With battlements, that on their restless fronts Bore stars-illumination of all gems!--(Wordsworth).
2, p. 580).

[328] Blessed indeed is that man who, while encumbered with a sinful body, can truly say, "I
live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me." In Him all the commandments are obeyed-all my sins
washed away by His blood-and my soul clothed with righteousness and immortality. Blessed are
the dead who die in the Lord: they enter the Celestial City. This is the righteous nation,
which keepeth the truth. O my reader, would you be one of the glorified inhabitants of that
city whose builder and maker is God? Then must you live the life of faith; so run that ye may
obtain; ever be found looking unto Jesus-(ED). "Prepare me, Lord, for Thy right hand, Then
come the joyful day; Come death, and some celestial hand, And fetch my soul away."

[329] O what acclamations of joy will there be, when all the children of God meet together,
without the fear of being disturbed by Antichrist! How will the heavens echo of joy, when the
Bride, the Lamb's wife, shall come to dwell with her Husband! If you would be better satisfied
what the beatific vision means, my request is, that you would live holily, and thus go and
see. Christ is the desire of all nations, the joy of angels, the delight of the Father. What
solace, then, must that soul be filled with, which hath the possession of Christ to all eternity?-(Bunyan's
Dying Sayings, vol.1, pp. 64, 65).

[330] When a formal visit from a minister, a few general questions, and a prayer, with or without
the sacrament, calm the mind of a dying person, whose life has been unsuitable to the Christian
profession; no doubt, could we penetrate the veil, we should see him wafted across the river
in the boat of Vain-hope, and meeting with the awful doom that is here described. From such
fatal delusions, good Lord, deliver us!-(Scott).

[331] Vain-hope ever dwells in the bosom of fools, and is ever ready to assist Ignorance. He
wanted him at the last, and he found him. He had been his companion through life, and will
not forsake him in the hour of death. You see Ignorance had no pangs in his death, no fears,
doubts, and sorrows, no terror from the enemy, but all was serene and happy. Vain-hope was
his ferryman; and he, as the good folks say, died like a lamb. Ah, but did such lambs see what
was to follow, when Vain-hope had wafted them over the river, they would roar like lions!-(Mason).

[332] This is a most awful conclusion. Consider it deeply. Weigh it attentively, so as to get
good satisfaction from the Word to these important questions-Am I in Christ, the way, the only
way, to the kingdom, or not? Do I see that all other ways, whether of sin or self-righteousness,
lead to hell? Does Christ dwell in my heart by faith? Am I a new creature in Him? Do I renounce
my own righteousness, as well as abhor my sins? Do I look alone to Christ for righteousness,
and depend only on Him for holiness? Is He the only hope of my soul, and the only confidence
of my heart? And do I desire to be found in Him; knowing by the Word, and feeling by the teaching
of His Spirit, that I am totally lost in myself? Thus, is Christ formed in me, the only hope
of glory? Do I study to please Him, as well as hope to enjoy Him? Is fellowship with God the
Father, and His Son, Jesus Christ, so prized by me, as to seek it, and to esteem it above all
things? If so, though I may find all things in nature, in the world, and from Satan, continually
opposing this, yet I am in Christ the way, and He is in me the truth and the life-(Mason).
How far may such an one go? This important question is very solemnly argued in Bunyan's Law
and Grace. He may be received into church-fellowship-and, like the foolish virgins, be clear
from outward pollution-have gone forth from the rudiments and traditions of men-and had their
lamps, but still lost their precious souls. They may bear office in the church, as Judas carried
the bag, and as Demas! They may become preachers and ministers of the Gospel, with rare gifts,
and a fluent tongue, like an angel, to speak of the hidden mysteries; but may die under the
curse. They may have the gifts of the Spirit and prophecy, and be but a Balaam. They may stand
thus until Christ come and reveal them. They may, with confidence, say, Lord, Lord, have we
not eaten and drank in Thy presence, and taught in Thy name, and in Thy name have cast out
devils? and yet, poor creatures, be shut out!-(ED).

***

THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS

FROM

THIS WORLD TO THAT WHICH IS TO COME.

THE SECOND PART.

DELIVERED UNDER THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM.

WHEREIN IS SET FORTH THE MANNER OF THE SETTING OUT OF CHRISTIAN'S WIFE AND CHILDREN, THEIR
DANGEROUS JOURNEY, AND SAFE ARRIVAL AT THE DESIRED COUNTRY.

By JOHN BUNYAN.

'I have used similitudes.'--Hosea 12:10.

London: Printed for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Peacock in the Poultry, near the Church, 1684.

THE AUTHOR'S WAY OF SENDING FORTH HIS SECOND PART OF THE PILGRIM.

Go now, my little book, to every place, Where my first Pilgrim has but shown his face, Call
at their door. If any say, Who's there? Then answer thou, CHRISTIANA is here. If they bid thee
come in, then enter thou, With all thy boys; and then, as thou know'st how, Tell who they are,
also from whence they came; Perhaps they know them by their looks, or name. But if they should
not, ask them yet again If formerly they did not entertain  One CHRISTIAN, a Pilgrim? If they
say  They did; and were delighted in his way:  Then let them know, that those related were
Unto him; yea, his wife and children are.

Tell them, that they have left their house and home,  Are turned Pilgrims, seek a world to
come;  That they have met with hardships in the way,  That they do meet with troubles night
and day;  That they have trod on serpents, fought with devils,  Have also overcome a many evils.
Yea, tell them also of the next, who have  Of love to pilgrimage, been stout and brave  Defenders
of that way, and how they still  Refuse this world, to do their Father's will.

Go, tell them also of those dainty things,  That pilgrimage unto the Pilgrim brings.  Let them
acquainted be, too, how they are  Beloved of their King, under His care:  What goodly mansions
for them He provides,  Tho' they meet with rough winds, and swelling tides, How brave a calm
they will enjoy at last,  Who to their Lord, and by His ways hold fast.

Perhaps with heart and hand they will embrace  Thee, as they did my firstling, and will grace
Thee, and thy fellows, with such cheer and fare,  As show will they of Pilgrims lovers are.

OBJECTION 1. But how, if they will not believe of me That I am truly thine; cause some there
be That counterfeit the Pilgrim and his name, Seek, by disguise, to seem the very same; And
by that means have wrought themselves into The hands and houses of I know not who?

ANSWER. 'Tis true, some have of late, to counterfeit  My Pilgrim, to their own my title set;[1]
Yea others, half my name and title too  Have stitched to their book, to make them do;  But
yet they, by their features, do declare  Themselves not mine to be, whose e'er they are.

If such thou meet'st with, then thine only way  Before them all, is, to say out thy say,  In
thine own native language, which no man  Now useth, nor with ease dissemble can.  If, after
all, they still of you shall doubt,  Thinking that you, like gipsies, go about

In naughty wise, the country to defile,  Or that you seek good people to beguile  With things
unwarrantable; send for me,  And I will testify you PILGRIMS be.  Yea, I will testify that
only you  My Pilgrims are; and that alone will do.

OBJECTION 2 But yet, perhaps, I may inquire for him, Of those that wish him damned, life and
limb. What shall I do, when I at such a door For Pilgrims ask, and they shall rage the more?[2]

ANSWER. Fright not thyself, my book, for such bugbears  Are nothing else but ground for groundless
fears.  My Pilgrim's book has travell'd sea and land,  Yet could I never come to understand
That it was slighted, or turn'd out of door  By any kingdom, were they rich or poor.

In France and Flanders, where men kill each other,  My Pilgrim is esteem'd a friend, a brother.
In Holland too, 'tis said, as I am told,  My Pilgrim is with some worth more than gold. 

Highlanders and wild Irish can agree  My Pilgrim should familiar with them be. 'Tis in New
England under such advance,  Receives there so much loving countenance,  As to be trimm'd,
new cloth'd, and deck'd with gems  That it may show its features and its limbs,  Yet more;
so comely doth my Pilgrim walk,  That of him thousands daily sing and talk.[3] 

If you draw nearer home, it will appear,  My Pilgrim knows no ground of shame or fear;  City
and country will him entertain  With, Welcome Pilgrim; yea, they can't refrain  From smiling,
if my Pilgrim be but by,  Or shows his head in any company.

Brave gallants do my Pilgrim hug and love,  Esteem it much, yea, value it above  Things of
a greater bulk: yea, with delight,  Say, My lark's leg is better than a kite. 

Young ladies, and young gentlewomen too,  Do no small kindness to my Pilgrim show.  Their cabinets,
their bosoms, and their hearts,  My Pilgrim has, 'cause he to them imparts  His pretty riddles
in such wholesome strains,  As yields them profit double to their pains  Of reading; yea, I
think, I may be bold  To say, some prize him far above their gold.

The very children that do walk the street,  If they do but my holy Pilgrim meet,  Salute him
well, will wish him well, and say,  He is the only stripling of the day.

They that have never seen him, yet admire  What they have heard of him, and much desire  To
have his company, and hear him tell  Those pilgrim stories which he knows so well.

Yea, some who did not love him at the first,  But called him fool and noddy, say they must,
Now they have seen and heard him, him commend  And to those whom they love, they do him send.[4] 

Wherefore, my Second Part, thou need'st not be  Afraid to show thy head; none can hurt thee,
That wish but well to him that went before,  'Cause thou com'st after with a second store 
Of things as good, as rich, as profitable,  For young, for old, for stagg'ring, and for stable.

OBJECTION 3. But some there he that say, He laughs too loud  And some do say, His head is in
a cloud.  Some say, His words and stories are so dark,  They know not how, by them, to find
his mark.

ANSWER. One may, I think, say, Both his laughs and cries,  May well be guess'd at by his wat'ry
eyes.  Some things are of that nature, as to make  One's fancy chuckle, while his heart doth
ache.  When Jacob saw his Rachel with the sheep,  He did at the same time both kiss and weep.

Whereas some say, A cloud is in his head,  That doth but show how wisdom's covered  With its
own mantles, and to stir the mind  To a search after what it fain would find.  Things that
seem to be hid in words obscure,  Do but the godly mind the more allure  To study what those
sayings should contain,  That speak to us in such a cloudy strain.

I also know a dark similitude  Will on the fancy more itself intrude,  And will stick faster
in the heart and head,  Than things from similes not borrowed. Wherefore, my book, let no discouragement
Hinder thy travels. Behold, thou art sent  To friends, not foes; to friends that will give
place  To thee, thy Pilgrims, and thy words embrace.

Besides, what my first Pilgrim left conceal'd  Thou, my brave second Pilgrim, hast reveal'd;
What CHRISTIAN left lock'd up, and went his way,  Sweet CHRISTIANA opens with her key.[5]

OBJECTION 4. But some love not the method of your first;  Romance they count it, throw't away
as dust,  If I should meet with such, what should I say?  Must I slight them as they slight
me, or nay?

ANSWER. My CHRISTIANA, if with such thou meet,  By all means, in all loving-wise, them greet;
Render them not reviling for revile;  But if they frown, I prithee on them smile;  Perhaps
'tis nature, or some ill report,  Has made them thus despise, or thus retort.

Some love no cheese, some love no fish, and some  Love not their friends, nor their own house
or home;  Some start at pig, slight chicken, love not fowl,  More than they love a cuckoo,
or an owl;  Leave such, my CHRISTIANA, to their choice,  And seek those who to find thee will
rejoice;  By no means strive, but in humble-wise,  Present thee to them in thy Pilgrim's guise.

Go, then, my little book, and show to all  That entertain, and bid thee welcome shall,  What
thou shalt keep close, shut up from the rest,  And wish what thou shalt show them may be blest
To them for good, may make them choose to be  Pilgrims better by far than thee or me.

Go, then, I say, tell all men who thou art;  Say, I am CHRISTIANA, and my part  Is now, with
my four sons, to tell you what  It is for men to take a Pilgrims lot.

Go also, tell them who and what they be,  That now do go on pilgrimage with thee;  Say, Here's
my neighbour, Mercy, she is one  That has long time with me a Pilgrim gone.  Come, see her
in her virgin race, and learn  'Twixt idle ones and Pilgrims to discern.  Yea, let young damsels
learn of her to prize  The world which is to come, in any wise.  When little tripping maidens
follow God,  And leave old doting sinners to His rod;  'Tis like those days wherein the young
ones cried,  Hosanna! to whom old ones did deride.

Next, tell them of old Honest, who you found  With his white hairs, treading the Pilgrim's
ground.  Yea, tell them how plain-hearted this man was,  How after his good Lord he bare his
cross. Perhaps with some gray head this may prevail  With Christ to fall in love, and sin bewail.

Tell them also, how Master Fearing went  On pilgrimage, and how the time he spent  In solitariness,
with fears and cries;  And how, at last, he won the joyful prize.  He was a good man, though
much down in spirit,  He is a good man, and doth life inherit.

Tell them of Master Feeble-mind also,  Who, not before, but still behind would go.  Show them
also, how he had like been slain,  And how one Great-heart did his life regain.  This man was
true of heart, though weak in grace,  One might true godliness read in his face. 

Then tell them of Master Ready-to-halt,  A man with crutches, but much without fault;  Tell
them how Master Feeble-mind and he  Did love, and in opinions much agree.  And let all know,
though weakness was their chance,  Yet sometimes one could sing, the other dance.

Forget not Master Valiant-for-the-truth,  That man of courage, though a very youth.  Tell everyone
his spirit was so stout,  No man could ever make him face about;  And how Great-heart and he
could not forbear,  But put down Doubting Castle, slay Despair. 

Overlook not Master Despondency,  Nor Much-afraid, his daughter, though they lie  Under such
mantles, as may make them look  (With some) as if their God had them forsook.  They softly
went, but sure, and at the end,  Found that the Lord of Pilgrims was their friend.  When thou
hast told the world of all these things,  Then turn about, my book, and touch these strings,
Which, if but touch'd, will such music make,  They'll make a cripple dance, a giant quake.

These riddles that lie couch'd within thy breast,  Freely propound, expound; and for the rest
Of thy mysterious lines, let them remain  For those whose nimble fancies shall them gain.

Now may this little book a blessing be
To those who love this little book and me;
And may its buyer have no cause to say,
His money is but lost or thrown away;
Yea, may this Second Pilgrim yield that fruit,
As may with each good Pilgrim's fancy suit;
And may it persuade some that go astray,
To turn their feet and heart to the right way,
Is the hearty prayer of
 The Author,
JOHN BUNYAN.

THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS;

IN THE SIMILITUDE OF A DREAM.

THE SECOND PART.

COURTEOUS COMPANIONS,

SOME time since, to tell you my dream that I had of Christian the Pilgrim, and of his dangerous
journey towards the Celestial Country, was pleasant to me, and profitable to you. I told you
then, also, what I saw concerning his wife and children, and how unwilling they were to go
with him on pilgrimage, insomuch that he was forced to go on his progress without them; for
he durst not run the danger of that destruction which he feared would come by staying with
them in the City of Destruction. Wherefore, as I then showed you, he left them and departed.[6]

Now it hath so happened, through the multiplicity of business, that I have been much hindered
and kept back from my wonted travels into those parts whence he went, and so could not, till
now, obtain an opportunity to make further inquiry after whom he left behind, that I might
give you an account of them.[7] But having had some concerns that way of late, I went down
again thitherward. Now, having taken up my lodgings in a wood, about a mile off the place,
as I slept, I dreamed again.[8]

And as I was in my dream, behold, an aged gentleman came by where I lay; and because he was
to go some part of the way that I was travelling, methought I got up and went with him. So
as we walked, and as travelers usually do, I was as if we fell into discourse, and our talk
happened to be about Christian and his travels; for thus I began with the old man:

Sir, said I, what town is that there below, that lieth on the left hand of our way?

Then said Mr. Sagacity (for that was his name), It is the City of Destruction, a populous place,
but possessed with a very ill-conditioned and idle sort of people.

I thought that was that city, quoth I; I went once myself through that town, and, therefore,
know that this report you give of it is true.

SAG. Too true; I wish I could speak truth in speaking better of them that dwell therein.

Well, Sir, quoth I, then I perceive you to be a well-meaning man; and so one that takes pleasure
to hear and tell of that which is good. Pray, did you never hear what happened to a man some
time ago in this town, whose name was Christian, that went on pilgrimage up towards the higher
regions?

SAG. Hear of him! Aye, and I also heard of the molestations, troubles, wars, captivities, cries,
groans, frights, and fears that he met with and had in his journey; besides, I must tell you,
all our country rings of him. There are but few houses that have heard of him and his doings
but have sought after and got the records of his pilgrimage; yea, I think I may say that that
his hazardous journey, has got a many well-wishers to his ways; for though, when he was here,
he was fool in every man's mouth, yet, now he is gone, he is highly commended of all. For,
it is said, he lives bravely where he is; yea, many of them that are resolved never to run
his hazards, yet have their mouths water at his gains.[9]

They may, quoth I, well think, if they think anything that is true, that he liveth well where
he is; for he now lives at and in the Fountain of Life, and has what he has without labour
and sorrow, for there is no grief mixed therewith. [But, pray, what talk have the people about
him?][10]

SAG. Talk! the people talk strangely about him; some say that he now walks in white (Rev. 3:4;
6:11); that he has a chain of gold about his neck; that he has a crown of gold, beset with
pearls, upon his head. Others say that the Shining Ones, that sometimes showed themselves to
him in his journey, are become his companions, and that he is as familiar with them in the
place where he is as here one neighbour is with another. Besides, it is confidently affirmed
concerning him, that the King of the place where he is has bestowed upon him already a very
rich and pleasant dwelling at court (Zech. 3:7); and that he every day eateth (Luke 14:15),
and drinketh, and walketh, and talketh with Him; and receiveth of the smiles and favours of
Him that is Judge of all there. Moreover, it is expected of some, that his Prince, the Lord
of that country, will shortly come into these parts, and will know the reason, if they can
give any, why his neighbours set so little by him, and had him so much in derision, when they
perceived that he would be a pilgrim (Jude 14, 15). For, they say, that now he is so in the
affections of his Prince, and that his Sovereign is so much concerned with the indignities
that were cast upon Christian, when he became a pilgrim, that He will look upon all as if done
unto Himself;[11] and no marvel, for it was for the love that he had to his Prince that he
ventured as he did[12] (Luke 10:16).

I dare say, quoth I, I am glad on it; I am glad for the poor man's sake, for that he now has
rest from his labour (Rev. 14:13); and for that he now reapeth the benefit of his tears with
joy (Psa. 126:5, 6); and for that he has got beyond the gunshot of his enemies, and is out
of the reach of them that hate him. I also am glad, for that a rumour of these things is noised
abroad in this country; who can tell but that it may work some good effect on some that are
left behind? But, pray Sir, while it is fresh in my mind, do you hear anything of his wife
and children? Poor hearts! I wonder in my mind what they do.[13]

SAG. Who! Christiana and her sons? They are like to do as well as did Christian himself; for
though they all played the fool at the first, and would by no means be persuaded by either
the tears or entreaties of Christian, yet second thoughts have wrought wonderfully with them;
so they have packed up, and are also gone after him.[14]

Better and better, quoth I. But what! wife and children, and all? SAG. It is true; I can give
you an account of the matter, for I was upon the spot at the instant, and was thoroughly acquainted
with the whole affair.

Then, said I, a man, it seems, may report it for a truth? SAG. You need not fear to affirm
it; I mean that they are all gone on pilgrimage, both the good woman and her four boys. And
being (we are, as I perceive) going some considerable way together, I will give you an account
of the whole of the matter.

This Christiana (for that was her name from the day that she, with her children, betook themselves
to a pilgrim's life), after her husband was gone over the river, and she could hear of him
no more, her thoughts began to work in her mind. First, for that she had lost her husband,
and for that the loving bond of that relation was utterly broken betwixt them. For you know,
said he to me, nature can do no less but entertain the living with many a heavy cogitation
in the remembrance of the loss of loving relations. This, therefore, of her husband did cost
her many a tear. But this was not all; for Christiana did also begin to consider with herself,
whether her unbecoming behaviour towards her husband was not one cause that she saw him no
more; and that in such sort he was taken away from her. And upon this, came into her mind,
by swarms, all her unkind, unnatural, and ungodly carriages to her dear friend; which also
clogged her conscience, and did load her with guilt. She was, moreover, much broken with calling
to remembrance the restless groans, brinish tears, and self-bemoanings of her husband, and
how she did harden her heart against all his entreaties, and loving persuasions, of her and
her sons, to go with him; yea, there was not anything that Christian either said to her or
did before her all the while that his burden did hang on his back, but it returned upon her
like a flash of lightning, and rent the caul of her heart in sunder. Specially that bitter
outcry of his, 'What shall I do to be saved?' did ring in her ears most dolefully.[15]

Then said she to her children, Sons, we are all undone. I have sinned away your father, and
he is gone; he would have had us with him, but I would not go myself. I also have hindered
you of life.[16] With that the boys fell all into tears, and cried out to go after their father.
O! said Christiana, that it had been but our lot to go with him, then had it fared well with
us, beyond what it is like to do now; for though I formerly foolishly imagined, concerning
the troubles of your father, that they proceeded of a foolish fancy that he had, or for that
he was overrun with melancholy humours; yet now it will not out of my mind but that they sprang
from another cause, to wit, for that the Light of light was given him (James 1:23-25); by the
help of which, as I perceive, he has escaped the snares of death.[17] Then they all wept again,
and cried out, O woe worth the day![18]

The next night Christiana had a dream; and, behold, she saw as if a broad parchment was opened
before her, in which were recorded the sum of her ways (Luke 18:13); and the times, as she
thought, looked very black upon her. Then she cried out aloud in her sleep, 'Lord, have mercy
upon me a sinner!'[19] and the little children heard her.

After this, she thought she saw two very ill-favoured ones standing by her bedside, and saying,
What shall we do with this woman? for she cries out for mercy waking and sleeping; if she be
suffered to go on as she begins, we shall lose her as we have lost her husband. Wherefore we
must, by one way or other, seek to take her off from the thoughts of what shall be hereafter,
else all the world cannot help it but she will become a pilgrim.

Now she awoke in a great sweat, also a trembling was upon her; but after a while she fell to
sleeping again. And then she thought she saw Christian her husband in a place of bliss, among
many immortals, with a harp in his hand, standing and playing upon it before One that sat on
a throne, with a rainbow about His head. She saw also as if he bowed his head, with his face
to the paved work that was under the Prince's feet, saying, I heartily thank my Lord and King,
for bringing of me into this place. Then shouted a company of them that stood round about,
and harped with their harps; but no man living could tell what they said, but Christian and
his companions.[20]

Next morning, when she was up, had prayed to God, and talked with her children a while, one
knocked hard at the door, to whom she spake out, saying, If thou comest in God's name, come
in. So he said, Amen, and opened the door, and saluted her with 'Peace be to this house.' The
which, when he had done, he said, Christiana, knowest thou wherefore I am come? Then she blushed
and trembled, also her heart began to wax warm with desires to know whence he came, and what
was his errand to her. So he said unto her, My name is Secret;[21] I dwell with those that
are high. It is talked of, where I dwell, as if thou hadst a desire to go thither; also, there
is a report, that thou art aware of the evil thou hast formerly done to thy husband, in hardening
of thy heart against his way, and in keeping of these thy babes in their ignorance.

Christiana, the Merciful One has sent me to tell thee, that He is a God ready to forgive, and
that He taketh delight to multiply to pardon offences. He also would have thee know, that He
inviteth thee to come into His presence, to His table, and that He will feed thee with the
fat of His house, and with the heritage of Jacob thy father.

There is Christian thy husband (that was), with legions more, his companions, ever beholding
that face that doth minister life to beholders; and they will all be glad when they shall hear
the sound of thy feet step over thy Father's threshold.

Christiana at this was greatly abashed in herself, and bowing her head to the ground, this
Visitor proceeded, and said, Christiana, here is also a letter for thee, which I have brought
from thy husband's King. So she took it and opened it, but it smelt after the manner of the
best perfume (Song. 1:3); also it was written in letters of gold. The contents of the letter
was, That the King would have her do as did Christian her husband; for that was the way to
come to His city, and to dwell in His presence with joy forever. At this the good woman was
quite overcome; so she cried out to her visitor, Sir, will you carry me and my children with
you, that we also may go and worship this King?

Then said the visitor, Christiana, the bitter is before the sweet. Thou must through troubles,
as did he that went before thee, enter this Celestial City. Wherefore I advise thee to do as
did Christian thy husband. Go to the wicket-gate yonder, over the plain, for that stands in
the head of the way up which thou must go, and I wish thee all good speed. Also I advise that
thou put this letter in thy bosom; that thou read therein to thyself, and to thy children,
until you have got it by rote of heart,[22] for it is one of the songs that thou must sing
while thou art in this house of thy pilgrimage (Psa. 119:54); also this thou must deliver in
at the further gate.[23] Now I saw in my dream, that this old gentleman, as he told me this
story, did himself seem to be greatly affected therewith. He, moreover, proceeded and said,
So Christiana called her sons together, and began thus to address herself unto them: My sons,
I have, as you may perceive, been of late under much exercise in my soul, about the death of
your father; not for that I doubt at all of his happiness, for I am satisfied now that he is
well. I have been also much affected with the thoughts of mine own state and yours, which I
verily believe is by nature miserable. My carriages, also, to your father in his distress,
is a great load to my conscience; for I hardened both my own heart and yours against him, and
refused to go with him on pilgrimage.[24]

The thoughts of these things would now kill me outright, but that for a dream which I had last
night, and but for the encouragement that this stranger has given me this morning. Come, my
children, let us pack up and begone to the gate that leads to the Celestial Country, that we
may see your father, and be with him and his companions in peace, according to the laws of
that land.

Then did her children burst out into tears for joy, that the heart of their mother was so inclined.[25]
So their visitor bade them farewell; and they began to prepare to set out for their journey.

But while they were thus about to be gone, two of the women, that were Christiana's neighbours,
came up to her house, and knocked at her door. To whom she said as before, If you come in God's
name, come in. At this the women were stunned; for this kind of language they used not to hear,
or to perceive to drop from the lips of Christiana.[26] Yet they came in; but, behold, they
found the good woman a-preparing to be gone from her house.

So they began and said, Neighbour, pray what is your meaning by this?

Christiana answered and said to the eldest of them, whose name was Mrs. Timorous, I am preparing
for a journey. (This Timorous was daughter to him that met Christian upon the Hill Difficulty,
and would have had him go back for fear of the lions).

Tim. For what journey, I pray you?

CHRIST. Even to go after my good husband. And with that she fell a-weeping.

Tim. I hope not so, good neighbour; pray, for your poor children's sakes, do not so unwomanly
cast away yourself.

CHRIST. Nay, my children shall go with me, not one of them is willing to stay behind.[27]

Tim. I wonder, in my very heart, what, or who has brought you into this mind.

CHRIST. Oh! neighbour, knew you but as much as I do, I doubt not but that you would go with me.

Tim. Prithee, what new knowledge hast thou got, that so worketh off thy mind from thy friends,
and that tempteth thee to go, nobody knows where?

CHRIST. Then Christiana replied, I have been sorely afflicted since my husband's departure
from me; but especially since he went over the river. But that which troubleth me most, is
my churlish carriages to him, when he was under his distress. Besides, I am now as he was then;
nothing will serve me but going on pilgrimage. I was a-dreaming last night that I saw him.
O that my soul was with him! He dwelleth in the presence of the King of the country; he sits
and eats with Him at His table; he is become a companion of immortals (1 Cor. 5:1-5), and has
a house now given him to dwell in, to which the best palaces on earth, if compared, seem to
me to be but as a dunghill. The Prince of the place has also sent for me, with promise of entertainment
if I shall come to Him; His messenger was here even now, and has brought me a letter, which
invites me to come. And with that she plucked out her letter,[28] and read it, and said to
them, What now will ye say to this?

Tim. O the madness that has possessed thee and thy husband, to run yourselves upon such difficulties!
You have heard, I am sure, what your husband did meet with, even, in a manner, at the first
step that he took on his way, as our neighbour Obstinate can yet testify, for he went along
with him; yea, and Pliable too, until they, like wise men, were afraid to go any further. We
also heard, over and above, how he met with the lions, Apollyon, the Shadow of Death, and many
other things. Nor is the danger that he met with at Vanity Fair to be forgotten by thee; for
if he, though a man, was so hard put to it, what canst thou, being but a poor woman, do? Consider
also, that these four sweet babes are thy children, thy flesh and thy bones. Wherefore, though
thou shouldest be so rash as to cast away thyself; yet, for the sake of the fruit of thy body,
keep thou at home.[29]

But Christiana said unto her, Tempt me not, my neighbour. I have now a price put into my hand
to get gain, and I should he a fool of the greatest size, if I should have no heart to strike
in with the opportunity.[30] And for that you tell me of all these troubles that I am like
to meet with in the way, they are so far off from being to me a discouragement, that they show
I am in the right. 'The bitter must come before the sweet,' and that also will make the sweet
the sweeter. Wherefore, since you came not to my house in God's name, as I said, I pray you
to be gone, and not to disquiet me farther.[31]

Then Timorous also reviled her, and said to her fellow, Come, neighbour Mercy, let us leave
her in her own hands, since she scorns our counsel and company. But Mercy was at a stand, and
could not so readily comply with her neighbour, and that for a twofold reason. First, her bowels
yearned over Christiana. So she said within herself, If my neighbour will needs be gone, I
will go a little way with her and help her. Secondly, her bowels yearned over her own soul,
for what Christiana had said had taken some hold upon her mind.[32] Wherefore she said within
herself again, I will yet have more talk with this Christiana, and if I find truth and life
in what she shall say, myself with my heart shall also go with her. Wherefore Mercy began thus
to reply to her neighbour Timorous.

MERCY. Neighbour, I did, indeed, come with you to see Christiana this morning; and since she
is, as you see, a-taking of her last farewell of her country, I think to walk, this sun-shine
morning, a little way with her, to help her on the way. But she told her not of the second
reason, but kept that to herself.

TIM. Well, I see you have a mind to go a-fooling too, but take heed in time, and be wise. While
we are out of danger, we are out; but when we are in, we are in. So Mrs. Timorous returned
to her house, and Christiana betook herself to her journey.[33] But when Timorous was got home
to her house, she sends for some of her neighbours, to wit, Mrs. Bat's-eyes, Mrs. Inconsiderate,
Mrs. Light-mind, and Mrs. Know-nothing. So when they were come to her house, she falls to telling
of the story of Christiana, and of her intended journey. And thus she began her tale.[34]

TIM. Neighbours, having had little to do this morning, I went to give Christiana a visit; and
when I came at the door, I knocked, as you know it is our custom. And she answered, If you
come in God's name, come in. So in I went, thinking all was well. But when I came in, I found
her preparing herself to depart the town, she, and also her children. So I asked her what was
her meaning by that. And she told me, in short, that she was now of a mind to go on pilgrimage,
as did her husband. She told me also a dream that she had, and how the King of the country
where her husband was, had sent her an inviting letter to come thither.

Then said Mrs. Know-nothing, what! do you think she will go?

TIM. Aye, go she will, whatever come on't; and methinks I know it by this; for that which was
my great argument to persuade her to stay at home (to wit, the troubles she was like to meet
with in the way) is one great argument with her to put her forward on her journey. For she
told me in so many words, 'The bitter goes before the sweet.' Yea, and forasmuch as it so doth,
it makes the sweet the sweeter.

MRS. BAT'S-EYES. O, this blind and foolish woman! said she; will she not take warning by her
husband's afflictions? For my part, I see, if he were here again, he would rest him content
in a whole skin, and never run so many hazards for nothing.

MRS. INCONSIDERATE also replied, saying, Away with such fantastical fools from the town! A
good riddance, for my part, I say, of her. Should she stay where she dwells, and retain this
her mind, who could live quietly by her? for she will either be dumpish or unneighbourly, or
talk of such matters as no wise body can abide; wherefore, for my part, I shall never be sorry
for her departure. Let her go, and let better come in her room. It was never a good world since
these whimsical fools dwelt in it.[35]

Then Mrs. Light-mind added as followeth--Come, put this kind of talk away. I was yesterday
at Madam Wanton's, where we were as merry as the maids. For who do you think should be there,
but I and Mrs. Love-the-flesh, and three or four more, with Mr. Lechery, Mrs. Filth, and some
others. So there we had music, and dancing, and what else was meet to fill up the pleasure.
And, I dare say, my lady herself is an admirably well-bred gentlewoman, and Mr. Lechery is
as pretty a fellow.

By this time, Christiana was got on her way, and Mercy went along with her. So as they went,
her children being there also, Christiana began to discourse. And, Mercy, said Christiana,
I take this as an unexpected favour, that thou shouldst set foot out of doors with me, to accompany
me a little in my way.

MERCY. Then said young Mercy (for she was but young), If I thought it would be to purpose to
go with you, I would never go near the town any more.

CHRIST. Well, Mercy, said Christiana, cast in thy lot with me; I well know what will be the
end of our pilgrimage. My husband is where he would not but be for all the gold in the Spanish
mines. Nor shalt thou be rejected, though thou goest but upon my invitation.[36] The King who
hath sent for me and my children is one that delighteth in mercy. Besides, if thou wilt, I
will hire thee, and thou shalt go along with me as my servant; yet we will have all things
in common betwixt thee and me; only, go along with me.[37]

MERCY. But how shall I be ascertained that I also shall be entertained? Had I this hope but
from one that can tell, I would make no stick at all, but would go, being helped by him that
can help, though the way was never so tedious.[38]

CHRIST. Well, loving Mercy, I will tell thee what thou shalt do. Go with me to the wicket-gate,
and there I will further inquire for thee; and if there thou shalt not meet with encouragement,
I will be content that thou shalt return to thy place. I also will pay thee for thy kindness
which thou showest to me and my children, in thy accompanying us in our way, as thou dost.

MERCY. Then will I go thither, and will take what shall follow; and the Lord grant that my
lot may there fall, even as the King of Heaven shall have His heart upon me.[39]

Christiana then was glad at her heart, not only that she had a companion, but also that she
had prevailed with this poor maid to fall in love with her own salvation. So they went on together,
and Mercy began to weep. Then said Christiana, Wherefore weepeth my Sister so?

MERCY. Alas! said she, who can but lament, that shall but rightly consider, what a state and
condition my poor relations[40] are in that yet remain in our sinful town? and that which makes
my grief the more heavy is, because they have no instructor, nor any to tell them what is to come.

CHRIST. Bowels becometh pilgrims; and thou dost for thy friends as my good Christian did for
me when he left me; he mourned for that I would not heed nor regard him; but his Lord and ours
did gather up after his tears and put them into His bottle; and now both I and thou, and these
my sweet babes, are reaping the fruit and benefit of them. I hope, Mercy, these tears of thine
will not be lost; for the truth hath said, that 'They that sow in tears shall reap in joy'
in singing. And 'he that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him' (Psa. 126:5, 6).

Then said Mercy-- Let the Most Blessed be my guide,  If't be His blessed will; Unto His gate,
into His fold,  Up to His holy hill. And let Him never suffer me To swerve or turn aside From
His free grace, and holy ways, Whate'er shall me betide.

And let Him gather them of mine,  That I have left behind; Lord, make them pray they may be
Thine, With all their heart and mind.[41]

Now my old friend proceeded, and said: But when Christiana came up to the Slough of Despond,
she began to be at a stand; for, said she, this is the place in which my dear husband had like
to have been smothered with mud. She perceived, also, that notwithstanding the command of the
King to make this place for pilgrims good, yet it was rather worse than formerly. So I asked
if that were true. Yes, said the old gentleman, too true; for that many there be that pretend
to be the King's labourers, and that say they are for mending the King's highway, that bring
dirt and dung instead of stones, and so mar instead of mending.[42] Here Christiana, therefore,
with her boys, did make a stand; but, said Mercy, Come, let us venture, only let us be wary.
Then they looked well to the steps, and made a shift to get staggeringly over.[43] Yet, Christiana
had like to have been in, and that not once nor twice. Now they had no sooner got over, but
they thought they heard words that said unto them, 'Blessed is she that believed; for there
shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord' (Luke 1:45).

Then they went on again; and said Mercy to Christiana, Had I as good ground to hope for a loving
reception at the wicket-gate as you, I think no Slough of Despond would discourage me. Well,
said the other, you know your sore,[44] and I know mine; and, good friend, we shall all have
enough evil before we come at our journey's end.

For can it be imagined, that the people that design to attain such excellent glories as we
do, and that are so envied that happiness as we are; but that we shall meet with what fears
and scares, with what troubles and afflictions they can possibly assault us with, that hate us?

And now Mr. Sagacity left me to dream out my dream by myself. Wherefore, methought I saw Christiana
and Mercy, and the boys, go all of them up to the gate; to which, when they were come, they
betook themselves to a short debate about how they must manage their calling at the gate, and
what should be said to Him that did open to them. So it was concluded, since Christiana was
the eldest, that she should knock for entrance, and that she should speak to Him that did open,
for the rest. So Christiana began to knock; and, as her poor husband did, she knocked, and
knocked again. But, instead of any that answered, they all thought that they heard as if a
dog came barking upon them; a dog, and a great one too, and this made the women and children
afraid: nor durst they, for a while, to knock any more, for fear the mastiff should fly upon
them. Now, therefore, they were greatly tumbled up and down in their minds, and knew not what
to do: knock they durst not, for fear of the dog; go back they durst not, for fear the Keeper
of that gate should espy them as they so went, and should be offended with them; at last they
thought of knocking again, and knocked more vehemently than they did at the first. Then said
the Keeper of the gate, Who is there? So the dog left off to bark, and He opened unto them.[45]
Then Christiana made low obeisance, and said, Let not our Lord be offended with his handmaidens,
for that we have knocked at His princely gate. Then said the Keeper, Whence come ye, and what
is that you would have?

Christiana answered, We are come from whence Christian did come, and upon the same errand as
he; to wit, to be, if it shall please You, graciously admitted by this gate into the way that
leads to the Celestial City. And I answer, my Lord, in the next place, that I am Christiana,
once the wife of Christian, that now is gotten above.[46]

With that the Keeper of the gate did marvel, saying, What! is she become now a pilgrim that,
but a while ago, abhorred that life Then she bowed her head, and said, Yes, and so are these
my sweet babes also.

Then He took her by the hand, and let her in, and said also, 'Suffer the little children to
come unto Me'; and with that He shut up the gate. This done, He called to a trumpeter that
was above, over the gate, to entertain Christiana with shouting and sound of trumpet for joy.
So he obeyed, and sounded, and filled the air with his melodious notes (Luke 15:7).

Now all this while poor Mercy did stand without, trembling and crying, for fear that she was
rejected. But when Christiana had gotten admittance for herself and her boys, then she began
to make intercession for Mercy.

CHRIST. And she said, My Lord, I have a companion of mine that stands yet without, that is
come hither upon the same account as myself; one that is much dejected in her mind, for that
she comes, as she thinks, without sending for; whereas I was sent to by my husband's King to come.

Now Mercy began to be very impatient, for each minute was as long to her as an hour; wherefore
she prevented Christiana from a fuller interceding for her, by knocking at the gate herself.
And she knocked then so loud, that she made Christiana to start. Then said the Keeper of the
gate, Who is there? and said Christiana, It is my friend.

So He opened the gate and looked out, but Mercy was fallen down without, in a swoon, for she
fainted, and was afraid that no gate would he opened to her.

Then He took her by the hand, and said, Damsel, I bid thee arise. O Sir, said she, I am faint;
there is scarce life left in me. But He answered, That one once said, 'When my soul fainted
within me, I remembered the Lord; and my prayer came in unto Thee, into Thine holy temple'
(Jonah 2:7). Fear not, but stand upon thy feet, and tell Me wherefore thou art come.[47]

MERCY. I am come for that unto which I was never invited, as my friend Christiana was. Hers
was from the King, and mine was but from her. Wherefore I fear I presume.[48]

KEEP. Did she desire thee to come with her to this place?

MERCY. Yes; and, as my Lord sees, I am come. And, if there is any grace or forgiveness of sins
to spare, I beseech that I, thy poor handmaid, may be partaker thereof.

Then He took her again by the hand, and led her gently in, and said, I pray for all them that
believe on Me, by what means soever they come unto Me. Then said He to those that stood by,
Fetch something, and give it Mercy to smell on, thereby to stay her fainting. So they fetched
her a bundle of myrrh; and a while after, she was revived.[49]

And now was Christiana and her boys, and Mercy, received of the Lord at the head of the way,
and spoke kindly unto by Him. Then said they yet further unto Him, We are sorry for our sins,
and beg of our Lord His pardon, and further information what we must do. I grant pardon, said
He, by word and deed: by word, in the promise of forgiveness; by deed, in the way I obtained
it. Take the first from My lips with a kiss, (Song. 1:2); and the other as it shall be revealed.[50]
(John 20:20).

Now, I saw in my dream, that He spake many good words unto them, whereby they were greatly
gladded. He also had them up to the top of the gate, and showed them by what deed they were
saved; and told them withal, That that sight they would have again, as they went along in the
way, to their comfort.

So He left them a while in a summer parlour below, where they entered into talk by themselves;
and thus Christiana began: O Lord! how glad am I that we are got in hither.

MERCY. So you well may; but I of all have cause to leap for joy.

CHRIST. I thought one time, as I stood at the gate (because I had knocked, and none did answer),
that all our labour had been lost, especially when that ugly cur made such a heavy barking
against us.[51]

MERCY. But my worse fear was after I saw that you was taken into His favour, and that I was
left behind. Now, thought I, it is fulfilled which is written, 'Two women shall he grinding
together, the one shall be taken and the other left'[52] (Matt. 24:41). I had much ado to forbear
crying out, Undone! undone![53]

And afraid I was to knock any more; but when I looked up to what was written over the gate,
I took courage.[54] I also thought that I must either knock again, or die; so I knocked, but
I cannot tell how, for my spirit now struggled betwixt life and death.

CHRIST. Can you not tell how you knocked? I am sure your knocks were so earnest that the very
sound of them made me start; I thought I never heard such knocking in all my life; I thought
you would have come in by violent hands, or have taken the kingdom by storm (Matt. 11:12).

MERCY. Alas! to be in my case, who that so was could but have done so? You saw that the door
was shut upon me, and that there was a most cruel dog thereabout. Who, I say, that was so faint-hearted
as I, that would not have knocked with all their might? But, pray, what said my Lord to my
rudeness? Was He not angry with me?

CHRIST. When He heard your lumbering noise, He gave a wonderful innocent smile; I believe what
you did pleased Him well enough, for He showed no sign to the contrary. But I marvel in my
heart, why He keeps such a dog; had I known that before,[55] I fear I should not have had heart
enough to have ventured myself in this manner. But now we are in, we are in; and I am glad
with all my heart.[56]

MERCY. I will ask, if you please, next time He comes down, why He keeps such a filthy cur in
His yard; I hope He will not take it amiss,

Aye, do, said the children, and persuade Him to hang him; for we are afraid he will bite us
when we go hence.

So at last He came down to them again, and Mercy fell to the ground on her face before Him,
and worshipped, and said, Let my Lord accept of the sacrifice of praise which I now offer unto
Him with the calves of my lips.

So He said unto her, 'Peace be to thee, stand up.' But she continued upon her face, and said,
'Righteous art Thou, O Lord, when I plead with Thee: yet let me talk with Thee of Thy judgments'
(Jer. 12:1). Wherefore dost Thou keep so cruel a dog in Thy yard, at the sight of which, such
women and children as we, are ready to fly from Thy gate for fear?

He answered and said, That dog has another owner, he also is kept close in another man's ground,
only My pilgrims hear his barking; he belongs to the castle which you see there at a distance,
but can come up to the walls of this place. He has frighted many an honest pilgrim from worse
to better, by the great voice of his roaring. Indeed, he that owneth him doth not keep him
of any goodwill to Me or Mine, but with intent to keep the pilgrims from coming to Me, and
that they may be afraid to knock at this gate for entrance. Sometimes also he has broken out,
and has worried some that I loved; but I take all at present patiently. I also give My pilgrims
timely help, so they are not delivered up to his power, to do to them what his doggish nature
would prompt him to. But what! my purchased one, I trow, hadst thou known never so much beforehand,
thou wouldst not have been afraid of a dog.

The beggars that go from door to door will, rather than they will lose a supposed alms, run
the hazard of the bawling, barking, and biting, too, of a dog; and shall a dog--a dog in another
man's yard, a dog whose barking I turn to the profit of pilgrims--keep any from coming to Me?
I deliver them from the lions, their darling from the power of the dog.[57]

MERCY. Then said Mercy, I confess my ignorance; I spake what I understood not; I acknowledge
that Thou dost all things well.

CHRIST. Then Christiana began to talk of their journey, and to inquire after the way. So He
fed them, and washed their feet, and set them in the way of His steps, according as He had
dealt with her husband before. So I saw in my dream, that they walked on in their way, and
had the weather very comfortable to them.

Then Christiana began to sing, saying-- Blessed be the day that I began  A pilgrim for to be;
And blessed also be that man That thereto moved me. 'Tis true, 'twas long ere I began To seek
to live forever: But now I run fast as I can; 'Tis better late then never.

Our tears to joy, our fears to faith,  Are turned, as we see, That our beginning, as one saith,
Shows what our end will be.

Now there was, on the other side of the wall that fenced in the way up which Christiana and
her companions were to go, a garden, and that garden belonged to him whose was that barking
dog of whom mention was made before. And some of the fruit-trees that grew in that garden shot
their branches over the wall; and being mellow, they that found them did gather them up, and
oft eat of them to their hurt. So Christiana's boys, as boys are apt to do, being pleased with
the trees, and with the fruit that did hang thereon, did plash[58] them, and began to eat.
Their mother did also chide them for so doing, but still the boys went on.[59]

Well, said she, my sons, you transgress, for that fruit is none of ours; but she did not know
that they did belong to the enemy; I will warrant you, if she had, she would have been ready
to die for fear. But that passed, and they went on their way. Now, by that they were gone about
two bow-shots from the place that let them into the way, they espied two very ill-favoured
ones coming down apace to meet them.[60] With that, Christiana and Mercy, her friend, covered
themselves with their veils, and so kept on their journey; the children also went on before;
so that at last they met together. Then they that came down to meet them, came just up to the
women, as if they would embrace them; but Christiana said, Stand back, or go peaceably by,
as you should. Yet these two, as men that are deaf, regarded not Christiana's words, but began
to lay hands upon them. At that Christiana, waxing very wroth, spurned at them with her feet.
Mercy also, as well as she could, did what she could to shift them. Christiana again said to
them, Stand back, and begone; for we have no money to lose, being pilgrims, as you see, and
such, too, as live upon the charity of our friends.

ILL-FAVOURED. Then said one of the two of the men, We make no assault upon you for money, but
are come out to tell you, that if you will but grant one small request, which we shall ask,
we will make women of you forever.

CHRIST. Now Christiana, imagining what they should mean, made answer again, We will neither
bear, nor regard, nor yield to what you shall ask. We are in haste, cannot stay; our business
is a business of life and death. So, again, she and her companions made a fresh essay to go
past them; but they letted them in their way.

ILL-FAV. And they said, We intend no hurt to your lives; it is another thing we would have.

CHRIST. Ah, quoth Christiana, you would have us body and soul, for I know it is for that you
are come; but we will die rather upon the spot, than suffer ourselves to be brought into such
snares as shall hazard our well-being hereafter. And with that they both shrieked out, and
cried, Murder! murder! and so put themselves under those laws that are provided for the protection
of women (Deut. 22:23-27). But the men still made their approach upon them, with design to
prevail against them. They, therefore, cried out again.[61]

Now, they being, as I said, not far from the gate in at which they came, their voice was heard
from where they were, thither; wherefore some of the house came out, and knowing that it was
Christiana's tongue, they made haste to her relief. But by that they were got within sight
of them, the women were in a very great scuffle, the children also stood crying by. Then did
he that came in for their relief call out to the ruffians, saying, What is that thing that
you do? Would you make my Lord's people to transgress? He also attempted to take them, but
they did make their escape over the wall, into the garden of the man to whom the great dog
belonged; so the dog became their protector. This Reliever then came up to the women, and asked
them how they did. So they answered, We thank thy Prince, pretty well; only we have been somewhat
affrighted; we thank thee also, for that thou camest in to our help, for otherwise we had been
overcome.

RELIEVER. So after a few more words, this Reliever said as followeth: I marveled much when
you were entertained at the gate above, being, [as] ye knew, that ye were but weak women, that
you petitioned not the Lord there for a conductor; then might you have avoided these troubles
and dangers, for He would have granted you one.[62]

CHRIST. Alas! said Christiana, we were so with our present blessing, that dangers to come were
forgotten by us; besides, who could have thought, that so near the King's palace, there should
have lurked such naughty ones? Indeed, it had been well for us, had we asked our Lord for one;
but, since our Lord knew it would be for our profit, I wonder He sent not one along with us![63]

REL. It is not always necessary to grant things not asked for, lest, by so doing, they become
of little esteem; but when the want of a thing is felt, it then comes under, in the eyes of
him that feels it, that estimate that properly is its due, and so, consequently, will be thereafter
used. Had my Lord granted you a conductor, you would not neither so have bewailed that oversight
of yours, in not asking for one, as now you have occasion to do. So all things work for good,
and tend to make you more wary.

CHRIST. Shall we go back again to my Lord, and confess our folly, and ask one?

REL. Your confession of your folly I will present Him with. To go back again you need not;
for in all places where you shall come, you will find no want at all; for in every of my Lord's
lodgings, which He has prepared for the reception of His pilgrims, there is sufficient to furnish
them against all attempts whatsoever. But, as I said, 'He will be inquired of by them, to do
it for them' (Ezek. 36:37). And it is a poor thing that is not worth asking for. When he had
thus said, he went back to his place, and the Pilgrims went on their way.

MERCY. Then said Mercy, What a sudden blank is here! I made account we had now been past all
danger, and that we should never see sorrow more.[64]

CHRIST. Thy innocency, my sister, said Christiana to Mercy, may excuse thee much; but as for
me, my fault is so much the greater, for that I saw this dancer before I came out of the doors,
and yet did not provide for it where provision might have been had. I am therefore much to
be blamed.[65]

MERCY. Then said Mercy, How knew you this before you came from home? Pray open to me this riddle.

CHRIST. Why, I will tell you. Before I set foot out of doors, one night, as I lay in my bed,
I had a dream about this; for, methought I saw two men, as like these as ever the world they
could look, stand at my bed's feet, plotting how they might prevent my salvation. I will tell
you their very words. They said (it was when I was in my troubles), What shall we do with this
woman? for she cries out, waking and sleeping, for forgiveness. If she be suffered to go on
as she begins, we shall lose her, as we have lost her husband. This, you know, might have made
me take heed, and have provided when provision might have been had.

MERCY. Well, said Mercy, as by this neglect we have an occasion ministered unto us, to behold
our own imperfections; so our Lord has taken occasion thereby, to make manifest the riches
of His grace; for He, as we see, has followed us with unasked kindness, and has delivered us
from their hands that were stronger than we, of His mere good pleasure.[66]

Thus, now when they had talked away a little more time, they drew nigh to a house which stood
in the way, which house was built for the relief of pilgrims; as you will find more fully related
in the First Part of these Records of the Pilgrim's Progress. So they drew on towards the house
(the House of the Interpreter), and when they came to the door, they heard a great talk in
the house. They then gave ear, and heard, as they thought, Christiana mentioned by name. For
you must know that there went along, even before her, a talk of her and her children's going
on pilgrimage. And this thing was the more pleasing to them, because they had heard that she
was Christian's wife, that woman who was sometime ago so unwilling to hear of going on pilgrimage.
Thus, therefore, they stood still, and heard the good people within commending her, who, they
little thought, stood at the door. At last Christiana knocked, as she had done at the gate
before. Now, when she had knocked, there came to the door a young damsel, named Innocent, and
opened the door and looked, and behold two women were there.

DAMSEL. Then said the damsel to them, With whom would you speak in this place?

CHRIST. Christiana answered, We understand that this is a privileged place for those that are
become pilgrims, and we now at this door are such; wherefore we pray that we may be partakers
of that for which we at this time are come; for the day, as thou seest, is very far spent,
and we are loath tonight to go any further.

DAMSEL. Pray, what may I call your name, that I may tell it to my Lord within?

CHRIST. My name is Christiana; I was the wife of that pilgrim, that some years ago did travel
this way, and these be his four children. This maiden also is my companion, and is going on
pilgrimage too.

INNOCENT. Then ran Innocent in (for that was her name) and said to those within, Can you think
who is at the door? There is Christiana and her children, and her companion, all waiting for
entertainment here. Then they leaped for joy, and went and told their Master. So He came to
the door, and looking upon her, He said, Art thou that Christiana whom Christian, the good
man, left behind him, when he betook himself to a pilgrim's life?

CHRIST. I am that woman that was so hard-hearted, as to slight my husband's troubles, and that
left him to go on in his journey alone, and these are his four children; but now I also am
come, for I am convinced that no way is right but this.

INTER. 21:29).

CHRIST. Then said Christiana, So be it, Amen. God make it a true saying upon me, and grant
that I may be found at the last of Him in peace, without spot, and blameless!

INTER. But why standest thou thus at the door? Come in, thou daughter of Abraham. We were talking
of thee but now, for tidings have come to us before, how thou art become a pilgrim. Come, children,
come in; come, maiden, come in. So He had them all into the house.[67]

So, when they were within, they were bidden sit down and rest them; the which when they had
done, those that attended upon the Pilgrims in the house, came into the room to see them. And
one smiled, and another smiled, and they all smiled, for joy that Christiana was become a pilgrim.
They also looked upon the boys. They stroked them over the faces with the hand, in token of
their kind reception of them. They also carried it lovingly to Mercy, and bid them all welcome
into their Master's house.[68]

After a while, because supper was not ready, the Interpreter took them into his significant
rooms, and showed them what Christian, Christiana's husband, had seen some time before. Here,
therefore, they saw the man in the cage, the man and his dream, the man that cut his way through
his enemies, and the picture of the biggest of them all, together with the rest of those things
that were then so profitable to Christian.

This done, and after these things had been somewhat digested by Christiana and her company,
the Interpreter takes them apart again, and has them first into a room where was a man that
could look no way but downwards, with a muck-rake in his hand. There stood also one over His
head with a celestial crown in His hand, and proffered him that crown for his muck-rake; but
the man did neither look up, nor regard, but raked to himself the straws, the small sticks,
and dust of the floor.[69]

Then said Christiana, I persuade myself that I know somewhat the meaning of this; for this
is a figure of a man of this world, is it not, good Sir?

INTER. Thou hast said the right, said He, and his muck-rake doth show his carnal mind. And
whereas thou seest him rather give heed to rake up straws and sticks, and the dust of the floor,
than to what He says that calls to him from above with the celestial crown in His hand, it
is to show that Heaven is but as a fable to some, and that things here are counted the only
things substantial. Now, whereas, it was also showed thee, that the man could look no way but
downwards, it is to let thee know that earthly things, when they are with power upon men's
minds, quite carry their hearts away from God.[70]

CHRIST. Then said Christiana, O deliver me from this muck-rake![71]

INTER. That prayer, Said the Interpreter, has lain by till it is almost rusty. 'Give me not
riches,' is scarce the prayer of one of ten thousand (Prov. 30:8). Straws, and sticks, and
dust, with most, are the great things now looked after.[72] With that Mercy and Christiana
wept, and said, It is, alas! too true.[73]

When the Interpreter had shown them this, He has them into the very best room in the house;
a very brave room it was. So He bid them look round about, and see if they could find anything
profitable there. Then they looked round and round; for there was nothing there to be seen
but a very great spider on the wall: and that they overlooked.

MERCY. Then said Mercy, Sir, I see nothing; but Christiana held her peace.

INTER. But, said the Interpreter, look again, and she therefore looked again, and said, Here
is not anything but an ugly spider, who hangs by her hands upon the wall. Then said He, Is
there but one spider in all this spacious room? Then the water stood in Christiana's eyes,
for she was a woman quick of apprehension; and she said, Yea, Lord, there is here more than
one. Yea, and spiders whose venom is far more destructive than that which is in her. The Interpreter
then looked pleasantly upon her, and said, Thou hast said the truth. This made Mercy blush,
and the boys to cover their faces, for they all began now to understand the riddle.[74]

Then said the Interpreter again, 'The spider taketh hold with their hands (as you see), and
is in kings' palaces' (Prov. 30:28). And wherefore is this recorded, but to show you, that
how full of the venom of sin soever you be, yet you may, by the hand of faith, lay hold of,
and dwell in the best room that belongs to the King's house above![75]

CHRIST. I thought, said Christiana, of something of this; but I could not imagine it all. I
thought that we were like spiders, and that we looked like ugly creatures, in what fine room
soever we were; but that by this spider, this venomous and ill-favoured creature, we were to
learn how to act faith, that came not into my mind. And yet she has taken hold with her hands,
as I see, and dwells in the best room in the house. God has made nothing in vain.

Then they seemed all to be glad; but the water stood in their eyes; yet they looked one upon
another, and also bowed before the Interpreter.

He had them then into another room, where was a hen and chickens, and bid them observe a while.
So one of the chickens went to the trough to drink, and every time she drank, she lift up her
head, and her eyes towards Heaven. See, said He, what this little chick doth, and learn of
her to acknowledge whence your mercies come, by receiving them with looking up. Yet again,
said He, observe and look; so they gave heed, and perceived that the hen did walk in a fourfold
method towards her chickens. 1. She had a common call, and that she hath all day long. 2. She
had a special call, and that she had but sometimes. 3. She had a brooding note. And 4. She
had an outcry (Matt. 23:37).

Now, said He, compare this hen to your King, and these chickens to His obedient ones.[76] For,
answerable to her, Himself has His methods, which He walketh in towards His people; by His
common call, He gives nothing; by His special call, He always has something to give; He has
also a brooding voice, for them that are under His wing; and He has an outcry, to give the
alarm when He seeth the enemy come.[77] I chose, My darlings, to lead you into the room where
such things are, because you are women, and they are easy for you.[78]

CHRIST. And Sir, said Christiana, pray let us see some more. So He had them into the slaughter-house,
where was a butcher killing of a sheep; and behold the sheep was quiet, and took her death
patiently. Then said the Interpreter, You must learn of this sheep to suffer, and to put up
wrongs without murmurings and complaints. Behold how quietly she taketh her death, and without
objecting, she suffereth her skin to be pulled over her ears. Your King doth call you His sheep.

After this He led them into His garden, where was great variety of flowers; and he said, Do
you see all these? So Christiana Said, Yes. Then said He again, Behold the flowers are diverse
in stature, in quality, and colour, and smell, and virtue; and some are better than some; also
where the gardener hath set them, there they stand, and quarrel not with one another.[79]

Again, He had them into His field, which He had sowed with wheat and corn; but when they beheld,
the tops of all were cut off, only the straw remained; He said again, This ground was dunged,
and ploughed, and sowed; but what shall we do with the crop? Then said Christiana, Burn some,
and make muck of the rest. Then Said the Interpreter again, Fruit, you see, is that thing you
look for,[80] and for want of that you condemn it to the fire, and to be trodden under foot
of men: beware that in this you condemn not yourselves.[81]

Then, as they were coming in from abroad, they espied a little robin with a great spider in
his mouth; so the Interpreter said, Look here. So they looked, and Mercy wondered; but Christiana
said, What a disparagement is it to such a little pretty bird as the robin-redbreast is, he
being also a bird above many, that loveth to maintain a kind of socialbleness with man; I had
thought they had lived upon crumbs of bread, or upon other such harmless matter; I like him
worse than I did.

The Interpreter then replied, This robin is an emblem, very apt to set forth some professors
by; for to sight, they are, as this robin, pretty of note, colour, and carriage. They seem
also to have a very great love for professors that are sincere; and above all other, to desire
to sociate with them, and to be in their company, as if they could live upon the good man's
crumbs. They pretend also, that therefore it is that they frequent the house of the godly,
and the appointments of the Lord; but, when they are by themselves, as the robin, they can
catch and gobble up spiders, they can change their diet, drink iniquity, and swallow down sin
like water.[82] So, when they were come again into the house, because supper as yet was not
ready, Christiana again desired that the Interpreter would either show or tell of some other
things that are profitable. Then the Interpreter began, and said, The fatter the sow is, the
more she desires the mire; the fatter the ox is, the more gamesomely he goes to the slaughter;
and the more healthy the lusty man is, the more prone he is unto evil.

There is a desire in women to go neat and fine, and it is a comely thing to be adorned with
that that in God's sight is of great price. It is easier watching a night or two, than to sit
up a whole year together. So it is easier for one to begin to profess well, than to hold out
as he should to the end.

Every shipmaster, when in a storm, will willingly cast that overboard that is of the smallest
value in the vessel; but who will throw the best out first? None but he that feareth not God.
One leak will sink a ship; and one sin will destroy a sinner. He that forgets his friend, is
ungrateful unto him; but he that forgets his Saviour, is unmerciful to himself.

He that lives in sin, and looks for happiness hereafter, is like him that soweth cockle, and
thinks to fill his barn with wheat or barley. If a man would live well, let him fetch his last
day to him, and make it always his company keeper.

Whispering, and change of thoughts, prove that sin is in the world. If the world, which God
sets light by, is counted a thing of that worth with men; what is Heaven, which God commendeth?

If the life that is attended with so many troubles, is so loath to be let go by us, what is
the life above?

Everybody will cry up the goodness of men; but who is there that is, as he should, affected
with the goodness of God?

We seldom sit down to meat, but we eat and leave; so there is in Jesus Christ more merit and
righteousness than the whole world has need of.[83]

When the Interpreter had done, He takes them out into His garden again, and had them to a tree,
whose inside was all rotten and gone, and yet it grew and had leaves. Then said Mercy, What
means this? This tree, said He, whose outside is fair, and whose inside is rotten, it is to
which many may be compared, that are in the garden of God; who with their mouths speak high
in behalf of God, but indeed will do nothing for Him; whose leaves are fair, but their heart
good for nothing but to be tinder for the devil's tinder box.[84] Now supper was ready, the
table spread, and all things set on the board; so they sat down and did eat, when one had given
thanks. And the Interpreter did usually entertain those that lodged with Him, with music at
meals; so the minstrels played. There was also one that did sing, and a very fine voice he
had. His song was this:

The Lord is only my support,  And he that doth me feed; How can I then want anything Whereof
I stand in need?

When the song and music was ended,[85] the Interpreter asked Christiana what it was that at
first did move her to betake herself to a Pilgrim's life. Christiana answered, First, the loss
of my husband came into my mind, at which I was heartily grieved; but all that was but natural
affection. Then, after that, came the troubles and pilgrimage of my husband into my mind, and
also how like a churl I had carried it to him as to that. So guilt took hold of my mind, and
would have drawn me into the pond; but that opportunely I had a dream of the well-being of
my husband, and a letter sent me by the King of that country where my husband dwells, to come
to Him. The dream and the letter together so wrought upon my mind, that they forced me to this way.

INTER. But met you with no opposition before you set out of doors?

CHRIST. Yes, a neighbour of mine, one Mrs. Timorous (she was akin to him that would have persuaded
my husband to go back, for fear of the lions). She all to befooled me for, as she called it,
my intended desperate adventure; she also urged what she could to dishearten me to it; the
hardship and troubles that my husband met with in the way, but all this I got over pretty well.[86]
But a dream that I had of two ill-looked ones, that I thought did plot how to make me miscarry
in my journey, that hath troubled me much; yea, it still runs in my mind, and makes me afraid
of everyone that I meet, lest they should meet me to do me a mischief, and to turn me out of
the way. Yea, I may tell my Lord, though I would not have everybody know it, that between this
and the gate by which we got into the way, we were both so sorely assaulted that we were made
to cry out, Murder! and the two them made this assault upon us were like the two that I saw
in my dream.

Then said the Interpreter, thy beginning is good, thy latter end shall greatly increase. So
He addressed Himself to Mercy, and said unto her, And what moved thee to come hither, sweet heart?

Then Mercy blushed and trembled, and for a while continued silent.

INTER. Then, said He, be not afraid, only believe, and speak thy mind.

MERCY. So she began, and said, Truly, Sir, my want of experience is that which makes me covet
to be in silence, and that also that fills me with fears of coming short at last. I cannot
tell of visions and dreams as my friend Christiana can; nor know I what it is to mourn for
my refusing of the counsel of those that were good relations.[87]

INTER. What was it then, dear heart, that hath prevailed with thee to do as thou hast done?

MERCY. Why, when our friend here was packing up to be gone from our town, I and another went
accidentally to see her; so we knocked at the door and went in. When we were within, and seeing
what she was doing, we asked what was her meaning. She said, she was sent for to go to her
husband; and then she up and told us how she had seen him in a dream, dwelling in a curious
place, among immortals, wearing a crown, playing upon a harp, eating and drinking at his Prince's
table, and singing praises to Him for bringing him thither, &c. Now, methought, while she was
telling these things unto us, my heart burned within me; and I said in my heart, If this be
true, I will leave my father and my mother, and the land of my nativity, and will, if I may,
go along with Christiana. So I asked her further of the truth of these things, and if she would
let me go with her; for I saw now that there was no dwelling, but with the danger of ruin,
any longer in our town. But yet I came away with a heavy heart, not for that I was unwilling
to come away, but for that so many of my relations were left behind. And I am come, with all
the desire of my heart, and will go, if I may, with Christiana, unto her husband, and his King.[88]

INTER.

Now supper was ended, and preparation was made for bed; the women were laid singly alone, and
the boys by themselves. Now when Mercy was in bed, she could not sleep for joy, for that now
her doubts of missing at last, were removed further from her than ever they were before. So
she lay blessing and praising God, who had had such favour for her.

In the morning they rose with the sun, and prepared themselves for their departure; but the
Interpreter would have them tarry awhile, for, said He, you must orderly go from hence. Then,
said He to the damsel that first opened unto them, Take them and have them into the garden
to the bath, and there wash them, and make them clean from the soil which they have gathered
by travelling. Then Innocent the damsel took them, and had them into the garden, and brought
them to the bath; so she told them that there they must wash and be clean, for so her Master
would have the women to do that called at His house, as they were going on pilgrimage. They
then went in and washed, yea, they and the boys and all; and they came out of that bath, not
only sweet and clean, but also much enlivened and strengthened in their joints.[90] So when
they came in, they looked fairer a deal than when they went out to the washing.[91]

When they were returned out of the garden from the bath, the Interpreter took them, and looked
upon them, and said unto them, Fair as the moon. Then he called for the seal, wherewith they
used to be sealed that were washed in His bath. So the seal was brought, and He set His mark
upon them, that they might be known in the places whither they were yet to go. Now the seal
was the contents and sum of the passover which the children of Israel did eat when they came
out from the land of Egypt, and the mark was set between their eyes.[92] This seal greatly
added to their beauty, for it was an ornament to their faces. It also added to their gravity,
and made their countenances more like them of angels[93] (Exo. 13:8-10).

Then said the Interpreter again to the damsel that waited upon these women, Go into the vestry
and fetch out garments for these people; so she went and fetched out white raiment, and laid
down before Him; so He commanded them to put it on. 'It was fine linen, white and clean.' When
the women were thus adorned, they seemed to be a terror one to the other; for that they could
not see that glory each one on herself, which they could see in each other. Now, therefore,
they began to esteem each other better than themselves. 'For you are fairer than I am,' said
one; and 'you are more comely than I am,' said another.[94] The children also stood amazed
to see into what fashion they were brought.[95]

The Interpreter then called for a man-servant of His, one Great-heart, and bid him take sword,
and helmet, and shield; and take these My daughters, said He, and conduct them to the house
called Beautiful, at which place they will rest next.[96] So he took his weapons and went before
them; and the Interpreter said, God speed. Those also that belonged to the family, sent them
away with many a good wish. So they went on their way and sang--

This place has been our second stage; Here we have heard and seen Those good things that, from
age to age, To others hid have been.

The dunghill-racer, spider, hen, The chicken, too, to me Hath taught a lesson; let me then
Conformed to it be.

The butcher, garden, and the field, The robin and his bait, Also the rotten tree doth yield
Me argument of weight;

To move me for to watch and pray,  To strive to be sincere; To take my cross up day by day,
And serve the Lord with fear.

Now I saw in my dream, that they went on, and Great-heart went before them: so they went and
came to the place where Christian's burden fell off his back, and tumbled into a sepulchre.
Here then they made a pause; and here also they blessed God. Now, said Christiana, it comes
to my mind, what was said to us at the gate, to wit, that we should have pardon by word and
deed; by word, that is, by the promise; by deed, to wit, in the way it was obtained. What the
promise is, of that I know something; but what it is to have pardon by deed, or in the way
that it was obtained, Mr. Great-heart, I suppose you know; wherefore, if you please, let us
hear you discourse thereof.

GREAT-HEART. Pardon by the deed done, is pardon obtained by someone, for another that hath
need thereof: not by the person pardoned, but in the way, saith another, in which I have obtained
it. So then, to speak to the question more [at] large, the pardon that you and Mercy, and these
boys have attained, was obtained by another, to wit, by Him that let you in at the gate; and
He hath obtained it in this double way. He has performed righteousness to cover you, and spilt
blood to wash you in.[97]

CHRIST. But if He parts with His righteousness to us, what will He have for Himself?

GREAT-HEART. He has more righteousness than you have need of, or than He needeth Himself.

CHRIST. Pray make that appear.

GREAT-HEART. With all my heart; but first I must premise, that He of whom we are now about
to speak is one that has not His fellow. He has two natures in one Person, plain to be distinguished,
impossible to be divided. Unto each of these natures a righteousness belongeth, and each righteousness
is essential to that nature; so that one may as easily cause the nature to be extinct, as to
separate its justice or righteousness from it. Of these righteousnesses, therefore, we are
not made partakers, so as that they, or any of them, should be put upon us, that we might be
made just, and live thereby. Besides these, there is a righteousness which this Person has,
as these two natures are joined in one: and this is not the righteousness of the Godhead, as
distinguished from the manhood; nor the righteousness of the manhood, as distinguished from
the Godhead; but a righteousness which standeth in the union of both natures, and may properly
be called, the righteousness that is essential to His being prepared of God to the capacity
of the mediatory office, which He was to be intrusted with. If He parts with His first righteousness,
He parts with His Godhead; if He parts with His second righteousness, He parts with the purity
of His manhood; if He parts with this third, He parts with that perfection that capacitates
Him to the office of mediation. He has, therefore, another righteousness, which standeth in
performance, or obedience, to a revealed will; and that is it that He puts upon sinners, and
that by which their sins are covered. 5:19).

CHRIST. But are the other righteousnesses of no use to us?

GREAT-HEART. Yes; for though they are essential to His natures and office and so cannot be
communicated unto another, yet it is by virtue of them, that the righteousness that justifies,
is, for that purpose, efficacious. The righteousness of His Godhead gives virtue to His obedience;
the righteousness of His manhood giveth capability to His obedience to justify; and the righteousness
that standeth in the union of these two natures to His office, giveth authority to that righteousness
to do the work for which it is ordained.

So then, here is a righteousness that Christ, as God, has no need of, for He is God without
it; here is a righteousness that Christ, as man, has no need of to make Him so, for He is perfect
man without it; again, here is a righteousness that Christ, as God-man, has no need of, for
He is perfectly so without it. Here, then, is a righteousness that Christ, as God, as man,
as God-man, has no need of, with reference to Himself, and therefore He can spare it; a justifying
righteousness, that He for Himself wanteth not, and therefore He giveth it away; hence it is
called 'the gift of righteousness' (Rom. 5:17). This righteousness, since Christ Jesus the
Lord has made Himself under the law, must be given away; for the law doth not only bind him
that is under it 'to do justly,' but to use charity. Wherefore he must, he ought, by the law,
if he hath two coats, to give one to him that hath none. Now, our Lord, indeed, hath two coats,
one for Himself, and one to spare; wherefore He freely bestows one upon those that have none.
And thus, Christiana, and Mercy, and the rest of you that are here, doth your pardon come by
deed, or by the work of another man. Your Lord Christ is He that has worked, and has given
away what he wrought for, to the next poor beggar He meets.[99]

But, again, in order to pardon by deed, there must something be paid to God as a price, as
well as something prepared to cover us withal. Sin has delivered us up to the just curse of
a righteous law; now, from this curse we must be justified by way of redemption, a price being
paid for the harms we have done (Rom. 4:24); and this is by the blood of your Lord, who came
and stood in your place and stead, and died your death for your transgressions (Gal. 3:13).
Thus has He ransomed you from your transgressions by blood, and covered your polluted and deformed
souls with righteousness. For the sake of which, God passeth by you, and will not hurt you,
when He comes to judge the world.

CHRIST. This is brave. Now, I see there was something to be learned by our being pardoned by
word and deed. Good Mercy, let us labour to keep this in mind; and my children, do you remember
it also. But, Sir, was not this it that made my good Christian's burden fall from off his shoulder,
and that made him give three leaps for joy?[100]

GREAT-HEART. Yes, it was the belief of this, that cut those strings, that could not be cut
by other means; and it was to give him a proof of the virtue of this, that he was suffered
to carry his burden to the Cross.

CHRIST. I thought so; for though my heart was lightful and joyous before, yet it is ten times
more lightsome and joyous now. And I am persuaded by what I have felt, though I have felt but
little as yet, that if the most burdened man in the world was here, and did see and believe
as I now do, it would make his heart the more merry and blithe.[101]

GREAT-HEART. There is not only comfort, and the ease of a burden brought to us, by the sight
and consideration of these, but an endeared affection begot in us by it; for who can, if he
doth but once think that pardon comes not only by promise, but thus, but be affected with the
way and means of his redemption, and so, with the Man that hath wrought it for him?

CHRIST. True; methinks it makes my heart bleed to think that He should bleed for me. O Thou
loving One! O Thou blessed One! Thou deservest to have me; Thou hast bought me; Thou deservest
to have me all; Thou hast paid for me ten thousand times more than I am worth! No marvel that
this made the water stand in my husband's eyes, and that it made him trudge so nimbly on; I
am persuaded he wished me with him; but, vile wretch that I was, I let him come all alone.
O Mercy, that thy father and mother were here; yea, and Mrs. Timorous also; nay, I wish now
with all my heart, that here was Madam Wanton too. Surely, surely their hearts would be affected;
nor could the fear of the one, nor the powerful lusts of the other, prevail with them to go
home again, and to refuse to become good pilgrims.[102]

GREAT-HEART. You speak now in the warmth of your affections. Will it, think you, be always
thus with you? Besides, this is not communicated to everyone that did see your Jesus bleed.
There were that stood by, and that saw the blood run from His heart to the ground, and yet
were so far off this, that, instead of lamenting, they laughed at Him; and, instead of becoming
His disciples, did harden their hearts against Him. So that all that you have, my daughters,
you have by a peculiar impression made by a Divine contemplating upon what I have spoken to
you. Remember that it was told you, that the hen, by her common call, gives no meat to her
chickens. This you have, therefore, by a special grace.[103]

Now, I saw still in my dream, that they went on until they were come to the place that Simple,
and Sloth, and Presumption,[104] lay and slept in, when Christian went by on pilgrimage; and,
behold, they were hanged up in irons a little way off on the other side.[105]

MERCY. Then said Mercy to him that was their guide and conductor, What are those three men?
and for what are they hanged there?

GREAT-HEART. These three men were men of very bad qualities. They had no mind to be pilgrims
themselves, and whosoever they could they hindered. They were for sloth and folly themselves,
and whoever they could persuade with, they made so too; and, withal, taught them to presume
that they should do well at last. They were asleep when Christian went by; and now you go by,
they are hanged.[106]

MERCY. But could they persuade any to be of their opinion?

GREAT-HEART. Yes; they turned several out of the way. There was Slow-pace that they persuaded
to do as they. They also prevailed with one Short-wind, with one No-heart, with one Linger-after-lust,
and with one Sleepy-head, and with a young woman, her name was Dull, to turn out of the way,
and become as they. Besides, they brought up an ill report of your Lord, persuading others
that He was a taskmaster. They also brought up an evil report of the good land, saying it was
not half so good as some pretend it was. They also began to vilify His servants, and to count
the very best of them meddlesome, troublesome, busybodies. Further, they could call the bread
of God husks; the comforts of His children, fancies; the travel and labour of pilgrims, things
to no purpose.[107]

CHRIST. Nay, said Christiana, if they were such, they shall never be bewailed by me. They have
but what they deserve; and I think it is well that they hang so near the highway, that others
may see and take warning. But had it not been well if their crimes had been engraven on some
plate of iron or brass, and left here, even where they did their mischiefs, for a caution to
other bad men?

GREAT-HEART. So it is, as you well may perceive, if you will go a little to the wall.

MERCY. No, no; let them hang, and their names rot, and their crimes live forever against them.
I think it a high favour that they were hanged before we came hither; who knows else what they
might have done to such poor women as we are? Then she turned it into a song, saying--

Now then, you three, hang there, and be a sign To all that shall against the truth combine.
And let him that comes after fear this end,  If unto pilgrims he is not a friend.  And thou,
my soul, of all such men beware,  That unto holiness opposers are.

Thus they went on, till they came at the foot of the Hill Difficulty,[108] where, again, their
good friend, Mr. Great-heart, took an occasion to tell them of what happened there when Christian
himself went by. So he had them first to the spring. Lo, said he, this is the spring that Christian
drank of, before he went up this hill; and then it was clear and good, but now it is dirty
with the feet of some that are not desirous that pilgrims here should quench their thirst (Ezek.
34:18). Thereat Mercy said, And why so envious, trow? But, said their guide, it will do, if
taken up, and put into a vessel that is sweet and good; for then the dirt will sink to the
bottom, and the water come out by itself more clear.[109] Thus, therefore, Christiana and her
companions were compelled to do. They took it up, and put it into an earthen pot, and so let
it stand till the dirt was gone to the bottom, and then they drank thereof.[110] Next, he showed
them the two by-ways that were at the foot of the hill, where Formality and Hypocrisy lost
themselves. And, said he, these are dangerous paths. Two were here cast away when Christian
came by. And although, as you see, these ways are since stopped up with chains, posts, and
a ditch, yet there are that will choose to adventure here, rather than take the pains to go
up this hill.[111]

CHRIST. 'The way of transgressors is hard' (Prov. 13:15). It is a wonder that they can get
into those ways without danger of breaking their necks.

GREAT-HEART. They will venture. Yea, if at any time any of the King's servants do happen to
see them, and do call unto them, and tell them that they are in the wrong ways, and do bid
them beware the danger, then they will railingly return them answer, and say, 'As for the word
that thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee; but we
will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth,' &c. (Jer. 44:16, 17).
Nay, if you look a little further, you shall see that these ways are made cautionary enough,
not only by these posts, and ditch, and chain; but also by being hedged up, yet they will choose
to go there.[112]

CHRIST. They are idle; they love not to take pains; uphill way is unpleasant to them. So it
is fulfilled unto them as it is written, 'The way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns'
(Prov. 15:19). Yea, they will rather choose to walk upon a snare, than to go up this hill,
and the rest of this way to the city.

Then they set forward, and began to go up the hill, and up the hill they went; but before they
got to the top, Christiana began to pant; and said, I dare say, this is a breathing hill. No
marvel if they that love their ease more than their souls, choose to themselves a smoother
way.[113] Then said Mercy, I must sit down; also the least of the children began to cry. Come,
come, said Great-heart, sit not down here, for a little above is the Prince's arbour. Then
took he the little boy by the hand, and led him up thereto.

When they were come to the arbour, they were very willing to sit down, for they were all in
a pelting heat. Then said Mercy, How sweet is rest to them that labour[114] (Matt. 11:28).
And how good is the Prince of pilgrims, to provide such resting-places for them! Of this arbour
I have heard much; but I never saw it before. But here let us beware of sleeping; for, as I
have heard, for that it cost poor Christian dear.

Then said Mr. Great-heart to the little ones, Come, my pretty boys, how do you do? What think
you now of going on pilgrimage? Sir, said the least, I was almost beat out of heart? but I
thank you for lending me a hand at my need.[115] And I remember now what my mother hath told
me, namely, that the way to Heaven is as up a ladder, and the way to hell is as down a hill.
But I had rather go up the ladder to life, than down the hill to death.[116]

Then said Mercy, But the proverb is, To go down the hill is easy. But James said (for that
was his name), The day is coming, when, in my opinion, going down hill will be the hardest
of all. 'Tis a good boy, said his Master, thou hast given her a right answer. Then Mercy smiled;
but the little boy did blush.[117]

CHRIST. Come, said Christiana, will you eat a bit, a little to sweeten your mouths, while you
sit here to rest your legs? For I have here a piece of pomegranate, which Mr. Interpreter put
in my hand, just when I came out of His doors. He gave me also a piece of a honeycomb, and
a little bottle of spirits. I thought He gave you something, said Mercy, because He called
you aside. Yes; so He did, said the other. But, said Christiana, it shall still be, as I said
it should, when at first we came from home, thou shalt be a sharer in all the good that I have,
because thou so willingly didst become my companion. Then she gave to them, and they did eat,
both Mercy and the boys. And, said Christiana to Mr. Great-heart, Sir, will you do as we? But
he answered, You are going on pilgrimage, and presently I shall return. Much good may what
you have do to you. At home I eat the same every day. Now, when they had eaten and drank, and
had chatted a little longer, their guide said to them. The day wears away, if you think good,
let us prepare to be going. So they got up to go, and the little boys went before. But Christiana
forgot to take her bottle of spirits with her; so she sent her little boy back to fetch it.
Then said Mercy, I think this is a losing place. Here Christian lost his roll; and here Christiana
left her bottle behind her. Sir, what is the cause of this? So their guide made answer, and
said, The cause is sleep or forgetfulness. Some sleep when they should keep awake; and some
forget when they should remember; and this is the very cause why, often at the resting-places,
some pilgrims, in some things, come off losers. Pilgrims should watch, and remember what they
have already received under their greatest enjoyments; but for want of doing so, ofttimes their
rejoicing ends in tears, and their sunshine in a cloud.[118] Witness the story of Christian
at this place.[119]

When they were come to the place where Mistrust and Timorous met Christian to persuade him
to go back for fear of the lions, they perceived as it were a stage, and before it, towards
the road, a broad plate, with a copy of verses written thereon, and underneath, the reason
of raising up of that stage in that place, rendered. The verses were these--

Let him who sees this stage take heed  Unto his heart and tongue; Lest if he do not, here he
speed,  As some have long agone. 120:3-4).

So they went on, till they came within sight of the lions. Now Mr. Great-heart was a strong
man, So he was not afraid of a lion; but yet when they were come up to the place where the
lions were, the boys that went before were glad when to cringe behind, for they were afraid
of the lions; so they stepped back, and went behind. At this their guide smiled, and said,
How now, my boys, do you love to go before, when no danger doth approach, and love to come
behind so soon as the lions appear?

Now, as they went up, Mr. Great-heart drew his sword, with intent to make a way for the Pilgrims,
in spite of the lions. Then there appeared one, that it seems, had taken upon him to back the
lions; and he said to the Pilgrims' guide, What is the cause of your coming hither? Now the
name of that man was Grim, or Bloody-man, because of his slaying of Pilgrims, and he was of
the race of the giants.[121]

GREAT-HEART. Then said the Pilgrims' guide, These women and children are going on pilgrimage;
and this is the way they must go, and go it they shall, in spite of thee and the lions.[122]

GRIM. This is not their way, neither shall they go therein. I am come forth to withstand them,
and to that end will back the lions.[123]

Now, to say truth, by reason of the fierceness of the lions, and of the grim carriage of him
that did back them, this way had of late lain much unoccupied, and was almost all grown over
with grass.

CHRIST. Then said Christiana, Though the highways have been unoccupied heretofore, and though
the travelers have been made in time past to walk through by-paths, it must not be so now I
am risen. Now 'I am risen a mother in Israel' (Judg. 5:6, 7).

GRIM. Then he swore by the lions, but it should; and therefore bid them turn aside, for they
should not have passage there.

GREAT-HEART. But their guide made first his approach unto Grim, and laid so heavily at him
with his sword, that he forced him to a retreat.[124]

GRIM. Then said he that attempted to back the lions, Will you slay me upon mine own ground?

GREAT-HEART. It is the King's highway that we are in, and in His way it is that thou hast placed
thy lions; but these women and these children, though weak, shall hold on their way in spite
of thy lions. And with that he gave him again a downright blow, and brought him upon his knees.
With this blow he also broke his helmet, and with the next he cut off an arm. Then did the
giant roar so hideously, that his voice frighted the women, and yet they were glad to see him
lie sprawling upon the ground. Now the lions were chained, and so of themselves could do nothing.[125]
Wherefore, when old Grim, that intended to back them, was dead, Mr. Great-heart said to the
Pilgrims, Come now, and follow me, and no hurt shall happen to you from the lions. They therefore
went on, but the women trembled as they passed by them; the boys also looked as if they would
die, but they all got by without further hurt.[126] Now then they were within sight of the
Porter's Lodge, and they soon came up unto it; but they made the more haste after this to go
thither, because it is dangerous travelling there in the night. So when they were come to the
gate, the guide knocked, and the Porter cried, Who is there? But as soon as the guide had said,
It is I, he knew his voice, and came down (for the guide had oft before that, come thither,
as a conductor of pilgrims). When he was come down, he opened the gate, and seeing the guide
standing just before it (for he saw not the women, for they were behind him), he said unto
him, How now, Mr. Great-heart, what is your business here so late tonight? I have brought,
said he, some pilgrims hither, where, by my Lord's commandment, they must lodge; I had been
here some time ago, had I not been opposed by the giant that did use to back the lions; but
I, after a long and tedious combat with him, have cut him off, and have brought the Pilgrims
hither in safety.[127]

PORTER. Will you not go in, and stay till morning?

GREAT-HEART. No, I will return to my Lord tonight.

CHRIST. Oh, Sir, I know not how to be willing you should leave us in our pilgrimage, you have
been so faithful and so loving to us, you have fought so stoutly for us, you have been so hearty
in counseling of us, that I shall never forget your favour towards us.

MERCY. Then said Mercy, O that we might have thy company to our journey's end! How can such
poor women as we hold out in a way so full of troubles as this way is, without a friend and
defender?

JAMES. Then said James, the youngest of the boys, Pray, Sir, be persuaded to go with us, and
help us, because we are so weak, and the way so dangerous as it is.[128]

GREAT-HEART. I am at my Lord's commandment; if He shall allot me to be your guide quite through,
I will willingly wait upon you. But here you failed at first; for, when He bid me come thus
far with you, then you should have begged me of Him to have gone quite through with you, and
He would have granted your request. However, at present, I must withdraw; and so, good Christiana,
Mercy, and my brave children, Adieu.

Then the Porter, Mr. Watchful, asked Christiana of her country, and of her kindred; and she
said, I came from the City of Destruction; I am a widow woman, and my husband is dead; his
name was Christian, the Pilgrim. How! said the Porter, was he your husband? Yes, said she,
and these are his children; and this, pointing to Mercy, is one of my townswomen. Then the
Porter rang his bell, as at such times he is wont, and there came to the door one of the damsels,
whose name was Humble-mind; and to her the Porter said, Go tell it within, that Christiana,
the wife of Christian, and her children, are come hither on pilgrimage. She went in, therefore,
and told it. But O what noise for gladness was there within, when the damsel did but drop that
word out of her mouth! So they came with haste to the Porter, for Christiana stood still at
the door. Then some of the most grave said unto her, Come in, Christiana, come in, thou wife
of that good man; come in, thou blessed woman; come in, with all that are with thee. So she
went in, and they followed her that were her children and her companions. Now when they were
gone in, they were had into a very large room, where they were bidden to sit down; so they
sat down, and the chief of the house was called to see and welcome the guests. Then they came
in, and understanding who they were, did salute each other with a kiss, and said, Welcome,
ye vessels of the grace of God; welcome to us your friends.[129]

Now, because it was somewhat late, and because the Pilgrims were weary with their journey,
and also made faint with the sight of the fight, and of the terrible lions, therefore they
desired, as soon as might be, to prepare to go to rest. Nay, said those of the family, refresh
yourselves first with a morsel of meat; for they had prepared for them a lamb, with the accustomed
sauce belonging thereto[130] (Exo. 12:21, 28; John 1:29); for the Porter had heard before of
their coming, and had told it to them within. So when they had supped, and ended their prayer
with a psalm, they desired they might go to rest. But let us, said Christiana, if we may be
so bold as to choose, be in that chamber[131] that was my husband's when he was here; so they
had them up thither, and they lay all in a room. When they were at rest, Christiana and Mercy
entered into discourse about things that were convenient.

CHRIST. Little did I think once, that when my husband went on pilgrimage, I should ever have
followed.

MERCY. And you as little thought of lying in his bed, and in his chamber to rest, as you do now.

CHRIST. And much less did I ever think of seeing his face with comfort, and of worshipping
the Lord the King with him; and yet now I believe I shall.

MERCY. Hark! Don't you hear a noise?

CHRIST. Yes; it is, as I believe, a noise of music, for joy that we are here.[132]

MERCY. Wonderful! music in the house, music in the heart, and music also in Heaven, for joy
that we are here![133] Thus they talked a while, and then betook themselves to sleep. So, in
the morning, when they were awake, Christiana said to Mercy:

CHRIST. What was the matter that you did laugh in your sleep tonight? I suppose you were in
a dream.

MERCY. So I was, and a sweet dream it was; but are you sure I laughed?

CHRIST. Yes; you laughed heartily; but, prithee, Mercy, tell me thy dream.

MERCY. I was a-dreamed that I sat all alone in a solitary place, and was bemoaning of the hardness
of my heart. Now, I had not sat there long, but methought many were gathered about me, to see
me, and to hear what it was that I said. So they hearkened, and I went on bemoaning the hardness
of my heart. At this, some of them laughed at me, some called me fool, and some began to thrust
me about. With that, methought I looked up, and saw one coming with wings towards me. So he
came directly to me, and said, Mercy, what aileth thee? Now, when he had heard me make my complaint,
he said 'Peace be to thee.' He also wiped mine eyes with his handkerchief, and clad me in silver
and gold. He put a chain about my neck, and ear-rings in mine ears, and a beautiful crown upon
my head (Ezek. 16:8-12). Then he took me by the hand, and said, Mercy, come after me. So he
went up, and I followed, till we came at a golden gate. Then he knocked; and when they within
had opened, the man went in, and I followed him up to a throne, upon which one sat, and He
said to me, Welcome, daughter. The place looked bright and twinkling, like the stars, or rather
like the sun; and I thought that I saw your husband there. So I awoke from my dream.[134] But
did I laugh?

CHRIST. Laugh! aye, and well you might, to see yourself so well. For you must give me leave
to tell you, that I believe it was a good dream; and that, as you have begun to find the first
part true, so you shall find the second at last. 'God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth
it not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in slumberings
upon the bed'[135] (Job 28:14, 15). We need not, when a-bed, lie awake to talk with God. He
can visit us while we sleep, and cause us then to hear His voice. Our heart ofttimes wakes
when we sleep; and God can speak to that, either by words, by proverbs, by signs and similitudes,
as well as if one was awake.[136]

MERCY. Well, I am glad of my dream; for I hope, ere long, to see it fulfilled, to the making
me laugh again.[137]

CHRIST. I think it is now high time to rise, and to know what we must do.

MERCY. Pray, if they invite us to stay awhile, let us willingly accept of the proffer. I am
the willinger to stay awhile here, to grow better acquainted with these maids. Methinks Prudence,
Piety, and Charity have very comely and sober countenances.[138]

CHRIST. We shall see what they will do. So when they were up and ready, they came down, and
they asked one another of their rest, and if it were comfortable, or not.

MERCY. Very good, said Mercy; it was one of the best night's lodging that ever I had in my life.

Then said Prudence and Piety, If you will be persuaded to stay here awhile, you shall have
what the house will afford.

CHAR. Aye, and that with a very good will, said Charity. So they consented and staid there
about a month, or above, and became very profitable one to another. And because Prudence would
see how Christiana had brought up her children, she asked leave of her to catechise them. So
she gave her free consent.[139] Then she began at the youngest, whose name was James.

PRUDENCE. And she said, Come, James, canst thou tell me who made thee?

JAMES. God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.

PRUD. Good boy. But how doth God the Father save thee?

JAMES. By his grace.

PRUD. How doth God the Son save thee?

JAMES. By His righteousness, death, and blood, and life.

PRUD. And how doth God the Holy Ghost save thee?

JAMES. By His illumination, by His renovation, and by His preservation.[140]

Then said Prudence to Christiana, You are to be commended for thus bringing up your children.
I suppose I need not ask the rest these questions, since the youngest of them can answer them
so well. I will therefore now apply myself to the next youngest.

PRUD. Then she said, Come, Joseph (for his name was Joseph), will you let me catechise you?

JOSEPH. With all my heart.

PRUD. What is man?

JOSEPH. A reasonable creature, so made by God, as my brother said.

PRUD. What is supposed by this word 'saved'?

JOSEPH. That man, by sin, has brought himself into a state of captivity and misery.

PRUD. What is supposed by his being saved by the Trinity?

JOSEPH. That sin is so great and mighty a tyrant, that none can pull us out of its clutches,
but God; and that God is so good and loving to man, as to pull him indeed out of this miserable
state.

PRUD. What is God's design in saving, of poor men?

JOSEPH. The glorifying of His name, of His grace, and justice, &c., and the everlasting happiness
of His creature.

PRUD. Who are they that must be saved?

JOSEPH. Those that accept of His salvation.[141]

PRUD. Good boy, Joseph; thy mother has taught thee well, and thou hast hearkened to what she
hath said unto thee. Then said Prudence to Samuel, who was the eldest but one,

PRUD. Come, Samuel, are you willing that I should catechise you also?

SAMUEL. Yes, forsooth, if you please.

PRUD. What is Heaven?

SAM. A place and state most blessed, because God dwelleth there.

PRUD. What is hell?

SAM. A place and state most woeful, because it is the dwelling-place of sin, the devil, and death.

PRUD. Why wouldest thou go to Heaven?

SAM. That I may see God, and serve Him without weariness; that I may see Christ, and love Him
everlastingly; that I may have that fullness of the Holy Spirit in me that I can by no means
here enjoy.

PRUD. A very good boy also, and one that has learned well. Then she addressed herself to the
eldest, whose name was Matthew; and she said to him, Come, Matthew, shall I also catechise you?

MATTHEW. With a very good will.

PRUD. I ask, then, if there were ever anything that had a being antecedent to, or before God?

MATT. No; for God is eternal; nor is there anything excepting Himself, that had a being until
the beginning of the first day. 'For in six days the Lord made Heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that in them is.'

PRUD. What do you think of the Bible?

MATT. It is the holy Word of God.

PRUD. Is there nothing written therein but what you understand?

MATT. Yes. A great deal.

PRUD. What do you do when you meet with such places therein that you do not understand?

MATT. I think God is wiser than I. I pray also that He will please to let me know all therein
that He knows will be for my good.[142]

PRUD. How believe you, as touching the resurrection of the dead?

MATT. I believe they shall rise, the same that was buried; the same in nature, though not in
corruption. And I believe this upon a double account: First, because God has promised it secondly,
because He is able to perform it.[143]

Then said Prudence to the boys, You must still hearken to your mother, for she can learn you
more. You must also diligently give ear to what good talk you shall hear from others; for,
for your sakes do they speak good things. Observe, also, and that with carefulness, what the
heavens and the earth do teach you; but especially be much in the meditation of that Book that
was the cause of your father's becoming a pilgrim. I, for my part, my children, will teach
you what I can while you are here, and shall be glad if you will ask me questions that tend
to godly edifying. Now, by that these Pilgrims had been at this place a week, Mercy had a visitor
that pretended some goodwill unto her, and his name was Mr. Brisk, a man of some breeding,
and that pretended to religion; but a man that stuck very close to the world. So he came once
or twice, or more, to Mercy, and offered love unto her. Now Mercy was of a fair countenance,
and therefore the more alluring. Her mind also was, to be always busying of herself in doing;
for when she had nothing to do for herself, she would be making of hose and garments for others,
and would bestow them upon them that had need.[144] And Mr. Brisk, not knowing where or how
she disposed of what she made, seemed to be greatly taken, for that he found her never idle.
I will warrant her a good housewife, quoth he to himself.[145]

Mercy then revealed the business to the maidens that were of the house, and inquired of them
concerning him, for they did know him better than she.[146] So they told her, that he was a
very busy young man, and one that pretended to religion; but was, as they feared, a stranger
to the power of that which was good. Nay then, said Mercy, I will look no more on him; for
I purpose never to have a clog to my soul.[147]

Prudence then replied that there needed no great matter of discouragement to be given to him,
her continuing so as she had begun to do for the poor, would quickly cool his courage. So the
next time he comes, he finds her at her old work, a-making of things for the poor. Then said
he, What! always at it? Yes, said she, either for myself or for others. And what canst thou
earn a day? quoth he. 6:17-19). Why, prithee, what dost thou with them? said he. Clothe the
naked, said she. With that his countenance fell. So he forbore to come at her again; and when
he was asked the reason why, he said, that Mercy was a pretty lass, but troubled with ill conditions.[148]
When he had left her, Prudence said, Did I not tell thee, that Mr. Brisk would soon forsake
thee? yea, he will raise up an ill report of thee; for, notwithstanding his pretence to religion,
and his seeming love to Mercy, yet Mercy and he are of tempers so different, that I believe
they will never come together.

MERCY. I might have had husbands afore now, though I spake not of it to any; but they were
such as did not like my conditions, though never did any of them find fault with my person.
So they and I could not agree.

PRUD. Mercy in our days is little set by, any further than as to its name; the practice, which
is set forth by thy conditions, there are but few that can abide.

MERCY. Well, said Mercy, if nobody will have me, I will die a maid, or my conditions shall
be to me as a husband. For I cannot change my nature; and to have one that lies cross to me
in this, that I purpose never to admit of as long as I live. I had a sister named Bountiful,
that was married to one of these churls; but he and she could never agree; but because my sister
was resolved to do as she had begun, that is, to show kindness to the poor, therefore her husband
first cried her down at the cross, and then turned her out of his doors.[149]

PRUD. And yet he was a professor, I warrant you.

MERCY. Yes, such a one as he was, and of such as he, the world is now full; but I am for none
of them all.

Now Matthew, the eldest son of Christiana, fell sick, and his sickness was sore upon him, for
he was much pained in his bowels, so that he was with it, at times, pulled as it were both
ends together.[150] There dwelt also not far from thence, one Mr. Skill, an ancient and well
approved physician. So Christiana desired it, and they sent for him, and he came. When he was
entered the room, and had a little observed the boy, he concluded that he was sick of the gripes.
Then he said to his mother, What diet has Matthew of late fed upon? Diet, said Christiana,
nothing but that which is wholesome. The physician answered, This boy has been tampering with
something that lies in his maw undigested, and that will not away without means. And I tell
you, he must he purged, or else he will die.

SAM. Then said Samuel, Mother, mother, what was that which my brother did gather up and eat,
so soon as we were come from the gate that is at the head of this way? You know that there
was an orchard on the left hand, on the other side of the wall, and some of the trees hung
over the wall, and my brother did plash and did eat.

CHRIST. True, my child, said Christiana, he did take thereof, and did eat; naughty boy as he
was, I did chide him, and yet he would eat thereof.[151]

SKILL. I knew he had eaten something that was not wholesome food; and that food, to wit, that
fruit, is even the most hurtful of all. It is the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard. I do marvel
that none did warn you of it; many have died thereof.

CHRIST. Then Christiana began to cry; and she said, O naughty boy! and O careless mother! What
shall I do for my son![152]

SKILL. Come, do not be too much dejected; the boy may do well again, but he must purge and vomit.

CHRIST. Pray, Sir, try the utmost of your skill with him, whatever it costs.

SKILL. Nay, I hope I shall be reasonable. So he made him a purge, but it was too weak; it was
said, it was made of the blood of a goat, the ashes of a heifer, and with some of the juice
of hyssop, &c. (Heb. 10:1-4). When Mr. Skill had seen that that purge was too weak, he made
him one to the purpose; it was made excarne et sanguine Christi [153] (John 6:54-57; Heb. 9:14).
(You know physicians give strange medicines to their patients). And it was made up into pills,
with a promise or two, and a proportionable quantity of salt (Mark 9:49). Now he was to take
them three at a time fasting, in half a quarter of a pint of the tears of repentance. When
this potion was prepared, and brought to the boy, he was loath to take it, though torn with
the gripes, as if he should be pulled in pieces. Come, come, said the physician, you must take
it. It goes against my stomach, said the boy (Zech. 12:10). I must have you take it, said his
mother. I shall vomit it up again, said the boy. Pray, Sir, said Christiana to Mr. Skill, how
does it taste? It has no ill taste, said the doctor; and with that she touched one of the pills
with the tip of her tongue. Oh, Matthew, said she, this potion is sweeter than honey. If thou
lovest thy mother, if thou lovest thy brothers, if thou lovest Mercy, if thou lovest thy life,
take it. So with much ado, after a short prayer for the blessing of God upon it, he took it,
and it wrought kindly with him. It caused him to purge, it caused him to sleep, and rest quietly;
it put him into a fine heat and breathing sweat, and did quite rid him of his gripes.[154]
So in little time he got up, and walked about with a staff, and would go from room to room,
and talk with Prudence, Piety, and Charity, of his distemper, and how he was healed.[155]

So when the boy was healed, Christiana asked Mr. Skill, saying, Sir, what will content you
for your pains and care to, and of my child? And he said, You must pay the Master of the College
of Physicians, according to rules made in that case and provided (Heb. 13:11-16).

CHRIST. But, Sir, said she, what is this pill good for else?

SKILL. It is an universal pill; it is good against all the diseases that Pilgrims are incident
to; and when it is well prepared, it will keep good, time out of mind.

CHRIST. Pray, Sir, make me up twelve boxes of them; for if I can get these, I will never take
other physic.[156]

SKILL. These pills are good to prevent diseases, as well as to cure when one is sick. Yea,
I dare say it, and stand to it, that if a man will but use this physic as he should, it will
make him live forever (John 6:50). But, good Christiana, thou must give these pills no other
way but as I have prescribed; for, if you do, they will do no good.[157] So he gave unto Christiana
physic for herself, and her boys, and for Mercy; and bid Matthew take heed how he eat any more
green plums, and kissed them, and went his way.

It was told you before, that Prudence bid the boys, that if at any time they would, they should
ask her some questions that might be profitable, and she would say something to them.

MATT. Then Matthew, who had been sick, asked her, Why, for the most part, physic should he
bitter to our palates.

PRUD. To show how unwelcome the Word of God, and the effects thereof, are to a carnal heart.

MATT. Why does physic, if it does good, purge, and cause that we vomit?

PRUD. To show that the Word, when it works effectually, cleanseth the heart and mind. For look,
what the one doth to the body, the other doth to the soul.[158]

MATT. What should we learn by seeing the flame of our fire go upwards? and by seeing the beams
and sweet influences of the sun strike downwards?

PRUD. By the going up of the fire we are taught to ascend to Heaven, by fervent and hot desires.
And by the sun's sending his heat, beams, and sweet influences downwards, we are taught that
the Saviour of the world, though high, reacheth down with His grace and love to us below.

MATT. Where have the clouds their water?

PRUD. Out of the sea.

MATT. What may we learn from that?

PRUD. That ministers should fetch their doctrine from God.

MATT. Why do they empty themselves upon the earth?

PRUD. To show that ministers should give out what they know of God to the world.

MATT. Why is the rainbow caused by the sun?

PRUD. To show that the covenant of God's grace is confirmed to us in Christ.

MATT. Why do the springs come from the sea to us, through the earth?

PRUD. To show that the grace of God comes to us through the body of Christ.

MATT. Why do some of the springs rise out of the tops of high hills?

PRUD. To show that the spirit of grace shall spring up in some that are great and mighty, as
well as in many that are poor and low.

MATT. Why doth the fire fasten upon the candlewick?

PRUD. To show, that unless grace doth kindle upon the heart there will be no true light of
life in us.

MATT. Why is the wick and tallow, and all, spent to maintain the light of the candle?

PRUD. To show that body and soul, and all, should be at the service of, and spend themselves
to maintain, in good condition, that grace of God that is in us.

MATT. Why doth the pelican pierce her own breast with her bill?

PRUD. To nourish her young ones with her blood, and thereby to show that Christ the blessed
so loveth His young, His people, as to save them from death by His blood.

MATT. What may one learn by hearing the cock crow?

PRUD. Learn to remember Peter's sin, and Peter's repentance. The cock's crowing shows also
that day is coming on; let then the crowing of the cock put thee in mind of that last and terrible
day of judgment.[159]

Now, about this time their month was out; wherefore they signified to those of the house that
it was convenient for them to up and be going. Then said Joseph to his mother, It is convenient
that you forget not to send to the house of Mr. Interpreter, to pray him to grant that Mr.
Great-heart should be sent unto us, that he may be our conductor the rest of our way. Good
boy, said she, I had almost forgot. So she drew up a petition,[160] and prayed Mr. Watchful,
the Porter, to send it by some fit man, to her good friend Mr. Interpreter; who, when it was
come, and He had seen the contents of the petition, said to the messenger, Go tell them that
I will send him.

When the family where Christiana was, saw that they had a purpose to go forward, they called
the whole house together, to give thanks to their King for sending of them such profitable
guests as these. Which done, they said to Christiana, And shall we not show thee something,
according as our custom is to do to pilgrims, on which thou mayest meditate when thou art upon
the way? So they took Christiana, her children, and Mercy, into the closet, and showed them
one of the apples that Eve did eat of, and that she also did give to her husband, and that
for the eating, of which they both were turned out of Paradise; and asked her what she thought
that was? Then Christiana said, It is food or poison, I know not which.[161] So they opened
the matter to her, and she held up her hands and wondered[162] (Gen. 3:6; Rom. 7:24).

Then they had her to a place, and showed her Jacob's ladder. Now at that time there were some
angels ascending upon it. So Christiana looked, and looked, to see the angels go up; and so
did the rest of the company. Then they were going into another place, to show them something
else; but James said to his mother, Pray, bid them stay here a little longer, for this is a
curious sight.[163] So they turned again, and stood feeding their eyes with this so pleasant
a prospect (Gen. 28:12; John 1:51). After this, they had them into a place where did hang up
a golden anchor, so they bid Christiana take it down; for, said they, you shall have it with
you, for it is of absolute necessity that you should, that you may lay hold of that within
the veil, and stand steadfast, in case you should meet with turbulent weather; so they were
glad thereof[164] (Heb. 6:19). Then they took them, and had them to the mount upon which Abraham
our father had offered up Isaac his son, and showed them the altar, the wood, the fire, and
the knife, for they remain to be seen to this very day (Gen. 22:9). When they had seen it,
they held up their hands and blessed themselves, and said, O what a man for love to his Master,
and for denial to himself, was Abraham! After they had showed them all these things, Prudence
took them into the dining-room, where stood a pair of excellent virginals;[165] so she played
upon them, and turned what she had showed them into this excellent song, saying--

Eve's apple we have showed you,  Of that be you aware; You have seen Jacob's ladder, too, 
Upon which angels are. An anchor you received have; But let not these suffice, Until, with
Abr'am, you have gave  Your best a sacrifice.

Now, about this time, one knocked at the door; so the Porter opened, and behold Mr. Great-heart
was there; but when he was come in, what joy was there! For it came now fresh again into their
minds, how but a while ago he had slain old Grim Bloody-man the giant, and had delivered them
from the lions.

Then said Mr. Great-heart to Christiana, and to Mercy, My Lord hath sent each of you a bottle
of wine, and also some parched corn, together with a couple of pomegranates; He has also sent
the boys some figs and raisins, to refresh you in your way.[166]

Then they addressed themselves to their journey; and Prudence and Piety went along with them.
When they came at the gate, Christiana asked the Porter if any of late went by? He said, No;
only one some time since, who also told me, that of late there had been a great robbery committed
on the King's highway, as you go; but, he said, the thieves are taken, and will shortly he
tried for their lives.[167] Then Christiana and Mercy were afraid; but Matthew said, Mother,
fear nothing, as long as Mr. Great-heart is to go with us, and to be our conductor.

Then said Christiana to the Porter, Sir, I am much obliged to you for all the kindnesses that
you have showed me since I came hither; and also for that you have been so loving and kind
to my children; I know not how to gratify your kindness. Wherefore, pray, as a token of my
respects to you, accept of this small mite; so she put a gold angel in his hand, and he made
her a low obeisance, and said, Let thy garments be always white, and let thy head want no ointment.[168]
Let Mercy live, and not die, and let not her works be few. And to the boys he said, Do you
fly youthful lusts, and follow after godliness with them that are grave and wise; so shall
you put gladness into your mother's heart, and obtain praise of all that are sober-minded.
So they thanked the Porter, and departed.

Now I saw in my dream, that they went forward until they were come to the brow of the hill,
where Piety, bethinking herself, cried out, Alas! I have forgot what I intended to bestow upon
Christiana and her companions; I will go back and fetch it. So she ran and fetched it. While
she was gone, Christiana thought she heard in a grove, a little way off, on the right hand,
a most curious melodious note, with words much like these--

Through all my life Thy favour is So frankly show'd to me, That in Thy house for evermore My
dwelling-place shall be.

And, listening still, she thought she heard another answer it, saying--

For why? The Lord our God is good,  His mercy is forever sure;  His truth at all times firmly
stood,  And shall from age to age endure.

So Christiana asked Prudence what it was that made those curious notes? They are, said she,
our country birds; they sing these notes but seldom, except it be at the spring, when the flowers
appear, and the sun shines warm, and then you may hear them all day long[169] (Song 2:11, 12).
I often, said she, go out to hear them; we also ofttimes keep them tame in our house. They
are very fine company for us when we are melancholy; also they make the woods, and groves,
and solitary places, places desirous to be in.[170]

By this time Piety was come again; so she said to Christiana, Look here, I have brought thee
a scheme of all those things that thou hast seen at our house, upon which thou mayest look
when thou findest thyself forgetful, and call those things again to remembrance for thy edification
and comfort.[171]

Now they began to go down the hill into the Valley of Humiliation. It was a steep hill, and
the way was slippery; but they were very careful, so they got down pretty well. When they were
down in the Valley,[172] Piety said to Christiana, This is the place where Christian your husband
met with the foul fiend Apollyon, and where they had that dreadful fight that they had; I know
you cannot but have heard thereof, But be of good courage, as long as you have here Mr. Great-heart
to be your guide and conductor, we hope you will fare the better. So when these two had committed
the Pilgrims unto the conduct of their guide, he went forward, and they went after.

GREAT-HEART. Then said Mr. Great-heart, We need not to be so afraid of this Valley, for here
is nothing to hurt us, unless we procure it to ourselves. It is true, Christian did here meet
with Apollyon, with whom he also had a sore combat; but that fray was the fruit of those slips
that he got in his going down the hill; for they that get slips there, must look for combats
here. And hence it is, that this Valley has got so hard a name. For the common people, when
they hear that some frightful thing has befallen such a one in such a place, are of an opinion,
that that place is haunted with some foul fiend, or evil spirit; when, alas! it is for the
fruit of their doing, that such things do befall them there.

This Valley of Humiliation is of itself as fruitful a place, as any the crow flies over; Christian
was and I am persuaded, if we could hit upon it, we might find somewhere hereabouts, something
that might give us an account why Christian was so hardly beset in this place.

Then James said to his mother, Lo, yonder stands a pillar, and it looks as if something was
written thereon; let us go and see what it is. So they went, and found there written, 'Let
Christian's slips, before he came hither, and the battles that he met with in this place, be
a warning to those that come after.' Lo, said their guide, did not I tell you, that there was
something hereabouts, that would give intimation of the reason why Christian was so hard beset
in this place? Then, turning himself to Christiana, he said, No disparagement to Christian,
more than to many others, whose hap and lot his was; for it is easier going up, than down this
hill, and that can he said but of few hills in all these parts of the world. But we will leave
the good man, he is at rest, he also had a brave victory over his enemy; let Him grant that
dwelleth above, that we fare no worse, when we come to be tried, than he.

But we will come again to this Valley of Humiliation. It is the best and most useful brave
piece of ground in all those parts. It is fat ground, and, as you see, consisteth much in meadows;
and if a man were to come here in the summer-time, as we do now, if he knew not anything before,
thereof, and if he also delighted himself in the sight of his eyes, he might see that that
would be delightful to him. Behold how green this Valley is, also how beautified with lilies[173]
(Song. 2:1). I have also known many labouring men that have got good estates in this Valley
of Humiliation 'for God resisteth the proud, but gives grace unto the humble,' (James 4:6;
1 Peter 5:5), for indeed it is a very fruitful soil, and doth bring forth by handfuls.[174]
Some also have wished, that the next way to their Father's house were here, that they might
be troubled no more with either hills or mountains to go over; but the way is the way, and
there is an end.[175]

Now, as they were going along and talking, they espied a boy feeding his father's sheep. The
boy was in very mean clothes, but of a very fresh and well-favoured countenance; and as he
sat by himself, he sang. Hark, said Mr. Great-heart, to what the shepherd's boy saith. So they
hearkened, and he said--

He that is down needs fear no fall;  He that is low, no pride; He that is humble, ever shall
Have God to be his guide.(Phil. 4:12, 13) I am content with what I have,  Little be it, or
much; And, Lord, contentment still I crave,  Because Thou savest such. Fullness to such a burden
is,  That go on pilgrimage; Here little, and hereafter bliss, Is best from age to age.[176](Heb.
13:5)

Then said the guide, Do you hear him? I will dare to say, that this boy lives a merrier life,
and wears more of that herb called heart's-ease in his bosom, than he that is clad in silk
and velvet;[177] but we will proceed in our discourse.

In this Valley our Lord formerly had His country house; He loved much to be here; He loved
also to walk these meadows, for He found the air was pleasant.[178] Besides, here a man shall
be free from the noise, and from the hurryings of this life. All states are full of noise and
confusion, only the Valley of Humiliation is that empty and solitary place. Here a man shall
not be so let and hindered in his contemplation, as in other places he is apt to be. This is
a Valley that nobody walks in, but those that love a pilgrim's life. And though Christian had
the hard hap to meet here with Apollyon, and to enter with him a brisk encounter, yet I must
tell you, that in former times men have met with angels here, have found pearls here, and have
in this place found the words of life[179] (Hosea 12:4, 5).

Did I say, our Lord had here in former days his country-house, and that He loved here to walk?
I will add, in this place, and to the people that live, and trace these grounds, He has left
a yearly revenue, to be faithfully paid them at certain seasons, for their maintenance by the
way, and for their further encouragement to go on in their pilgrimage (Matt. 11:29).

SAMUEL.[180] Now, as they went on, Samuel said to Mr. Great-heart; Sir, I perceive that in
this Valley my father and Apollyon had their battle; but whereabout was the fight? for I perceive
this Valley is large.

GREAT-HEART. Your father had that battle with Apollyon, at a place yonder, before us, in a
narrow passage, just beyond Forgetful Green.[181] And indeed, that place is the most dangerous
place in all these parts. For if at any time the pilgrims meet with any brunt, it is when they
forget what favours they have received, and how unworthy they are of them.[182] This is the
place also, where others have been hard put to it; but more of the place when we are come to
it; for I persuade myself, that to this day there remains either some sign of the battle, or
some monument to testify that such a battle there was fought.

MERCY. Then said Mercy, I think I am as well in this Valley, as I have been anywhere else in
all our journey; the place, methinks, suits with my spirit. I love to be in such places where
there is no rattling with coaches, nor rumbling with wheels; methinks, here one may, without
much molestation, be thinking what he is, whence he came, what he has done, and to what the
King has called him; here one may think, and break at heart, and melt in one's spirit, until
one's eyes become like 'the fish-pools of Heshbon' (Song. 7:4). They that go rightly through
this Valley of Baca, make it a well, the rain that God sends down from Heaven upon them that
are here, also filleth the pools (Psa. 84:6, 7). This Valley is that from whence also the King
will give to His their vineyards (Hosea 2:15); and they that go through it, shall sing, as
Christian did, for all he met with Apollyon.

GREAT-HEART. It is true, said their guide, I have gone through this Valley many a time, and
never was better than when here. I have also been a conductor to several pilgrims, and they
have confessed the same. 'To this man will I look (saith the King), even to him that is poor
and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at My Word'[183] (Isa. 66:2).

Now they were come to the place where the afore-mentioned battle was fought. Then said the
guide to Christiana, her children, and Mercy, This is the place, on this ground Christian stood,
and up there came Apollyon against him. And look, did not I tell you? here is some of your
husband's blood upon these stones to this day; behold, also, how here and there are yet to
be seen upon the place, some of the shivers of Apollyon's broken darts; see also, how they
did beat the ground with their feet as they fought, to make good their places against each
other; how also, with their by-blows, they did split the very stones in pieces. Verily, Christian
did here play the man, and showed himself as stout, as could, had he been there, even Hercules
himself.[184] When Apollyon was beat, he made his retreat to the next Valley, that is called,
the Valley of the Shadow of Death, unto which we shall come anon.[185]

Lo, yonder also stands a monument, on which is engraven this battle, and Christian's victory,
to his fame throughout all ages. So, because it stood just on the wayside before them, they
stepped to it, and read the writing, which word for word was this--

Hard by, here was a battle fought, Most strange, and yet most true;[186] Christian and Apollyon
sought Each other to subdue. The man so bravely play'd the man, He made the fiend to fly; Of
which a monument I stand, The same to testify.

When they had passed by this place, they came upon the borders of the Shadow of Death; and
this Valley was longer than the other; a place, also, most strangely haunted with evil things,
as many are able to testify;[187] but these women and children went the better through it,
because they had daylight, and because Mr. Great-heart was their conductor.

When they were entered upon this Valley, they thought that they heard a groaning, as of dead
men, a very great groaning. They thought, also, they did hear words of lamentation spoken,
as of some in extreme torment. These things made the boys to quake, the women also looked pale
and wan; but their guide bid them be of good comfort.

So they went on a little further, and they thought that they felt the ground begin to shake
under them, as if some hollow place was there; they heard also a kind of a hissing, as of serpents,
but nothing as yet appeared. Then said the boys, Are we not yet at the end of this doleful
place? But the guide also bid them be of good courage, and look well to their feet, lest haply,
said he, you be taken in some snare.[188]

Now James began to be sick, but I think the cause thereof was fear; so his mother gave him
some of that glass of spirits that she had given her at the Interpreter's house, and three
of the pills that Mr. Skill had prepared, and the boy began to revive. Thus they went on, till
they came to about the middle of the Valley, and then Christiana said, Methinks I see something
yonder upon the road before us, a thing of such a shape such as I have not seen. Then said
Joseph, Mother, what is it? An ugly thing, child; an ugly thing, said she. But, mother, what
is it like? said he. It is like I cannot tell what, said she. And now it was but a little way
off; then said she, It is nigh.

Well, well, said Mr. Great-heart, Let them that are most afraid, keep close to me. So the fiend
came on, and the conductor met it; but when it was just come to him, it vanished to all their
sights. Then remembered they what had been said some time ago, 'Resist the devil, and he will
flee from you' (James 4:7).

They went therefore on, as being a little refreshed; but they had not gone far, before Mercy,
looking behind her, saw, as she thought, something most like a lion, and it came a great padding
pace after; and it had a hollow voice of roaring; and at every roar that it gave, it made all
the Valley echo, and their hearts to ache, save the heart of him that was their guide. So it
came up; and Mr. Great-heart went behind, and put the Pilgrims all before him. The lion also
came on apace, and Mr. Great-heart addressed himself to give him battle. But when he saw that
it was determined that resistance should be made, he also drew back, and came no further[189]
(1 Peter 5:8, 9).

Then they went on again, and their conductor did go before them, till they came at a place
where was cast up a pit the whole breadth of the way; and, before they could be prepared to
go over that, a great mist and darkness fell upon them, so that they could not see. Then said
the Pilgrims, Alas! now what shall we do? But their guide made answer, Fear not, stand still,
and see what an end will be put to this also. So they staid there, because their path was marred.
They then also thought that they did hear more apparently the noise and rushing of the enemies;
the fire, also, and the smoke of the pit, was much easier to be discerned.[190] Then said Christiana
to Mercy, Now I see what my poor husband went through; I have heard much of this place, but
I never was here before now. Poor man, he went here all alone in the night; he had night almost
quite through the way; also, these fiends were busy about him, as if they would have torn him
in pieces. Many have spoke of it, but none can tell what the Valley of the Shadow of Death
should mean, until they come in it themselves. 'The heart knows its own bitterness; and a stranger
intermeddleth not with its joy.' To be here is a fearful thing.

GREAT-HEART. This is like doing business in great waters, or like going down into the deep;
this is like being in the heart of the sea, and like going down to the bottoms of the mountains;
now it seems as if the earth, with its bars, were about us forever. But let them that walk
in darkness, and have no light, trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon their God[191]
(Isa. 1:10). For my part, as I have told you already, I have gone often through this Valley,
and have been much harder put to it than now I am, and yet you see I am alive. I would not
boast, for that I am not mine own saviour; but I trust we shall have a good deliverance. Come,
let us pray for light to Him that can lighten our darkness, and that can rebuke not only these,
but all the Satans in hell.

So they cried and prayed, and God sent light and deliverance, for there was now no let in their
way; no not there, where but now they were stopped with a pit. Yet they were not got through
the Valley; so they went on still, and behold great stinks and loathsome smells, to the great
annoyance of them.[192] Then said Mercy to Christiana, There is not such pleasant being here,
as at the gate, or at the Interpreter's, or at the house where we lay last.

O but, said one of the boys, it is not so bad to go through here, as it is to abide here always;
and for aught I know, one reason why we must go this way to the house prepared for us, is,
that our home might be made the sweeter to us.[193]

Well said, Samuel, quoth the guide, thou hast now spoke like a man. Why, if ever I get out
here again said the boy, I think I shall prize light and good way better than ever I did in
all my life. Then said the guide, We shall he out by and by.[194]

So on they went, and Joseph said, Cannot we see to the end of this Valley as yet? Then said
the guide, Look to your feet, for you shall presently be among the snares. So they looked to
their feet, and went on; but they were troubled much with the snares. Now, when they were come
among the snares, they espied a man cast into the ditch on the left hand, with his flesh all
rent and torn. Then said the guide, That is one Heedless, that was agoing this way; he has
lain there a great while.[195] There was one Take-heed with him, when he was taken and slain;
but he escaped their hands. You cannot imagine how many are killed hereabout, and yet men are
so foolishly venturous, as to set out lightly on pilgrimage, and to come without a guide.[196]
Poor Christian! it was a wonder that he here escaped; but he was beloved of his God: also,
he had a good heart of his own,[197] or else he could never have done it. Now they drew towards
the end of the way; and just there where Christian had seen the cave when he went by, out thence
came forth Maul, a giant. This Maul did use to spoil young pilgrims with sophistry; and he
called Great-heart by his name, and said unto him, How many times have you been forbidden to
do these things? Then said Mr. Great-heart, What things? What things? quoth the giant; you
know what things; but I will put an end to your trade. But pray, said Mr. Great-heart, before
we fall to it, let us understand wherefore we must fight. Now the women and children stood
trembling, and knew not what to do. Quoth the giant, You rob the country, and rob it with the
worst of thefts.[198] These are but generals, said Mr. Great-heart; come to particulars, man.
Then said the giant, Thou practisest the craft of a kidnapper; thou gatherest up women and
children, and carriest them into a strange country, to the weakening of my master's kingdom.
But now Great-heart replied, I am a servant of the God of Heaven; my business is to persuade
sinners to repentance; I am commanded to do my endeavour to turn men, women, and children,
'from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God': and if this be indeed the ground
of thy quarrel, let us fall to it as soon as thou wilt.

Then the giant came up, and Mr. Great-heart went to meet him; and as he went, he drew his sword,
but the giant had a club. So without more ado, they fell to it, and at the first blow the giant
struck Mr. Great-heart down upon one of his knees; with that the women and children cried out;
so Mr. Great-heart recovering himself, laid about him in full lusty manner, and gave the giant
a wound in his arm; thus he fought for the space of an hour, to that height of heat, that the
breath came out of the giant's nostrils, as the heat doth out of a boiling caldron.

Then they sat down to rest them, but Mr. Great-heart betook him to prayer; also the women and
children did nothing but sigh and cry all the time that the battle did last.[199]

When they had rested them, and taken breath, they both fell to it again,[200] and Mr. Great-heart
with a full blow, fetched the giant down to the ground. Nay, hold, and let me recover, quoth
he; so Mr. Great-heart fairly let him get up. So to it they went again, and the giant missed
but little of all-to-breaking Mr. Great-heart's skull with his club.

Mr. Great-heart seeing that, runs to him in the full heat of his spirit, and pierceth him under
the fifth rib; with that the giant began to faint, and could hold up his club no longer. Then
Mr. Great-heart seconded his blow, and smote the head of the giant from his shoulders. Then
the women and children rejoiced, and Mr. Great-heart also praised God, for the deliverance
He had wrought.[201] When this was done, they among them erected a pillar, and fastened the
giant's head thereon, and wrote underneath in letters, that passengers might read--

He that did wear this head, was one That pilgrims did misuse; He stopp'd their way, he spared
none,  But did them all abuse; Until that I, Great-heart, arose, The pilgrim's guide to be;
Until that I did him oppose, That was their enemy.

Now I saw, that they went to the ascent that was a little way off, cast up to be a prospect
for pilgrims (that was the place from whence Christian had the first sight of Faithful his
brother); wherefore here they sat down, and rested; they also here did eat and drink, and make
merry, for that they had gotten deliverance from this so dangerous an enemy.[202] As they sat
thus, and did eat, Christiana asked the guide if he had caught no hurt in the battle. Then
said Mr. Great-heart, No, save a little on my flesh; yet that also shall be so far from being
to my detriment, that it is at present a proof of my love to my Master and you, and shall be
a means, by grace, to increase my reward at last[203] (2 Cor. 4).

CHRIST. But were you not afraid, good Sir, when you saw him come out with his club?[204]

GREAT-HEART. It is my duty, said he, to distrust my own ability, that I may have reliance on
Him that is stronger than all.

CHRIST. But what did you think when he fetched you down to the ground at the first blow?

GREAT-HEART. Why, I thought, quoth he, that so my Master Himself was served, and yet He it
was that conquered at the last.

MATT. When you all have thought what you please, I think God has been wonderful good unto us,
both in bringing us out of this Valley, and in delivering us out of the hand of this enemy;
for my part, I see no reason, why we should distrust our God any more, since He has now, and
in such a place as this, given us such testimony of His love as this.

Then they got up and went forward. Now a little before them stood an oak; and under it, when
they came to it, they found an old pilgrim fast asleep; they knew that he was a pilgrim by
his clothes, and his staff, and his girdle.

So the guide, Mr. Great-heart, awaked him, and the old gentleman, as he lift up his eyes, cried
out, What's the matter? Who are you? and what is your business here?[205]

GREAT-HEART. Come, man, be not so hot, here is none but friends; yet the old man gets up, and
stands upon his guard, and will know of them what they were. Then said the guide, My name is
Great-heart; I am the guide of these Pilgrims, which are going to the Celestial Country.

HONEST. Then said Mr. Honest, I cry you mercy; I feared that you had been of the company of
those that sometime ago did rob Little-faith of his money; but now I look better about me,
I perceive you are honester people.

GREAT-HEART. Why, what would, or could you have done, to have helped yourself, if we indeed
had been of that company. HON. Done! why I would have fought as long as breath had been in
me; and had I so done, I am sure you could never have given me the worst on it; for a Christian
can never be overcome, unless he should yield of himself.[206]

GREAT-HEART. Well said, father Honest, quoth the guide; for by this I know thou art a cock
of the right kind, for thou hast said the truth.

HON. And by this, also, I know that thou knowest what true pilgrimage is; for all others do
think that we are the soonest overcome of any.

GREAT-HEART. Well, now we are so happily met, pray let me crave your name, and the name of
the place you came from.

HON. My name I cannot; but I came from the town of Stupidity; it lieth about four degrees beyond
the City of Destruction.

GREAT-HEART. Oh! are you that countryman, then? I deem I have half a guess of you; your name
is Old Honesty, is it not? So the old gentleman blushed, and said, Not Honesty, in the abstract,[207]
but Honest is my name; and I wish that my nature shall agree to what I am called.

HON. But, Sir, said the old gentleman, how could you guess that I am such a man, since I came
from such a place?

GREAT-HEART. I had heard of you before, by my Master; for He knows all things that are done
on the earth; but I have often wondered that any should come from your place, for your town
is worse than is the City of Destruction itself.

HON. Yes, we lie more off from the sun, and so are more cold and senseless; but was a man in
a mountain of ice, yet if the Sun of Righteousness will arise upon him, his frozen heart shall
feel a thaw; and thus it hath been with me.[208]

GREAT-HEART. I believe it, father Honest, I believe it; for I know the thing is true.

Then the old gentleman saluted all the Pilgrims with a holy kiss of charity; and asked them
of their names, and how they had fared since they set out on their pilgrimage.[209]

CHRIST. Then said Christiana, My name, I suppose you have heard of; good Christian was my husband,
and these four were his children. But can you think how the old gentleman was taken, when she
told him who she was! He skipped, he smiled, and blessed them with a thousand good wishes, saying:

HON. I have heard much of your husband, and of his travels and wars, which he underwent in
his days. Be it spoken to your comfort, the name of your husband rings over all these parts
of the world: his faith, his courage, his enduring, and his sincerity under all, has made his
name famous. Then he turned him to the boys, and asked them of their names, which they told
him. And then said he unto them: Matthew, be thou like Matthew the publican, not in vice, but
in virtue (Matt. 10:3). Samuel, said he, be thou like Samuel the Prophet, a man of faith and
prayer (Psa. 99:6). Joseph, said he, be thou like Joseph in Potiphar's house, chaste, and one
that flees from temptation (Gen. 39). And James, be thou like James the Just, and like James
the brother of our Lord (Acts 1:13, 14). Then they told him of Mercy, and how she had left
her town and her kindred to come along with Christiana and with her sons. At that the old honest
man said, Mercy is thy name; by Mercy shalt thou be sustained, and carried through all those
difficulties that shall assault thee in thy way, till thou shalt come thither, where thou shalt
look the Fountain of Mercy in the face with comfort. All this while the guide, Mr. Great-heart,
was very much pleased, and smiled upon his companion.

Now, as they walked along together, the guide asked the old gentleman, if he did not know one
Mr. Fearing, that came on pilgrimage out of his parts?

HON. Yes, very well, said he. He was a man that had the root of the matter in him; but he was
one of the most troublesome pilgrims that ever I met with in all my days.[210]

GREAT-HEART. I perceive you knew him; for you have given a very right character of him.

HON. Knew him! I was a great companion of his; I was with him most an end; when he first began
to think of what would come upon us hereafter, I was with him.

GREAT-HEART. I was his guide from my Master's house to the gates of the Celestial City.

HON. Then you knew him to be a troublesome one.

GREAT-HEART. I did so, but I could very well bear it; for men of my calling are oftentimes
intrusted with the conduct of such as he was.

HON. Well then, pray let us hear a little of him, and how he managed himself under your conduct.

GREAT-HEART. Why, he was always afraid that he should come short of whither he had a desire
to go. Everything frightened him that he heard anybody speak of, that had but the least appearance
of opposition in it. I hear that he lay roaring at the Slough of Despond for about a month
together; nor durst he, for all he saw several go over before him, venture, though they, many
of them, offered to lend him their hand. He would not go back again neither.[211] The Celestial
City, he said, he should die if he came not to it; and yet was dejected at every difficulty,
and stumbled at every straw that anybody cast in his way. Well, after he had lain at the Slough
of Despond a great while, as I have told you, one sunshine morning, I do not know how, he ventured,
and so got over; but when he was over, he would scarce believe it. He had, I think, a Slough
of Despond in his mind; a slough that he carried everywhere with him, or else he could never
have been as he was. So he came up to the gate, you know what I mean, that stands at the head
of this way; and there also he stood a good while, before he would adventure to knock. When
the gate was opened, he would give back, and give place to others, and say that he was not
worthy. For, for all he got before some to the gate, yet many of them went in before him. There
the poor man would stand, shaking and shrinking. I dare say, it would have pitied one's heart
to have seen him; nor would he go back again. At last, he took the hammer that hanged on the
gate in his hand, and gave a small rap or two; then One opened to him, but he shrank back as
before. He that opened stepped out after him, and said, Thou trembling one, what wantest thou?
With that he fell down to the ground. He that spoke to him wondered to see him so faint. So
he said to him, Peace be to thee; up, for I have set open the door to thee. Come in, for thou
art blessed. With that he got up, and went in trembling; and when he was in, he was ashamed
to show his face. Well, after he had been entertained there a while, as you know how the manner
is, he was bid go on his way, and also told the way he should take. So he came till he came
to our house. But as he behaved himself at the gate, so he did His behaviour at my Master the
Interpreter's door. He lay thereabout in the cold a good while, before he would adventure to
call; yet he would not go back, and the nights were long and cold then. Nay, he had a note
of necessity in his bosom to my Master, to receive him and grant him the comfort of His house,
and also to allow him a stout and valiant conductor, because he was himself so chicken-hearted
a man; and yet, for all that, he was afraid to call at the door. So he lay up and down thereabouts,
till, poor man! he was almost starved. Yea, so great was his dejection, that though he saw
several others, for knocking, get in, yet he was afraid to venture. At last, I think, I looked
out of the window, and perceiving a man to be up and down about the door, I went out to him,
and asked what he was; but, poor man! the water stood in his eyes; so I perceived what he wanted.
I went, therefore, in and told it in the house, and we showed the thing to our Lord. So He
sent me out again, to entreat him to come in; but, I dare say, I had hard work to do it. At
last he came in; and I will say that for my Lord, He carried it wonderfully lovingly to him.
There were but a few good bits at the table, but some of it was laid upon his trencher. Then
he presented the note, and my Lord looked thereon, and said his desire should he granted. So,
when he had been there a good while, he seemed to get some heart, and to be a little more comfortable;
for my Master, you must know, is one of very tender bowels, especially to them that are afraid;
wherefore He carried it so towards him, as might tend most to his encouragement. Well, when
he had had a sight of the things of the place, and was ready to take his journey to go to the
city, my Lord, as He did to Christian before, gave him a bottle of spirits, and some comfortable
things to eat. Thus we set forward, and I went before him; but the man was but of few words,
only he would sigh aloud.

When we were come to where the three fellows were hanged, he said that he doubted that that
would be his end also. Only he seemed glad when he saw the Cross and the Sepulchre. There,
I confess, he desired to stay a little to look, and he seemed, for a while after, to be a little
cheery. Also, when he was in, I brought him acquainted with the damsels that were of the place;
but he was ashamed to make himself much for company. He desired much to be alone, yet he always
loved good talk, and often would get behind the screen to hear it. He also loved much to see
ancient things, and to be pondering them in his mind. He told me afterwards that he loved to
be in those two houses from which he came last, to wit, at the gate, and that of the Interpreter,
but that he durst not be so bold to ask.

When we went also from the House Beautiful, he went down the hill, into the Valley of Humiliation,
he went down as well as ever I saw man in my life; for he cared not how mean he was, so he
might he happy at last. Yea, I think, there was a kind of a sympathy betwixt that valley and
him; for I never saw him better in all his pilgrimage than when he was in that valley.[213]

Here he would lie down, embrace the ground, and kiss the very flowers that grew in this valley
(Lam. 3:27-29). He would now be up every morning by break of day, tracing and walking to and
fro in this valley.

But when he was come to the entrance of the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I thought I should
have lost my man; not for that he had any inclination to go back; that he always abhorred;
but he was ready to die for fear. Oh! the hobgoblins will have me! the hobgoblins will have
me! cried he; and I could not beat him out on it. He made such a noise, and such an outcry
here, that, had they but heard him, it was enough to encourage them to come and fall upon us.[214]

But this I took very great notice of, that this valley was as quiet while he went through it,
as ever I knew it before or since. I suppose these enemies here had now a special check from
our Lord, and a command not to meddle until Mr. Fearing was passed over it.

It would he too tedious to tell you of all. We will, therefore, only mention a passage or two
more. When he was come at Vanity Fair, I thought he would have fought with all at the men at
the fair. I feared there we should both have been knocked on the head, so hot was he against
their fooleries.[215] Upon the Enchanted Ground, he was also very wakeful. But when he was
come at the river, where was no bridge, there again he was in a heavy case. Now, now, he said,
he should be drowned forever, and so never see that Face with comfort that he had come so many
miles to behold.

And here, also, I took notice of what was very remarkable; the water of that river was lower
at this time than ever I saw it in all my life. So he went over at last, not much above wet-shod.[216]
When he was going up to the gate, I began to take his leave of him, and to wish him a good
reception above. So he said, I shall, I shall. Then parted we asunder, and I saw him no more.

HON. Then, it seems, he was well at last.

GREAT-HEART. Yes, yes; I never had doubt about him; he was a man of a choice spirit, only he
was always kept very low, and that made his life so burdensome to himself, and so troublesome
to others (Psa. 88). He was, above many, tender of sin. He was so afraid of doing injuries
to others, that he often would deny himself of that which was lawful, because he would not
offend (Rom. 14:21; 1 Cor. 8:13).

HON. But what should be the reason that such a good man should be all his days so much in the
dark?[217]

GREAT-HEART. There are two sorts of reasons for it: One is, the wise God will have it so; some
must pipe, and some must weep (Matt. 11:16-18). Now Mr. Fearing was one that played upon this
bass; he and his fellows sound the sackbut, whose notes are more doleful than the notes of
other music are; though, indeed, some say the bass is the ground of music. And, for my part,
I care not at all for that profession that begins not in heaviness of mind. The first string
that the musician usually touches is the bass, when he intends to put all in tune. God also
plays upon this string first, when he sets the soul in tune for Himself. Only here was the
imperfection of Mr. Fearing, he could play upon no other music but this, till towards his latter
end.[218]

I make bold to talk thus metaphorically, for the ripening of the wits of young readers; and
because, in the book of the Revelations, the saved are compared to a company of musicians that
play upon their trumpets and harps, and sing their songs before the throne (Rev. 8:2; 14:2, 3).

HON. He was a very zealous man, as one may see by what relation you have given of him; difficulties,
lions, or Vanity Fair, he feared not at all. It was only sin, death, and hell that was to him
a terror, because he had some doubts about his interest in that celestial country.[219]

GREAT-HEART. You say right. Those were the things that were his troublers, and they, as you
have well observed, arose from the weakness of his mind thereabout, not from weakness of spirit
as to the practical part of a pilgrim's life. I dare believe that, as the proverb is, 'he could
have bit a firebrand, had it stood in his way'; but the things with which he was oppressed,
no man ever yet could shake off with ease.

CHRIST. Then said Christiana, This relation of Mr. Fearing has done me good. I thought nobody
had been like me; but I see there was some semblance betwixt this good man and I; only we differed
in two things: His troubles were so great, they break out; but mine I kept within. His, also,
lay so hard upon him, they made him that he could not knock at the houses provided for entertainment;
but my trouble was always such as made me knock the louder.

MERCY. If I might also speak my heart, I must say, that something of him has also dwelt in
me; for I have ever been more afraid of the lake, and the loss of a place in Paradise, than
I have been of the loss of other things. O, thought I, may I have the happiness to have a habitation
there, it is enough, though I part with all the world to win it!

MATT. Then said Matthew, Fear was one thing that made me think that I was far from having that
within me that accompanies salvation; but if it were so with such a good man as he, why may
it not also go well with me?

JAMES. No fears, no grace, said James. Though there is not always grace where thereis the fear
of hell, yet, to be sure, there is no grace where there is no fear of God.[220]

GREAT-HEART. Well said, James, thou hast hit the mark; for the fear of God is the beginning
of wisdom; and, to be sure, they that lack the beginning, have neither middle nor end. But
we will here conclude our discourse of Mr. Fearing, after we have sent after him this farewell.

Well, Master Fearing, thou didst fear Thy God, and wast afraid Of doing anything, while here,
That would have thee betray'd. And didst thou fear the lake and pit?  Would others did so too!
For, as for them that want thy wit, They do themselves undo.[221]

Now I saw, that they still went on in their talk; for after Mr. Great-heart had made an end
with Mr. Fearing, Mr. Honest began to tell them of another, but his name was Mr. Self-will.
He pretended himself to be a pilgrim, said Mr. Honest; but I persuade myself he never came
in at the gate that stands at the head of the way.

GREAT-HEART. Had you ever any talk with him about it?

HON. Yes, more than once or twice; but he would always be like himself, self-willed. He neither
cared for man, nor argument, nor yet example; what his mind prompted him to, that he would
do, and nothing else could he be got to.

GREAT-HEART. Pray, what principles did he hold? for I suppose you can tell.

HON. He held, that a man might follow the vices as well as the virtues of the pilgrims; and
that if he did both, he should be certainly saved.

GREAT-HEART. How! if he had said, It is possible for the heart to be guilty of the vices, as
well as to partake of the virtues of pilgrims, he could not much have been blamed; for indeed
we are exempted from no vice absolutely, but on condition that we watch and strive.[222] But
this, I perceive, is not the thing; but if I understand you right, your meaning is, that he
was of that opinion, that it was allowable so to be.

HON. Aye, aye, so I mean; and so he believed and practised.

GREAT-HEART. But what ground had he for his so saying?

HON. Why, he said he had the Scripture for his warrant.

GREAT-HEART. Prithee, Mr. Honest, present us with a few particulars.

HON. So I will. He said, To have to do with other men's wives, had been practised by David,
God's beloved; and therefore he could do it. He said, To have more women than one, was a thing
that Solomon practised; and therefore he could do it. He said, That Sarah and the godly midwives
of Egypt lied, and so did saved Rahab; and therefore he could do it. He said, That the disciples
went at the bidding of their Master, and took away the owner's ass; and therefore he could
do so too. He said, That Jacob got the inheritance of his father in a way of guile and dissimulation;
and therefore he could do so too.[223]

GREAT-HEART. Highly base! indeed. And you are sure he was of this opinion?

HON. I have heard him plead for it, bring Scripture for it, bring argument for it, &c.

GREAT-HEART. An opinion that is not fit to be with any allowance in the world.

HON. You must understand me rightly. He did not say that any man might do this; but that those
that had the virtues of those that did such things, might also do the same.

GREAT-HEART. But what more false than such a conclusion? for this is as much as to say, that
because good men heretofore have sinned of infirmity, therefore he had allowance to do it of
a presumptuous mind; or if, because a child by the blast of the wind, or for that it stumbled
at a stone, fell down, and defiled itself in mire, therefore he might willfully lie down and
wallow like a boar therein. Who could have thought that anyone could so far have been blinded
by the power of lust? But what is written must be true: They 'stumble at the Word, being disobedient;
whereunto also they were appointed' (1 Peter 2:8).

His supposing that such may have the godly men's virtues, who addict themselves to their vices,
is also a delusion as strong as the other. It is just as if the dog should say, I have, or
may have, the qualities of the child, because I lick up its stinking excrements. To eat up
the sin of God's people, is no sign of one that is possessed with their virtues (Hosea 4:8).
Nor can I believe, that one that is of this opinion, can at present have faith or love in him.
But I know you have made strong objections against him; prithee, what can he say for himself?[224]

HON. Why, he says, To do this by way of opinion, seems abundance more honest, than to do it,
and yet hold contrary to it in opinion.

GREAT-HEART. A very wicked answer; for though to let loose the bridle to lusts, while our opinions
are against such things, is bad; yet, to sin, and plead a toleration so to do, is worse. The
one stumbles beholders accidentally, the other pleads them into the snare.

HON. There are many of this man's mind, that have not this man's mouth; and that makes going
on pilgrimage of so little esteem as it is.

GREAT-HEART. You have said the truth, and it is to be lamented; but he that feareth the King
of Paradise, shall come out of them all.

CHRIST. There are strange opinions in the world; I know one that said, It was time enough to
repent when they come to die.[225]

GREAT-HEART. Such are not over wise. That man would have been loath, might he have had a week
to run twenty miles in for his life, to have deferred that journey to the last hour of that week.

HON. You say right; and yet the generality of them, that count themselves pilgrims, do indeed
do thus. I am, as you see, an old man, and have been a traveler in this road many a day; and
I have taken notice of many things.[226]

I have seen some that have set out as if they would drive all the world afore them, who yet
have, in few days, died as they in the wilderness, and so never got sight of the promised land.
I have seen some that have promised nothing, at first setting out to be pilgrims, and that
one would have thought could not have lived a day, that have yet proved very good pilgrims.

I have seen some who have run hastily forward, that again have, after a little time, run as
fast just back again.

I have seen some who have spoken very well of a pilgrim's life at first, that, after a while,
have spoken as much against it. I have heard some, when they first set out for Paradise, say
positively there is such a place; who when they have been almost there, have come back again,
and said there is none.

I have heard some vaunt what they would do, in case they should he opposed, that have, even
at a false alarm, fled faith, the pilgrim's way, and all.[227]

Now, as they were thus in their way, there came one running to meet them, and said, Gentlemen,
and you of the weaker sort, if you love life, shift for yourselves, for the robbers are before
you.[228]

GREAT-HEART. Then said Mr. Great-heart, They be the three that set upon Little-faith heretofore.
Well, said he, we are ready for them; so they went on their way. Now, they looked at every
turning, when they should have met with the villains; but whether they heard of Mr. Great-heart,
or whether they had some other game, they came not up to the Pilgrims.

Christiana then wished for an inn for herself and her children, because they were weary.[229]
Then said Mr. Honest, There is one a little before us, where a very honourable disciple, one
Gaius, dwells (Rom. 16:23). So they all concluded to turn in thither, and the rather, because
the old gentleman gave him so good a report. So when they came to the door, they went in, not
knocking, for folks use not to knock at the door of an inn. Then they called for the master
of the house, and he came to them. So they asked if they might lie there that night.

GAIUS. Yes, gentlemen, if ye be true men, for my house is for none but pilgrims. Then was Christiana,
Mercy, and the boys, the more glad, for that the Inn-keeper was a lover of pilgrims. So they
called for rooms, and he showed them one for Christiana and her children, and Mercy, and another
for Mr. Great-heart and the old gentleman.

GREAT-HEART. Then said Mr. Great-heart, Good Gaius, what hast thou for supper? for these pilgrims
have come far today, and are weary.

GAIUS. It is late, said Gaius, so we cannot conveniently go out to seek food; but such as we
have, you shall be welcome to, if that will content.[230]

GREAT-HEART. We will be content with what thou hast in the house; forasmuch as I have proved
thee, thou art never destitute of that which is convenient.

Then he went down and spake to the cook, whose name was Taste-that-which-is-good, to get ready
supper for so many pilgrims. This done, he comes up again, saying, Come, my good friends, you
are welcome to me, and I am glad that I have a house to entertain you; and while supper is
making ready, if you please, let us entertain one another with some good discourse. So they
all said, Content.

GAIUS. Then said Gaius, Whose wife is this aged matron? and whose daughter is this young damsel.

GREAT-HEART. The woman is the wife of one Christian, a Pilgrim of former times; and these are
his four children. The maid is one of her acquaintance; one that she hath persuaded to come
with her on pilgrimage. The boys take all after their father, and covet to tread in his steps;
yea, if they do but see any place where the old Pilgrim hath lain, or any print of his foot,
it ministereth joy to their hearts, and they covet to lie or tread in the same.

GAIUS. Then said Gaius, Is this Christian's wife? and are these Christian's children? I knew
your husband's father, yea, also his father's father. Many have been good of this stock; their
ancestors dwelt first at Antioch (Acts 11:26). Christian's progenitors (I suppose you have
heard your husband talk of them) were very worthy men. They have, above any that I know, showed
themselves men of great virtue and courage, for the Lord of the Pilgrims, His ways, and them
that loved Him. I have heard of many of your husband's relations, that have stood all trials
for the sake of the truth. Stephen, that was one of the first of the family from whence your
husband sprang, was knocked on the head with stones (Acts 7:59, 60). James, another of this
generation, was slain with the edge of the sword (Acts 12:2). To say nothing of Paul and Peter,
men anciently of the family from whence your husband came, there was Ignatius, who was cast
to the lions;[231] Romanus, whose flesh was cut by pieces from his bones, and Polycarp, that
played the man in the fire. There was he that was hanged up in a basket in the sun, for the
wasps to eat; and he who they put into a sack, and cast him into the sea to be drowned. It
would be utterly impossible to count up all of that family that have suffered injuries and
death, for the love of a pilgrim's life. Nor can I but be glad, to see that thy husband has
left behind him four such boys as these. I hope they will bear up their father's name, and
tread in their father's steps, and come to their father's end.

GREAT-HEART. Indeed, Sir, they are likely lads; they seem to choose heartily their father's ways.

GAIUS. That is it that I said; wherefore Christian's family is like still to spread abroad
upon the face of the ground, and yet to be numerous upon the face of the earth; wherefore,
let Christiana look out some damsels for her sons, to whom they may be betrothed, &c., that
the name of their father and the house of his progenitors may never be forgotten in the world.[232]

HON. It is pity this family should fall and be extinct.

GAIUS. Fall it cannot, but be diminished it may; but let Christiana take my advice, and that
is the way to uphold it.

And, Christiana, said this Innkeeper, I am glad to see thee and thy friend Mercy together here,
a lovely couple. And may I advise, take Mercy into a nearer relation to thee; if she will,
let her be given to Matthew, thy eldest son; it is the way to preserve you a posterity in the
earth. So this match was concluded, and in process of time they were married; but more of that
hereafter.

Gaius also proceeded, and said, I will now speak on the behalf of women, to take away their
reproach. For as death and the curse came into the world by a woman, (Gen. 3), so also did
life and health: 'God sent forth His Son made of a woman' (Gal. 4:4). Yea, to show how much
those that came after, did abhor the act of the mother, this sex, in the Old Testament, coveted
children, if happily this or that woman might be the mother of the Saviour of the world.

I will say again, that when the Saviour was come, women rejoiced in Him before either man or
angel (Luke 2). I read not, that ever any man did give unto Christ so much as one groat; but
the women followed Him, and ministered to Him of their substance (Luke 8:2, 3). It was a woman
that washed His feet with tears, and a woman that anointed His body to the burial (Luke 7:37,
50; John 11:2; 12:3). They were women that wept, when He was going to the Cross, and women
that followed Him from the Cross, and that sat by His sepulchre, when he was buried (Luke 23:27;
Matt. 27:55, 56, 61). They were women that were first with Him at His resurrection-morn; and
women that brought tidings first to His disciples, that He was risen from the dead (Luke 24:22,
23). Women, therefore, are highly favoured, and show by these things that they are sharers
with us in the grace of life.

Now the cook sent up to signify that supper was almost ready, and sent one to lay the cloth,
the trenchers, and to set the salt and bread in order.

Then said Matthew, The sight of this cloth, and of this fore-runner of the supper, begetteth
in me a greater appetite to my food than I had before.

GAIUS. So let all ministering doctrines to thee, in this life, beget in thee a greater desire
to sit at the supper of the great King in His kingdom; for all preaching, books, and ordinances
here, are but as the laying of the trenchers, and as setting of salt upon the board, when compared
with the feast that our Lord will make for us when we come to His house.

So supper came up;[233] and first, a heave-shoulder, and a wave-breast (Lev. 7:32-34; 10:14,
15), were set on the table before them, to show that they must begin their meal with prayer
and praise to God (Psa. 25:1; Heb. 13:15). The heave-shoulder, David lifted his heart up to
God with; and with the wave-breast, where his heart lay, with that he used to lean upon his
harp when he played. These two dishes were very fresh and good, and they all eat heartily well
thereof.

The next they brought up, was a bottle of wine, red as blood (Deut. 32:14). So Gaius said to
them, Drink freely; this is the juice of the true vine, that makes glad the heart of God and
man (Judg. 9:13; John 15:1). So they drank and were merry.

The next was a dish of milk well crumbed; but Gaius said, Let the boys have that, that they
may grow thereby (1 Peter 2:1, 2). Then they brought up in course a dish of butter and honey.
Then said Gaius, Eat freely of this; for this is good to cheer up, and strengthen your judgments
and understandings. This was our Lord's dish when He was a child: 'Butter and honey shall He
eat, that He may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good' (Isa. 7:15).

Then they brought them up a dish of apples, and they were very good tasted fruit. Then said
Matthew, May we eat apples, since they were such, by, and with which, the serpent beguiled
our first mother?

Then said Gaius-

Apples were they with which we were beguil'd  Yet sin, not apples, hath our souls defil'd.
Apples forbid, if eat, corrupt the blood;  To eat such, when commanded, does us good.  Drink
of His flagons, then, thou church, His dove,  And eat His apples, who are sick of love.

Then said Matthew, I made the scruple, because I awhile since was sick with eating of fruit.

GAIUS. Forbidden fruit will make you sick but not what our Lord has tolerated.

While they were thus talking, they were presented with another dish, and it was a dish of nuts
(Song. 6:11). Then said some at the table, Nuts spoil tender teeth, especially the teeth of
children; which when Gaius heard, he said--

Hard texts are nuts (I will not call them cheaters),  Whose shells do keep their kernels from
the eaters.  Ope then the shells, and you shall have the meat;  They here are brought for you
to crack and eat.

Then were they very merry, and sat at the table a long time, talking of many things. Then said
the old gentleman, My good landlord, while we are cracking your nuts, if you please, do you
open this riddle:[234]

A man there was though some did count him mad, The more he cast away, the more he had.

Then they all gave good heed, wondering what good Gaius would say; so he sat still awhile,
and then thus replied--

He that bestows his goods upon the poor, Shall have as much again, and ten times more.

Then said Joseph, I dare say, Sir, I did not think you could have found it out.

Oh! said Gaius, I have been trained up in this way a great while; nothing teaches like experience;
I have learned of my Lord to be kind; and have found by experience, that I have gained thereby.
'There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is meet;
but it tendeth to poverty' (Prov. 11:24). 'There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing;
there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches'[235] (Prov. 13:7). Then Samuel whispered
to Christiana, his mother, and said, Mother, this is a very good man's house, let us stay here
a good while, and let my brother Matthew be married here to Mercy, before we go any further.[236]

The which Gaius the host overhearing, said, With a very good will, my child.

So they staid there more than a month, and Mercy was given to Matthew to wife.

While they staid here, Mercy, as her custom was, would be making coats and garments to give
to the poor, by which she brought up a very good report upon the Pilgrims.[237]

But to return again to our story. After supper the lads desired a bed; for that they were weary
with travelling: then Gaius called to show them their chamber; but said Mercy, I will have
them to bed. So she had them to bed, and they slept well; but the rest sat up all night; for
Gaius and they were such suitable company, that they could not tell how to part. Then after
much talk of their Lord, themselves, and their journey, old Mr. Honest, he that put forth the
riddle to Gaius, began to nod. Then said Great-heart, What, Sir, you begin to be drowsy; come,
rub up; now here is a riddle for you. Then said Mr. Honest, Let us hear it. Then said Mr. Great-heart,

He that will kill, must first be overcome, Who live abroad would, first must die at home.

Ha! said Mr. Honest, it is a hard one, hard to expound, and harder to practise. But come, landlord,
said he, I will, if you please, leave my part to you; do you expound it, and I will hear what
you say. No, said Gaius, it was put to you, and it is expected that you should answer it. Then
said the old gentleman,

He first by grace must conquer'd be, That sin would mortify; And who, that lives, would convince
me, Unto himself must die.[238]

It is right, said Gaius; good doctrine and experience teaches this. For, first, until grace
displays itself, and overcomes the soul with its glory, it is altogether without heart to oppose
sin; besides if sin is Satan's cords, by which the soul lies bound, how should it make resistance,
before it is loosed from that infirmity?

Secondly, nor will any, that knows either reason or grace, believe that such a man can be a
living monument of grace that is a slave to his own corruptions.

And now it comes in my mind, I will tell you a story worth the hearing. There were two men
that went on pilgrimage; the one began when he was young, the other when he was old. The young
man had strong corruptions to grapple with; the old man's were decayed with the decays of nature.
The young man trod his steps as even as did the old one, and was every way as light as he.
Who now, or which of them, had their graces shining clearest, since both seemed to be alike

HON. The young man's, doubtless. For that which heads it against the greatest opposition, gives
best demonstration that it is strongest; especially when it also holdeth pace with that that
meets not with half so much; as, to be sure, old age does not.[239] Besides, I have observed
that old men have blessed themselves with this mistake, namely, taking the decays of nature
for a gracious conquest over corruptions, and so have been apt to beguile themselves. Indeed,
old men that are gracious, are best able to give advice to them that are young, because they
have seen most of the emptiness of things. But yet, for an old and a young [man] to set out
both together, the young one has the advantage of the fairest discovery of a work of grace
within him, though the old man's corruptions are naturally the weakest.

Thus they sat talking till break of day. Now, when the family was up, Christiana bid her son
James that he should read a chapter; so he read the fifty-third of Isaiah. When he had done,
Mr. Honest asked, why it was said that the Saviour is said to come 'out of a dry ground'; and
also, that 'He had no form or comeliness in him?'

GREAT-HEART. Then said Mr. Great-heart, To the first, I answer, Because the church of the Jews,
of which Christ came, had then lost almost all the sap and spirit of religion. To the second,
I say, The words are spoken in the person of the unbelievers, who, because they want that eye
that can see into our Prince's heart, therefore they judge of Him by the meanness of His outside.
Just like those that know not that precious stones are covered over with a homely crust; who,
when they have found one, because they know not what they have found, cast it again away, as
men do a common stone.

Well, said Gaius, now you are here, and since, as I know, Mr. Great-heart is good at his weapons,
if you please, after we have refreshed ourselves, we will walk into the fields, to see if we
can do any good.[240] About a mile from hence, there is one Slay-good, a giant that does much
annoy the King's highway in these parts; and I know whereabout his haunt is. He is master of
a number of thieves; it would be well if we could clear these parts of him. So they consented,
and went, Mr. Great-heart with his sword, helmet, and shield, and the rest with spears and
staves.[241] When they came to the place where he was, they found him with one Feeble-mind
in his hands, whom his servants had brought unto him, having taken him in the way. Now the
giant was rifling him, with a purpose, after that, to pick his bones, for he was of the nature
of flesh-eaters.

Well, so soon as he saw Mr. Great-heart and his friends at the mouth of his cave, with their
weapons, he demanded what they wanted.

GREAT-HEART. We want thee; for we are come to revenge the quarrel of the many that thou hast
slain of the pilgrims, when thou hast dragged them out of the King's highway; wherefore, come
out of thy cave. So he armed himself and came out; and to a battle they went, and fought for
above an hour, and then stood still to take wind.

SLAY. Then said the giant, Why are you here on my ground?

GREAT-HEART. To revenge the blood of pilgrims, as I also told thee before. So they went to
it again, and the giant made Mr. Great-heart give back; but he came up again, and, in the greatness
of his mind, he let fly with such stoutness at the giant's head and sides, that he made him
let his weapon fall out of his hand; so he smote him, and slew him, and cut off his head, and
brought it away to the inn. He also took Feeble-mind, the pilgrim, and brought him with him
to his lodgings. When they were come home, they showed his head to the family, and then set
it up, as they had done others before, for a terror to those that shall attempt to do as he
hereafter.[242]

Then they asked Mr. Feeble-mind how he fell into his hands?

FEEBLE-MIND. Then said the poor man, I am a sickly man, as you see; and, because death did
usually once a day knock at my door, I thought I should never be well at home; so I betook
myself to a pilgrim's life, and have traveled hither from the town of Uncertain, where I and
my father were born. I am a man of no strength at all of body, nor yet of mind; but would,
if I could, though I can but crawl, spend my life in the pilgrim's way.[243] When I came at
the gate that is at the head of the way, the Lord of that place did entertain me freely; neither
objected He against my weakly looks, nor against my feeble mind; but gave me such things that
were necessary for my journey, and bid me hope to the end. When I came to the house of the
Interpreter, I received much kindness there; and because the Hill Difficulty was judged too
hard for me, I was carried up that by one of His servants. Indeed, I have found much relief
from pilgrims, though none were willing to go so softly as I am forced to do; yet still, as
they came on, they bid me be of good cheer, and said that it was the will of their Lord that
comfort should be given to the feeble-minded, and so went on their own pace (1 Thess. 5:14).
When I was come up to Assault Lane, then this giant met with me, and bid me prepare for an
encounter; but, alas! feeble one that I was, I had more need of a cordial. So he came up and
took me. I conceited he should not kill me. Also, when he had got me into his den, since I
went not with him willingly, I believed I should come out alive again; for I have heard, that
not any pilgrim that is taken captive by violent hands, if he keeps heart-whole towards his
Master, is, by the laws of Providence, to die by the hand of the enemy. Robbed I looked to
be, and robbed to be sure I am; but I am, as you see, escaped with life; for the which I thank
my King as author, and you as the means. Other brunts I also look for; but this I have resolved
on, to wit, to run when I can, to go when I cannot run, and to creep when I cannot go. As to
the main, I thank Him that loves me, I am fixed. My way is before me, my mind is beyond the
river that has no bridge, though I am, as you see, but of a feeble mind.[244]

HON. Then said old Mr. Honest, Have you not, some time ago, been acquainted with one Mr. Fearing,
a pilgrim.

FEEBLE. Acquainted with him! Yes; he came from the town of Stupidity, which lieth four degrees
to the northward of the City of Destruction, and as many off of where I was born; yet we were
well acquainted, for, indeed, he was my uncle, my father's brother. He and I have been much
of a temper. He was a little shorter than I, but yet we were much of a complexion.

HON. I perceive you know him; and I am apt to believe also, that you were related one to another;
for you have his whitely look, a cast like his with your eye, and your speech is much alike.

FEEBLE. Most have said so that have known us both; and besides, what I have read in him, I
have, for the most part, found in myself.

GAIUS. Come, Sir, said good Gaius, be of good cheer, you are welcome to me, and to my house,
and what thou hast a mind to, call for freely; and what thou wouldest have my servants do for
thee, they will do it with a ready mind.

Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, This is unexpected favour, and as the sun shining out of a very
dark cloud. Did Giant Slay-good intend me this favour when he stopped me, and resolved to let
me go no further? Did he intend, that after he had rifled my pockets, I should go to Gaius,
mine host? Yet so it is.[245]

Now, just as Mr. Feeble-mind and Gaius were thus in talk, there comes one running, and called
at the door, and told that, about a mile and a half off, there was one Mr. Not-right, a pilgrim,
struck dead upon the place where he was with a thunder-bolt.[246]

FEEBLE. Alas! said Mr. Feeble-mind, is he slain? He overtook me some days before I came so
far as hither, and would be my company-keeper. He also was with me when Slay-good, the giant,
took me; but he was nimble of his heels, and escaped. But, it seems, he escaped to die, and
I was took to live.[247]

What, one would think, doth seek to slay outright,  Ofttimes delivers from the saddest plight.
That very providence, whose face is death,  Doth ofttimes to the lowly life bequeath.  I taken
was, he did escape and flee;  Hands cross'd gives death to him, and life to me.

Now, about this time, Matthew and Mercy were married. Also Gaius gave his daughter Phoebe to
James, Matthew's brother, to wife; after which time they yet staid above ten days at Gaius'
house, spending their time, and the seasons, like as pilgrims used to do.[248]

When they were to depart, Gaius made them a feast, and they did eat and drink, and were merry.
Now the hour was come that they must be gone; wherefore, Mr. Great-heart called for a reckoning;
but Gaius told him, that at his house it was not the custom for pilgrims to pay for their entertainment.
He boarded them by the year, but looked for his pay from the good Samaritan, who had promised
him, at his return, whatsoever charge he was at with them, faithfully to repay him (Luke 10:34,
35). Then said Mr. Great-heart to him,

GREAT-HEART. 'Beloved, thou dost faithfully whatsoever thou dost to the brethren, and to strangers;
which have borne witness of thy charity before the church; whom if thou (yet) bring forward
on their journey after a godly sort, thou shalt do well' (3 John 5, 6). Then Gaius took his
leave of them all, and of his children, and particularly of Mr. Feeble-mind. He also gave him
something to drink by the way.

Now Mr. Feeble-mind, when they were going out of the door, made as if he intended to linger;
the which when Mr. Great-heart espied, he said, Come, Mr. Feeble-Mind, pray do you go along
with us, I will be your conductor, and you shall fare as the rest.

FEEBLE. Alas! I want a suitable companion; you are all lusty and strong; but I, as you see,
am weak; I choose, therefore, rather to come behind, lest, by reason of my many infirmities,
I should be both a burden to myself and to you. I am, as I said, a man of a weak and feeble
mind, and shall be offended and made weak at that which others can bear. I shall like no laughing;
I shall like no gay attire; I shall like no unprofitable questions. Nay, I am so weak a man,
as to be offended with that which others have liberty to do. I do not yet know all the truth;
I am a very ignorant Christian man; sometimes, if I hear some rejoice in the Lord, it troubles
me, because I can not do so too. It is with me, as it is with a weak man among the strong,
or as with a sick man among the healthy, or as a lamp despised ('He that is ready to slip with
his feet, is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease' Job 12:5), so that I
know not what to do.[249]

GREAT-HEART. But, brother, said. Mr. Great-heart, I have it in commission to 'comfort the feeble-minded,'
and to 'support the weak' (1 Thess. 5:14). You must needs go along with us; we will wait for
you; we will lend you our help (Rom. 14:1); we will deny ourselves of some things, both opinionative
and practical, for your sake (1 Cor. 8), we will not enter into doubtful disputations before
you; we will be made all things to you, rather than you shall be left behind[250] (1 Cor. 9:22).

Now all this while they were at Gaius' door; and behold, as they were thus in the heat of their
discourse, Mr. Ready-to-halt came by, with his crutches [promises] in his hand (Psa. 38:17);
and he also was going on pilgrimage.

FEEBLE. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind to him, Man, How camest thou hither? I was but just now complaining,
that I had not a suitable companion, but thou art according to my wish. Welcome, welcome, good
Mr. Ready-to-halt, I hope thee and I may be some help.

READY-TO-HALT. I shall be glad of thy company, said the other; and good Mr. Feeble-mind, rather
than we will part, since we are thus happily met, I will lend thee one of my crutches.[251]

FEEBLE. Nay, said he, though I thank thee for thy goodwill, I am not inclined to halt before
I am lame. Howbeit, I think, when occasion is, it may help me against a dog.[252]

READY. If either myself or my crutches can do thee a pleasure, we are both at thy command,
good Mr. Feeble-mind.

Thus therefore they went on; Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Honest went before, Christiana and her
children went next, and Mr. Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt, came behind with his crutches.[253]
Then said Mr. Honest,

HON. Pray, Sir, now we are upon the road, tell us some profitable things of some that have
gone on pilgrimage before us.

GREAT-HEART. With a good will. I suppose you have heard how Christian of old did meet with
Apollyon in the Valley of Humiliation; and also what hard work he had, to go through the Valley
of the Shadow of Death. Also I think you cannot but have heard how Faithful was put to it with
Madam Wanton, with Adam the first, with one Discontent, and Shame, four as deceitful villains
as a man can meet with upon the road.

HON. Yes, I have heard of all this; but indeed, good Faithful was hardest put to it with Shame;
he was an unwearied one.

GREAT-HEART. Aye; for, as the Pilgrim well said, he of all men had the wrong name.

HON. But pray, Sir, where was it that Christian and Faithful met Talkative? That same was also
a notable one.

GREAT-HEART. He was a confident fool, yet many follow his ways.

HON. He had like to have beguiled Faithful.

GREAT-HEART. Aye, but Christian put him into a way quickly to find him out. Thus they went
on till they came at the place where Evangelist met with Christian and Faithful, and prophesied
to them of what should befall them at Vanity Fair.

GREAT-HEART. Then said their guide, Hereabouts did Christian and Faithful meet with Evangelist,
who prophesied to them of what troubles they should meet with at Vanity Fair.

HON. Say you so? I dare say it was a hard chapter that then he did read unto them.[254]

GREAT-HEART. It was so; but he gave them encouragement withal. But what do we talk of them?
they were a couple of lion-like men; they had set their faces like flint. Don't you remember
how undaunted they were when they stood before the judge?

HON. Well, Faithful bravely suffered.

GREAT-HEART. So he did, and as brave things came on it; for Hopeful and some others, as the
story relates it, were converted by his death.

HON. Well, but pray go on; for you are well acquainted with things.

GREAT-HEART. Above all that Christian met with after he had passed through Vanity Fair, one
By-ends was the arch one.

HON. By-ends! What was he?

GREAT-HEART. A very arch fellow; a downright hypocrite. One that would be religious which way
ever the world went; but so cunning, that he would be sure neither to lose nor suffer for it.
He had his mode of religion for every fresh occasion; and his wife was as good at it as he.
He would turn and change from opinion to opinion; yea, and plead for so doing too. But, so
far as I could learn, he came to an ill end with his by-ends; nor did I ever hear that any
of his children were ever of any esteem with any that truly feared God.

Now, by this time, they were come within sight of the town of Vanity, where Vanity Fair is
kept. So, when they saw that they were so near the town, they consulted with one another, how
they should pass through the town; and some said one thing, and some another. At last Mr. Great-heart
said, I have, as you may understand, often been a conductor of pilgrims through this town;
now I am acquainted with one Mr. Mnason, a Cyprusian by nation, an old disciple, at whose house
we may lodge (Acts 21:16). If you think good, said he, we will turn in there.[255]

Content, said old Honest; Content, said Christiana; Content, said Mr. Feeble-mind; and so they
said all. Now, you must think, it was even-tide by that they got to the outside of the town;
but Mr. Great-heart knew the way to the old man's house. So thither they came; and he called
at the door, and the old man within knew his tongue so soon as ever he heard it; so he opened,
and they all came in. Then said Mnason their host, How far have ye come today? So they said,
From the house of Gaius our friend. I promise you, said he, you have gone a good stitch, you
may well be a weary; sit down. So they sat down.

GREAT-HEART. Then said their guide, Come, what cheer, Sirs? I dare say you are welcome to my
friend.

MNASON. I also, said Mr. Mnason, do bid you welcome, and, whatever you want, do but say, and
we will do what we can to get it for you.

HON. Our great want, a while since, was harbour and good company, and now I hope we have both.

MNASON. For harbour, you see what it is; but for good company, that will appear in the trial.

GREAT-HEART. Well, said Mr. Great-heart, will you have the Pilgrims up into their lodging?

MNASON. I will, said Mr. Mnason. So he had them to their respective places; and also showed
them a very fair dining-room, where they might be, and sup together, until time was come to
go to rest.

Now, when they were set in their places, and were a little cheery after their journey, Mr.
Honest asked his landlord, if there were any store of good people in the town?

MNASON. We have a few, for indeed they are but a few, when compared with them on the other side.

HON. But how shall we do to see some of them? for the sight of good men to them that are going
on pilgrimage, is like to the appearing of the moon and the stars to them that are sailing
upon the seas.[256]

Then Mr. Mnason stamped with his foot, and his daughter Grace came up; so he said unto her,
Grace, go you, tell my friends, Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Love-saint, Mr. Dare-not-lie,
and Mr. Penitent; that I have a friend or two at my house that have a mind this evening to
see them.

So Grace went to call them, and they came; and, after salutation made, they sat down together
at the table.

Then said Mr. Mnason, their landlord, My neighbours, I have, as you see, a company of strangers
come to my house; they are Pilgrims; they come from afar, and are going to mount Zion. But
who, quoth he, do you think this is? pointing with his finger to Christiana; it is Christiana,
the wife of Christian, that famous Pilgrim, who, with Faithful his brother, were so shamefully
handled in our town. At that they stood amazed, saying, We little thought to see Christiana,
when Grace came to call us; wherefore this is a very comfortable surprise. Then they asked
her of her welfare, and if these young men were her husband's sons? And when she had told them
they were, they said, The King whom you love and serve, make you as your father, and bring
you where he is in peace!

HON. Then Mr. Honest (when they were all sat down) asked Mr. Contrite, and the rest, in what
posture their town was at present?

CONTRITE. You may be sure we are full of hurry in fair-time. It is hard keeping our hearts
and spirits in any good order, when we are in a cumbered condition. He that lives in such a
place as this is, and that has to do with such as we have, has need of an item, to caution
him to take heed, every moment of the day.

HON. But how are your neighbours for quietness?

CONTRITE. They are much more moderate now than formerly. You know how Christian and Faithful
were used at our town; but of late, I say, they have been far more moderate. I think the blood
of Faithful lieth with load upon them till now; for since they burned him, they have been ashamed
to burn any more. In those days we were afraid to walk the streets, but now we can show our
heads. Then the name of a professor was odious; now, especially in some parts of our town (for
you know our town is large), religion is counted honourable.[257]

Then said Mr. Contrite to them, Pray how fareth it with you in your pilgrimage? How stands
the country affected towards you?

HON. It happens to us as it happeneth to wayfaring men; sometimes our way is clean, sometimes
foul, sometimes up hill, sometimes down hill; we are seldom at a certainty; the wind is not
always on our backs, nor is everyone a friend that we meet with in the way. We have met with
some notable rubs already; and what are yet behind, we know not; but for the most part, we
find it true, that has been talked of, of old, A good man must suffer trouble.

CONTRITE. You talk of rubs; what rubs have you met withal?

HON. Nay, ask Mr. Great-heart, our guide, for he can give the best account of that.

GREAT-HEART. We have been beset three or four times already. First, Christiana and her children
were beset with two ruffians, that they feared would a took away their lives. We were beset
with Giant Bloody-man, Giant Maul, and Giant Slay-good. Indeed we did rather beset the last,
than were beset of him. And thus it was: After we had been some time at the house of 'Gaius,
mine host, and of the whole church' (Rom. 16:23), we were minded upon a time to take our weapons
with us, and so go see if we could light upon any of those that were enemies to pilgrims (for
we heard that there was a notable one thereabouts). Now Gaius knew his haunt better than I,
because he dwelt thereabout; so we looked, and looked, till at last we discerned the mouth
of his cave; then we were glad, and plucked up our spirits. So we approached up to his den,
and lo, when we came there, he had dragged, by mere force, into his net, this poor man, Mr.
Feeble-mind, and was about to bring him to his end. But when he saw us, supposing, as we thought,
he had had another prey, he left the poor man in his hole, and came out. So we fell to it full
sore, and he lustily laid about him; but in conclusion, he was brought down to the ground,
and his head cut off, and set up by the way-side, for a terror to such as should after practise
such ungodliness. That I tell you the truth, here is the man himself to affirm it, who was
as a lamb taken out of the mouth of the lion.

FEEBLE-MIND. Then said Mr. Feeble-mind, I found this true, to my cost, and comfort; to my cost,
when he threatened to pick my bones every moment; and to my comfort, when I saw Mr. Great-heart
and his friends with their weapons, approach so near for my deliverance.

HOLY-MAN. Then said Mr. Holy-man, There are two things that they have need to be possessed
with, that go on pilgrimage; courage, and an unspotted life. If they have not courage, they
can never hold on their way; and if their lives be loose, they will make the very name of a
Pilgrim stink.

LOVE-SAINT. Then said Mr. Love-saint, I hope this caution is not needful amongst you. But truly,
there are many that go upon the road, that rather declare themselves strangers to pilgrimage,
than strangers and pilgrims in the earth.

DARE-NOT-LIE. Then said Mr. Dare-not-lie, It is true, they neither have the pilgrim's need,
nor the pilgrim's courage; they go not uprightly, but all awry with their feet; one shoe goes
inward, another outward, and their hosen out behind; there a rag, and there a rent, to the
disparagement of their Lord.

PENITENT. These things, said Mr. Penitent, they ought to be troubled for; nor are the pilgrims
like to have that grace put upon them and their pilgrim's progress, as they desire, until the
way is cleared of such spots and blemishes.

Thus they sat talking and spending the time, until supper was set upon the table; unto which
they went and refreshed their weary bodies; so they went to rest. Now they stayed in this fair
a great while, at the house of this Mr. Mnason, who, in process of time, gave his daughter
Grace unto Samuel, Christiana's son, to wife, and his daughter Martha to Joseph.

The time, as I said, that they lay here, was long (for it was not now as in former times).
Wherefore the Pilgrims grew acquainted with many of the good people of the town, and did them
what service they could. Mercy, as she was wont, laboured much for the poor; wherefore their
bellies and backs blessed her, and she was there an ornament to her profession.[258] And, to
say the truth for Grace, Phoebe, and Martha, they were all of a very good nature, and did much
good in their place. They were also all of them very fruitful; so that Christian's name, as
was said before, was like to live in the world.

While they lay here, there came a monster out of the woods, and slew many of the people of
the town. It would also carry away their children, and teach them to suck its whelps.[259]
Now, no man in the town durst so much as face this monster; but all men fled when they heard
of the noise of his coming.

The monster was like unto no one beast upon the earth; its body was like a dragon, and it had
seven heads and ten horns (Rev. 17:3). It made great havoc of children, and yet it was governed
by a woman.[260] This monster propounded conditions to men, and such men as loved their lives
more than their souls, accepted of those conditions. So they came under.[261]

Now this Mr. Great-heart, together with these that came to visit the pilgrims at Mr. Mnason's
house, entered into a covenant to go and engage this beast, if perhaps they might deliver the
people of this town from the paws and mouth of this so devouring a serpent.

Then did Mr. Great-heart, Mr. Contrite, Mr. Holy-man, Mr. Dare-not-lie, and Mr. Penitent, with
their weapons go forth to meet him. Now the monster, at first, was very rampant, and looked
upon these enemies with great disdain; but they so belaboured him, being sturdy men at arms,
that they made him make a retreat; so they came home to Mr. Mnason's house again.

The monster, you must know, had his certain seasons to come out in, and to make his attempts
upon the children of the people of the town; also these seasons did these valiant worthies
watch him in, and did still continually assault him; insomuch, that in process of time he became
not only wounded, but lame; also he has not made that havoc of the townsmen's children, as
formerly he has done. And it is verily believed by some, that this beast will die of his wounds.[262]

This, therefore, made Mr. Great-heart and his fellows of great fame in this town; so that many
of the people that wanted their taste of things, yet had a reverend esteem and respect for
them.[263] Upon this account therefore it was, that these pilgrims got not much hurt here.
True, there were some of the baser sort, that could see no more than a mole, nor understand
more than a beast; these had no reverence for these men, nor took they notice of their valour
or adventures.[264]

Well, the time grew on that the Pilgrims must go on their way, wherefore they prepared for
their journey. They sent for their friends; they conferred with them; they had some time set
apart, therein to commit each other to the protection of their Prince. There were again, that
brought them of such things as they had, that were fit for the weak and the strong, for the
women and the men, and so laded them with such things as were necessary (Acts 28:10).

Then they set forward on their way; and their friends accompanying them so far as was convenient,
they again committed each other to the protection of their King, and parted. They, therefore,
that were of the Pilgrims' company went on, and Mr. Great-heart went before them. Now the women
and children being weakly, they were forced to go as they could bear; by this means Mr. Ready-to-halt
and Mr. Feeble-mind had more to sympathize with their condition.

When they were gone from the townsmen, and when their friends had bid them farewell; they quickly
came to the place where Faithful was put to death; there therefore they made a stand, and thanked
Him that had enabled him to bear his cross so well; and the rather because they now found that
they had a benefit by such a manly suffering as his was.[265]

They went on, therefore, after this, a good way further, talking of Christian and Faithful;
and how Hopeful joined himself to Christian after that Faithful was dead.

Now they were come up with the Hill Lucre, where the silver mine was, which took Demas off
from his pilgrimage, and into which, as some think, By-ends fell and perished; wherefore they
considered that. But when they were come to the old monument that stood over against the Hill
Lucre, to wit, to the pillar of salt that stood also within view of Sodom and its stinking
lake; they marveled, as did Christian before, that men of that knowledge and ripeness of wit,
as they were, should be so blinded as to turn aside here. Only they considered again, that
nature is not affected with the harms that others have met with, especially if that thing upon
which they look, has an attracting virtue upon the foolish eye.

I saw now that they went on, till they came at the river that was on this side of the Delectable
Mountains. To the river where the fine trees grow on both sides; and whose leaves, if taken
inwardly, are good against surfeits, where the meadows are green all the year long, and where
they might lie down safely (Psa. 23).

By this river side, in the meadow, there were cotes and folds for sheep, a house built for
the nourishing and bringing up of those lambs, the babes of those women that go on pilgrimage
(Heb. 5:2). 40:11). Now to the care of THIS MAN, Christiana admonished her four daughters to
commit their little ones, that by these waters they might be housed, harboured, succoured,
and nourished, and that none of them might be lacking in time to come.[266] This Man, if any
of them go astray, or be lost, He will bring them again; He will also bind up that which was
broken, and will strengthen them that are sick (Ezek. 34:11-16). Here they will never want
meat, and drink, and clothing; here they will be kept from thieves and robbers; for this Man
will die before one of those committed to His trust shall be lost (Jer. 23:4).

Besides, here they shall be sure to have good nurture and admonition, and shall be taught to
walk in right paths, and that you know is a favour of no small account. Also here, as you see,
are delicate waters, pleasant meadows, dainty flowers, variety of trees, and such as bear wholesome
fruit; fruit not like that that Matthew ate of, that fell over the wall out of Beelzebub's
garden; but fruit that procureth health where there is none, and that continueth and increaseth
it where it is.[267]

So they were content to commit their little ones to Him; and that which was also an encouragement
to them so to do, was, for that all this was to be at the charge of the King, and so was as
an hospital for young children and orphans.

Now they went on; and when they were come to By-path Meadow, to the stile over which Christian
went with his fellow Hopeful, when they were taken by Giant Despair, and put into Doubting
Castle; they sat down and consulted what was best to be done; to wit, now they were so strong,
and had got such a man as Mr. Great-heart for their conductor, whether they had not best to
make an attempt upon the Giant, demolish his castle, and, if there were any pilgrims in it,
to set them at liberty, before they went any further. So one said one thing, and another said
the contrary. One questioned if it were lawful to go upon unconsecrated ground; another said
they might, provided their end was good; but Mr. Great-heart said, Though that assertion offered
last cannot be universally true, yet I have a commandment to resist sin, to overcome evil,
to fight the good fight of faith; and, I pray, with whom should I fight this good fight, if
not with Giant Despair? I will, therefore, attempt the taking away of his life, and the demolishing
of Doubting Castle. Then said he, Who will go with me? Then said old Honest, I will. And so
will we too, said Christiana's four sons, Matthew, Samuel, James, and Joseph; for they were
young men and strong (1 John 3:13, 14). So they left the women in the road, and with them Mr.
Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt with his crutches, to be their guard, until they came back;
for in that place though Giant Despair dwelt so near, they keeping in the road, a little child
might lead them (Isa. 11:6). So Mr. Great-heart, old Honest, and the four young men, went to
go up to Doubting Castle, to look for Giant Despair. When they came at the Castle-gate, they
knocked for entrance with an unusual noise. At that the old Giant comes to the gate, and Diffidence,
his wife, follows. Then said he, Who, and what is he that is so hardy, as after this manner
to molest the Giant Despair?

Mr. Great-heart replied, It is I, Great-heart, one of the King of the Celestial Country's conductors
of pilgrims to their place; and I demand of thee that thou open thy gates for my entrance.
Prepare thyself also to fight, for I am come to take away thy head, and to demolish Doubting
Castle.

Now Giant Despair, because he was a giant, thought no man could overcome him; and, again, thought
he, since heretofore I have made a conquest of angels, shall Great-heart make me afraid! So
he harnessed himself, and went out. He had a cap of steel upon his head, a breast-plate of
fire girded to him, and he came out in iron shoes with a great club in his hand. Then these
six men made up to him, and beset him behind and before. Also when Diffidence, the giantess,
came up to help him, old Mr. Honest cut her down at one blow. Then they fought for their lives,
and Giant Despair was brought down to the ground, but was very loath to die. He struggled hard,
and had, as they say, as many lives as a cat; but Great-heart was his death, for he left him
not till he had severed his head from his shoulders.[268]

Then they fell to demolishing Doubting Castle, that you know might with ease be done, since
Giant Despair was dead. They were seven days in destroying of that; and in it of pilgrims they
found one Mr. Despondency, almost starved to death, and one Much-afraid, his daughter; these
two they saved alive. But it would have made you a-wondered to have seen the dead bodies that
lay here and there in the castle-yard, and how full of dead men's bones the dungeon was.

When Mr. Great-heart and his companions had performed this exploit, they took Mr. Despondency,
and his daughter Much-afraid, into their protection; for they were honest people, though they
were prisoners in Doubting Castle, to that tyrant Giant Despair. They, therefore, I say, took
with them the head of the Giant, for his body they had buried under a heap of stones, and down
to the road and to their companions they came, and showed them what they had done. Now when
Feeble-mind and Ready-to-halt saw that it was the head of Giant Despair indeed, they were very
jocund and merry.[269] Now Christiana, if need was, could play upon the viol, and her daughter
Mercy upon the lute; so, since they were so merry disposed, she played them a lesson, and Ready-to-halt
would dance. So he took Despondency's daughter, named Much-afraid, by the hand, and to dancing
they went in the road. True, he could not dance without one crutch in his hand; but, I promise
you, he footed it well. Also the girl was to be commended, for she answered the music handsomely.

As for Mr. Despondency, the music was not much to him; he was for feeding rather than dancing,
for that he was almost starved. So Christiana gave him some of her bottle of spirits, for present
relief, and then prepared him something to eat; and, in little time, the old gentleman came
to himself, and began to be finely revived. 

The antelopes have again collected in small herds, composed of several females with their young,
attended by one or two males, though some of the males are still solitary or wander in parties
of two over the plains, which the antelope invariably prefers to the woodlands, and to which
it always retreats if by accident it is found straggling in the hills,
confiding no doubt in its wonderful fleetness.

We also killed a few young geese, but as this game is small and very incompetent to the subsistence
of the party, we have forbidden the men any longer to waste their
ammunition on them.

About four and a half miles above Gass's creek, the valley in which
we have been travelling ceases, the high craggy cliffs again approach
the river, which now enters or rather leaves what appears to be a
second great chain of the Rocky mountains.

About a mile after entering these hills or low mountains we passed a number of fine bold springs,
which burst out near the edge of the river under the cliffs on the left, and furnished a fine freestone
water: near these we met with two of the worst rapids we have seen since entering the mountains;
a ridge of sharp pointed rocks stretching across the river, leaving but small and dangerous channels
for the navigation.

The cliffs are of a lighter colour than those we have already passed, and in the bed of the river
is some limestone which is small and worn smooth, and seems to have been brought down by the current.
We went about a mile further and encamped under a high bluff on the right opposite to a cliff of
rocks, having made sixteen miles.

All these cliffs appeared to have been undermined by the water at some period, and fallen down
from the hills on their sides, the stratas of rock sometimes lying with their edges upwards, others
not detached from the hills are depressed obliquely on the side next
the river as if they had sunk to fill up the cavity formed by the
washing of the river.

In the open places among the rocky cliffs are two kinds of gooseberry, one yellow and the other
red. The former species was observed for the first time near the falls, the latter differs from
it in no respect except in colour and in being of a larger size; both have a sweet flavour,
and are rather indifferent fruit.

Friday 26. We again found the current strong and the ripples frequent: these we were obliged
to overcome by means of the cord and the pole, the oar being scarcely ever used except in crossing
to take advantage of the shore. Within three and three quarter miles we passed seven small islands
and reached the mouth of a large creek which empties itself in the centre of a bend on the left
side: it is a bold running stream fifteen yards wide, and received the name of Howard creek
after John P. Howard one of the party. One mile beyond it is a small run which falls in on the same
side just above a rocky cliff. Here the mountains recede from the river, and the valley widens to
the extent of several miles. The river now becomes crowded with islands of which we passed
ten in the next thirteen and three quarter miles, then at the distance of eighteen miles we encamped
on the left shore near a rock in the centre of a bend towards the left, and opposite to two more
islands. This valley has wide low grounds covered with high grass, and in many with a fine
turf of green sward. The soil of the highlands is thin and meagre, without any covering except
a low sedge and a dry kind of grass which is almost as inconvenient as the prickly pear. The seeds
of it are armed with a long twisted hard beard at their upper extremity,
while the lower part is a sharp firm point, beset at its base with
little stiff bristles, with the points in a direction contrary to
the subulate point to which they answer as a barb.

We see also another species of prickly pear. It is of a globular form, composed of an assemblage
of little conic leaves springing from a common root to which their small points are attached as a
common centre, and the base of the cone forms the apex of the leaf which is garnished with
a circular range of sharp thorns like the cochineal plant, and quite as stiff and even more
keen than those of the common flat-leafed species. Between the hills the river had been confined
within one hundred and fifty or two hundred yards, but in the valley it widens to two hundred
or two hundred and fifty yards, and sometimes is spread by its numerous islands to the distance
of three quarters of a mile. The banks are low, but the river never overflows them. On entering
the valley we again saw the snow-clad mountains before us, but the appearance of the hills as
well as of the timber near us is much as heretofore.

Finding Chaboneau unable to proceed captain Clarke left him with one of the men, and accompanied
by the other went up the river about twelve miles to the top of a
mountain.

Here he had an extensive view of the river valley upwards and saw a large creek which flowed
in on the right side. He however discovered no fresh sign of the Indians, and therefore determined
to examine the middle branch and join us by the time we reached the forks: he descended the
mountain by an Indian path which wound through a deep valley, and
at length reached a fine cold spring.

The day had been very warm, the path unshaded by timber, and his thirst was excessive; he was
therefore tempted to drink: but although he took the precaution of previously wetting his head,
feet and hands, he soon found himself very unwell; he continued his route, and after resting
with Chaboneau at his camp, resumed his march across the north fork near a large island. The
first part was knee deep, but on the other side of the island the water came to their waists
and was so rapid that Chaboneau was on the point of being swept away,
and not being able to swim would have perished if captain Clarke had
not rescued him.

While crossing the island they killed two brown bear and saw great quantities of beaver. He
then went on to a small river which falls into the north fork some miles above its junction
with the two others: here, finding himself grow more unwell, he halted for the night at the distance
of four miles from his last encampment.

Saturday 27. We proceeded on but slowly, the current being still so rapid as to require the
utmost exertions of us all to advance, and the men are losing their
strength fast in consequence of their constant efforts.

At half a mile we passed an island, and a mile and a quarter further again entered a ridge of hills
which now approach the river with cliffs apparently sinking like those of yesterday. They are
composed of a solid limestone of a light lead colour when exposed to the air, though when freshly
broken it is of a deep blue, and of an excellent quality and very fine grain. On these cliffs
were numbers of the bighorn.

At two and a half miles we reached the centre of a bend towards the south passing a small island,
and at one mile and a quarter beyond this reached about nine in the morning the mouth of a river
seventy yards wide, which falls in from the southeast. Here the country suddenly opens into extensive
and beautiful meadows and plains, surrounded on every side with distant and lofty mountains.
Captain Lewis went up this stream for about half a mile, and from the height of a limestone
cliff could observe its course about seven miles, and the three forks of the Missouri, of which
this river is one. Its extreme point bore S. 65° E. and during the seven miles it passes through
a green extensive meadow of fine grass dividing itself into several streams, the largest passing
near the ridge of hills on which he stood. On the right side of the Missouri a high, wide and
extensive plain succeeds to this low meadow which reaches the hills. In the meadow a large
spring rises about a quarter of a mile from this Southeast fork, into which it discharges itself
on the right side about four hundred paces from where he stood. Between the southeast and middle
forks a distant range of snow-topped mountains spread from east to south above the irregular
broken hills nearer to this spot: the middle and southwest forks unite at half a mile above the
entrance of the southeast fork. The extreme point at which the former can be seen, bears S.
15° E. and at the distance of fourteen miles, where it turns to the right round the point of
a high plain and disappears from the view. Its low grounds are several miles in width, forming
a smooth and beautiful green meadow, and like the southeast fork it divides itself into several
streams.

Between these two forks and near their junction with that from the southwest, is a position
admirably well calculated for a fort. It is a limestone rock of an oblong form, rising from
the plain perpendicularly to the height of twenty-five feet on three of its sides; the fourth
towards the middle fork being a gradual ascent and covered with a fine green sward, as is also
the top which is level and contains about two acres. An extensive plain lies between the middle
and southwest forks, the last of which after watering a country like that of the other two branches,
disappears about twelve miles off, at a point bearing south 30° west. It is also more divided
and serpentine in its course than the other two, and possesses more timber in its meadows. This
timber consists almost exclusively of the narrow-leafed cottonwood,
with an inter-mixture of box alder and sweet-willow, the underbrush
being thick and like that of the Missouri lower down.

A range of high mountains partially covered with snow is seen at a considerable distance running
from south to west, and nearly all around us are broken ridges of country like that below, through
which those united streams appear to have forced their passage: after observing the country
captain Lewis descended to breakfast.

We then left the mouth of the southeast fork, to which in honour of the secretary of the treasury
we called Gallatin's river, and at the distance of half a mile reached the confluence of the southwest
and middle branch of the Missouri. Here we found the letter from captain Clarke, and as we
agreed with him that the direction of the southwest fork gave it a decided preference over
the others, we ascended that branch of the river for a mile, and
encamped in a level handsome plain on the left: having advanced only
seven miles.

Here we resolved to wait the return of captain Clarke, and in the meantime make the necessary
celestial observations, as this seems an essential point in the geography of the western world,
and also to recruit the men and air the baggage.

It was accordingly all unloaded and stowed away on shore. Near the three forks we saw many collections
of the mud-nests of the small martin attached to the smooth faces
of the limestone rock, where they were sheltered by projections of
the rock above it: and in the meadows were numbers of the duck or
mallard with their young, who are now nearly grown.

The hunters returned towards evening with six deer, three otter and a muskrat; and had seen great
numbers of antelopes, and much sign of the beaver and elk.

During all last night captain Clarke had a high fever and chills accompanied with great pain.
He however pursued his route eight miles to the middle branch, where
not finding any fresh Indian track he came down it and joined us about
three o'clock, very much exhausted with fatigue and the violence of
his fever.

Believing himself bilious he took a dose of Rush's pills, which we have always found sovereign
in such cases, and bathing the lower extremities in warm water.

Sunday, July 28. Captain Clarke continued very unwell during the night, but was somewhat relieved
this morning. On examining the two streams it became difficult to decide which was the larger
or the real Missouri; they are each ninety yards wide and so perfectly
similar in character and appearance that they seem to have been formed
in the same mould.

We were therefore induced to discontinue the name of Missouri, and gave to the southwest branch
the name of Jefferson in honour of the president of the United States,
and the projector of the enterprise: and called the middle branch
Madison, after James Madison secretary of state.

These two, as well as Gallatin river, run with great velocity and throw out large bodies of
water. Gallatin river is however the most rapid of the three, and though not quite as deep, yet
navigable for a considerable distance. Madison river though much less rapid than the Gallatin, is
somewhat more rapid than the Jefferson; the beds of all of them are formed of smooth pebble and gravel,
and the waters are perfectly transparent.

The timber in the neighbourhood would be sufficient for the ordinary uses of an establishment,
which, however, it would be adviseable to build of brick, as the earth appears calculated for
that purpose, and along the shores are some bars of fine pure sand. The greater part of the
men, having yesterday put their deer skins in water, were this day engaged in dressing them, for
the purpose of making clothing.

The weather was very warm, the thermometer in the afternoon was at 90° above 0, and the musquitoes
more than usually inconvenient: we were, however, relieved from them by a high wind from the southwest,
which came on at four o'clock, bringing a storm of thunder and lightning, attended by refreshing
showers, which continued till after dark. In the evening the hunters returned with eight deer
and two elk; and the party who had been sent up the Gallatin, reported that after passing
the point, where it escaped from captain* Lewis's view yesterday, it turned more towards the
east, as far as they could discern the opening of the mountains, formed by the valley which
bordered it. The low grounds were still wide but not so extensive as near its mouth, and though
the stream is rapid and much divided by islands, it is still sufficiently deep for navigation
with canoes. The low grounds, although not more than eight or nine feet above the water, seem
never to be overflowed, except a part on the west side of the middle fork, which is stony and
seems occasionally inundated, are furnished with great quantities of small fruit, such as currants
and gooseberries: among the last of which is a black species, which we observe not only in
the meadows but along the mountain rivulets. From the same root rise a number of stems to the
height of five or six feet, some of them particularly branched and
all reclining.

The berry is attached by a long peduncle to the stem, from which they hang of a smooth ovate
form, as large as the common garden gooseberry, and as black as jet, though the pulp is of a
bright crimson colour. It is extremely acid: the form of the leaf resembles that of the common
gooseberry, though larger.

The stem is covered with very sharp thorns or briars: the grass too
is very luxuriant and would yield fine hay in parcels of several acres.

 I fought till my sword did cleave to my hand; and when they were joined together,
as if a sword grew out of my arm, and when the blood ran through my fingers, then I fought
with most courage[284] (2 Sam. 23:10).

GREAT-HEART. Thou hast done well. Thou hast 'resisted unto blood, striving against sin.' Thou
shalt abide by us, come in and go out with us, for we are thy companions.

Then they took him, and washed his wounds, and gave him of what they had to refresh him; and
so they went on together. Now, as they went on, because Mr. Great-heart was delighted in him,
for he loved one greatly that he found to be a man of his hands, and because there were with
his company them that were feeble and weak, therefore he questioned with him about many things;
as, first, what countryman he was?[285]

VALIANT. I am of Dark-land; for there I was born, and there my father and mother are still.

GREAT-HEART. Dark-land, said the guide; doth not that lie up on the same coast with the City
of Destruction?

VALIANT. Yes, it doth. Now, that which caused me to come on pilgrimage was this; we had one
Mr. Tell-true came into our parts, and he told it about what Christian had done, that went
from the City of Destruction; namely, how he had forsaken his wife and children, and had betaken
himself to a pilgrim's life. It was also confidently reported, how he had killed a serpent
that did come out to resist him in his journey, and how he got through to whither he intended.
It was also told, what welcome he had at all his Lord's lodgings, especially when he came to
the gates of the Celestial City; for there, said the man, he was received with sound of trumpet,
by a company of Shining Ones. He told it also, how all the bells in the city did ring for joy
at his reception, and what golden garments he was clothed with, with many other things that
now I shall forbear to relate. In a word, that man so told the story of Christian and his travels,
that my heart fell into a burning haste to be gone after him; nor could father or mother stay
me! So I got from them, and am come thus far on my way.

GREAT-HEART. You came in at the gate, did you not?

VALIANT. Yes, yes; for the same man also told us that all would be nothing, if we did not begin
to enter this way at the gate.[286]

GREAT-HEART. Look you, said the guide to Christiana, the pilgrimage of your husband, and what
he has gotten thereby, is spread abroad far and near.

VALIANT. Why, is this Christian's wife?

GREAT-HEART. Yes, that it is; and these are also her four sons.

VALIANT. What! and going on pilgrimage too?

GREAT-HEART. Yes, verily; they are following after.

VALIANT. It glads me at heart. Good man! how joyful will he be when he shall see them that
would not go with him, yet to enter after him in at the gates into the City!

GREAT-HEART. Without doubt it will be a comfort to him; for, next to the joy of seeing himself
there, it will be a joy to meet there his wife and children.

VALIANT. But, now you are upon that, pray let me hear your opinion about it. Some make a question,
Whether we shall know one another when we are there.

GREAT-HEART. Do they think they shall know themselves then, or that they shall rejoice to see
themselves in that bliss? and if they think they shall know and do these, why not know others,
and rejoice in their welfare also?[287]

Again, since relations are our second self, though that state will be dissolved there; yet
why may it not be rationally concluded, that we shall be more glad to see them there, than
to see they are wanting?

VALIANT. Well, I perceive whereabouts you are as to this. Have you any more things to ask me
about my beginning to come on pilgrimage?[288]

GREAT-HEART, Yes. Was your father and mother willing that you should become a pilgrim?

VALIANT. O no! They used all means imaginable to persuade me to stay at home.

GREAT-HEART, What could they say against it?

VALIANT. They said it was an idle life; and if I myself were not inclined to sloth and laziness,
I would never countenance a pilgrim's condition.[289]

GREAT-HEART. And what did they say else?

VALIANT. Why, they told me that it was a dangerous way; yea, the most dangerous way in the
world, said they, is that which the pilgrims go.

GREAT-HEART. Did they show wherein this way is so dangerous?

VALIANT. Yes; and that in many particulars.

GREAT-HEART. Name some of them.

VALIANT. They told me of the Slough of Despond, where Christian was well nigh smothered. They
told me that there were archers standing ready in Beelzebub Castle, to shoot them that should
knock at the wicket-gate for entrance. They told me also of the wood, and dark mountains; of
the Hill Difficulty; of the lions; and also of the three giants, Bloody-man, Maul, and Slay-good.
They said, moreover, that there was a foul fiend haunted the Valley of Humiliation, and that
Christian was by him almost bereft of life. Besides, said they, you must go over the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, where the hobgoblins are; where the light is darkness; where the way
is full of snares, pits, traps, and gins. They told me also of Giant Despair, of Doubting Castle,
and of the ruin that the Pilgrims met with there. Further they said I must go over the Enchanted
Ground: which was dangerous. And that, after all this, I should find a river, over which I
should find no bridge, and that that river did be betwixt me and the Celestial Country.

GREAT-HEART. And was this all?

VALIANT. No. They also told me that this way was full of deceivers,[290] and of persons that
laid in wait there to turn good men out of the path.

GREAT-HEART. But how did they make that out?

VALIANT. They told me that Mr. Worldly-wiseman did there lie in wait to deceive. They also
said, that there was Formality and Hypocrisy continually on the road. They said also that By-ends,
Talkative, or Demas would go near to gather me up; that the Flatterer would catch me in his
net; or that, with green-headed Ignorance, I would presume to go on to the gate, from whence
he always was sent back to the hole that was in the side of the hill, and made to go the by-way
to hell.

GREAT-HEART. I promise you this was enough to discourage; but did they make an end here?

VALIANT. No; stay. They told me also of many that had tried that way of old, and that had gone
a great way therein, to see if they could find something of the glory there, that so many had
so much talked of from time to time; and how they came back again, and befooled themselves
for setting a foot out of doors in that path, to the satisfaction of all the country. And they
named several that did so; as Obstinate and Pliable, Mistrust and Timorous, Turn-away and old
Atheist, with several more, who, they said, had some of them, gone far to see if they could
find; but not one of them found so much advantage by going as amounted to the weight of a feather.[291]

GREAT-HEART. Said they anything more to discourage you?

VALIANT. Yes. They told me of one Mr. Fearing who was a pilgrim; and how he found this way
so solitary, that he never had comfortable hour therein. Also that Mr. Despondency had like
to have been starved therein; yea, and also, which I had almost forgot, that Christian himself,
about whom there has been such a noise, after all his ventures for a celestial crown, was certainly
drowned in the Black River, and never went foot further, however it was smothered up.[292]

GREAT-HEART. And did none of these things discourage you?

VALIANT. No; they seemed but as so many nothings to me.

GREAT-HEART. How came that about?

VALIANT. Why, I still believed what Mr. Tell-true had said, and that carried me beyond them all.

GREAT-HEART. Then this was your victory, even your faith.

VALIANT. It was so. I believed, by the grace of God, and therefore came out, got into the way,
fought all that set themselves against me, and, by believing, am come to this place.[293]

Who would true valour see, Let him come hither; One here will constant be, Come wind, come
weather. There's no discouragement Shall make him once relent, His first avow'd intent To be
a pilgrim.

Who so beset him round With dismal stories, Do but themselves confound. His strength the more
is; No lion can him fright, He'll with a giant fight; But he will have a right To be a pilgrim.

Hobgoblin nor foul fiend Can daunt his spirit; He knows he at the end Shall life inherit. Then
fancies fly away, He'll fear not what men say; He'll labour night and day To be a pilgrim.

By this time they were got to the Enchanted Ground,[294] where the air naturally tended to
make one drowsy; and that place was all grown over with briars and thorns, excepting here and
there, where was an Enchanted Arbour, upon which if a man sits, or in which, if a man sleeps,
it is a question, say some, whether ever he shall rise or wake again in this world.[295] Over
this forest, therefore, they went, both one and the other, and Mr. Great-heart went before,
for that he was the guide; and Mr. Valiant-for-truth, he came behind, being there a guard,
for fear, lest peradventure some fiend, or dragon, or giant, or thief, should fall upon their
rear, and so do mischief. They went on here, each man with his sword drawn in his hand, for
they knew it was a dangerous place. Also they cheered up one another as well as they could;
Feeble-mind, Mr. Great-heart commanded, should come up after him, and Mr. Despondency was under
the eye of Mr. Valiant.[296]

Now they had not gone far, but a great mist and darkness fell upon them all, so that they could
scarce, for a great while, see the one the other; wherefore they were forced, for some time,
to feel for one another by words; for they walked not by sight.

But anyone must think that here was but sorry going for the best of them all; but how much
worse for the women and children, who both of feet and heart, were but tender. Yet so it was,
that through the encouraging words of he that led in the front, and of him that brought them
up behind, they made a pretty good shift to wag along.

The way also was here very wearisome, through dirt and slabbiness. Nor was there on all this
ground so much as one inn, or victualling house, therein to refresh the feebler sort. Here,
therefore, was grunting, and puffing, and sighing. While one tumbleth over a bush, another
sticks fast in the dirt; and the children, some of them, lost their shoes in the mire. While
one cries out, I am down; and another, Ho! where are you? and a third, The bushes have got
such fast hold on me, I think I cannot get away from them.

Then they came at an arbour, warm, and promising much refreshing to the Pilgrims; for it was
finely wrought above the head, beautified with greens, furnished with benches and settles.[297]
It also had in it a soft couch, whereon the weary might lean. This, you must think, all things
considered, was tempting; for the Pilgrims already began to be foiled with the badness of the
way; but there was not one of them that made so much as a motion to stop there. Yea, for aught
I could perceive, they continually gave so good heed to the advice of their guide, and he did
so faithfully tell them of dangers, and of the nature of dangers, when they were at them, that
usually, when they were nearest to them, they did most pluck up their spirits, and hearten
one another to deny the flesh. This arbour was called The Slothful's Friend, on purpose to
allure, if it might be, some of the pilgrims there to take up their rest when weary.

I saw then in my dream, that they went on in this their solitary ground, till they came to
a place at which a man is apt to lose his way.[298] Now, though when it was light, their guide
could well enough tell how to miss those ways that led wrong, yet in the dark he was put to
a stand; but he had in his pocket a map of all ways leading to, or from the Celestial City;
wherefore he struck a light, for he never goes also without his tinder-box, and takes a view
of his book or map, which bids him be careful, in that place, to turn to the right-hand way.
And had he not here been careful to look in his map, they had all, in probability, been smothered
in the mud; for, just a little before them, and that at the end of the cleanest way too, was
a pit, none knows how deep, full of nothing but mud, there made on purpose to destroy the Pilgrims
in.[299]

Then thought I with myself, who that goeth on pilgrimage, but would have one of these maps
about him, that he may look when he is at a stand, which is the way he must take.[300]

They went on, then, in this Enchanted Ground, till they came to where there was another arbour,
and it was built by the highway-side. And in that arbour there lay two men, whose names were
Heedless and Too-bold.[301] These two went thus far on pilgrimage; but here, being wearied
with their journey, they sat down to rest themselves, and so fell fast asleep. When the Pilgrims
saw them, they stood still, and shook their heads; for they knew that the sleepers were in
a pitiful case. Then they consulted what to do, whether to go on and leave them in their sleep,
or to step to them, and try to awake them. So they concluded to go to them, and awake them;
that is, if they could; but with this caution, namely, to take heed that themselves did not
sit down nor embrace the offered benefit of that arbour.

So they went in, and spake to the men, and called each by his name,[302] for the guide, it
seems, did know them; but there was no voice nor answer. Then the guide did shake them, and
do what he could to disturb them. Then said one of them, I will pay you when I take my money.
At which the guide shook his head. I will fight so long as I can hold my sword in my hand,
said the other. At that one of the children laughed.

Then said Christiana, What is the meaning of this? The guide said, They talk in their sleep.
If you strike them, beat them, or whatever else you do to them, they will answer you after
this fashion; or, as one of them said in old time, when the waves of the sea did beat upon
him, and he slept as one upon the mast of a ship, 'When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again'
(Prov. 23:34, 35). You know, when men talk in their sleep, they say anything, but their words
are not governed either by faith or reason. There is an incoherency in their words now, as
there was before, betwixt their going on pilgrimage, and sitting down here.[303] This, then,
is the mischief of it, when heedless ones go on pilgrimage, it is twenty to one but they are
served thus; for this Enchanted Ground is one of the last refuges that the enemy to pilgrims
has. Wherefore it is, as you see, placed almost at the end of the way, and so it standeth against
us with the more advantage. For when, thinks the enemy, will these fools be so desirous to
sit down, as when they are weary? and when so like to be weary, as when almost at their journey's
end? Therefore it is, I say, that the Enchanted Ground is placed so nigh to the Land Beulah,
and so near the end of their race.[304] Wherefore, let pilgrims look to themselves, lest it
happen to them as it has done to these, that, as you see, are fallen asleep, and none can wake
them.[305]

Then the Pilgrims desired, with trembling, to go forward; only they prayed their guide to strike
a light, that they might go the rest of their way by the help of the light, of a lantern.[306]
So he struck a light, and they went by the help of that through the rest of this way, though
the darkness was very great (2 Peter 1:19).

But the children began to be sorely weary; and they cried out unto Him that loveth pilgrims,
to make their way more comfortable. So by that they had gone a little further, a wind arose,
that drove away the fog; so the air became more clear.

Yet they were not off, by much, of the Enchanted Ground, only now they could see one another
better, and the way wherein they should walk.

Now, when they were almost at the end of this ground, they perceived that, a little before
them, was a solemn noise of one that was much concerned. So they went on and looked before
them; and behold, they saw, as they thought, a man upon his knees, with hands and eyes lift
up, and speaking, as they thought, earnestly to One that was above.[307] They drew nigh, but
could not tell what he said. So they went softly till he had done. When he had done, he got
up, and began to run towards the Celestial City. Then Mr. Great-heart called after him, saying,
Soho! friend, let us have your company, if you go, as I suppose you do, to the Celestial City.
So the man stopped, and they came up to him. But so soon as Mr. Honest saw him, he said, I
know this man. Then said Mr. Valiant-for-truth, Prithee, who is it? It is one, said he, who
comes from whereabouts I dwelt. His name is Stand-fast; he is certainly a right good pilgrim.

So they came up one to another; and presently Stand-fast said to old Honest, Ho, father Honest,
are you there? Aye, said he, that I am, as sure as you are there. Right glad am I, said Mr.
Stand-fast, that I have found you on this road. And as glad am I, said the other, that I espied
you upon your knees. Then Mr. Stand-fast blushed, and said, But why, did you see me? Yes, that
I did, quoth the other, and with my heart was glad at the sight. Why, what did you think? said
Stand-fast. Think! said old Honest, what should I think? I thought we had an honest man upon
the road, and therefore should have his company by and by. If you thought not amiss [said Stand-fast],
how happy am I; but if I be not as I should, I alone must bear it. That is true, said the other;
but your fear doth further confirm me, that things are right betwixt the Prince of Pilgrims
and your soul; for, saith he, 'Blessed is the man that feareth always.'

VALIANT. Well, but brother, I pray thee tell us what was it that was the cause of thy being
upon thy knees even now? Was it for that some special mercies laid obligations upon thee, or how?

STAND-FAST. Why, we are, as you see, upon the Enchanted Ground; and as I was coming along,
I was musing with myself of what a dangerous road the road in this place was, and how many
that had come even thus far on pilgrimage had here been stopped, and been destroyed. I thought
also of the manner of the death with which this place destroyeth men. Those that die here,
die of no violent distemper. The death which such die is not grievous to them; for he that
goeth away in a sleep, begins that journey with desire and pleasure; yea, such acquiesce in
the will of that disease.

HON. Then Mr. Honest, interrupting of him, said, Did you see the two men asleep in the arbour?

STAND-FAST. Aye, aye, I saw Heedless and Too-bold there; and, for aught I know, there they
will lie till they rot (Prov. 10:7). But let me go on in my tale. As I was thus musing, as
I said, there was one, in very pleasant attire, but old, who presented herself unto me, and
offered me three things; to wit, her body, her purse, and her bed. Now, the truth is, I was
both a-weary and sleepy; I am also as poor as an owlet,[308] and that, perhaps, the witch knew.
Well, I repulsed her once and twice, but she put by my repulses, and smiled. Then I began to
be angry; but she mattered that nothing at all. Then she made offers again, and said, If I
would be ruled by her, she would make me great and happy; for, said she, I am the mistress
of the world, and men are made happy by me. Then I asked her name, and she told me it was Madam
Bubble.[309] This set me further from her; but she still followed me with enticements. Then
I betook me as you saw, to my knees; and with hands lift up, and cries, I prayed to Him that
had said He would help.[310] So, just as you came up, the gentlewoman went her way. Then I
continued to give thanks for this my great deliverance; for I verily believe she intended no
good, but rather sought to make stop of me in my journey.[311]

HON. Without doubt her designs were bad. But stay, now you talk of her, methinks I either have
seen her, or have read some story of her.

STAND-FAST. Perhaps you have done both.

HON. Madam Bubble! is she not a tall, comely dame, something of a swarthy complexion?

STAND-FAST. Right, you hit it, she is just such a one.

HON. Doth she not speak very smoothly, and give you a smile at the end of a sentence?

STAND-FAST. You fall right upon it again, for these are her very actions.

HON. Doth she not wear a great purse by her side; and is not her hand often in it, fingering
her money, as if that was her heart's delight?

STAND-FAST. It is just so; had she stood by all this while, you could not more amply have set
her forth before me, nor have better described her features.

HON. Then he that drew her picture was a good limner, and he that wrote of her said true.[312]

GREAT-HEART. This woman is a witch, and it is by virtue of her sorceries that this ground is
enchanted. Whoever doth lay their head down in her lap, had as good lay it down upon that block
over which the axe doth hang; and whoever lay their eyes upon her beauty, are counted the enemies
of God (James 4:4; 1 John 2:15). This is she that maintaineth in their splendour all those
that are the enemies of pilgrims. Yea, this is she that hath bought off many a man from a pilgrim's
life. She is a great gossipper; she is always, both she and her daughters, at one pilgrim's
heels or another, now commending, and then preferring the excellencies of this life. She is
a bold and impudent slut; she will talk with any man. She always laugheth poor pilgrims to
scorn; but highly commends the rich. If there be one cunning to get money in a place, she will
speak well of him from house to house; she loveth banqueting and feasting mainly well; she
is always at one full table or another. She has given it out in some places, that she is a
goddess, and therefore some do worship her. She has her times and open places of cheating;
and she will say and avow it, that none can show a good comparable to hers. She promiseth to
dwell with children's children, if they will but love and make much of her. She will cast out
of her purse gold like dust, in some places, and to some persons. She loves to be sought after,
spoken well of, and to lie in the bosoms of men. She is never weary of commending her commodities,
and she loves them most that think best of her. She will promise to some crowns and kingdoms,
if they will but take her advice; yet many hath she brought to the halter, and ten thousand
times more to hell.

STAND-FAST. O, said Stand-fast, what a mercy is it that I did resist! for whither might she
have drawn me!

GREAT-HEART. Whither! nay, none but God knows whither. But, in general, to be sure, she would
have drawn thee into 'many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition'--(1
Tim. 6:9).

It was she that set Absalom against his father, and Jeroboam against his master. It was she
that persuaded Judas to sell his Lord, and that prevailed with Demas to forsake the godly pilgrims'
life; none can tell of the mischief that she doth. She makes variance betwixt rulers and subjects,
betwixt parents and children, betwixt neighbour and neighbour, betwixt a man and his wife,
betwixt a man and himself, betwixt the flesh and the heart.

Wherefore, good Master Stand-fast, be as your name is, and 'when you have done all, Stand.'[313]

At this discourse there was, among the Pilgrims, a mixture of joy and trembling; but at length
they brake out, and sang--

What danger is the pilgrim in!  How many are his foes! How many ways there are to sin  No living
mortal knows. Some of the ditch shy are, yet can  Lie tumbling in the mire; Some, though they
shun the frying-pan,  Do leap into the fire.

After this, I beheld until they were come unto the Land of Beulah, where the sun shineth night
and day.[314] Here, because they were weary, they betook themselves a while to rest; and, because
this country was common for pilgrims, and because the orchards and vineyards that were here
belonged to the King of the Celestial country, therefore they were licensed to make bold with
any of His things. But a little while soon refreshed them here; for the bells did so ring,
and the trumpets continually sound so melodiously, that they could not sleep; and yet they
received as much refreshing, as if they had slept their sleep ever so soundly. Here also all
the noise of them that walked in the streets, was, More pilgrims are come to town. Foes to my greatness,
let your envy rest, In me no taste for grandeur now is found; Consum'd by grief, with heavy
ills oppress'd, Your wishes and desires will soon be crown'd. And you, my friends, who still have
held me dear, Bethink you, that when health and heart are fled, And ev'ry hope of future good
is dead, 'Tis time to wish our sorrows ended here; And that this punishment on earth is given,
That my pure soul may rise to endless bliss in heaven."
 In this land they heard nothing, saw nothing, felt nothing, smelled nothing, tasted
nothing, that was offensive to their stomach or mind; only when they tasted of the water of
the river over which they were to go, they thought that tasted a little bitterish to the palate,
but it proved sweeter when it was down.

In this place there was a record kept of the names of them that had been pilgrims of old, and
a history of all the famous acts that they had done. It was here also much discoursed how the
river to some had had its flowings, and what ebbings it has had while others have gone over.
It has been in a manner dry for some, while it has overflowed its banks for others.

In this place the children of the town would go into the King's gardens, and gather nosegays
for the Pilgrims, and bring them to them with much affection. Here also grew camphire, with
spikenard, and saffron, calamus, and cinnamon, with all its trees of frankincense, myrrh, and
aloes, with all chief spices. With these the Pilgrims' chambers were perfumed, while they staid
here; and with these were their bodies anointed, to prepare them to go over the river when
the time appointed was come.

Now, while they lay here, and waited for the good hour, there was a noise in the town, that
there was a post come from the Celestial City, with matter of great importance to one Christiana,
the wife of Christian the Pilgrim. So inquiry was made for her, and the house was found out
where she was; so the post presented her with a letter; the contents whereof were, 'Hail, good
woman! I bring thee tidings that the Master calleth for thee, and expecteth that thou shouldest
stand in His presence, in clothes of immortality, within these ten days.'

When he had read this letter to her, he gave her therewith a sure token that he was a true
messenger, and was come to bid her make haste to be gone. The token was, an arrow with a point
sharpened with love, let easily into her heart, which by degrees wrought so effectually with
her, that at the time appointed she must be gone.[315]

When Christiana saw that her time was come, and that she was the first of this company that
was to go over, she called for Mr. Great-heart her guide, and told him how matters were. So
he told her he was heartily glad of the news, and could have been glad had the post come for
him. Then she bid that he should give advice how all things should be prepared for her journey.
So he told her, saying, thus and thus it must be; and we that survive will accompany you to
the river side.

Then she called for her children, and gave them her blessing, and told them, that she yet read
with comfort the mark that was set in their foreheads, and was glad to see them with her there,
and that they had kept their garments so white. Lastly, she bequeathed to the poor that little
she had, and commanded her sons and her daughters to be ready against the messenger should
come for them. When she had spoken these words to her guide and to her children, she called
for Mr. Valiant-for-truth, and said unto him, Sir, you have in all places showed yourself truehearted;
'be faithful unto death,' and my King will give you 'a crown of life.' I would also entreat
you to have an eye to my children; and if at any time you see them faint, speak comfortably
to them. For my daughters, my sons' wives, they have been faithful, and a fulfilling of the
promise upon them will be their end. But she gave Mr. Stand-fast a ring. Then she called for
old Mr. Honest, and said of him, 'Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.' Then said
he, I wish you a fair day, when you set out for Mount Zion, and shall be glad to see that you
go over the river dry-shod. But she answered, Come wet, come dry, I long to be gone; for, however
the weather is in my journey, I shall have time enough when I come there to sit down and rest
me, and dry me.

Then came in that good man Mr. Ready-to-halt, to see her. So she said to him, Thy travel hither
has been with difficulty; but that will make thy rest the sweeter. But watch and be ready;
for at an hour when you think not, the messenger may come. After him came in Mr. Despondency,
and his daughter Much-afraid, to whom she said, You ought with thankfulness, forever to remember
your deliverance from the hands of Giant Despair, and out of Doubting Castle. The effect of
that mercy is, that you are brought with safety hither. Be ye watchful, and cast away fear;
'be sober and hope to the end.'

Then she said to Mr. Feeble-mind, Thou wast delivered from the mouth of Giant Slay-good, that
thou mightest live in the light of the living forever, and see thy King with comfort; only
I advise thee to repent thee of thine aptness to fear and doubt of His goodness, before He
sends for thee; lest thou shouldest, when He comes, be forced to stand before Him, for that
fault, with blushing. Now the day drew on, that Christiana must be gone. So the road was full
of people to see her take her journey. But, behold, all the banks beyond the river were full
of horses and chariots, which were come down from above to accompany her to the city gate.
So she came forth, and entered the river, with a beckon of farewell to those that followed
her to the river side. The last words that she was heard to say here, were, I come, Lord, to
be with Thee, and bless Thee.[316]

So her children and friends returned to their place, for that those that waited for Christiana
had carried her out of their sight. So she went and called, and entered in at the gate with
all the ceremonies of joy that her husband Christian had done before her.

At her departure her children wept. But Mr. Great-heart and Mr. Valiant played upon the well-tuned
cymbal and harp for joy. So all departed to their respective places.[317]

In process of time there came a post to the town again, and his business was with Mr. Ready-to-halt.
So he inquired him out, and said to him, I am come to thee in the name of Him whom thou hast
loved and followed, though upon crutches; and my message is to tell thee, that He expects thee
at His table to sup with Him, in His kingdom, the next day after Easter; wherefore prepare
thyself for this journey.[318]

Then he also gave him a token that he was a true messenger, saying, I have broken thy golden
bowl, and loosed thy silver cord (Eccl. 12:6).

After this, Mr. Ready-to-halt called for his fellow-pilgrims, and told them, saying, I am sent
for, and God shall surely visit you also. So he desired Mr. Valiant to make his will; and because
he had nothing to bequeath to them that should survive him, but his crutches, and his good
wishes, therefore thus he said, These crutches I bequeath to my son that shall tread in my
steps, with a hundred warm wishes that he may prove better than I have done. Then he thanked
Mr. Great-heart for his conduct and kindness, and so addressed himself to his journey. When
he came at the brink of the river, he said, Now I shall have no more need of these crutches,
since yonder are chariots and horses for me to ride on. The last words he was heard to say
was, Welcome life![319] So he went his way.

After this, Mr. Feeble-mind had tidings brought him, that the post sounded his horn at his
chamber door. Then he came in, and told him, saying, I am come to tell thee, that thy Master
hath need of thee; and that, in very little time, thou must behold His face in brightness.
And take this as a token of the truth of my message, 'Those that look out of the windows shall
be darkened'[320] (Eccl. 12:3).

Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his friends, and told them what errand had been brought unto
him, and what token he had received of the truth of the message. Then he said, Since I have
nothing to bequeath to any, to what purpose should I make a will As for my feeble mind, that
I will leave behind me, for that I have no need of that in the place whither I go. Nor is it
worth bestowing upon the poorest pilgrim; wherefore, when I am gone, I desire that you, Mr.
Valiant, would bury it in a dunghill. This done, and the day being come in which he was to
depart, he entered the river as the rest. His last words were, Hold out, faith and patience.
So he went over to the other side.

When days had many of them passed away, Mr. Despondency was sent for; for a post was come,
and brought this message to him: Trembling man, these are to summon thee to be ready with thy
King by the next Lord's Day, to shout for joy for thy deliverance from all thy doubtings.

And, said the messenger, that my message is true, take this for a proof; so he gave him the
grasshopper to be a burden unto him (Eccl. 12:5). Now, Mr. Despondency's daughter, whose name
was Much-afraid, said, when she heard what was done, that she would go with her, father. Then
Mr. Despondency said to his friends, Myself and my daughter, you know what we have been, and
how troublesomely we have behaved ourselves in every company. My will and my daughter's is,
that our desponds and slavish fears be by no man ever received, from the day of our departure,
forever; for I know that after my death they will offer themselves to others.[321] For, to
be plain with you, they are ghosts the which we entertained when we first began to be pilgrims,
and could never shake them off after; and they will walk about and seek entertainment of the
pilgrims; but, for our sakes, shut ye the doors upon them.[322]

When the time was come for them to depart, they went to the brink of the river. The last words
of Mr. Despondency were, Farewell night, welcome day. His daughter went through the river singing,
but none could understand what she said.[323]

Then it came to pass, a while after, that there was a post in the town that inquired for Mr.
Honest. So he came to his house where he was, and delivered to his hand these lines: Thou art
commanded to be ready against this day sevennight, to present thyself before thy Lord, at His
Father's house. And for a token that my message is true, 'All thy daughters of music shall
he brought low' (Eccl. 12:4). Then Mr. Honest called for his friends, and said unto them, I
die, but shall make no will. As for my honesty, it shall go with me; let him that comes after
be told of this. When the day that he was to be gone was come, he addressed himself to go over
the river. On leaving Dearborn's river we passed at three and a half miles a small creek, and
at six beyond it an island on the north side of the river, which makes within that distance
many small bends. At two and a half miles further is another island: three quarters of a mile
beyond this is a small creek on the north side.

At a mile and a half above the creek is a much larger stream thirty yards wide, and discharging
itself with a bold current on the north side: the banks are low, and the bed formed of stones
altogether. 12:6). When he understood it, he called for his friends,
and told them of it. Then, said he, I am going to my Father's; and though with great difficulty
I am got hither, yet now I do not repent me of all the trouble I have been at to arrive where
I am. My sword I give to him that shall succeed me in my pilgrimage, and my courage and skill
to him that can get it. My marks and scars I carry with me, to be a witness for me, that I
have fought His battles, who now will be my Rewarder. When the day that he must go hence was
come, many accompanied him to the river-side, into which as he went, he said, 'Death, where
is thy sting?' And as he went down deeper, he said, 'Grave, where is thy victory?' So he passed
over, and all the trumpets sounded for him on the other side.[324]

Then there came forth a summons for Mr. Stand-fast--this Mr. Stand-fast was he that the rest
of the Pilgrims found upon his knees in the Enchanted Ground--for the post brought it him open
in his hands. The contents whereof were, that he must prepare for a change of life, for his
Master was not willing that he should be so far from Him any longer. At this Mr. Stand-fast
was put into a muse. Nay, said the messenger, you need not doubt of the truth of my message,
for here is a token of the truth thereof: 'Thy wheel is broken at the cistern' (Eccl. 12:6).
Then he called unto him Mr. Great-heart, who was their guide, and said unto him, Sir, although
it was not my hap to be much in your good company in the days of my pilgrimage; yet, since
the time I knew you, you have been profitable to me. When I came from home, I left behind me
a wife and five small children; let me entreat you, at your return (for I know that you will
go, and return to your Master's house, in hopes that you may yet be a conductor to more of
the holy pilgrims), that you send to my family, and let them be acquainted with all that hath,
or shall happen unto me. Tell them, moreover, of my happy arrival to this place, and of the
present [and] late blessed condition that I am in. Tell them also of Christian, and Christiana
his wife, and how she and her children came after her husband. Tell them also of what a happy
end she made, and whither she is gone. I have a little or nothing to send to my family, except
it be prayers and tears for them; of which it will suffice if thou acquaint them, if peradventure
they may prevail.

When Mr. Stand-fast had thus set things in order, and the time being come for him to haste
him away, he also went down to the river. Now there was a great calm at that time in the river;
wherefore Mr. Stand-fast, when he was about half-way in, stood a while and talked to his companions
that had waited upon him thither; and he said, This river has been a terror to many; yea, the
thoughts of it also have often frightened me. Now, methinks, I stand easy, my foot is fixed
upon that upon which the feet of the priests that bare the ark of the covenant stood, while
Israel went over this Jordan (Josh. 3:17). The waters, indeed, are to the palate bitter, and
to the stomach cold; yet the thoughts of what I am going to, and of the conduct that waits
for me on the other side, doth lie as a glowing coal at my heart.

I see myself now at the end of my journey, my toilsome days are ended. I am going now to see
that Head that was crowned with thorns, and that Face that was spit upon for me.[325]

I have formerly lived by hearsay and faith; but now I go where I shall live by sight, and shall
be with Him in whose company I delight myself.

I have loved to hear my Lord spoken of; and wherever I have seen the print of His shoe in the
earth, there I have coveted to set my foot too.

His name has been to me as a civet-box; yea, sweeter than all perfumes. His voice to me has
been most sweet; and His countenance I have more desired than they that have most desired the
light of the sun. His Word I did use to gather for my food, and for antidotes against my faintings.
'He has held me, and hath kept me from mine iniquities; yea, my steps hath He strengthened
in His way.'[326]

Now, while he was thus in discourse, his countenance changed, his strong man bowed under him;
and after he had said, Take me, for I come unto Thee, he ceased to be seen of them.

But glorious it was to see how the open region was filled with horses and chariots, with trumpeters
and pipers, with singers and players on stringed instruments, to welcome the Pilgrims as they
went up, and followed one another in at the beautiful gate of the city.[327]

As for Christian's children, the four boys that Christiana brought with her, with their wives
and children, I did not stay where I was till they were gone over. Also, since I came away,
I heard one say that they were yet alive, and so would be for the increase of the CHURCH in
that place where they were, for a time.[328]

Shall it be my lot to go that way again, I may give those that desire it an account of what
I here am silent about.[329] Meantime, I bid my reader ADIEU.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] In 1683, the year before Bunyan published his Second Part, a little volume was printed
under the same title, by some anonymous author; for a description of it, see the Introduction
(p. 57)--(ED).

[2] While the carnal heart is in a state of such bitter enmity against the Gospel, it requires
wisdom to introduce the subject of religion; still we have a duty to perform, even if the truth
should prove a savour of death unto death. We must live the Gospel in the sight of such, and
not be daunted from inviting them to become pilgrims to the Celestial City--(ED).

[3] I went over the Tract House in New York, and was delighted to see there six steam-presses.
During the last year, they printed 17,000 copies of Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress'--(American
Scenes, by Eben. Davies, London, 1849, p. 299).

[4] This poem was written within six years of the first publication of the First Part. In that
short period it had become so wonderfully popular as to have been extensively circulated in
the languages which the author names, and to have had a large circulation in America. After
another four years, namely in 1688, upwards of 100,00 copies had been issued in English; and
to the present time it has been steadily increasing in popularity, so that, after 170 years
have elapsed, it is more popular than ever. This is a fact without parallel in the annals of
literature--(ED).

[5] After the author had heard the criticisms of friends and foes upon the First Part, he adopts
this second narrative to be a key explaining many things which appeared dark in Christian's
journey--(ED).

[6] This address prepares the reader for a greater variety of experience and adventures than
he meets with in the First Part; all of which are different: and the behaviour of the several
pilgrims, under their various calamities, are beautifully described. Their conflicts and their
consolations being manifold, convince us that the exercises of every experienced soul are for
the most part dissimilar, notwithstanding, if they proceed from the operation of the Spirit,
they have the same happy tendency--(Mason). The Second Part is peculiarly adapted to direct
and encourage female Christians and young persons; and it is hoped will be a blessing to such--(Burder).
Perhaps the Second Part of this pilgrimage comes nearer to the ordinary experience of the great
multitude of Christians than the First Part; and this may have been Bunyan's intention. The
First Part shows, as in Christian, Faithful, and Hopeful, the great examples and strong lights
of this pilgrimage; it is as if Paul and Luther were passing over the scene. The Second Part
shows a variety of pilgrims, whose stature and experience are more on a level with our own.
The First Part is more severe, sublime, inspiring; the Second Part is more soothing and comforting.
The First Part has deep and awful shadows mingled with its light, terribly instructive, and
like warnings from hell and the grave. The Second Part is more continually and uninterruptedly
cheerful, full of good nature and pleasantry, and showing the pilgrimage in lights and shades
that are common to weaker Christians--(Cheever).

[7] The First Part had been published six years, during which time Mr. Bunyan had been so fully
occupied by his pastoral labours and frequent preaching in different parts of England, that
he had not been able to accomplish his design of publishing A FEMALE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS. He
was without exception the most popular preacher of his day--(Ivimey).

