Besides the tombstones, the new Sculpture Room contains some most fascinating examples of Roman
decorative art under the Emperors. The most wonderful of all, and this alone is worth a trip
to Bloomsbury, is a bas-relief representing a marriage scene, Juno Pronuba is joining the hands
of a handsome young noble and a very stately lady.  There is all the grace of Perugino in this
marble, all the grace of Raphael even.  The date of it is uncertain, but the particular cut
of the bridegroom's beard seems to point to the time of the Emperor Hadrian.  It is clearly
the work of Greek artists and is one of the most beautiful bas-reliefs in the whole Museum.
There is something in it which reminds one of the music and the sweetness of Propertian verse.
Then we have delightful friezes of children.  One representing children playing on musical
instruments might have suggested much of the plastic art of Florence.  Indeed, as we view these
marbles it is not difficult to see whence the Renaissance sprang and to what we owe the various
forms of Renaissance art.  The frieze of the Muses, each of whom wears in her hair a feather
plucked from the wings of the vanquished sirens, is extremely fine; there is a lovely little
bas- relief of two cupids racing in chariots; and the frieze of recumbent Amazons has some
splendid qualities of design.  A frieze of children playing with the armour of the god Mars
should also be mentioned.  It is full of fancy and delicate humour.

 We hope that some more of the hidden treasures will shortly be
catalogued and shown.  In the vaults at present there is a very
remarkable bas-relief of the marriage of Cupid and Psyche, and
another representing the professional mourners weeping over the
body of the dead.  The fine cast of the Lion of Chaeronea should
also be brought up, and so should the stele with the marvellous
portrait of the Roman slave.  Economy is an excellent public
virtue, but the parsimony that allows valuable works of art to
remain in the grim and gloom of a damp cellar is little short of a
detestable public vice.

Now, this increased sense of the absolutely satisfying value of beautiful workmanship, this
recognition of the primary importance of the sensuous element in art, this love of art for
art's sake, is the point in which we of the younger school have made a departure from the teaching
of Mr. Ruskin,--a departure definite and different and decisive.

Master indeed of the knowledge of all noble living and of the wisdom of all spiritual things
will he be to us ever, seeing that it was he who by the magic of his presence and the music
of his lips taught us at Oxford that enthusiasm for beauty which is the secret of Hellenism,
and that desire for creation which is the secret of life, and filled some of us, at least,
with the lofty and passionate ambition to go forth into far and fair lands with some message
for the nations and some mission for the world, and yet in his art criticism, his estimate
of the joyous element of art, his whole method of approaching art, we are no longer with him;
for the keystone to his aesthetic system is ethical always.  To him perfection of workmanship
seems but the symbol of pride, and incompleteness of technical resource the image of an imagination
too limitless to find within the limits of form its complete expression, or of love too simple
not to stammer in its tale.  But to us the rule of art is not the rule of morals. In an ethical
system, indeed, of any gentle mercy good intentions will, one is fain to fancy, have their
recognition; but of those that would enter the serene House of Beauty the question that we
ask is not what they had ever meant to do, but what they have done. Their pathetic intentions
are of no value to us, but their realized creations only.