We expect to return to the post in a few days. I would like to remain longer, but as everybody
and everything will go, I can't very well. The trout fishing in Birch Creek is very good, and
I often go for a little fish, sometimes alone and sometimes Mrs. Stokes will go with me. I
do not go far, because of the dreadful Indians that are always wandering about. They have a
small village across the creek from us, and every evening we hear their "tom-toms" as they
chant and dance, and when the wind is from that direction we get a smell now and then of their
dirty tepees. Major Stokes and Mrs. Stokes, also, see the noble side of Indians, but that side
has always been so covered with blankets and other dirty things I have never found it!

FORT SHAW, MONTANA TERRITORY, November, 1882.

YOU will be shocked, I know, when you hear that we are houseless--homeless--that for the second
time Faye has been ranked out of quarters! At Camp Supply the turn out was swift, but this
time it has been long drawn out and most vexatious. Last month Major Bagley came here from
Fort Maginnis, and as we had rather expected that he would select our house, we made no preparations
for winter previous to his coming. But as soon as he reached the post, and many times after,
he assured Faye that nothing could possibly induce him to disturb us, and said many more sweet
things.

Unfortunately for us, he was ordered to return to Fort Maginnis to straighten out some of his
accounts while quartermaster, and Mrs. Bagley decided to remain as she was until Major Bagley's
return. He was away one month, and during that time the gardener stored away in our little
cellar our vegetables for the winter, including quantities of beautiful celery that was packed
in boxes. All those things had to be taken down a ladder, which made it really very hard work.
Having faith in Major Bagley's word, the house was cleaned from top to bottom, much painting
and calcimining having been done. All the floors were painted and hard-oiled, and everyone
knows what discomfort that always brings about. But at last everything was finished, and we
were about to settle down to the enjoyment of a tidy, cheerful little home when Major Bagley
appeared the second time, and within two hours Faye was notified that his quarters had been
selected by him!

We are at present in two rooms and a shed that happened to be unoccupied, and I feel very much
as though I was in a second-hand shop. Things are piled up to the ceiling in both rooms, and
the shed is full also. All of the vegetables were brought up from the cellar, of course, and
as the weather has been very cold, the celery and other tender things were frozen. General
and Mrs. Bourke have returned, and at once insisted upon our going to their house, but as there
was nothing definite about the time when we will get our house, we said "No." We are taking
our meals with them, however, and Hang is there also, teaching their new Chinaman. But I can
assure you that I am more than cross. If Major Bagley had selected the house the first time
he came, or even if he had said nothing at all about the quarters, much discomfort and unpleasantness
would have been avoided. They will get our nice clean house, and we will get one that will
require the same renovating we have just been struggling with. I have made up my mind unalterably
to one thing--the nice little dinner I had expected to give Major and Mrs. Bagley later on,
will be for other people, friends who have had less honey to dispose of.

The splendid hunting was interrupted by the move, too. Every October in this country we have
a snowstorm that lasts usually three or four days; then the snow disappears and there is a
second fall, with clear sunny days until the holidays. This year the weather remained warm
and the storm was later than usual, but more severe when it did come, driving thousands of
water-fowl down with a rush from the mountain streams and lakes. There is a slough around a
little plateau near the post, and for a week or more this was teeming with all kinds of ducks,
until it was frozen over. Sometimes we would see several species quietly feeding together in
the most friendly way. Faye and I would drive the horses down in the cutter, and I would hold
them while he walked on ahead hunting.

One day, when the snow was falling in big moist flakes that were so thick that the world had
been narrowed down to a few yards around us, we drove to some tall bushes growing on the bank
of the slough. Faye was hunting, and about to make some ducks rise when he heard a great whir
over his head, and although the snow was so thick he could not see just what was there, he
quickly raised his gun and fired at something he saw moving up there. To his great amazement
and my horror, an immense swan dropped down and went crashing through the bushes. It was quite
as white as the snow on the ground, and coming from the dense cloud of snow above, where no
warning of its presence had been given, no call sounded, one felt that there was something
queer about it all. With its enormous wings spread, it looked like an angel coming to the earth.

The horses thought so, also, for as soon as it touched the bushes they bolted, and for a few
minutes I was doubtful if I could hold them. I was so vexed with them, too, for I wanted to
see that splendid bird. They went around and around the plateau, and about all I was able to
do at first was to keep them from going to the post. They finally came down to a trot, but
it was some time before I could coax them to go to the bushes where the swan had fallen. I
did not blame them much, for when the big bird came down, it seemed as if the very heavens
were falling. We supplied our friends with ducks several days, and upon our own dinner table
duck was served ten successive days. And it was just as acceptable the last day as the first,
for almost every time there was a different variety, the cinnamon, perhaps, being the most rare.

Last year Hang was very contrary about the packing down of the eggs for winter use. I always
put them in salt, but he thought they should be put in oats because Mrs. Pierce had packed
hers that way. You know he had been Mrs. Pierce's cook two years before he came to me, and
for a time he made me weary telling how she had things done. Finally I told him he must do
as I said, that he was my cook now. There was peace for a while, and then came the eggs.

He would not do one thing to assist me, not even take down the eggs, and looked at Volmer with
scorn when he carried down the boxes and salt. I said nothing, knowing what the result would
be later on if Hang remained with me. When the cold weather came and no more fresh eggs were
brought in, it was astonishing to see how many things that stubborn Chinaman could make without
any eggs at all. Get them out of the salt he simply would not. Of course that could not continue
forever, so one day I brought some up and left them on his table without saying a word. He
used them, and after that there was no trouble, and one day in the spring he brought in to
show me some beautifully beaten eggs, and said, "Velly glood--allee same flesh."

This fall when the time came to pack eggs, I said, "Hang, perhaps we had better pack the eggs
in oats this year." He said, "Naw, loats no glood!" Then came my revenge. I said, "Mrs. Pierce
puts hers in oats," but he became angry and said, "Yes, me know--Missee Pleese no know--slalt
makee him allee same flesh." And in salt they are, and Hang packed every one. I offered to
show him how to do it, but he said, "Me know--you see." It gave him such a fine opportunity
to dictate to Volmer! If the striker did not bring the eggs the very moment he thought they
should be in, Hang would look him up and say, "You bling leggs!" Just where these boxes of
eggs are I do not know. The Chinaman has spirited them off to some place where they will not
freeze. He cannot understand all this ranking out of quarters, particularly after he had put
the house in perfect order. When I told him to sweep the rooms after everything had been carried
out, he said: "What for? You cleanee house nuff for him; he no care," and off he went. I am
inclined to think that the little man was right, after all.

There have been many changes in the garrison during the past few months, and a number of our
friends have gone to other posts. Colonel and Mrs. Palmer, Major and Mrs. Pierce, and Doctor
and Mrs. Gordon are no longer here. We have lost, consequently, both of our fine tenors and
excellent organist, and our little choir is not good now. Some of us will miss in other ways
Colonel Palmer's cultivated voice. During the summer four of us found much pleasure in practicing
together the light operas, each one learning the one voice through the entire opera.

When we get settled, if we ever do, we will be at our old end of the garrison again, and our
neighbors on either side will be charming people. There is some consolation in that; nevertheless,
I am thinking all the time of the pretty walls and shiny floors we had to give up, and to a
very poor housekeeper, too. After we get our house, it will take weeks to fix it up, and it
will be impossible to take the same interest in it that we found in the first. If Faye gets
his first lieutenancy in the spring, it is possible that we may have to go to another post,
which will mean another move. But I am tired and cross; anyone would be under such uncomfortable
conditions.

FORT ELLIS, MONTANA TERRITORY, March, 1883.

THE trip over was by far the most enjoyable of any we have taken between Fort Shaw and this
post, and we were thankful enough that we could come before the snow began to melt on the mountains.
Our experience with the high water two years ago was so dreadful that we do not wish to ever
encounter anything of the kind again. The weather was delightful--with clear, crisp atmosphere,
such as can be found only in this magnificent Territory. It was such a pleasure to have our
own turn-out, too, and to be able to see the mountains and canons as we came along, without
having our heads bruised by an old ambulance.

Faye had to wait almost twelve years for a first lieutenancy, and now, when at last he has
been promoted, it has been the cause of our leaving dear friends and a charming garrison, and
losing dear yellow Hang, also. The poor little man wept when he said good-by to me in Helena.
We had just arrived and were still on the walk in front of the hotel, and of course all the
small boys in the street gathered around us. I felt very much like weeping, too, and am afraid
I will feel even more so when I get in my own home. Hang is going right on to China, to visit
his mother one year, and I presume that his people will consider him a very rich man, with
the twelve hundred dollars he has saved. He has never cut his hair, and has never worn American
clothes. Even in the winter, when it has been freezing cold, he would shuffle along on the
snow with his Chinese shoes.

I shall miss the pretty silk coats about the house, and his swift, almost noiseless going around.
That Chinamen are not more generally employed I cannot understand, for they make such exceptional
servants. They are wonderfully economical, and can easily do the work of two maids, and if
once you win their confidence and their affection they are your slaves. But they are very suspicious.
Once, when Bishop Tuttle was with us, he wanted a pair of boots blackened, and set them in
his room where Hang could see them, and on the toe of one he put a twenty-five cent piece.
Hang blackened the boots beautifully, and then put the money back precisely where it was in
the first place. Then he came to me and expressed his opinion of the dear bishop. He said,
"China-man no stealee--you tellee him me no stealee--he see me no takee him"--and then he insisted
upon my going to see for myself that the money was on the boot. I was awfully distressed. The
bishop was to remain with us several days, and no one could tell how that Chinaman might treat
him, for I saw that he was deeply hurt, but it was utterly impossible to make him believe otherwise
than that the quarter had been put there to test his honesty. I finally concluded to tell the
bishop all about it, knowing that his experience with all kinds of human nature had been great
in his travels about to his various missions, and his kindness and tact with miner, ranchman,
and cowboy; he is now called by them lovingly "The Cowboy Bishop." He laughed heartily about
Hang, and said, "I'll fix that," which he must have done to Hang's entire satisfaction, for
he fairly danced around the bishop during the remainder of his stay with us.

Faye was made post quartermaster and commissary as soon as he reported for duty here, and is
already hard at work. The post is not large, but the office of quartermaster is no sinecure.
An immense amount of transportation has to be kept in readiness for the field, for which the
quartermaster alone is held responsible, and this is the base of supplies for outfits for all
parties--large and small--that go to the Yellowstone Park, and these are many, now that Livingstone
can be reached from the north or the south by the Northern Pacific Railroad. Immense pack trains
have to be fitted out for generals, congressmen, even the President himself, during the coming
season. These people bring nothing whatever with them for camp, but depend entirely upon the
quartermaster here to fit them out as luxuriously as possible with tents and commissaries--even
to experienced camp cooks!

The railroad has been laid straight through the post, and it looks very strange to see the
cars running directly back of the company quarters. The long tunnel--it is to be called the
Bozeman tunnel--that has been cut through a large mountain is not quite finished, and the cars
are still run up over the mountain upon a track that was laid only for temporary use. It requires
two engines to pull even the passenger trains up, and when the divide is reached the "pilot"
is uncoupled and run down ahead, sometimes at terrific speed. One day, since we came, the engineer
lost control, and the big black thing seemed almost to drop down the grade, and the shrieking
of the continuous whistle was awful to listen to; it seemed as if it was the wailing of the
souls of the two men being rushed on--perhaps to their death. The thing came on and went screaming
through the post and on through Bozeman, and how much farther we do not know. Some of the enlisted
men got a glimpse of the engineer as he passed and say that his face was like chalk. We will
not be settled for some time, as Faye is to take a set of vacant quarters on the hill until
one of the officers goes on leave, when we will move to that house, as it is nicer and nearer
the offices. He could have taken it when we came had he been willing to turn anyone out. It
seems to me that I am waiting for a house about half the time, yet when anyone wants our house
it is taken at once!

For a few days we are with Lieutenant and Mrs. Fiske. They gave us an elegant dinner last evening.
Miss Burt and her brother came up from Bozeman. This evening we dine with Major and Mrs. Gillespie
of the cavalry. He is in command of the post--and tomorrow we will dine with Captain and Mrs.
Spencer. And so it will go on, probably, until everyone has entertained us in some delightful
manner, as this is the custom in the Army when there are newcomers in the garrison. I am so
sorry that these courtesies cannot be returned for a long time--until we get really settled,
and then how I shall miss Hang! How I am to do without him I do not quite see.

FORT ELLIS, MONTANA TERRITORY, July, 1884.

THIS post is in a most dilapidated condition, and it--also the country about--looks as though
it had been the scene of a fierce bombardment. And bombarded we certainly have been--by a terrific
hailstorm that made us feel for a time that our very lives were in danger. The day had been
excessively warm, with brilliant sunshine until about three o'clock, when dark clouds were
seen to be coming up over the Bozeman Valley, and everyone said that perhaps at last we would
have the rain that was so much needed, I have been in so many frightful storms that came from
innocent-looking clouds, that now I am suspicious of anything of the kind that looks at all
threatening. Consequently, I was about the first person to notice the peculiar unbroken gray
that had replaced the black of a few minutes before, and the first, too, to hear the ominous
roar that sounded like the fall of an immense body of water, and which could be distinctly
heard fifteen minutes before the storm reached us.

While I stood at the door listening and watching, I saw several people walking about in the
garrison, each one intent upon his own business and not giving the storm a thought. Still,
it seemed to me that it would be just as well to have the house closed tight, and calling Hulda
we soon had windows and doors closed--not one minute too soon, either, for the storm came across
the mountains with hurricane speed and struck us with such force that the thick-walled log
houses fairly trembled. With the wind came the hail at the very beginning, changing the hot,
sultry air into the coldness of icebergs. Most of the hailstones were the size of a hen's egg,
and crashed through windows and pounded against the house, making a noise that was not only
deafening but paralyzing. The sounds of breaking glass came from every direction and Hulda
and I rushed from one room to the other, not knowing what to do, for it was the same scene
everyplace--floors covered with broken glass and hail pouring in through the openings.

The ground upon which the officers' quarters are built is a little sloping, therefore it had
to be cut away, back of the kitchen, to make the floor level for a large shed where ice chest
and such things are kept, and there are two or three steps at the door leading from the shed
up to the ground outside. This gradual rise continues far back to the mountains, so by the
time the hail and water reached us from above they had become one broad, sweeping torrent,
ever increasing in volume. In one of the boards of our shed close to the steps, and just above
the ground, there happened to be a large "knot" which the pressure of the water soon forced
out, and the water and hailstones shot through and straight across the shed as if from a fire
hose, striking the wall of the main building! The sight was most laughable--that is, at first
it was; but we soon saw that the awful rush of water that was coming in through the broken
sash and the remarkable hose arrangement back of the kitchen was rapidly flooding us.

