I mean, to lose sight of actual nature; but the greatest care must be given to distinguish
actual nature from true nature, which is the subject of simple poetry. Actual nature exists
everywhere; but true nature is so much the more rare because it requires an internal necessity
that determines its existence. Every eruption of passion, however vulgar, is real--it may be
even true nature; but it is not true human nature, for true human nature requires that the
self-directing faculty in us should have a share in the manifestation, and the expression of
this faculty is always dignified. All moral baseness is an actual human phenomenon, but I hope
not real human nature, which is always noble. All the faults of taste cannot be surveyed that
have been occasioned in criticism or the practice of art by this--confusion between actual
human nature and true human nature. The greatest trivialities are tolerated and applauded under
the pretext that they are real nature. Caricatures not to be tolerated in the real world are
carefully preserved in the poetic world and reproduced according to nature! The poet can certainly
imitate a lower nature; and it enters into the very definition of a satirical poet: but then
a beauty by its own nature must sustain and raise the object, and the vulgarity of the subject
must not lower the imitator too much. If at the moment he paints he is true human nature himself,
the object of his paintings is indifferent; but it is only on this condition we can tolerate
a faithful reproduction of reality. Unhappy for us readers when the rod of satire falls into
hands that nature meant to handle another instrument, and when, devoid of all poetic talent,
with nothing but the ape's mimicry, they exercise it brutally at the expense of our taste!

But vulgar nature has even its dangers for the simple poet; for the simple poet is formed by
this fine harmony of the feeling and thinking faculty, which yet is only an idea, never actually
realized. Even in the happiest geniuses of this class, receptivity will always more or less
carry the day over spontaneous activity. But receptivity is always more or less subordinate
to external impressions, and nothing but a perpetual activity of the creative faculty could
prevent matter from exercising a blind violence over this quality. Now, every time this happens
the feeling becomes vulgar instead of poetical.

No genius of the simple class, from Homer down to Bodmer, has entirely steered clear of this
quicksand. It is evident that it is most perilous to those who have to struggle against external
vulgarity, or who have parted with their refinement owing to a want of proper restraint. The
first-named difficulty is the reason why even authors of high cultivation are not always emancipated
from platitudes--a fact which has prevented many splendid talents from occupying the place
to which they were summoned by nature. For this reason, a comic poet whose genius has chiefly
to deal with scenes of real life, is more liable to the danger of acquiring vulgar habits of
style and expression--a fact evidenced in the case of Aristophanes, Plautus, and all the poets
who have followed in their track. Even Shakspeare, with all his sublimity, suffers us to fall
very low now and then. Again, Lope De Vega, Moliere, Regnard, Goldoni worry us with frequent
trifling. Holberg drags us down into the mire. Schlegel, a German poet, among the most remarkable
for intellectual talent, with genius to raise him to a place among poets of the first order;
Gellert, a truly simple poet, Rabener, and Lessing himself, if I am warranted to introduce
his name in this category--this highly-cultivated scholar of criticism and vigilant examiner
of his own genius--all these suffer in different degrees from the platitudes and uninspired
movements of the natures they chose as the theme of their satire. With regard to more recent
authors of this class, I avoid naming any of them, as I can make no exceptions in their case.

But not only is simple genius exposed to the danger of coming too near to vulgar reality; the
ease of expression, even this too close approximation to reality, encourages vulgar imitators
to try their hand in poetry. Sentimental poetry, though offering danger enough, has this advantage,
to keep this crowd at a distance, for it is not for the first comer to rise to the ideal; but
simple poetry makes them believe that, with feeling and humor, you need only imitate real nature
to claim the title of poet. Now nothing is more revolting than platitude when it tries to be
simple and amiable, instead of hiding its repulsive nature under the veil of art. This occasions
the incredible trivialities loved by the Germans under the name of simple and facetious songs,
and which give them endless amusement round a well-garnished table. Under the pretext of good
humor and of sentiment people tolerate these poverties: but this good humor and this sentiment
ought to be carefully proscribed. The Muses of the Pleisse, in particular, are singularly pitiful;
and other Muses respond to them, from the banks of the Seine, and the Elbe. If these pleasantries
are flat, the passion heard on our tragic stage is equally pitiful, for, instead of imitating
true nature, it is only an insipid and ignoble expression of the actual. Thus, after shedding
torrents of tears, you feel as you would after visiting a hospital or reading the "Human Misery"
of Saltzmann. But the evil is worse in satirical poetry and comic romance, kinds which touch
closely on every-day life, and which consequently, as all frontier posts, ought to be in safer
hands. In truth, he less than any other is called on to become the painter of his century,
who is himself the child and caricature of his century. But as, after all, nothing is easier
than to take in hand, among our acquaintances, a comic character--a big, fat man--and draw
a coarse likeness of him on paper, the sworn enemies of poetic inspiration are often led to
blot some paper in this way to amuse a circle of friends. It is true that a pure heart, a well-made
mind, will never confound these vulgar productions with the inspirations of simple genius.
But purity of feeling is the very thing that is wanting, and in most cases nothing is thought
of but satisfying a want of sense, without spiritual nature having any share. A fundamentally
just idea, ill understood, that works of bel esprit serve to recreate the mind, contributes
to keep up this indulgence, if indulgence it may be called when nothing higher occupies the
mind, and reader as well as writer find their chief interest therein. This is because vulgar
natures, if overstrained, can only be refreshed by vacuity; and even a higher intelligence,
when not sustained by a proportional culture, can only rest from its work amidst sensuous enjoyments,
from which spiritual nature is absent.

Poetic genius ought to have strength enough to rise with a free and innate activity above all
the accidental hinderances which are inseparable from every confined condition, to arrive at
a representation of humanity in the absolute plenitude of its powers; it is not, however, permitted,
on the other hand, to emancipate itself from the necessary limits implied by the very idea
of human nature; for the absolute only in the circle of humanity is its true problem. Simple
genius is not exposed to overstep this sphere, but rather not to fill it entirely, giving too
much scope to external necessity, to accidental wants, at the expense of the inner necessity.
The danger for the sentimental genius is, on the other hand, by trying to remove all limits,
of nullifying human nature absolutely, and not only rising, as is its right and duty, beyond
finite and determinate reality, as far as absolute possibility, or in other terms to idealize;
but of passing even beyond possibility, or, in other words, dreaming. This fault--overstraining--is
precisely dependent on the specific property of the sentimental process, as the opposite defect,
inertia, depends on the peculiar operation of the simple genius. The simple genius lets nature
dominate, without restricting it; and as nature in her particular phenomena is always subject
to some want, it follows that the simple sentiment will not be always exalted enough to resist
the accidental limitations of the present hour. The sentimental genius, on the contrary, leaves
aside the real world, to rise to the ideal and to command its matter with free spontaneity.
But while reason, according to law, aspires always to the unconditional, so the sentimental
genius will not always remain calm enough to restrain itself uniformly and without interruption
within the conditions implied by the idea of human nature, and to which reason must always,
even in its freest acts, remain attached. He could only confine himself in these conditions
by help of a receptivity proportioned to his free activity; but most commonly the activity
predominates over receptivity in the sentimental poet, as much as receptivity over activity
in the simple poet. Hence, in the productions of simple genius, if sometimes inspiration is
wanting, so also in works of sentimental poetry the object is often missed. Thus, though they
proceed in opposite ways, they will both fall into a vacuum, for before the aesthetic judgment
an object without inspiration, and inspiration without an object, are both negations.

The poets who borrow their matter too much from thought, and rather conceive poetic pictures
by the internal abundance of ideas than by the suggestions of feeling, are more or less likely
to be addicted to go thus astray. In their creations reason makes too little of the limits
of the sensuous world, and thought is always carried too far for experience to follow it. Now,
when the idea is carried so far that not only no experience corresponds to it--as is the case
in the beau ideal--but also that it is repugnant to the conditions of all possible experience,
so that, in order to realize it, one must leave human nature altogether, it is no longer a
poetic but an exaggerated thought; that is, supposing it claims to be representable and poetical,
for otherwise it is enough if it is not self-contradictory. If thought is contradictory it
is not exaggeration, but nonsense; for what does not exist cannot exceed. But when the thought
is not an object proposed to the fancy, we are just as little justified in calling it exaggerated.
For simple thought is infinite, and what is limitless also cannot exceed. Exaggeration, therefore,
is only that which wounds, not logical truth, but sensuous truth, and what pretends to be sensuous
truth. Consequently, if a poet has the unhappy chance to choose for his picture certain natures
that are merely superhuman and cannot possibly be represented, he can only avoid exaggeration
by ceasing to be a poet, and not trusting the theme to his imagination. Otherwise one of two
things would happen: either imagination, applying its limits to the object, would make a limited
and merely human object of an absolute object--which happened with the gods of Greece--or the
object would take away limits from fancy, that is, would render it null and void, and this
is precisely exaggeration.

Extravagance of feeling should be distinguished from extravagance of portraiture; we are speaking
of the former. The object of the feeling may be unnatural, but the feeling itself is natural,
and ought accordingly to be shadowed forth in the language of nature. While extravagant feelings
may issue from a warm heart and a really poetic nature, extravagance of portraiture always
displays a cold heart, and very often a want of poetic capacity. Therefore this is not a danger
for the sentimental poet, but only for the imitator, who has no vocation; it is therefore often
found with platitude, insipidity, and even baseness. Exaggeration of sentiment is not without
truth, and must have a real object; as nature inspires it, it admits of simplicity of expression
and coming from the heart it goes to the heart. As its object, however, is not in nature, but
artificially produced by the understanding, it has only a logical reality, and the feeling
is not purely human. It was not an illusion that Heloise had for Abelard, Petrarch for Laura,
Saint Preux for his Julia, Werther for his Charlotte; Agathon, Phanias, and Peregrinus--in
Wieland--for the object of their dreams: the feeling is true, only the object is factitious
and outside nature. If their thought had kept to simple sensuous truth, it could not have taken
this flight; but on the other hand a mere play of fancy, without inner value, could not have
stirred the heart: this is only stirred by reason. Thus this sort of exaggeration must be called
to order, but it is not contemptible: and those who ridicule it would do well to find out if
the wisdom on which they pride themselves is not want of heart, and if it is not through want
of reason that they are so acute. The exaggerated delicacy in gallantry and honor which characterizes
the chivalrous romances, especially of Spain, is of this kind; also the refined and even ridiculous
tenderness of French and English sentimental romances of the best kind. These sentiments are
not only subjectively true, but also objectively they are not without value; they are sound
sentiments issuing from a moral source, only reprehensible as overstepping the limits of human
truth. Without this moral reality how could they stir and touch so powerfully? The same remark
applies to moral and religious fanaticism, patriotism, and the love of freedom when carried
up to exaltation. As the object of these sentiments is always a pure idea, and not an external
experience, imagination with its proper activity has here a dangerous liberty, and cannot,
as elsewhere, be called back to bounds by the presence of a visible object. But neither the
man nor the poet can withdraw from the law of nature, except to submit to that of reason. He
can only abandon reality for the ideal; for liberty must hold to one or the other of these
anchors. But it is far from the real to the ideal; and between the two is found fancy, with
its arbitrary conceits and its unbridled freedom. It must needs be, therefore, that man in
general, and the poet in particular, when he withdraws by liberty of his understanding from
the dominion of feeling, without being moved to it by the laws of reason--that is, when he
abandons nature through pure liberty--he finds himself freed from all law, and therefore a
prey to the illusions of phantasy.

It is testified by experience that entire nations, as well as individual men, who have parted
with the safe direction of nature, are actually in this condition; and poets have gone astray
in the same manner. The true genius of sentimental poetry, if its aim is to raise itself to
the rank of the ideal, must overstep the limits of the existing nature; but false genius oversteps
all boundaries without any discrimination, flattering itself with the belief that the wild
sport of the imagination is poetic inspiration. A true poetical genius can never fall into
this error, because it only abandons the real for the sake of the ideal, or, at all events,
it can only do so at certain moments when the poet forgets himself; but his main tendencies
may dispose him to extravagance within the sphere of the senses. His example may also drive
others into a chase of wild conceptions, because readers of lively fancy and weak understanding
only remark the freedom which he takes with existing nature, and are unable to follow him in
copying the elevated necessities of his inner being. The same difficulties beset the path of
the sentimental genius in this respect, as those which afflict the career of a genius of the
simple order. If a genius of this class carries out every work, obedient to the free and spontaneous
impulses of his nature, the man devoid of genius who seeks to imitate him is not willing to
consider his own nature a worse guide than that of the great poet. This accounts for the fact
that masterpieces of simple poetry are commonly followed by a host of stale and unprofitable
works in print, and masterpieces of the sentimental class by wild and fanciful effusions,--a
fact that may be easily verified on questioning the history of literature.

Two maxims are prevalent in relation to poetry, both of them quite correct in themselves, but
mutually destructive in the way in which they are generally conceived. The first is, that "poetry
serves as a means of amusement and recreation," and we have previously observed that this maxim
is highly favorable to aridity and platitudes in poetical actions. The other maxim, that "poetry
is conducive to the moral progress of humanity," takes under its shelter theories and views
of the most wild and extravagant character. It may be profitable to examine more attentively
these two maxims, of which so much is heard, and which are so often imperfectly understood
and falsely applied.

We say that a thing amuses us when it makes us pass from a forced state to the state that is
natural to us. The whole question here is to know in what our natural state ought to consist,
and what a forced state means. If our natural state is made to consist merely in the free development
of all our physical powers, in emancipation from all constraint, it follows that every act
of reason by resisting what is sensuous, is a violence we undergo, and rest of mind combined
with physical movement will be a recreation par excellence. But if we make our natural state
consist in a limitless power of human expression and of freely disposing of all our strength,
all that divides these forces will be a forced state, and recreation will be what brings all
our nature to harmony. Thus, the first of these ideal recreations is simply determined by the
wants of our sensuous nature; the second, by the autonomous activity of human nature. Which
of these two kinds of recreation can be demanded of the poet? Theoretically, the question is
inadmissible, as no one would put the human ideal beneath the brutal. But in practice the requirements
of a poet have been especially directed to the sensuous ideal, and for the most part favor,
though not the esteem, for these sorts of works is regulated thereby. Men's minds are mostly
engaged in a labor that exhausts them, or an enjoyment that sets them asleep. Now labor makes
rest a sensible want, much more imperious than that of the moral nature; for physical nature
must be satisfied before the mind can show its requirements. On the other hand, enjoyment paralyzes
the moral instinct. Hence these two dispositions common in men are very injurious to the feeling
for true beauty, and thus very few even of the best judge soundly in aesthetics. Beauty results
from the harmony between spirit and sense; it addresses all the faculties of man, and can only
be appreciated if a man employs fully all his strength. He must bring to it an open sense,
a broad heart, a spirit full of freshness. All a man's nature must be on the alert, and this
is not the case with those divided by abstraction, narrowed by formulas, enervated by application.
They demand, no doubt, a material for the senses; but not to quicken, only to suspend, thought.
They ask to be freed from what? From a load that oppressed their indolence, and not a rein
that curbed their activity.

After this can one wonder at the success of mediocre talents in aesthetics? or at the bitter
anger of small minds against true energetic beauty? They reckon on finding therein a congenial
recreation, and regret to discover that a display of strength is required to which they are
unequal. With mediocrity they are always welcome; however little mind they bring, they want
still less to exhaust the author's inspiration. They are relieved of the load of thought; and
their nature can lull itself in beatific nothings on the soft pillow of platitude. In the temple
of Thalia and Melpomene--at least, so it is with us--the stupid savant and the exhausted man
of business are received on the broad bosom of the goddess, where their intelligence is wrapped
in a magnetic sleep, while their sluggish senses are warmed, and their imagination with gentle
motions rocked.

Vulgar people may be excused what happens to the best capacities. Those moments of repose demanded
by nature after lengthy labor are not favorable to aesthetic judgment, and hence in the busy
classes few can pronounce safely on matters of taste. Nothing is more common than for scholars
to make a ridiculous figure, in regard to a question of beauty, besides cultured men of the
world; and technical critics are especially the laughing-stock of connoisseurs. Their opinion,
from exaggeration, crudeness, or carelessness guides them generally quite awry, and they can
only devise a technical judgment, and not an aesthetical one, embracing the whole work, in
which feeling should decide. If they would kindly keep to technicalities they might still be
useful, for the poet in moments of inspiration and readers under his spell are little inclined
to consider details. But the spectacle which they afford us is only the more ridiculous inasmuch
as we see these crude natures--with whom all labor and trouble only develop at the most a particular
aptitude,--when we see them set up their paltry individualities as the representation of universal
and complete feeling, and in the sweat of their brow pronounce judgment on beauty.

We have just seen that the kind of recreation poetry ought to afford is generally conceived
in too restricted a manner, and only referred to a simple sensuous want. Too much scope, however,
is also given to the other idea, the moral ennobling the poet should have in view, inasmuch
as too purely an ideal aim is assigned.

In fact, according to the pure ideal, the ennobling goes on to infinity, because reason is
not restricted to any sensuous limits, and only finds rest in absolute perfection. Nothing
can satisfy whilst a superior thing can be conceived; it judges strictly and admits no excuses
of infirmity and finite nature. It only admits for limits those of thought, which transcends
time and space. Hence the poet could no more propose to himself such an ideal of ennobling
(traced for him by pure (didactic) reason) any more than the coarse ideal of recreation of
sensuous nature. The aim is to free human nature from accidental hinderances, without destroying
the essential ideal of our humanity, or displacing its limits. All beyond this is exaggeration,
and a quicksand in which the poet too easily suffers shipwreck if he mistakes the idea of nobleness.
But, unfortunately, he cannot rise to the true ideal of ennobled human nature without going
some steps beyond it. To rise so high he must abandon the world of reality, for, like every
ideal, it is only to be drawn from its inner moral source. He does not find it in the turmoil
of worldly life, but only in his heart, and that only in calm meditation. But in this separation
from real life he is likely to lose sight of all the limits of human nature, and seeking pure
form he may easily lose himself in arbitrary and baseless conceptions. Reason will abstract
itself too much from experience, and the practical man will not be able to carry out, in the
crush of real life, what the contemplative mind has discovered on the peaceful path of thought.
Thus, what makes a dreamy man is the very thing that alone could have made him a sage; and
the advantage for the latter is not that he has never been a dreamer, but rather that he has
not remained one.

We must not, then, allow the workers to determine recreation according to their wants, nor
thinkers that of nobleness according to their speculations, for fear of either a too low physical
poetry, or a poetry too given to hyperphysical exaggeration. And as these two ideas direct
most men's judgments on poetry, we must seek a class of mind at once active, but not slavishly
so, and idealizing, but not dreamy; uniting the reality of life within as few limits as possible,
obeying the current of human affairs, but not enslaved by them. Such a class of men can alone
preserve the beautiful unity of human nature, that harmony which all work for a moment disturbs,
and a life of work destroys; such alone can, in all that is purely human, give by its feelings
universal rules of judgment. Whether such a class exists, or whether the class now existing
in like conditions answers to this ideal conception, I am not concerned to inquire. If it does
not respond to the ideal it has only itself to blame. In such a class--here regarded as a mere
ideal--the simple and sentimental would keep each other from extremes of extravagance and relaxation.
For the idea of a beautiful humanity is not exhausted by either, but can only be presented
in the union of both.

THE STAGE AS A MORAL INSTITUTION.

Sulzer has remarked that the stage has arisen from an irresistible longing for the new and
extraordinary. Man, oppressed by divided cares, and satiated with sensual pleasure, felt an
emptiness or want. Man, neither altogether satisfied with the senses, nor forever capable of
thought, wanted a middle state, a bridge between the two states, bringing them into harmony.
Beauty and aesthetics supplied that for him. But a good lawgiver is not satisfied with discovering
the bent of his people-- he turns it to account as an instrument for higher use; and hence
he chose the stage, as giving nourishment to the soul, without straining it, and uniting the
noblest education of the head and heart.

The man who first pronounced religion to be the strongest pillar of the state, unconsciously
defended the stage, when he said so, in its noblest aspect. The uncertain nature of political
events, rendering religion a necessity, also demands the stage as a moral force. Laws only
prevent disturbances of social life; religion prescribes positive orders sustaining social
order. Law only governs actions; religion controls the heart and follows thought to the source.

Laws are flexible and capricious; religion binds forever. If religion has this great sway over
man's heart, can it also complete his culture? Separating the political from the divine element
in it, religion acts mostly on the senses; she loses her sway if the senses are gone. By what
channel does the stage operate? To most men religion vanishes with the loss of her symbols,
images, and problems; and yet they are only pictures of the imagination, and insolvable problems.
Both laws and religion are strengthened by a union with the stage, where virtue and vice, joy
and sorrow, are thoroughly displayed in a truthful and popular way; where a variety of providential
problems are solved; where all secrets are unmasked, all artifice ends, and truth alone is
the judge, as incorruptible as Rhadamanthus.

Where the influence of civil laws ends that of the stage begins. Where venality and corruption
blind and bias justice and judgment, and intimidation perverts its ends, the stage seizes the
sword and scales and pronounces a terrible verdict on vice. The fields of fancy and of history
are open to the stage; great criminals of the past live over again in the drama, and thus benefit
an indignant posterity. They pass before us as empty shadows of their age, and we heap curses
on their memory while we enjoy on the stage the very horror of their crimes. When morality
is no more taught, religion no longer received, or laws exist, Medea would still terrify us
with her infanticide. The sight of Lady Macbeth, while it makes us shudder, will also make
us rejoice in a good conscience, when we see her, the sleep-walker, washing her hands and seeking
to destroy the awful smell of murder. Sight is always more powerful to man than description;
hence the stage acts more powerfully than morality or law.

But in this the stage only aids justice. A far wider field is really open to it. There are
a thousand vices unnoticed by human justice, but condemned by the stage; so, also, a thousand
virtues overlooked by man's laws are honored on the stage. It is thus the handmaid of religion
and philosophy. From these pure sources it draws its high principles and the exalted teachings,
and presents them in a lovely form. The soul swells with noblest emotions when a divine ideal
is placed before it. When Augustus offers his forgiving hand to Cinna, the conspirator, and
says to him: "Let us be friends, Cinna!" what man at the moment does not feel that he could
do the same. Again, when Francis von Sickingen, proceeding to punish a prince and redress a
stranger, on turning sees the house, where his wife and children are, in flames, and yet goes
on for the sake of his word--how great humanity appears, how small the stern power of fate!

Vice is portrayed on the stage in an equally telling manner. Thus, when old Lear, blind, helpless,
childless, is seen knocking in vain at his daughters' doors, and in tempest and night he recounts
by telling his woes to the elements, and ends by saying: "I have given you all,"--how strongly
impressed we feel at the value of filial piety, and how hateful ingratitude seems to us!

The stage does even more than this. It cultivates the ground where religion and law do not
think it dignified to stop. Folly often troubles the world as much as crime; and it has been
justly said that the heaviest loads often hang suspended by the slightest threads. Tracing
actions to their sources, the list of criminals diminish, and we laugh at the long catalogue
of fools. In our sex all forms of evil emanate almost entirely from one source, and all our
excesses are only varied and higher forms of one quality, and that a quality which in the end
we smile at and love; and why should not nature have followed this course in the opposite sex
too? In man there is only one secret to guard against depravity; that is, to protect his heart
against wickedness.

Much of all this is shown up on the stage. It is a mirror to reflect fools and their thousand
forms of folly, which are there turned to ridicule. It curbs vice by terror, and folly still
more effectually by satire and jest. If a comparison be made between tragedy and comedy, guided
by experience, we should probably give the palm to the latter as to effects produced. Hatred
does not wound the conscience so much as mockery does the pride of man. We are exposed specially
to the sting of satire by the very cowardice that shuns terrors. From sins we are guarded by
law and conscience, but the ludicrous is specially punished on the stage. Where we allow a
friend to correct our morals, we rarely forgive a laugh. We may bear heavy judgment on our
transgressions, but our weaknesses and vulgarities must not be criticised by a witness.

The stage alone can do this with impunity, chastising us as the anonymous fool. We can bear
this rebuke without a blush, and even gratefully.

But the stage does even more than this. It is a great school of practical wisdom, a guide for
civil life, and a key to the mind in all its sinuosities. It does not, of course, remove egoism
and stubbornness in evil ways; for a thousand vices hold up their heads in spite of the stage,
and a thousand virtues make no impression on cold-hearted spectators. Thus, probably, Moliere's
Harpagon never altered a usurer's heart, nor did the suicide in Beverley save any one from
the gaming-table. Nor, again, is it likely that the high roads will be safer through Karl Moor's
untimely end. But, admitting this, and more than this, still how great is the influence of
the stage! It has shown us the vices and virtues of men with whom we have to live. We are not
surprised at their weaknesses, we are prepared for them. The stage points them out to us, and
their remedy. It drags off the mask from the hypocrite, and betrays the meshes of intrigue.
Duplicity and cunning have been forced by it to show their hideous features in the light of
day. Perhaps the dying Sarah may not deter a single debauchee, nor all the pictures of avenged
seduction stop the evil; yet unguarded innocence has been shown the snares of the corrupter,
and taught to distrust his oaths.

The stage also teaches men to bear the strokes of fortune. Chance and design have equal sway
over life. We have to bow to the former, but we control the latter. It is a great advantage
if inexorable facts do not find us unprepared and unexercised, and if our breast has been steeled
to bear adversity. Much human woe is placed before us on the stage. It gives us momentary pain
in the tears we shed for strangers' troubles, but as a compensation it fills us with a grand
new stock of courage and endurance. We are led by it, with the abandoned Ariadne, through the
Isle of Naxos, and we descend the Tower of Starvation in Ugolino; we ascend the terrible scaffold,
and we are present at the awful moment of execution. Things remotely present in thought become
palpable realities now. We see the deceived favorite abandoned by the queen. When about to
die, the perfidious Moor is abandoned by his own sophistry. Eternity reveals the secrets of
the unknown through the dead, and the hateful wretch loses all screen of guilt when the tomb
opens to condemn him.

Then the stage teaches us to be more considerate to the unfortunate, and to judge gently. We
can only pronounce on a man when we know his whole being and circumstances. Theft is a base
crime, but tears mingle with our condemnation, when we read what obliged Edward Ruhberg to
do the horrid deed. Suicide is shocking; but the condemnation of an enraged father, her love,
and the fear of a convent, lead Marianne to drink the cup, and few would dare to condemn the
victim of a dreadful tyranny. Humanity and tolerance have begun to prevail in our time at courts
of princes and in courts of law. A large share of this may be due to the influence of the stage
in showing man and his secret motives.

The great of the world ought to be especially grateful to the stage, for it is here alone that
they hear the truth.

Not only man's mind, but also his intellectual culture, has been promoted by the higher drama.
The lofty mind and the ardent patriot have often used the stage to spread enlightenment.

Considering nations and ages, the thinker sees the masses enchained by opinion and cut off
by adversity from happiness; truth only lights up a few minds, who perhaps have to acquire
it by the trials of a lifetime. How can the wise ruler put these within the reach of his nation.

The thoughtful and the worthier section of the people diffuse the light of wisdom over the
masses through the stage. Purer and better principles and motives issue from the stage and
circulate through society: the night of barbarism and superstition vanishes. I would mention
two glorious fruits of the higher class of dramas. Religious toleration has latterly become
universal. Before Nathan the Jew and Saladin the Saracen put us to shame, and showed that resignation
to God's will did not depend on a fancied belief of His nature--even before Joseph II. contended
with the hatred of a narrow piety--the stage had sown seeds of humanity and gentleness: pictures
of fanaticism had taught a hatred of intolerance, and Christianity, seeing itself in this awful
mirror, washed off its stains. It is to be hoped that the stage will equally combat mistaken
systems of education. This is a subject of the first political importance, and yet none is
so left to private whims and caprice. The stage might give stirring examples of mistaken education,
and lead parents to juster, better views of the subject. Many teachers are led astray by false
views, and methods are often artificial and fatal.

Opinions about governments and classes might be reformed by the stage. Legislation could thus
justify itself by foreign symbols, and silence doubtful aspersions without offence.

Now, if poets would be patriotic they could do much on the stage to forward invention and industry.
A standing theatre would be a material advantage to a nation. It would have a great influence
on the national temper and mind by helping the nation to agree in opinions and inclinations.
The stage alone can do this, because it commands all human knowledge, exhausts all positions,
illumines all hearts, unites all classes, and makes its way to the heart and understanding
by the most popular channels.

If one feature characterized all dramas; if the poets were allied in aim--that is, if they
selected well and from national topics--there would be a national stage, and we should become
a nation. It was this that knit the Greeks so strongly together, and this gave to them the
all-absorbing interest in the republic and the advancement of humanity.

Another advantage belongs to the stage; one which seems to have become acknowledged even by
its censurers. Its influence on intellectual and moral culture, which we have till now been
advocating, may be doubted; but its very enemies have admitted that it has gained the palm
over all other means of amusement. It has been of much higher service here than people are
often ready to allow.

Human nature cannot bear to be always on the rack of business, and the charms of sense die
out with their gratification. Man, oppressed by appetites, weary of long exertion, thirsts
for refined pleasure, or rushes into dissipations that hasten his fall and ruin, and disturb
social order. Bacchanal joys, gambling, follies of all sorts to disturb ennui, are unavoidable
if the lawgiver produces nothing better. A man of public business, who has made noble sacrifices
to the state, is apt to pay for them with melancholy, the scholar to become a pedant, and the
people brutish, without the stage. The stage is an institution combining amusement with instruction,
rest with exertion, where no faculty of the mind is overstrained, no pleasure enjoyed at the
cost of the whole. When melancholy gnaws the heart, when trouble poisons our solitude, when
we are disgusted with the world, and a thousand worries oppress us, or when our energies are
destroyed by over-exercise, the stage revives us, we dream of another sphere, we recover ourselves,
our torpid nature is roused by noble passions, our blood circulates more healthily. The unhappy
man forgets his tears in weeping for another. The happy man is calmed, the secure made provident.
Effeminate natures are steeled, savages made man, and, as the supreme triumph of nature, men
of all clanks, zones, and conditions, emancipated from the chains of conventionality and fashion,
fraternize here in a universal sympathy, forget the world, and come nearer to their heavenly
destination. The individual shares in the general ecstacy, and his breast has now only space
for an emotion: he is a man.

ON THE TRAGIC ART.

The state of passion in itself, independently of the good or bad influence of its object on
our morality, has something in it that charms us. We aspire to transport ourselves into that
state, even if it costs us some sacrifices. You will find this instinct at the bottom of all
our most habitual pleasures. As to the nature itself of the affection, whether it be one of
aversion or desire, agreeable or painful, this is what we take little into consideration. Experience
teaches us that painful affections are those which have the most attraction for us, and thus
that the pleasure we take in an affection is precisely in an inverse ratio to its nature. It
is a phenomenon common to all men, that sad, frightful things, even the horrible, exercise
over us an irresistible seduction, and that in presence of a scene of desolation and of terror
we feel at once repelled and attracted by two equal forces. Suppose the case be an assassination.
Then every one crowds round the narrator and shows a marked attention. Any ghost story, however
embellished by romantic circumstances, is greedily devoured by us, and the more readily in
proportion as the story is calculated to make our hair stand on end.

This disposition is developed in a more lively manner when the objects themselves are placed
before our eyes. A tempest that would swallow up an entire fleet would be, seen from shore,
a spectacle as attractive to our imagination as it would be shocking to our heart. It would
be difficult to believe with Lucretius that this natural pleasure results from a comparison
between our own safety and the danger of which we are witnesses. See what a crowd accompanies
a criminal to the scene of his punishment! This phenomenon cannot be explained either by the
pleasure of satisfying our love of justice, nor the ignoble joy of vengeance. Perhaps the unhappy
man may find excuses in the hearts of those present; perhaps the sincerest pity takes an interest
in his reprieve: this does not prevent a lively curiosity in the spectators to watch his expressions
of pain with eye and ear. If an exception seems to exist here in the case of a well-bred man,
endowed with a delicate sense, this does not imply that he is a complete stranger to this instinct;
but in his case the painful strength of compassion carries the day over this instinct, or it
is kept under by the laws of decency. The man of nature, who is not chained down by any feeling
of human delicacy, abandons himself without any sense of shame to this powerful instinct. This
attraction must, therefore, have its spring of action in an original disposition, and it must
be explained by a psychological law common to the whole species.

But if it seems to us that these brutal instincts of nature are incompatible with the dignity
of man, and if we hesitate, for this reason, to establish on this fact a law common to the
whole species, yet no experiences are required to prove, with the completest evidence, that
the pleasure we take in painful emotions is real, and that it is general. The painful struggle
of a heart drawn asunder between its inclinations or contrary duties, a struggle which is a
cause of misery to him who experiences it, delights the person who is a mere spectator. We
follow with always heightening pleasure the progress of a passion to the abyss into which it
hurries its unhappy victim. The same delicate feeling that makes us turn our eyes aside from
the sight of physical suffering, or even from the physical expression of a purely moral pain,
makes us experience a pleasure heightened in sweetness, in the sympathy for a purely moral
pain. The interest with which we stop to look at the painting of these kinds of objects is
a general phenomenon.

Of course this can only be understood of sympathetic affections, or those felt as a secondary
effect after their first impression; for commonly direct and personal affections immediately
call into life in us the instinct of our own happiness, they take up all our thoughts, and
seize hold of us too powerfully to allow any room for the feeling of pleasure that accompanies
them, when the affection is freed from all personal relation. Thus, in the mind that is really
a prey to painful passion, the feeling of pain commands all others notwithstanding all the
charm that the painting of its moral state may offer to the hearers and the spectators. And
yet the painful affection is not deprived of all pleasure, even for him who experiences it
directly; only this pleasure differs in degree according to the nature of each person's mind.
The sports of chance would not have half so much attraction for us were there not a kind of
enjoyment in anxiety, in doubt, and in fear; danger would not be encountered from mere foolhardiness;
and the very sympathy which interests us in the trouble of another would not be to us that
pleasure which is never more lively than at the very moment when the illusion is strongest,
and when we substitute ourselves most entirely in the place of the person who suffers. But
this does not imply that disagreeable affections cause pleasure of themselves, nor do I think
any one will uphold this view; it suffices that these states of the mind are the conditions
that alone make possible for its certain kinds of pleasure. Thus the hearts particularly sensitive
to this kind of pleasure, and most greedy of them, will be more easily led to share these disagreeable
affections, which are the condition of the former; and even in the most violent storms of passion
they will always preserve some remains of their freedom.

The displeasure we feel in disagreeable affections comes from the relation of our sensuous
faculty or of our moral faculty with their object. In like manner, the pleasure we experience
in agreeable affections proceeds from the very same source. The degree of liberty that may
prevail in the affections depends on the proportion between the moral nature and the sensuous
nature of a man. Now it is well known that in the moral order there is nothing arbitrary for
us, that, on the contrary, the sensuous instinct is subject to the laws of reason and consequently
depends more or less on our will. Hence it is evident that we can keep our liberty full and
entire in all those affections that are concerned with the instinct of self-love, and that
we are the masters to determine the degree which they ought to attain. This degree will be
less in proportion as the moral sense in a man will prevail over the instinct of happiness,
and as by obeying the universal laws of reasons he will have freed himself from the selfish
requirements of his individuality, his Ego. A man of this kind must therefore, in a state of
passion, feel much less vividly the relation of an object with his own instinct of happiness,
and consequently he will be much less sensible of the displeasure that arises from this relation.
On the other hand, he will be perpetually more attentive to the relation of this same object
with his moral nature, and for this very reason he will be more sensible to the pleasure which
the relation of the object with morality often mingles with the most painful affections. A
mind thus constituted is better fitted than all others to enjoy the pleasure attaching to compassion,
and even to regard a personal affection as an object of simple compassion. Hence the inestimable
value of a moral philosophy, which, by raising our eyes constantly towards general laws, weakens
in us the feeling of our individuality, teaches us to plunge our paltry personality in something
great, and enables us thus to act to ourselves as to strangers. This sublime state of the mind
is the lot of strong philosophic minds, which by working assiduously on themselves have learned
to bridle the egotistical instinct. Even the most cruel loss does not drive them beyond a certain
degree of sadness, with which an appreciable sum of pleasure can always be reconciled. These
souls, which are alone capable of separating themselves from themselves, alone enjoy the privilege
of sympathizing with themselves and of receiving of their own sufferings only a reflex, softened
by sympathy.

The indications contained in what precedes will suffice to direct our attention to the sources
of the pleasure that the affection in itself causes, more particularly the sad affection. We
have seen that this pleasure is more energetic in moral souls, and it acts with greater freedom
in proportion as the soul is more independent of the egotistical instinct. This pleasure is,
moreover, more vivid and stronger in sad affections, when self-love is painfully disquieted,
than in gay affections, which imply a satisfaction of self-love. Accordingly this pleasure
increases when the egotistical instinct is wounded, and diminishes when that instinct is flattered.
Now we only know of two sources of pleasure--the satisfaction of the instinct of happiness,
and the accomplishment of the moral laws. Therefore, when it is shown that a particular pleasure
does not emanate from the former source, it must of necessity issue from the second. It is
therefore from our moral nature that issues the charm of the painful affections shared by sympathy,
and the pleasure that we sometimes feel even where the painful affection directly affects ourselves.

Many attempts have been made to account for the pleasure of pity, but most of these solutions
had little chance of meeting the problem, because the principle of this phenomenon was sought
for rather in the accompanying circumstances than in the nature of the affection itself. To
many persons the pleasure of pity is simply the pleasure taken by the mind in exercising its
own sensibility. To others it is the pleasure of occupying their forces energetically, of exercising
the social faculty vividly--in short, of satisfying the instinct of restlessness. Others again
make it derived from the discovery of morally fine features of character, placed in a clear
light by the struggle against adversity or against the passions. But there is still the difficulty
to explain why it should be exactly the very feeling of pain,--suffering properly so called,--that
in objects of pity attracts us with the greatest force, while, according to those elucidations,
a less degree of suffering ought evidently to be more favorable to those causes to which the
source of the emotion is traced. Various matters may, no doubt, increase the pleasure of the
emotion without occasioning it. Of this nature are the vividness and force of the ideas awakened
in our imagination, the moral excellence of the suffering persons, the reference to himself
of the person feeling pity. I admit that the suffering of a weak soul, and the pain of a wicked
character, do not procure us this enjoyment. But this is because they do not excite our pity
to the same degree as the hero who suffers, or the virtuous man who struggles. Thus we are
constantly brought back to the first question: why is it precisely the degree of suffering
that determines the degree of sympathetic pleasure which we take in an emotion? and one answer
only is possible; it is because the attack made on our sensibility is precisely the condition
necessary to set in motion that quality of mind of which the activity produces the pleasure
we feel in sympathetic affections.

Now this faculty is no other than the reason; and because the free exercise of reason, as an
absolutely independent activity, deserves par excellence the name of activity; as, moreover,
the heart of man only feels itself perfectly free and independent in its moral acts, it follows
that the charm of tragic emotions is really dependent on the fact that this instinct of activity
finds its gratification in them. But, even admitting this, it is neither the great number nor
the vivacity of the ideas that are awakened then in our imagination, nor in general the exercise
of the social faculty, but a certain kind of ideas and a certain activity of the social faculty
brought into play by reason, which is the foundation of this pleasure.

Thus the sympathetic affections in general are for us a source of pleasure because they give
satisfaction to our instinct of activity, and the sad affections produce this effect with more
vividness because they give more satisfaction to this instinct. The mind only reveals all its
activity when it is in full possession of its liberty, when it has a perfect consciousness
of its rational nature, because it is only then that it displays a force superior to all resistance.

Hence the state of mind which allows most effectually the manifestation of this force, and
awakens most successfully its activity, is that state which is most suitable to a rational
being, and which best satisfies our instincts of activity: whence it follows that a greater
amount of pleasure must be attached necessarily to this state. Now it is the tragic states
that place our soul in this state, and the pleasure found in them is necessarily higher than
the charm produced by gay affections, in the same degree that moral power in us is superior
to the power of the senses.

Points that are only subordinate and partial in a system of final causes may be considered
by art independently of that relation with the rest, and may be converted into principal objects.
It is right that in the designs of nature pleasure should only be a mediate end, or a means;
but for art it is the highest end. It is therefore essentially important for art not to neglect
this high enjoyment attaching to the tragic emotion. Now, tragic art, taking this term in its
widest acceptation, is that among the fine arts which proposes as its principal object the
pleasure of pity.

Art attains its end by the imitation of nature, by satisfying the conditions which make pleasure
possible in reality, and by combining, according to a plan traced by the intelligence, the
scattered elements furnished by nature, so as to attain as a principal end to that which, for
nature, was only an accessory end. Thus tragic art ought to imitate nature in those kinds of
actions that are specially adapted to awaken pity.

It follows that, in order to determine generally the system to be followed by tragic art, it
is necessary before all things to know on what conditions in real life the pleasure of the
emotion is commonly produced in the surest and the strongest manner; but it is necessary at
the same time to pay attention to the circumstances that restrict or absolutely extinguish
this pleasure.

After what we have established in our essay "On the Cause of the Pleasure we derive from Tragic
Objects," it is known that in every tragic emotion there is an idea of incongruity, which,
though the emotion may be attended with charm, must always lead on to the conception of a higher
consistency. Now it is the relation that these two opposite conceptions mutually bear which
determines in an emotion if the prevailing impression shall be pleasurable or the reverse.
If the conception of incongruity be more vivid than that of the contrary, or if the end sacrificed
is more important than the end gained, the prevailing impression will always be displeasure,
whether this be understood objectively of the human race in general, or only subjectively of
certain individuals.

If the cause that has produced a misfortune gives us too much displeasure, our compassion for
the victim is diminished thereby. The heart cannot feel simultaneously, in a high degree, two
absolutely contrary affections. Indignation against the person who is the primary cause of
the suffering becomes the prevailing affection, and all other feeling has to yield to it. Thus
our interest is always enfeebled when the unhappy man whom it would be desirable to pity had
cast himself into ruin by a personal and an inexcusable fault; or if, being able to save himself,
he did not do so, either through feebleness of mind or pusillanimity. The interest we take
in unhappy King Lear, ill-treated by two ungrateful daughters, is sensibly lessened by the
circumstance that this aged man, in his second childhood, so weakly gave up his crown, and
divided his love among his daughters with so little discernment. In the tragedy of Kronegk,
"Olinda and Sophronia," the most terrible suffering to which we see these martyrs to their
faith exposed only excites our pity feebly, and all their heroism only stirs our admiration
moderately, because madness alone can suggest the act by which Olinda has placed himself and
all his people on the brink of the precipice.

Our pity is equally lessened when the primary cause of a misfortune, whose innocent victim
ought to inspire us with compassion, fills our mind with horror. When the tragic poet cannot
clear himself of his plot without introducing a wretch, and when he is reduced to derive the
greatness of suffering from the greatness of wickedness, the supreme beauty of his work must
always be seriously injured. Iago and Lady Macbeth in Shakspeare, Cleopatra in the tragedy
of "Rodogune," or Franz Moor in "The Robbers," are so many proofs in support of this assertion.
A poet who understands his real interest will not bring about the catastrophe through a malicious
will which proposes misfortune as its end; nor, and still less, by want of understanding: but
rather through the imperious force of circumstances. If this catastrophe does not come from
moral sources, but from outward things, which have no volition and are not subject to any will,
the pity we experience is more pure, or at all events it is not weakened by any idea of moral
incongruity. But then the spectator cannot be spared the disagreeable feeling of an incongruity
in the order of nature, which can alone save in such a case moral propriety. Pity is far more
excited when it has for its object both him who suffers and him who is the primary cause of
the suffering. This can only happen when the latter has neither elicited our contempt nor our
hatred, but when he has been brought against his inclination to become the cause of this misfortune.
It is a singular beauty of the German play of "Iphigenia" that the King of Tauris, the only
obstacle who thwarts the wishes of Orestes and of his sister, never loses our esteem, and that
we love him to the end.

There is something superior even to this kind of emotion; this is the case when the cause of
the misfortune not only is in no way repugnant to morality, but only becomes possible through
morality, and when the reciprocal suffering comes simply from the idea that a fellow-creature
has been made to suffer. This is the situation of Chimene and Rodrigue in "The Cid" of Pierre
Corneille, which is undeniably in point of intrigue the masterpiece of the tragic stage. Honor
and filial love arm the hand of Rodrigue against the father of her whom he loves, and his valor
gives him the victory. Honor and filial love rouse up against him, in the person of Chimene,
the daughter of his victim, an accuser and a formidable persecutor. Both act in opposition
to their inclination, and they tremble with anguish at the thought of the misfortune of the
object against which they arm themselves, in proportion as zeal inspires them for their duty
to inflict this misfortune. Accordingly both conciliate our esteem in the highest sense, as
they accomplish a moral duty at the cost of inclination; both inflame our pity in the highest
degree, because they suffer spontaneously for a motive that renders them in the highest degree
to be respected. It results from this that our pity is in this case so little modified by any
opposite feeling that it burns rather with a double flame; only the impossibility of reconciling
the idea of misfortune with the idea of a morality so deserving of happiness might still disturb
our sympathetic pleasure, and spread a shade of sadness over it. It is besides a great point,
no doubt, that the discontent given us by this contradiction does not bear upon our moral being,
but is turned aside to a harmless place, to necessity only; but this blind subjection to destiny
is always afflicting and humiliating for free beings, who determine themselves. This is the
cause that always leaves something to be wished for even in the best Greek pieces. In all these
pieces, at the bottom of the plot it is always fatality that is appealed to, and in this there
is a knot that cannot be unravelled by our reason, which wishes to solve everything.

But even this knot is untied, and with it vanishes every shade of displeasure, at the highest
and last step to which man perfected by morality rises, and at the highest point which is attained
by the art which moves the feelings. This happens when the very discontent with destiny becomes
effaced, and is resolved in a presentiment or rather a clear consciousness of a teleological
concatenation of things, of a sublime order, of a beneficent will. Then, to the pleasure occasioned
in us by moral consistency is joined the invigorating idea of the most perfect suitability
in the great whole of nature. In this case the thing that seemed to militate against this order,
and that caused us pain, in a particular case, is only a spur that stimulates our reason to
seek in general laws for the justification of this particular case, and to solve the problem
of this separate discord in the centre of the general harmony. Greek art never rose to this
supreme serenity of tragic emotion, because neither the national religion, nor even the philosophy
of the Greeks, lighted their step on this advanced road. It was reserved for modern art, which
enjoys the privilege of finding a purer matter in a purer philosophy, to satisfy also this
exalted want, and thus to display all the moral dignity of art.

If we moderns must resign ourselves never to reproduce Greek art because the philosophic genius
of our age, and modern civilization in general are not favorable to poetry, these influences
are at all events less hurtful to tragic art, which is based rather on the moral element. Perhaps
it is in the case of this art only that our civilization repairs the injury that it has caused
to art in general.

In the same manner as the tragic emotion is weakened by the admixture of conflicting ideas
and feelings, and the charm attaching to it is thus diminished, so this emotion can also, on
the contrary, by approaching the excess of direct and personal affection, become exaggerated
to the point where pain carries the day over pleasure. It has been remarked that displeasure,
in the affections, comes from the relation of their object with our senses, in the same way
as the pleasure felt in them comes from the relation of the affection itself to our moral faculty.
This implies, then, between our senses and our moral faculty a determined relation, which decides
as regards the relation between pleasure and displeasure in tragic emotions. Nor could this
relation be modified or overthrown without overthrowing at the same time the feelings of pleasure
and displeasure which we find in the emotions, or even without changing them into their opposites.
In the same ratio that the senses are vividly roused in us, the influence of morality will
be proportionately diminished; and reciprocally, as the sensuous loses, morality gains ground.
Therefore that which in our hearts gives a preponderance to the sensuous faculty, must of necessity,
by placing restrictions on the moral faculty, diminish the pleasure that we take in tragic
emotions, a pleasure which emanates exclusively from this moral faculty. In like manner, all
that in our heart impresses an impetus on this latter faculty, must blunt the stimulus of pain
even in direct and personal affections. Now our sensuous nature actually acquires this preponderance,
when the ideas of suffering rise to a degree of vividness that no longer allows us to distinguish
a sympathetic affection from a personal affection, or our own proper Ego from the subject that
suffers,--reality, in short, from poetry. The sensuous also gains the upper hand when it finds
an aliment in the great number of its objects, and in that dazzling light which an over-excited
imagination diffuses over it. On the contrary, nothing is more fit to reduce the sensuous to
its proper bounds than to place alongside it super-sensuous ideas, moral ideas, to which reason,
oppressed just before, clings as to a kind of spiritual props, to right and raise itself above
the fogs of the sensuous to a serener atmosphere. Hence the great charm which general truths
or moral sentences, scattered opportunely over dramatic dialogue, have for all cultivated nations,
and the almost excessive use that the Greeks made of them. Nothing is more agreeable to a moral
soul than to have the power, after a purely passive state that has lasted too long, of escaping
from the subjection of the senses, and of being recalled to its spontaneous activity, and restored
to the possession of its liberty.

These are the remarks I had to make respecting the causes that restrict our pity and place
an obstacle to our pleasure in tragic emotions. I have next to show on what conditions pity
is solicited and the pleasure of the emotion excited in the most infallible and energetic manner.

Every feeling of pity implies the idea of suffering, and the degree of pity is regulated according
to the degree more or less of vividness, of truth, of intensity, and of duration of this idea.

1st. The moral faculty is provoked to reaction in proportion to the vividness of ideas in the
soul, which incites it to activity and solicits its sensuous faculty. Now the ideas of suffering
are conceived in two different manners, which are not equally favorable to the vividness of
the impression. The sufferings that we witness affect us incomparably more than those that
we have through a description or a narrative. The former suspend in us the free play of the
fancy, and striking our senses immediately penetrate by the shortest road to our heart. In
the narrative, on the contrary, the particular is first raised to the general, and it is from
this that the knowledge of the special case is afterwards derived; accordingly, merely by this
necessary operation of the understanding, the impression already loses greatly in strength.
Now a weak impression cannot take complete possession of our mind, and it will allow other
ideas to disturb its action and to dissipate the attention. Very frequently, moreover, the
narrative account transports us from the moral disposition, in which the acting person is placed,
to the state of mind of the narrator himself, which breaks up the illusion so necessary for
pity. In every case, when the narrator in person puts himself forward, a certain stoppage takes
place in the action, and, as an unavoidable result, in our sympathetic affection. This is what
happens even when the dramatic poet forgets himself in the dialogue, and puts in the mouth
of his dramatic persons reflections that could only enter the mind of a disinterested spectator.
It would be difficult to mention a single one of our modern tragedies quite free from this
defect; but the French alone have made a rule of it. Let us infer, then, that the immediate
vivid and sensuous presence of the object is necessary to give to the ideas impressed on us
by suffering that strength without which the emotion could not rise to a high degree.

2d. But we can receive the most vivid impressions of the idea of suffering without, however,
being led to a remarkable degree of pity, if these impressions lack truth. It is, necessary
that we should form of suffering an idea of such a nature that we are obliged to share and
take part in it. To this end there must be a certain agreement between this suffering and something
that we have already in us. In other words, pity is only possible inasmuch as we can prove
or suppose a resemblance between ourselves and the subject that suffers. Everywhere where this
resemblance makes itself known, pity is necessary; where this resemblance is lacking, pity
is impossible. The more visible and the greater is the resemblance, the more vivid is our pity;
and they mutually slacken in dependence on each other. In order that we may feel the affections
of another after him, all the internal conditions demanded by this affection must be found
beforehand in us, in order that the external cause which, by meeting with the internal conditions,
has given birth to the affection, may also produce on us a like effect. It is necessary that,
without doing violence to ourselves, we should be able to exchange persons with another, and
transport our Ego by an instantaneous substitution in the state of the subject. Now, how is
it possible to feel in us the state of another, if we have not beforehand recognized ourselves
in this other.

This resemblance bears on the totality of the constitution of the mind, in as far as that is
necessary and universal. Now, this character of necessity and of universality belongs especially
to our moral nature. The faculty of feeling can be determined differently by accidental causes:
our cognitive faculties themselves depend on variable conditions: the moral faculty only has
its principle in itself, and by that very fact it can best give us a general measure and a
certain criterion of this resemblance. Thus an idea which we find in accord with our mode of
thinking and of feeling, which offers at once a certain relationship with the train of our
own ideas, which is easily grasped by our heart and our mind, we call a true idea. If this
relationship bears on what is peculiar to our heart, on the private determinations that modify
in us the common fundamentals of humanity, and which may be withdrawn without altering this
general character, this idea is then simply true for us. If it bears on the general and necessary
form that we suppose in the whole species, the truth of this idea ought to be held to be equal
to objective truth. For the Roman, the sentence of the first Brutus and the suicide of Cato
are of subjective truth. The ideas and the feelings that have inspired the actions of these
two men are not an immediate consequence of human nature in general, but the mediate consequence
of a human nature determined by particular modifications. To share with them these feelings
we must have a Roman soul, or at least be capable of assuming for a moment a Roman soul. It
suffices, on the other hand, to be a man in general, to be vividly touched by the heroic sacrifice
of Leonidas, by the quiet resignation of Aristides, by the voluntary death of Socrates, and
to be moved to tears by the terrible changes in the fortunes of Darius. We attribute to these
kinds of ideas, in opposition to the preceding ones, an objective truth because they agree
with the nature of all human subjects, which gives them a character of universality and of
necessity as strict as if they were independent of every subjective condition.

Moreover, although the subjectively true description is based on accidental determinations,
this is no reason for confounding it with an arbitrary description. After all, the subjectively
true emanates also from the general constitution of the human soul, modified only in particular
directions by special circumstances; and the two kinds of truth are equally necessary conditions
of the human mind. If the resolution of Cato were in contradiction with the general laws of
human nature, it could not be true, even subjectively. The only difference is that the ideas
of the second kind are enclosed in a narrower sphere of action; because they imply, besides
the general modes of the human mind, other special determinations. Tragedy can make use of
it with a very intense effect, if it will renounce the extensive effect; still the unconditionally
true, what is purely human in human relations, will be always the richest matter for the tragic
poet, because this ground is the only one on which tragedy, without ceasing to aspire to strength
of expression can be certain of the generality of this impression.

3d. Besides the vividness and the truth of tragic pictures, there must also be completeness.
None of the external data that are necessary to give to the soul the desired movement ought
to be omitted in the representation. In order that the spectator, however Roman his sentiments
may be, may understand the moral state of Cato--that he may make his own the high resolution
of the republican, this resolution must have its principle, not only in the mind of the Roman,
but also in the circumstances of the action. His external situation as well as his internal
situation must be before our eyes in all their consequences and extent: and we must, lastly,
have unrolled before us, without omitting a single link, the whole chain of determinations
to which are attached the high resolution of the Roman as a necessary consequence. It may be
said in general that without this third condition, even the truth of a painting cannot be recognized;
for the similarity of circumstances, which ought to be fully evident, can alone justify our
judgment on the similarity of the feelings, since it is only from the competition of external
conditions and of internal conditions that the affective phenomenon results. To decide if we
should have acted like Cato, we must before all things transport ourselves in thought to the
external situation in which Cato was placed, and then only we are entitled to place our feelings
alongside his, to pronounce if there is or is not likeness, and to give a verdict on the truth
of these feelings.

A complete picture, as I understand it, is only possible by the concatenation of several separate
ideas, and of several separate feelings, which are connected together as cause and effect,
and which, in their sum total, form one single whole for our cognitive faculty. All these ideas,
in order to affect us closely, must make an immediate impression on our senses; and, as the
narrative form always weakens this impression, they must be produced by a present action. Thus,
in order that a tragic picture may be complete, a whole series is required of particular actions,
rendered sensuous and connected with the tragic action as to one whole.

4th. It is necessary, lastly, that the ideas we receive of suffering should act on us in a
durable manner, to excite in us a high degree of emotion. The affection created in us by the
suffering of another is to us a constrained state, from which we hasten to get free; and the
illusion so necessary for pity easily disappears in this case. It is, therefore, a necessity
to fasten the mind closely to these ideas, and not to leave it the freedom to get rid too soon
of the illusion. The vividness of sudden ideas and the energy of sudden impressions, which
in rapid succession affect our senses, would not suffice for this end. For the power of reaction
in the mind is manifested in direct proportion to the force with which the receptive faculty
is solicited, and it is manifested to triumph over this impression. Now, the poet who wishes
to move us ought not to weaken this independent power in us, for it is exactly in the struggle
between it and the suffering of our sensuous nature that the higher charm of tragic emotions
lies. In order that the heart, in spite of that spontaneous force which reacts against sensuous
affections, may remain attached to the impressions of sufferings, it is, therefore, necessary
that these impressions should be cleverly suspended at intervals, or even interrupted and intercepted
by contrary impressions, to return again with twofold energy and renew more frequently the
vividness of the first impression. Against the exhaustion and languor that result from habit,
the most effectual remedy is to propose new objects to the senses; this variety retempers them,
and the gradation of impressions calls forth the innate faculty, and makes it employ a proportionately
stronger resistance. This faculty ought to be incessantly occupied in maintaining its independence
against the attacks of the senses, but it must not triumph before the end, still less must
it succumb in the struggle. Otherwise, in the former case, suffering, and, in the latter, moral
activity is set aside; while it is the union of these two that can alone elicit emotion. The
great secret of the tragic art consists precisely in managing this struggle well; it is in
this that it shows itself in the most brilliant light.

For this, a succession of alternate ideas is required: therefore a suitable combination is
wanted of several particular actions corresponding with these different ideas; actions round
which the principal action and the tragic impression which it is wished to produce through
it unroll themselves like the yarn from the distaff, and end by enlacing our souls in nets,
through which they cannot break. Let me be permitted to make use of a simile, by saying that
the artist ought to begin by gathering up with parsimonious care all the separate rays that
issue from the object by aid of which he seeks to produce the tragic effect that he has in
view, and these rays, in his hands, become a lightning flash, setting the hearts of all on
fire. The tyro casts suddenly and vainly all the thunderbolts of horror and fear into the soul;
the artist, on the contrary, advances step by step to his end; he only strikes with measured
strokes, but he penetrates to the depth of our soul, precisely because he has only stirred
it by degrees.

If we now form the proper deductions from the previous investigation, the following will be
the conditions that form bases of the tragic art. It is necessary, in the first place, that
the object of our pity should belong to our own species--I mean belong in the full sense of
the term and that the action in which it is sought to interest us be a moral action; that is,
an action comprehended in the field of free-will. It is necessary, in the second place, that
suffering, its sources, its degrees, should be completely communicated by a series of events
chained together. It is necessary, in the third place, that the object of the passion be rendered
present to our senses, not in a mediate way and by description, but immediately and in action.
In tragedy art unites all these conditions and satisfies them.

According to these principles tragedy might be defined as the poetic imitation of a coherent
series of particular events (forming a complete action): an imitation which shows us man in
a state of suffering, and which has for its end to excite our pity.

I say first that it is the imitation of an action; and this idea of imitation already distinguishes
tragedy from the other kinds of poetry, which only narrate or describe. In tragedy particular
events are presented to our imagination or to our senses at the very time of their accomplishment;
they are present, we see them immediately, without the intervention of a third person. The
epos, the romance, simple narrative, even in their form, withdraw action to a distance, causing
the narrator to come between the acting person and the reader. Now what is distant and past
always weakens, as we know, the impressions and the sympathetic affection; what is present
makes them stronger. All narrative forms make of the present something past; all dramatic form
makes of the past a present.

Secondly, I say that tragedy is the imitation of a succession of events, of an action. Tragedy
has not only to represent by imitation the feelings and the affections of tragic persons, but
also the events that have produced these feelings, and the occasion on which these affections
are manifested. This distinguishes it from lyric poetry, and from its different forms, which
no doubt offer, like tragedy, the poetic imitation of certain states of the mind, but not the
poetic imitation of certain actions. An elegy, a song, an ode, can place before our eyes, by
imitation, the moral state in which the poet actually is--whether he speaks in his own name,
or in that of an ideal person--a state determined by particular circumstances; and up to this
point these lyric forms seem certainly to be incorporated in the idea of tragedy; but they
do not complete that idea, because they are confined to representing our feelings. There are
still more essential differences, if the end of these lyrical forms and that of tragedy are
kept in view.

I say, in the third place, that tragedy is the imitation of a complete action. A separate event,
though it be ever so tragic, does not in itself constitute a tragedy. To do this, several events
are required, based one on the other, like cause and effect, and suitably connected so as to
form a whole; without which the truth of the feeling represented, of the character, etc.--that
is, their conformity with the nature of our mind, a conformity which alone determines our sympathy--will
not be recognized. If we do not feel that we ourselves in similar circumstances should have
experienced the same feelings and acted in the same way, our pity would not be awakened. It
is, therefore, important that we should be able to follow in all its concatenation the action
that is represented to us, that we should see it issue from the mind of the agent by a natural
gradation, under the influence and with the concurrence of external circumstances. It is thus
that we see spring up, grow, and come to maturity under our eyes, the curiosity of Oedipus
and the jealousy of Iago. It is also the only way to fill up the great gap that exists between
the joy of an innocent soul and the torments of a guilty conscience, between the proud serenity
of the happy man and his terrible catastrophe; in short, between the state of calm, in which
the reader is at the beginning, and the violent agitation he ought to experience at the end.

A series of several connected incidents is required to produce in our souls a succession of
different movements which arrest the attention, which, appealing to all the faculties of our
minds, enliven our instinct of activity when it is exhausted, and which, by delaying the satisfaction
of this instinct, do not kindle it the less. Against the suffering of sensuous nature the human
heart has only recourse to its moral nature as counterpoise. It is, therefore, necessary, in
order to stimulate this in a more pressing manner, for the tragic poet to prolong the torments
of sense, but he must also give a glimpse to the latter of the satisfaction of its wants, so
as to render the victory of the moral sense so much the more difficult and glorious. This twofold
end can only be attained by a succession of actions judiciously chosen and combined to this end.

In the fourth place, I say that tragedy is the poetic imitation of an action deserving of pity,
and, therefore, tragic imitation is opposed to historic imitation. It would only be a historic
imitation if it proposed a historic end, if its principal object were to teach us that a thing
has taken place, and how it took place. On this hypothesis it ought to keep rigorously to historic
accuracy, for it would only attain its end by representing faithfully that which really took
place. But tragedy has a poetic end, that is to say, it represents an action to move us, and
to charm our souls by the medium of this emotion. If, therefore, a matter being given, tragedy
treats it conformably with this poetic end, which is proper to it, it becomes, by that very
thing, free in its imitation. It is a right--nay, more, it is an obligation--for tragedy to
subject historic truth to the laws of poetry; and to treat its matter in conformity with requirements
of this art. But as it cannot attain its end, which is emotion, except on the condition of
a perfect conformity with the laws of nature, tragedy is, notwithstanding its freedom in regard
to history, strictly subject to the laws of natural truth, which, in opposition to the truth
of history, takes the name of poetic truth. It may thus be understood how much poetic truth
may lose, in many cases by a strict observance of historic truth, and, reciprocally, how much
it may gain by even a very serious alteration of truth according to history. As the tragic
poet, like poets in general, is only subject to the laws of poetic truth, the most conscientious
observance of historic truth could never dispense him from his duties as poet, and could never
excuse in him any infraction of poetic truth or lack of interest. It is, therefore, betraying
very narrow ideas on tragic art, or rather on poetry in general, to drag the tragic poet before
the tribunal of history, and to require instruction of the man who by his very title is only
bound to move and charm you. Even supposing the poet, by a scrupulous submission to historic
truth, had stripped himself of his privilege of artist, and that he had tacitly acknowledged
in history a jurisdiction over his work, art retains all her rights to summon him before its
bar; and pieces such as "The Death of Hermann," "Minona," "Fust of Stromberg," if they could
not stand the test on this side, would only be tragedies of mediocre value, notwithstanding
all the minuteness of costume--of national costume--and of the manners of the time.

Fifthly, tragedy is the imitation of an action that lets us see man suffering. The word man
is essential to mark the limits of tragedy. Only the suffering of a being like ourselves can
move our pity. Thus, evil genii, demons--or even men like them, without morals--and again pure
spirits, without our weaknesses, are unfit for tragedy. The very idea of suffering implies
a man in the full sense of the term. A pure spirit cannot suffer, and a man approaching one
will never awaken a high degree of sympathy. A purely sensuous being can indeed have terrible
suffering; but without moral sense it is a prey to it, and a suffering with reason inactive
is a disgusting spectacle. The tragedian is right to prefer mixed characters, and to place
the ideal of his hero half way between utter perversity and entire perfection.

Lastly, tragedy unites all these requisites to excite pity. Many means the tragic poet takes
might serve another object; but he frees himself from all requirements not relating to this
end, and is thereby obliged to direct himself with a view to this supreme object.

The final aim to which all the laws tend is called the end of any style of poetry. The means
by which it attains this are its form. The end and form are, therefore, closely related. The
form is determined by the end, and when the form is well observed the end is generally attained.
Each kind of poetry having a special end must have a distinguishing form. What it exclusively
produces it does in virtue of this special nature it possesses. The end of tragedy is emotion;
its form is the imitation of an action that leads to suffering. Many kinds may have the same
object as tragedy, of emotion, though it be not their principal end. Therefore, what distinguishes
tragedy is the relation of its form to its end, the way in which it attains its end by means
of its subject.

If the end of tragedy is to awaken sympathy, and its form is the means of attaining it, the
imitation of an action fit to move must have all that favors sympathy. Such is the form of tragedy.

The production of a kind of poetry is perfect when the form peculiar to its kind has been used
in the best way. Thus, a perfect tragedy is that where the form is best used to awaken sympathy.
Thus, the best tragedy is that where the pity excited results more from the treatment of the
poet than the theme. Such is the ideal of a tragedy.

A good number of tragedies, though fine as poems are bad as dramas, because they do not seek
their end by the best use of tragic form. Others, because they use the form to attain an end
different from tragedy. Some very popular ones only touch us on account of the subject, and
we are blind enough to make this a merit in the poet. There are others in which we seem to
have quite forgotten the object of the poet, and, contented with pretty plays of fancy and
wit, we issue with our hearts cold from the theatre. Must art, so holy and venerable, defend
its cause by such champions before such judges? The indulgence of the public only emboldens
mediocrity: it causes genius to blush, and discourages it.

OF THE CAUSE OF THE PLEASURE WE DERIVE FROM TRAGIC OBJECTS.

Whatever pains some modern aesthetics give themselves to establish, contrary to general belief,
that the arts of imagination and of feeling have not pleasure for their object, and to defend
them against this degrading accusation, this belief will not cease: it reposes upon a solid
foundation, and the fine arts would renounce with a bad grace the beneficent mission which
has in all times been assigned to them, to accept the new employment to which it is generously
proposed to raise them. Without troubling themselves whether they lower themselves in proposing
our pleasure as object, they become rather proud of the advantages of reaching immediately
an aim never attained except mediately in other routes followed by the activity of the human
mind. That the aim of nature, with relation to man, is the happiness of man,--although he ought
of himself, in his moral conduct, to take no notice of this aim,-- is what, I think, cannot
be doubted in general by any one who admits that nature has an aim. Thus the fine arts have
the same aim as nature, or rather as the Author of nature, namely, to spread pleasure and render
people happy. It procures for us in play what at other more austere sources of good to man
we extract only with difficulty. It lavishes as a pure gift that which elsewhere is the price
of many hard efforts. With what labor, what application, do we not pay for the pleasures of
the understanding; with what painful sacrifices the approbation of reason; with what hard privations
the joys of sense! And if we abuse these pleasures, with what a succession of evils do we expiate
excess! Art alone supplies an enjoyment which requires no appreciable effort, which costs no
sacrifice, and which we need not repay with repentance. But who could class the merit of charming
in this manner with the poor merit of amusing? who would venture to deny the former of these
two aims of the fine arts solely because they have a tendency higher than the latter.

