It remained for the judge to sweep away the defence, or to favor the prisoners by countenancing
it. Fortunately for them, he was an old man; and could recall, not without regret, a time when
the memory of Cribb and Molyneux was yet green. He began his summing-up by telling the jury
that the police had failed to prove that the fight was a prize-fight. After that, the public,
by indulging in roars of laughter whenever they could find a pretext for doing so without being
turned out of court, showed that they had ceased to regard the trial seriously.

Finally the jury acquitted Mellish, and found Cashel and Paradise guilty of a common assault.
They were sentenced to two days' imprisonment, and bound over to keep the peace for twelve
months in sureties of one hundred and fifty pounds each. The sureties were forthcoming; and
as the imprisonment was supposed to date from the beginning of the sessions, the prisoners
were at once released.

CHAPTER XVI

Miss Carew, averse to the anomalous relations of courtship, made as little delay as possible
in getting married. Cashel's luck was not changed by the event. Bingley Byron died three weeks
after the ceremony (which was civic and private); and Cashel had to claim possession of the
property in Dorsetshire, in spite of his expressed wish that the lawyers would take themselves
and the property to the devil, and allow him to enjoy his honeymoon in peace. The transfer
was not, however, accomplished at once. Owing to his mother's capricious reluctance to give
the necessary information without reserve, and to the law's delay, his first child was born
some time before his succession was fully established and the doors of his ancestral hall opened
to him. The conclusion of the business was a great relief to his attorneys, who had been unable
to shake his conviction that the case was clear enough, but that the referee had been squared.
By this he meant that the Lord Chancellor had been bribed to keep him out of his property.

His marriage proved an unusually happy one. She indignantly refused--not that she had any reason
to complain of him, but because the prospect of returning to Wiltstoken made her feel ill used,
and she could not help revenging her soreness upon the first person whom she could find a pretext
for attacking. He, lukewarm before, now became eager, and she was induced to relent without
much difficulty. Lucian was supposed to have made a brilliant match; and, as it proved, he
made a fortunate one. She kept his house, entertained his guests, and took charge of his social
connections so ably that in course of time her invitations came to be coveted by people who
were desirous of moving in good society. She was even better looking as a matron than she had
been as a girl; and her authority in matters of etiquette inspired nervous novices with all
the terrors she had herself felt when she first visited Wiltstoken Castle. She invited her
brother-in-law and his wife to dinner twice a year--at midsummer and Easter; but she never
admitted that either Wallace Parker or Cashel Byron were gentlemen, although she invited the
latter freely, notwithstanding the frankness with which he spoke to strangers after dinner
of his former exploits, without deference to their professions or prejudices. Sometimes the valley widens in vast folds and severe Curb, and the valley is filled of undulations
and small hills, where vineyards glisten in the sun clean, beautiful grain and green beans,
or in thick carpets spread some small meadows that they will lose at the foot of the cliffs stratified
limestone, or of rigid vertical granite rocks which seem to threaten the traveler from the top of
his formidable strongholds. Elsewhere, the valley narrows, the road turns on the edge of a slope
or cliff overlooking waves of the river, this jump, is dislocated and twisted his foaming over
hail stirred bed; the hills rise on either side as colossal walls, offering the most romantic forms
in the high caves, its rugged relief, its huge vertical cracks, their collapse, its jagged and
harsh, his Cascadilla that are released into the valley in thin wires become small dust in Argentina,
its harsh and sad bushes floating near the wind and scarcely adhering to the interstices of the
rocks, and green stripes superimposed sombío - upright fir wreaths respect the snows in the mountains
of the Alps leaving his eternal glory. And in the middle and top of that, it opens a magnificent
sky, And far to the east, you can see, on a cluster of granite crowned giants ice, the dome of
Mont Blanc, dignified stronghold of two great nations - Italy and France, - sovereign of that world
of magnificent horrors they call the Alps!

Across the valley of the Arve abundant wildlife sites, natural curiosities
and points lovely view.

As society is there very little interest, nature, full Power and majesty, is the first actor.
Poor population, race no well-defined type, although traditionally brave, the Savoyards of
this valley have some sympathy for compassionate without their locations call the attention
of the traveler.
 Cashel at the
time was in Dorsetshire; but Lydia relieved the destitute wretch, whose condition was now far
worse than it had been at their last meeting. At his next application, which followed soon,
he was confronted by Cashel, who bullied him fiercely, threatened to break every bone in his
skin if he ever again dared to present himself before Lydia, flung him five shillings, and
bade him be gone. For Cashel retained for Paradise that contemptuous and ruthless hatred in
which a duly qualified professor holds a quack. Paradise bought a few pence-worth of food,
which he could hardly eat, and spent the rest in brandy, which he drank as fast as his stomach
would endure it. Shortly afterwards a few sporting papers reported his death, which they attributed
to "consumption, brought on by the terrible injuries sustained by him in his celebrated fight
with Cashel Byron."