MYTHS AND LEGENDS
                                   OF
                              OUR OWN LAND

                                   By
                           Charles M. Skinner

                                Vol. 3. After the red-coats had established camp here the American outposts
were advanced and one of the pickets was stationed at Welsh Tract Church.
On his first tour of duty the sentry was thrown into great alarm by the
appearance of a figure robed from head to foot in white, that rode a
horse at a charging gait within ten feet of his face. When guard was
relieved the soldier begged that he might never be assigned to that post
again. His nerves were strong in the presence of an enemy in the
flesh--but an enemy out of the grave! Ugh! He would desert rather than
encounter that shape again. His request was granted. The sentry who
succeeded him was startled, in the small hours, by a rush of hoofs and
the flash of a pallid form. He fired at it, and thought that he heard the
sound of a mocking laugh come back.

Every night the phantom horseman made his rounds, and several times the sentinels shot at him
without effect, the white horse and white rider showing no annoyance at these assaults. When
it came the turn of a sceptical and unimaginative old corporal to take the night detail, he
took the liberty of assuming the responsibilities of this post himself. He looked well to the
priming of his musket, and at midnight withdrew out of the moonshine and waited, with his gun
resting on a fence. It was not long before the beat of hoofs was heard approaching, and in
spite of himself the corporal felt a thrill along his spine as a mounted figure that might
have represented Death on the pale horse came into view; but he jammed his hat down, set his
teeth, and sighted his flint-lock with deliberation. The rider was near, when bang went the
corporal's musket, and a white form was lying in the road, a horse speeding into the distance.
Scrambling over the fence, the corporal, reassured, ran to the form and turned it over: a British
scout, quite dead. The daring fellow, relying on the superstitious fears of the rustics in
his front, had made a nightly ride as a ghost, in order to keep the American outposts from
advancing, and also to guess, from elevated points, at the strength and disposition of their
troops. He wore a cuirass of steel, but that did not protect his brain from the corporal's bullet.

DELAWARE WATER GAP

The Indian name of this beautiful region, Minisink, "the water is gone," agrees with the belief
of geologists that a lake once existed behind the Blue Ridge, and that it burst its way through
the hills at this point. Similar results were produced by a cataclysm on the Connecticut at
Mount Holyoke, on the Lehigh at Mauch Chunk, and Runaway Pond, New Hampshire, got its name
by a like performance. The aborigines, whatever may be said against them, enjoyed natural beauty,
and their habitations were often made in this delightful region, their councils being attended
by chief Tamanend, or Tammany, a Delaware, whose wisdom and virtues were such as to raise him
to the place of patron saint of America. The notorious Tammany Society of New York is named
for him. When this chief became old and feeble his tribe abandoned him in a hut at New Britain,
Pennsylvania, and there he tried to kill himself by stabbing, but failing in that, he flung
burning leaves over himself, and so perished. He was buried where he died. It was a princess
of his tribe that gave the name of Lover's Leap to a cliff on Mount Tammany, by leaping from
it to her death, because her love for a young European was not reciprocated.

