The hotel at the bottom of the ravine, on the side of Round Nob, offers little in the way of
prospect, but it is a picturesque place, and we could understand why it was full of visitors
when we came to the table. For Jonathan Winthrop and Christopher Corwin, with their plots and pranks,
were enough to make poor Master Halleck sell his soul to the Evil One, as report said he had
done.

"His ferule was sharp as a knife," said overgrown Jo Tucker, the butt
of the school. But it soon freed itself and sent
up for a long time, like a sulky geyser, mud and foul water. When it got freedom and tolerable
clearness, we noted that the water went up in pulsations, which were marked at short distances
by the water falling off, giving the column the appearance of a spine. The summit, always beating
the air in efforts to rise higher, fell over in a veil of mist.

There are certain excursions that the sojourner at Asheville must make. He must ride forty-five
miles south through Henderson and Transylvania to Caesar's Head, on the South Carolina border,
where the mountain system abruptly breaks down into the vast southern plain; where the observer,
standing on the edge of the precipice, has behind him and before him the greatest contrast
that nature can offer. He must also take the rail to Waynesville, and visit the much-frequented
White Sulphur Springs, among the Balsam Mountains, and penetrate the Great Smoky range by way
of Quallatown, and make the acquaintance of the remnant of Cherokee Indians living on the north
slope of Cheoah Mountain. The Professor could have made it a matter of personal merit that
he escaped all these encounters with wild and picturesque nature, if his horse had not been
too disabled for such long jaunts. It is only necessary, however, to explain to the public
that the travelers are not gormandizers of scenery, and were willing to leave some portions
of the State to the curiosity of future excursionists.

But so much was said about Hickory Nut Gap that a visit to it could not be evaded. The Gap
is about twenty-four miles southeast of Asheville. In the opinion of a well-informed colonel,
who urged us to make the trip, it is the finest piece of scenery it this region. We were brought
up on the precept "get the best," and it was with high anticipations that we set out about
eleven o'clock one warm, foggy morning. We followed a very good road through a broken, pleasant
country, gradually growing wilder and less cultivated. There was heavy rain most of the day
on the hills, and occasionally a shower swept across our path. The conspicuous object toward
which we traveled all the morning was a shapely conical hill at the beginning of the Gap.

At three o'clock we stopped at the Widow Sherrill's for dinner. Her house, only about a mile
from the summit, is most picturesquely situated on a rough slope, giving a wide valley and
mountain view. The house is old rambling, many-roomed, with wide galleries on two sides. If
one wanted a retired retreat for a few days, with good air and fair entertainment, this could
be commended. It is an excellent fruit region; apples especially are sound and of good flavor.
That may be said of all this part of the State. The climate is adapted to apples, as the hilly
part of New England is. I fancy the fruit ripens slowly, as it does in New England, and is
not subject to quick decay like much of that grown in the West. But the grape also can be grown
in all this mountain region. Nothing but lack of enterprise prevents any farmer from enjoying
abundance of fruit. The industry carried on at the moment at the Widow Sherrill's was the artificial
drying of apples for the market. The apples are pared, cored, and sliced in spirals, by machinery,
and dried on tin sheets in a patented machine. The industry appears to be a profitable one
hereabouts, and is about the only one that calls in the aid of invention.

While our dinner was preparing, we studied the well-known pictures of "Jane" and "Eliza," the
photographs of Confederate boys, who had never returned from the war, and the relations, whom
the traveling photographers always like to pillory in melancholy couples, and some stray volumes
of the Sunday-school Union. If they loosen they can be retightened. The disadvantages are, that
they are expensive, that they take time to insert, that they show very plainly, and that they
do not hold well in end grain.

BOLTS

Bolts with nuts are useful where great strength is desired. There are three chief varieties, Fig.
230.

Stove-bolts are cheaply made (cast) bolts having either flat
or round heads with a slot for the screwdriver, like ordinary screws.

Carriage-bolts
are distinguished by having the part of the shank which is near the
head, square. The noisy stream made the ride animated, and an occasional cabin, a poor farmhouse,
a mill, a schoolhouse, a store with an assemblage of lean horses tied to the hitching rails,
gave the Professor opportunity for remarks upon the value of life under such circumstances.

The valley which we followed down probably owes its celebrity to the uncommon phenomena of
occasional naked rocks and precipices. The inclosing mountains are from 3000 to 4000 feet high,
and generally wooded. I do not think that the ravine would be famous in a country where exposed
ledges and buttressing walls of rock are common. It is only by comparison with the local scenery
that this is remarkable. About a mile above judge Logan's we caught sight, through the trees,
of the famous waterfall. From the top of the high ridge on the right, a nearly perpendicular
cascade pours over the ledge of rocks and is lost in the forest. We could see nearly the whole
of it, at a great height above us, on the opposite side of the river, and it would require
an hour's stiff climb to reach its foot. "Verily, I hope the Black Man cracked him across his knuckles,
if he did not," said Christopher; and he thought of his own often-aching fists.
"Chris, thou art too wise to believe the poor master's a witch,"
said Jonathan. It may
be, but the valley where we stood is at least at an elevation of 1300 feet; we could not believe
that the ridge over which the water pours is much higher than 3000 feet, and the length of
the fall certainly did not appear to be a quarter of the height of the mountain from our point
of observation. But we had no desire to belittle this pretty cascade, especially when we found
that Judge Logan would regard a foot abated from the 1400 as a personal grievance. Mr. Logan
once performed the functions of local judge, a Republican appointment, and he sits around the
premises now in the enjoyment of that past dignity and of the fact that his wife is postmistress.
His house of entertainment is at the bottom of the valley, a place shut in, warm, damp, and
not inviting to a long stay, although the region boasts a good many natural curiosities.

It was here that we encountered again the political current, out of which we had been for a
month. The Judge himself was reticent, as became a public man, but he had conspicuously posted
up a monster prospectus, sent out from Augusta, of a campaign life of Blaine and Logan, in
which the Professor read, with shaking knees, this sentence: "Sure to be the greatest and hottest
[campaign and civil battle] ever known in this world. The thunder of the supreme struggle and
its reverberations will shake the continents for months, and will be felt from Pole to Pole."

For this and other reasons this seemed a risky place to be in. There was something sinister
about the murky atmosphere, and a suspicion of mosquitoes besides. Had there not been other
travelers staying here, we should have felt still more uneasy. The house faced Bald Mountain,
4000 feet high, a hill that had a very bad reputation some years ago, and was visited by newspaper
reporters. This is, in fact, the famous Shaking Mountain. For a long time it had a habit of
trembling, as if in an earthquake spasm, but with a shivering motion very different from that
produced by an earthquake. The only good that came of it was that it frightened all the "moonshiners,"
and caused them to join the church. "Thou art but a Quaker thyself, and a Quaker's as bad as a
witch any day," shouted Robert Pike.

"There, muddle thy stockings in yon mud puddle for that speech, thou
water-loving Baptist," cried Christopher Corwin, as he jostled Baptist
Bob in some water by the way. A rock is pointed out toward the summit, which
the beholder is asked to see resembles a hut, and which is called "Esmeralda's Cottage." But
this attractive maiden has departed, and we did not discover any woman in the region who remotely
answers to her description.

In the morning we rode a mile and a half through the woods and followed up a small stream to
see the celebrated pools, one of which the Judge said was two hundred feet deep, and another
bottomless. These pools, not round, but on one side circular excavations, some twenty feet
across, worn in the rock by pebbles, are very good specimens, and perhaps remarkable specimens,
of "pot-holes." They are, however, regarded here as one of the wonders of the world. On the
way to them we saw beautiful wild trumpet-creepers in blossom, festooning the trees.

The stream that originates in Hickory Nut Gap is the westernmost branch of several forks of
the Broad, which unite to the southeast in Rutherford County, flow to Columbia, and reach the
Atlantic through the channel of the Santee. It is not to be confounded with the French Broad,
which originates among the hills of Transylvania, runs northward past Asheville, and finds
its way to the Tennessee through the Warm Springs Gap in the Bald Mountains. In the latter case
the back strip may have a short barefaced blind tenon which is mortised
into the upright, Fig. 278.

It also fits into a rabbet on the upper back side of the shelf. Made in this way the shelves
can be knocked down easily.
 It was a day of heavy showers, and apparently of leisure to the
scattered population; at every store and mill was a congregation of loafers, who had hitched
their scrawny horses and mules to the fences, and had the professional air of the idler and
gossip the world over. The vehicles met on the road were a variety of the prairie schooner,
long wagons with a top of hoops over which is stretched a cotton cloth. The wagons are without
seats, and the canvas is too low to admit of sitting upright, if there were. The occupants
crawl in at either end, sit or lie on the bottom of the wagon, and jolt along in shiftless
uncomfortableness.

Riding down the French Broad was one of the original objects of our journey. Travelers with
the same intention may be warned that the route on horseback is impracticable. The distance
to the Warm Springs is thirty-seven miles; to Marshall, more than halfway, the road is clear,
as it runs on the opposite side of the river from the railway, and the valley is something
more than river and rails. But below Marshall the valley contracts, and the rails are laid
a good portion of the way in the old stage road. One can walk the track, but to ride a horse
over its sleepers and culverts and occasional bridges, and dodge the trains, is neither safe
nor agreeable. We sent our horses round--the messenger taking the risk of leading them, between
trains, over the last six or eight miles,--and took the train.

