TWICE TOLD TALES

                      THE THREEFOLD DESTINY

                         A FAIRY LEGEND

                     By Nathaniel Hawthorne

I have sometimes produced a singular and not unpleasing effect, so far as my own mind was concerned,
by imagining a train of incidents, in which the spirit and mechanism of the fairy legend should
be combined with the characters and manners of familiar life.  In the little tale which follows,
a subdued tinge of the wild and wonderful is thrown over a sketch of New England personages
and scenery, yet, it is hoped, without entirely obliterating the sober hues of nature. It's just
by being generous and giving ourselves, helping without enslaving, and giving without exacting
gratitude, planning and protecting with infinite care, that we bring that world nearer.... Since
I've known you I've come to know such things are possible...."


In the twilight of a summer eve, a tall, dark figure, over which long and remote travel had
thrown an outlandish aspect, was entering a village, not in "Fairy Londe," but within our own
familiar boundaries. The staff, on which this traveller leaned, had been his companion from
the spot where it grew, in the jungles of Hindostan; the hat, that overshadowed his sombre
brow, had shielded him from the suns of Spain; but his cheek had been blackened by the red-hot
wind of an Arabian desert, and had felt the frozen breath of an Arctic region.  Long sojourning
amid wild and dangerous men, he still wore beneath his vest the ataghan which he had once struck
into the throat of a Turkish robber.  In every foreign clime he had lost something of his New
England characteristics; and, perhaps, from every people he had unconsciously borrowed a new
peculiarity; so that when the world- wanderer again trod the street of his native village,
it is no wonder that he passed unrecognized, though exciting the gaze and curiosity of all.
Yet, as his arm casually touched that of a young woman, who was wending her way to an evening
lecture, she started, and almost uttered a cry.

"Ralph Cranfield!" was the name that she half articulated.

"Can that be my old playmate, Faith Egerton?" thought the traveller, looking round at her figure,
but without pausing.

Ralph Cranfield, from his youth upward, had felt himself marked out for a high destiny.  He
had imbibed the idea--we say not whether it were revealed to him by witchcraft, or in a dream
of prophecy, or that his brooding fancy had palmed its own dictates upon him as the oracles
of a Sibyl--but he had imbibed the idea, and held it firmest among his articles of faith, that
three marvellous events of his life were to be confirmed to him by three signs.

The first of these three fatalities, and perhaps the one on which his youthful imagination
had dwelt most fondly, was the discovery of the maid, who alone, of all the maids on earth,
could make him happy by her love.  He was to roam around the world till he should meet a beautiful
woman, wearing on her bosom a jewel in the shape of a heart; whether of pearl, or ruby, or
emerald, or carbuncle, or a changeful opal, or perhaps a priceless diamond, Ralph Cranfield
little cared, so long as it were a heart of one peculiar shape.  On encountering this lovely
stranger, he was bound to address her thus:  "Maiden, I have brought you a heavy heart.  May
I rest its weight on you?"  And if she were his fated bride,--if their kindred souls were destined
to form a union here below, which all eternity should only bind more closely,-- she would reply,
with her finger on the heart-shaped jewel, "This token, which I have worn so long, is the assurance
that you may!"

And, secondly, Ralph Cranfield had a firm belief that there was a mighty treasure hidden somewhere
in the earth, of which the burial- place would be revealed to none but him.  When his feet
should press upon the mysterious spot, there would be a hand before him, pointing downward,--whether
carved of marble, or hewn in gigantic dimensions on the side of a rocky precipice, or perchance
a hand of flame in empty air, he could not tell; but, at least, he would discern a hand, the
forefinger pointing downward, and beneath it the Latin word EFFODE,-- Dig!  And digging thereabouts,
the gold in coin or ingots, the precious stones, or of whatever else the treasure might consist,
would be certain to reward his toil.

The third and last of the miraculous events in the life of this high- destined man was to be
the attainment of extensive influence and sway over his fellow-creatures.  Whether he were
to be a king, and founder of an hereditary throne, or the victorious leader of a people contending
for their freedom, or the apostle of a purified and regenerated faith, was left for futurity
to show.  As messengers of the sign, by which Ralph Cranfield might recognize the summons,
three venerable men were to claim audience of him.  The chief among them, a dignified and majestic
person, arrayed, it may be supposed, in the flowing garments of an ancient sage, would be the
bearer of a wand, or prophet's rod. With this wand, or rod, or staff, the venerable sage would
trace a certain figure in the air, and then proceed to make known his heaven-instructed message;
which, if obeyed, must lead to glorious results.

With this proud fate before him, in the flush of his imaginative youth, Ralph Cranfield had
set forth to seek the maid, the treasure, and the venerable sage, with his gift of extended
empire.  And had he found them?  Alas! it was not with the aspect of a triumphant man, who
had achieved a nobler destiny than all his fellows, but rather with the gloom of one struggling
against peculiar and continual adversity, that he now passed homeward to his mother's cottage.
He had come back, but only for a time, to lay aside the pilgrim's staff, trusting that his
weary manhood would regain somewhat of the elasticity of youth, in the spot where his threefold
fate had been foreshown him. There had been few changes in the village; for it was not one
of those thriving places where a year's prosperity makes more than the havoc of a century's
decay; but like a gray hair in a young man's head, an antiquated little town, full of old maids,
and aged elms, and moss- grown dwellings.  Few seemed to be the changes here.  The drooping
elms, indeed, had a more majestic spread; the weather-blackened houses were adorned with a
denser thatch of verdant moss; and doubtless there were a few more gravestones in the burial-ground,
inscribed with names that had once been familiar in the village street.  Yet, summing up all
the mischief that ten years had wrought, it seemed scarcely more than if Ralph Cranfield had
gone forth that very morning, and dreamed a daydream till the twilight, and then turned back
again.  But his heart grew cold, because the village did not remember him as he remembered
the village.

"Here is the change!" sighed he, striking his hand upon his breast. "Who is this man of thought
and care, weary with world-wandering, and heavy with disappointed hopes?  The youth returns
not, who went forth so joyously!"

And now Ralph Cranfield was at his mother's gate, in front of the small house where the old
lady, with slender but sufficient means, had kept herself comfortable during her son's long
absence.  Admitting himself within the enclosure, he leaned against a great, old tree, trifling
with his own impatience, as people often do in those intervals when years are summed into a
moment.  He took a minute survey of the dwelling,--its windows, brightened with the sky-gleans,
its doorway, with the half of a mill-stone for a step, and the faintly traced path waving thence
to the gate.  He made friends again with his childhood's friend, the old tree against which
he leaned; and glancing his eye a-down its trunk, beheld something that excited a melancholy
smile.  It was a half-obliterated inscription--the Latin word EFFODE-- which he remembered
to have carved in the bark of the tree, with a whole day's toil, when he had first begun to
muse about his exalted destiny.  It might be accounted a rather singular coincidence, that
the bark, just above the inscription, had put forth an excrescence, shaped not unlike a hand,
with the forefinger pointing obliquely at the word of fate.  Such, at least, was its appearance
in the dusky light.

"Now a credulous man," said Ralph Cranfield carelessly to himself, "might suppose that the
treasure which I have sought round the world lies buried, after all, at the very door of my
mother's dwelling. That would be a jest indeed!"

More he thought not about the matter; for now the door was opened, and an elderly woman appeared
on the threshold, peering into the dusk to discover who it might be that had intruded on her
premises, and was standing in the shadow of her tree.  It was Ralph Cranfield's mother. Pass
we over their greeting, and leave the one to her joy and the other to his rest,--if quiet rest
he found.

But when morning broke, he arose with a troubled brow; for his sleep and his wakefulness had
alike been full of dreams.  All the fervor was rekindled with which he had burned of yore to
unravel the threefold mystery of his fate.  The crowd of his early visions seemed to have awaited
him beneath his mother's roof, and thronged riotously around to welcome his return.  In the
well-remembered chamber--on the pillow where his infancy had slumbered--he had passed a wilder
night than ever in an Arab tent, or when he had reposed his head in the ghastly shades of a
haunted forest.  A shadowy maid had stolen to his bedside, and laid her finger on the scintillating
heart; a hand of flame had glowed amid the darkness, pointing downward to a mystery within
the earth; a hoary sage had waved his prophetic wand, and beckoned the dreamer onward to a
chair of state.  The same phantoms, though fainter in the daylight, still flitted about the
cottage, and mingled among the crowd of familiar faces that were drawn thither by the news
of Ralph Cranfield's return, to bid him welcome for his mother's sake. There they found him,
a tall, dark, stately man, of foreign aspect, courteous in demeanor and mild of speech, yet
with an abstracted eye, which seemed often to snatch a glance at the invisible.

Meantime the Widow Cranfield went bustling about the house full of joy that she again had somebody
to love, and be careful of, and for whom she might vex and tease herself with the petty troubles
of daily life. It was nearly noon, when she looked forth from the door, and descried three
personages of note coming along the street, through the hot sunshine and the masses of elm-tree
shade.  At length they reached her gate, and undid the latch.

"See, Ralph!" exclaimed she, with maternal pride, "here is Squire Hawkwood and the two other
selectmen coming on purpose to see you! Now do tell them a good long story about what you have
seen in foreign parts."

The foremost of the three visitors, Squire Hawkwood, was a very pompous, but excellent old
gentleman, the head and prime mover in all the affairs of the village, and universally acknowledged
to be one of the sagest men on earth.  He wore, according to a fashion, even then becoming
antiquated, a three-cornered hat, and carried a silver-headed cane, the use of which seemed
to be rather for flourishing in the air than for assisting the progress of his legs.  His two
companions were elderly and respectable yeomen, who, retaining an ante-revolutionary reverence
for rank and hereditary wealth, kept a little in the Squire's rear.  As they approached along
the pathway, Ralph Cranfield sat in an oaken elbow-chair, half unconsciously gazing at the
three visitors, and enveloping their homely figures in the misty romance that pervaded his
mental world.

"Here," thought he, smiling at the conceit,--"here come three elderly personages, and the first
of the three is a venerable sage with a staff.  What if this embassy should bring me the message
of my fate!"

While Squire Hawkwood and his colleagues entered, Ralph rose from his seat, and advanced a
few steps to receive them; and his stately figure and dark countenance, as he bent courteously
towards his guests, had a natural dignity, contrasting well with the bustling importance of
the Squire.  The old gentleman, according to invariable custom, gave an elaborate preliminary
flourish with his cane in the air, then removed his three-cornered hat in order to wipe his
brow, and finally proceeded to make known his errand.

"My colleagues and myself," began the Squire, "are burdened with momentous duties, being jointly
selectmen of this village. What's been putting ideers into your head? You got to have a directress
to the thing; you must have a woman of education who knows a bit about things to look after the matrons
and so on. Very likely she isn't everything you want. She's the only one we could get, and
I don't see----. Here I go and work hard for a year and more getting these things together
to please you, and then suddenly you don't like 'em. There's a lot of the spoilt child in you, Elly--first
and last. There they are...."

They were silent for the rest of the journey to Putney, both being filled with incommunicable things.

§12

And
now Lady Harman began to share the trouble of all those who let their minds pass out of the
circle of their immediate affections with any other desire save interest and pleasure. Assisted
in this unhappy development by the sedulous suggestions of Mr. Brumley she had begun to offend
against the most sacred law in our sensible British code, she was beginning to take herself and
her hostels seriously, and think that it mattered how she worked
for them and what they became.

She tried to give all the attention her children's upbringing, her husband's ailments and the
general demands of her household left free, to this complex, elusive,
puzzling and worrying matter.

Instead of thinking that these hostels were just old hostels and that you start them and put
in a Mrs. Pembrose and feel very benevolent and happy and go away,
she had come to realize partly by dint of her own conscientious thinking
and partly through Mr. Brumley's strenuous resolve that she should
not take Sir Isaac's gift horse without the most exhaustive examination
of its quality, that this new work, like most new things in human
life, was capable not only of admirable but of altogether detestable
consequences, and that it rested with her far more than with any other
human being to realize the former and avoid the latter.

And directly one has got to this critical pose towards things, just as one ceases to be content
with things anyhow and to want them precisely somehow, one begins
to realize just how intractable, confused and disingenuous are human
affairs.

Mr. Brumley had made himself see and had made her see how inevitable these big wholesale ways
of doing things, these organizations and close social co-operations, have become unless there
is to be a social disintegration and set back, and he had also brought himself and her to realize
how easily they may develop into a new servitude, how high and difficult is the way towards
methods of association that will ensure freedom and permit people to live fine individual
lives. Every step towards organization raises a crop of vices peculiar to itself, fresh developments
of the egotism and greed and vanity of those into whose hands there falls control, fresh instances
of that hostile pedantry which seems so natural to officials and managers, insurgencies and
obstinacies and suspicions on the part of everyone.
 As Cranfield walked down
the street of the village, the level sunbeams threw his shadow far before him; and he fancied
that, as his shadow walked among distant objects, so had there been a presentiment stalking
in advance of him throughout his life.  And when he drew near each object, over which his tall
shadow had preceded him, still it proved to be--one of the familiar recollections of his infancy
and youth. Every crook in the pathway was remembered.  Even the more transitory characteristics
of the scene were the same as in bygone days.  A company of cows were grazing on the grassy
roadside, and refreshed him with their fragrant breath.   "It is sweeter," thought he, "than
the perfume which was wafted to our shipp from the Spice Islands."  The round little figure
of a child rolled from a doorway, and lay laughing almost beneath Cranfield's feet.  The dark
and stately man stooped down, and, lifting the infant, restored him to his mother's arms. 
"The children," said he to himself, and sighed, and smiled,--"the children are to be my charge!"
And while a flow of natural feeling gushed like a wellspring in his heart, he came to a dwelling
which he could nowise forbear to enter.  A sweet voice, which seemed to come from a deep and
tender soul, was warbling a plaintive little air, within.

He bent his head, and passed through the lowly door.  As his foot sounded upon the threshold,
a young woman advanced from the dusky interior of the house, at first hastily, and then with
a more uncertain step, till they met face to face.  There was a singular contrast in their
two figures; he dark and picturesque,--one who had battled with the world,--whom all suns had
shone upon, and whom all winds had blown on a varied course; she neat, comely, and quiet,--
quiet even in her agitation,--as if all her emotions had been subdued to the peaceful tenor
of her life.  Yet their faces, all unlike as they were, had an expression that seemed not so
alien,--a glow of kindred feeling, flashing upward anew from half-extinguished embers.

"You are welcome home!" said Faith Egerton.

But Cranfield did not immediately answer; for his eye had been caught by an ornament in the
shape of a Heart, which Faith wore as a brooch upon her bosom.  The material was the ordinary
white quartz; and he recollected having himself shaped it out of one of those Indian arrowheads,
which are so often found in the ancient haunts of the red men.  It was precisely on the pattern
of that worn by the visionary Maid.  When Cranfield departed on his shadowy search he had bestowed
this brooch, in a gold setting, as a parting gift to Faith Egerton.

"So, Faith, you have kept the Heart!" said he, at length.

"Yes," said she, blushing deeply; then more gayly, "and what else have you brought me from
beyond the sea?"

"Faith!" replied Ralph Cranfield, uttering the fated words by an uncontrollable impulse,  "I
have brought you nothing but a heavy heart!  May I rest its weight on you?"

"This token, which I have worn so long," said Faith, laying her tremulous finger on the Heart,
"is the assurance that you may!"

"Faith! Faith!" cried Cranfield, clasping her in his arms, "you have interpreted my wild and
weary dream!"

Yes, the wild dreamer was awake at last.  To find the mysterious treasure, he was to till the
earth around his mother's dwelling, and reap its products!  Instead of warlike command, or
regal or religious sway, he was to rule over the village children!  And now the visionary Maid
had faded from his fancy, and in her place he saw the playmate of his childhood! I have to add,
that the Kennedies of Bargany, who interfered in behalf of the oppressed Abbot, were themselves
a younger branch of the Cassilis family, but held different politics, and were powerful enough
in this, and other instances, to bid them defiance.  Happy they who read the riddle, without a weary world-search, or
a lifetime spent in vain!

