The Lady and Sada San

A Sequel to

The Lady of the Decoration

By

Frances Little

New York The Century Co. 1912

Copyright, 1912, by

THE CENTURY CO.

Published, October, 1912

TO

ELLEN CHURCHILL SEMPLE

AND

CHARLOTTE SMITH

MY FELLOW WANDERERS THROUGH THE ORIENT

The Lady and Sada San

ON THE HIGH SEAS.  June, 1911.

Mate:

You once told me, before you went to Italy, that after having been my intimate relative all
these years, you had drawn a red line through the word surprise.  Restore the abused thing
to its own at once.  You will need it when the end of this letter is reached.  I have left
Kentucky after nine years of stay-at-home happiness, and once again I am on my way to Japan--this
time in wifely disobedience to Jack's wishes. Therefore, our readers will give us a slight break, and submit the following
number if you have curiosity.

II

Stayed at the end of our previous article in the skull temerón. This is divided into civilian
and military, if the influence was not enough to achieve his epaulet
(because it ever happens epaulets that occur under the influence),
then civilian, but not between each other more than the difference
of the uniform.  If by some wonderful chance, between
baby prattle, bumps and measles, they have given you a moment's respite, then you know that
the Government has grown decidedly restless for fear the energetic and enterprising bubonic
or pneumonic germ might take passage on some of the ships from the Orient.  So it is fortifying
against invasion.  The Government, knowing Jack's indomitable determination to learn everything
knowable about the private life and character of a given germ, asked him to join several other
men it is sending out to get information, provided of course the germ doesn't get them first.

Jack read me the official-looking document one night between puffs of his after-dinner pipe.

Another surprise awaits you.  For once in my life I had nothing to say.  Possibly it is just
as well for the good of the cause that the honorable writer of the letter could not see how
my thoughts looked.

I glanced about our little den, aglow with soft lights; everything in it seemed to smile. 
Well, as you know it, Mate, I do not believe even you realize the blissfulness of the hours
of quiet comradeship we have spent there.  With the great know-it-all old world shut out, for
joyful years we have dwelt together in a home-made paradise.  And yet it seemed just then as
if I were dwelling in a home-made Other Place.

The difference in the speed of time depends on whether love is your guest or not.

The thought of the briefest interruption to my content made me feel like cold storage.  A break
in happiness is sometimes hard to mend. The blossom does not return to the tree after the storm,
no matter how beautiful the sunshine; and the awful fear of the faintest echo of past sorrow
made my heart as numb as a snowball.  To the old terror of loneliness was added fear for Jack's
safety.  But I did not do what you naturally would prophesy.  After seeing the look on Jack's
face I changed my mind, and my protest was the silent kind that says so much.  It was lost!
Already Jack had gone into one of his trances, as he does whenever there is a possibility of
bearding a brand-new microbe in its den, whether it is in his own country or one beyond the
seas.  In body he was in a padded chair with all the comforts of home and a charming wife within
speaking distance.  In spirit he was in dust-laden China, joyfully following the trail of the
wandering germ.  Later on, when Jack came to, we talked it over.  I truly remembered your warnings
on the danger of impetuosity; for I choked off every hasty word and gave my consent for Jack
to go.  Then I cried half the night because I had.

We both know that long ago Jack headed for the topmost rung of a very tall scientific ladder.
Sometimes my enthusiasm as chief booster and encourager has failed, as when it meant absence
and risk.  Though I have known women who specialized in renunciation, till they were the only
happy people in the neighborhood, its charms have never lured me into any violent sacrifice.
Here was my chance and I firmly refused to be the millstone to ornament Jack's neck.

You might know, Mate?  I was hoping all the time that he would find it quite impossible to
leave such a nice biddable wife at home. But I learn something new about Jack every day.  After
rather heated discussion it was decided that I should stay in the little home.  That is, the
heat and the discussion was all on my side. The decision lay in the set of Jack's mouth, despite
the tenderness in his eyes.  He thought the risks of the journey too great for me; the hardships
of the rough life too much.  Dear me!  Will men never learn that hardship and risk are double
cousins to loneliness, and not even related to love by marriage?

But just as well paint on water as to argue with a scientist when he has reached a conclusion.

Besides, said Jack, the fatherly Government has no intention that petticoats, even hobbled
ones, should be flitting around while the habits and the methods of the busy insect were being
examined through a microscope or a telescope.  The choice of instrument depending, of course,
upon the activity of the bug.

Black Charity was to be my chief-of-police and comforter-in-general.  Parties--house, card
and otherwise--were to be my diversion, and I was to make any little trips I cared for. Well,
that 's just what I am doing.  Of course, there might be a difference of opinion as to whether
a journey from Kentucky to Japan is a little trip.

I am held by a vague uneasiness today.  Possibly it 's because I am not certain as to Jack's
attitude, when he learns through my letter, which is sailing along with me, that I am going
to Japan to be as near him as possible.  I hope he will appreciate my thoughtfulness in saving
him all the bother of saying no.  Or it might be that my slightly dampened spirits come from
the discussion I am still having with myself whether it 's the part of a dutiful wife to present
herself a wiggling sacrifice to science, or whether science should attend to its own business
and lead not into temptation the scientifically inclined heads of peaceful households.

You 'll say the decision of what was best lay with Jack.  Honey, there 's the error of your
mortal mind!  In a question like that my spouse is as one-sided as a Civil War veteran.  Say
germ-hunt to Jack and it 's like dangling a gaudy fly before a hungry carp.

I saw Jack off at the station, and went hack to the little house. Charity had sent the cook
home and with her own hands served all the beloved dainties of my long-ago childhood, trying
to coax me into forgetfulness.  As you remember, Mate, dinner has always been the happiest
hour of the day in our small domain.  Now?  Well, everything was just the same.  The only difference
was Jack.  And the half circle of bare tablecloth opposite me was about as cheerful as a snowy
afternoon at the North Pole.  I wandered around the house for awhile, but every time I turned
a corner there was a memory waiting to greet me.  Now the merriest of them seemed to be covered
with a chilly shadow, and every one was pale and ghostly. All night I lay awake, playing at
the old game of mental solitaire and keeping tryst with the wind which seemed to tap with unseen
fingers at my window and sigh,

  "Then let come what come may
  .    .    .    .    .    .
  I shall have had my day."

Is it possible, Mate, that my glorious day, which I thought had barely tipped the hour of noon,
is already lengthening into the still shadows of evening?

It was foolish but, for the small comfort I got out of it, I turned on the light and looked
inside my wedding-ring.  Time has worn it a bit but the letters which spell "My Lady of the
Decoration," spelled again the old-time thrill into my heart.

What 's the use of tying your heartstrings around a man, and then have ambition slip the knot
and leave you all a-quiver?

Far be it from me to stand in Jack's way if germ-stalking is necessary to his success.  Just
the same, I could have spent profitable moments reading the burial service over every microbe,
home-grown and foreign.

Really, Mate, I 've conscientiously tried every plan Jack proposed and a few of my own.  It
was no use.  That day-after-Christmas feeling promptly suppressed any effort towards contentment.

At first there was a certain exhilaration in catching pace with the gay whirl which for so
long had been passed by for homier things. You will remember there was a time when the pace
of that same whirl was never swift enough for me; but my taste for it now was gone, and it
was like trying to do a two-step to a funeral march.  For once in my life I knew the real meaning
of that poor old worn-to-a-frazzle call of the East, for now the' dominant note was the call
of love.

I heard it above the clink of the teacups.  It was in the swish of every silk petticoat.  If
I went to the theater, church or concert, the call of that germ-ridden spot of the unholy name
beat into my brain with the persistency of a tom-tom on a Chinese holiday.

Say what you will, Mate, it once took all my courage to leave those I loved best and go to
far-away Japan.  Now it required more than I could dig up to stay--with the best on the other
side of the Pacific.

The struggle was easy and swift.  The tom-tom won and I am on my way to be next-door neighbor
to Jack.  Those whom it concerned here were away from home, so I told no one good-by, thus
saving everybody so much wasted advice.  If there were a tax on advice the necessities of life
would not come so high.  Charity followed me to the train, protesting to the last that "Marse
Jack gwine doubt her velocity when she tell him de truf bout her lady going a-gaddin' off by
herse'f and payin' no mind to her ole mammy's prosterations."  I asked her to come with me
as maid.  She refused; said her church was to have an ice-cream sociable and she had "to fry
de fish." This letter will find you joyfully busy with the babies and the "only man."  Blest
woman that you are.

But I know you.  I have a feeling that you have a few remarks to make.  So hurry up.  Let us
get it off our minds.  Then I can better tell you what I am doing.  Something is going to happen.
It usually does when I am around.  I have been asked to chaperone a young girl whose face and
name spell romance.  If I were seeking occupation here is the opportunity knocking my door
into splinters.

STILL AT SEA.  June, 1911.

Any time you are out of a job and want to overwork all your faculties and a few emotions, try
chaperoning a young room-mate answering to the name of Sada San, who is one-half American dash,
and the other half the unnamable witchery of a Japanese woman; a girl with the notes of a lark
in her voice when she sings to the soft twang of an old guitar.

If, too, you are seeking to study psychological effect of such a combination on people, good,
middlin' and otherwise, I would suggest a Pacific liner as offering fifty-seven varieties,
and then some.

The last twinge of conscience I had over coming, died a cheerful death.  I 'd do it again.
For not only is romance surcharging the air, but fate gives promise of weaving an intricate
pattern in the story of this maid whose life is just fairly begun and whom the luck of the
road has given me as traveling mate.  Now, remembering a few biffs fate has given me, I have
no burning desire to meddle with her business.  Neither am I hungering for responsibility.
But what are you going to say to yourself, when a young girl with a look in her eyes you would
wish your daughter to have, unhesitatingly gives you a letter addressed at large to some "Christian
Sister"!  You read it to find it's from her home pastor, requesting just a little companionship
for "a tender young soul who is trying her wings for the first time in the big and beautiful
world"!  I have a very private opinion about reading my title clear to the Christian Sister
business, but no woman with a heart as big as a pinch of snuff could resist giving her very
best and much more to the slip of a winsome maid, who confidingly asks it--especially if the
sister has any knowledge of the shadows lurking in the beautiful world.

Mate, these steamers as they sail from shore to shore are like giant theaters.  Every trip
is an impromptu drama where comedy, farce, and often startling tragedy offer large speaking
parts.  The revelation of human nature in the original package is funny and pathetic.  Amusement
is always on tap and life stories are just hanging out of the port-hole waiting to attack your
sympathy or tickle your funny bone.  But you 'd have to travel far to find the beginning of
a story so heaped up with romantic interest as that of Sada San as she told it to me, one long,
lazy afternoon as I lay on the couch in my cabin, thanking my stars I was getting the best
of the bare tablecloth and the empty house at home.

Some twenty years ago Sada's father, an American, grew tired of the slow life in a slow town
and lent ear to the fairy stories told of the Far East, where fortunes were made by looking
wise for a few moments every morning and devoting the rest of the day to samisens and flutes.
He found the glorious country of Japan.  The beguiling tea-houses, and softly swinging sampans
were all too distracting. They sang ambition to sleep and the fortune escaped.

He drifted, and at last sought a mean existence as teacher of English in a school of a remote
seaside village.  His spirit broke when the message came of the death of the girl in America
who was waiting for him.  Isolation from his kind and bitter hours left for thought made life
alone too ghastly.  He tried to make it more endurable by taking the pretty daughter of the
head man of the village as his wife.

My temperature took a tumble when I saw proofs of a hard and fast marriage ceremony, signed
and counter-signed by a missionary brother who meant business.

You say it is a sordid tale?  Mate, I know a certain spot in this Land of Blossoms, where only
foreigners are laid to rest, which bears testimony to a hundred of its kind--strange and pitiful
destinies begun with high and brilliant hopes in their native land; and when illusions have
faded, the end has borne the stamp of tragedy, because suicide proved the open door out of
a life of failure and exile.

Sada's father was saved suicide and long unhappiness by a timely tidal-wave, which swept the
village nearly bare, and carried the man and his wife out to sea and to eternity.

The child was found by Susan West who came from a neighboring town to care for the sick and
hungry.  Susan was a teacher-missionary. Not much to look at, if her picture told the truth,
but from bits of her history that I 've picked up her life was a brighter jewel than most of
us will ever find in a heavenly crown.  Instead of holding the unbeliever by the nape of the
neck and thrusting a not-understood doctrine down his unwilling throat, she lived the simple
creed of loving her neighbor better than herself.  And the old pair of goggles she wore made
little halos around the least speck of good she found in any transgressor, no matter how warped
with evil.

When she was n't helping some helpless sinner to see the rainbow of promise at the end of the
straight and narrow way, Susan spent her time and all her salary, giving sick babies a fighting
chance for life.  She took the half-drowned little Sada home with her, and searched for any
kinsman left the child.  There was only one, her mother's brother.  He was very poor and gladly
gave his consent that Miss West should keep the child--as long as it was a girl! Susan had
taught the man English once in the long ago and this was his chance to repay her.

Later on when the teacher found her health failing and headed for home in America, Uncle Mura
was still more generous and raised no objections to her taking the baby with her.

Together they lived in a small Western town.  The missionary reared the child by rule of love
only and went on short rations to educate her.  Sada's eager mind absorbed everything offered
her like a young sponge, and when a few months ago Susanna folded her hands and joined her
foremothers, there was let loose on the world this exquisite girl with her solitary legacy
of untried ideals and a blind enthusiasm for her mother's people.

Right here, Mate, was when I had a prolonged attack of cold shivers.  Just before Miss West
passed along, knowing that the Valley was near, she wrote to Uncle in Japan and told him that
his niece would soon he alone.  Can't you imagine the picture she drew of her foster child
who had satisfied every craving of her big mother heart?  Fascinating and charming and so weighted
with possibilities, that Mura, who had prospered, leaped for his chance and sent Sada San money
for the passage over.

Not a mite of anxiety shadowed her eyes when she told me that Uncle kept a wonderful tea-house
in Kioto.  He must be very rich, she thought, because he wrote her of the beautiful things
she was to have.  About this time the room seemed suffocating.  I got up and turned on the
electric fan. I know medieval languages ​​that have been made in the last thirty years, agreement
with all the latest philological. With a small base is a language in less time it takes to make
a political party. We could thus make a language Galician, but how much we last?

Around fifty, sixty or a hundred years, this would Galician language, logic and fatally, to
be confused with Castilian. Galician evolve following their natural course.

- And the Castilian? - Ask someone.

The Castilian not evolve at all, because we have the academics to keep evolving.

Moreover, perhaps all this language is much less important than it seems. I think the importance
of languages ​​is very small, even in the same literature.

If the most important thing was the language in literature, Latin
Americans would read Spanish books in preference to books from other
countries.

The language unites us Latin Americans; but other things, positively
stronger, are attracted to countries with very different talk.

VI

STRESS

On a recent trip, aboard a cruise ship, I was fortunate to coincide with an illustrious company
of Spanish actors. I came a little sick.

My mind gave me a strange sensation as if it was not exactly mine, but rather a head resembling
that someone had troublesome given the task of carrying up to Spain.

Judging with this head, I took a great actress, a woman who always spoke in a very emphatic, but soon
she pulled my mistake. If you spoke, it was not for her, but for girls, two of his daughters,
very cute, indeed.

The girls were starting his theatrical career, and only if they put
in the company more than just their pretty faces, but his mother,
between racks, put the emphasis.

- Poor thing - said the good lady -.

There is one that speaks something, but the other says nothing word.

I pitied the dumbness unhappy because I think a great misfortune for
a marriageable girl.

Fortunately, it was just a dumb artist. The girl had a pretty language loose, but the director
did not dare to trust rather than silent roles.

- And why not let her speak?

- For the accent - I said the grieving mother -. We are Galicia, and in this company can not have
an accent. Do you think that, were it not for the accent, my girls would come second? The emphasis
is our misfortune. Fortunately, the big girl and loses ...

The big girl, in fact, knew that without an accent "hello, viscount!",
"I take it without sugar" and other phrases of high comedy, but little
was incorrigible and as not lose the accent, would not talk.

In this company was supposed to, probably, that the action of all the comedies happening on
the moon. No one was allowed any accent.

A Marquise to leave the Galician or Catalan, Andalusian or Madrid,
they found it unacceptable, as if marquesas not born anywhere.

And the poor thing could not move break to talk until he had his voice completely denatured achievements
expressed as a phonograph.

Meanwhile, Her mother took care of the accent as well that could take care of liver disease.

-
Look woman - used to say -. Yesterday you were quite relieved, but
today I feel much worse.

- What do you, Mom!

It must be the dizziness ...

The accent is one of the great charms
of Galicia.

When I arrived the first friends vi who broke into pitiful moans.

-
Fulaniño! - Tell me -.

You will come very cansadiño. Pobriño! ...

Seemed to cry, and what they did was to express a great joy. Are disadvantages This sweet accent.

But
I do not want to comment on the Galician accent.

In the accents that I have a unpleasant experience and I would not
repeat with my own countrymen.

VII

ANTONINO

Make about two or three months, Antoniño went to confession, and in
the course of his confession, he said the priest who read newspapers.

-
Bad! !...-- Malo muttered the priest -.

I do not see what need have you to read newspapers.

Siqueira were of good press! ... But, surely, will the other.

Were of the other, in effect, and Antoniño acknowledged this, although
claiming a good cause.

- What do you, father!

"- He said -. The Good News is so bad! ...

- No more bad press than bad press - said the priest sententiously -.

And let's see What newspapers are those that you read?

...

- Leo Sun - Antoniño said.

- Is the Sun?

- The Sun

- A period of ten cents?

- Exactly.

A ten-cent newspaper - thought maybe the priest - must be as bad as two newspapers five. Then
aloud, he continued:

- A newspaper that does not support the payment refundable?

- Yes, father - said Antoniño and half stunned.

- A newspaper - even
the priest asked - which campaigns against German espionage?

Antoniño could not deny.

- Same father - he sighed -. The same! ...

- Well, my son - then said the priest -.

I'm sorry, but I can not give absolution.

Antoniño was terrified.

If he had left no girlfriend, he might have been resigned. He could also live some time without
employment, but without absolution!

...

- Well, I - I told Antoniño when the poor fellow told me his troubles -. I believe that if necessary,
could live without absolution. I've seen people with one lung only, and others that are totally
spleen. And I saw something even more curious, Antoniño, I have seen men living without money
and live well ... In Madrid there is the sea.

- In Madrid is different
- noted Antoniño -.

That is a great city.

I'm not saying that there I would become essential for absolution,
but here!

... How do you want live here without absolution a poor cooper?

- And what happened at last? Do not you give absolution?

- Quia! ... If it were the cure Ribalta!

... That really is a cure straightforward.

All Girls go to confession to absolve him because you always and
makes a very penance small.

"Have fun - they say -. Time will have to pray if you do not find waiters law marry you '...
But the priest here is very strict. And that gift I occasionally eggs or a few blocks! To say
that men are church thanks!

- So you did not give you absolution?

- No, sir. I said no but gave me erase me from the newspaper that day.

All the people found out. Some people did say hello, and factory were about to take away the
bread.

Then I left the city, ready to get an acquittal, although I had to spend two hundred reals.
What a devil! For these cases one wants the money. I came to the church, I sat in the confessional,
and the first thing I told the priest was this: "Acúsome, father, reading The Sun."

- Is that what you said, Antoniño?

- So, yes, sir, and with the same
ease with which it could say "good morning."

No you will figure that I am a chicken.

- And the priest, what did he say?

- The priest asked me if it's The Sun was a novel, and when I explained
it was a period of ten cents, he said:

- If it's ten cents, must
be good ...

- What you get absolution?

- You bet.

In the cities get everything. But I wanted to avenge the priest here, and the next day, when I
was serving communion, I was with others, and I had it to give himself.

The must already realize that I had my acquittal in his pocket, but If you could see which side
got me! ...

- Bravo, Antoniño! And did you read The Sun?

- Yes, sir.

- For a few days it will read your story. People are not going to believe, but there are you
to testify.

- Well ... if by chance they find in the factory and lay off me ...

- Worry, Antoniño. I will not give details and will retain all the necessary elements your life:
a job, a girlfriend, an acquittal ...

VIII

BORROW A FRIEND OF MISTER

Back in 1835, fell in Spain English eccentric who came to sell Bibles.

A English came to update this Pontevedra with a letter of recommendation for Mr. Garcia, a
notary of the city. Mr. García was an enthusiastic patriot, but in
a purely local, as has English.

His homeland was Pontevedra, and abroad, Vigo.

- These guys Vigo
- exclaimed - say their city is better than ours and it should become
capital of the province.

Have you ever heard such madness?

Do you have never occurred to you to compare Vigo Pontevedra?

- I do not know - said the Englishman -. I have never been to Vigo, but I have heard that the Bay Vigo
is the best in the world.

- The Bay! - Grumbled Mr. Garcia -. The bay! ... Yes scoundrels have a bay and with it we have
robbed us all of the trade, but, what you need Bay a provincial capital?
The bay!

I hope - continued Mr. Garcia, speaking in English - which you have not come so far to catch the defense
of such bandits as taifa de Vigo.

- No - replied the Englishman -. Actually I knew that they needed my help Vigo in this dispute.
The only thing I intend to do with them is to bring the New Testament which obviously have
much need if they are as gulfs and as scoundrels like you the painting ...

And long time later, Mr. Garcia still grumbling:

    
    - The Bay!

... A I was never reached by what right can a town like Bay the de Vigo ...

I had read this dialogue, I just translate almost literally in the Bible in Spain George Borrow, which
was the name that English eccentric, now one of the purest glories available to English literature.
I had read long ago, and believed that Mr. Garcia, no longer young at the beginning of last century,
would lie under their beloved land now Pontevedra, perhaps helping with their spoils a brown or a cherry.
But Spain is the country where not ever dies completely. Arriving in Pontevedra one is at once
the Mr. Garcia, who began to speak ill of Vigo.

The struggle between Vigo and Pontevedra continues today as in 1835.

And that ignores the Mr. Garcia, as if since he talked to Mr. Borrow had not spent days none,
is that against Vigo, Pontevedra Pontevedra is not, but Madrid. Pontevedra is the Ministry
Finance and of War, and Development, and Interior. Pontevedra is the administration, Geography and
Vigo. If Vigo might become one day the most important communications center between Europe
and America, I do not think the people Pontevedra lose nothing by it. Bay Vigo would then become
simply a Bay Pontevedra. Something like his own Bay of you, dear Mr. Garcia.

As for Vigo, I am afraid that the bay is higher than its ambition. With an ambition worthy of a
beautiful bay, the Vigo Pontevedra should consider as a neighborhood Vigo the future. The aristocratic
neighborhood, the official neighborhood some twenty-odd kilometers
commercial neighborhood!

The old district notaries, as that great and Mr. Parish Garcia, who,
after buying some Bibles to Borrow, said:

- If you ever have occasion
to talk about me in print, do not let you do so.

You know my name and title: Mr. Garcia, a notary public of Pontevedra
...

IX

Virgiliano PLOW

If, when writing his History of the Plow,
I would have to be limited to Galicia Fraying Dr., for very wise,
very heavy and very German it was, had not been able to fill up twenty
pages.

The plow Galician, as the good woman, no history. It is an instrument prehistoric, whose image
is accurate in some Etruscan tombs and I think in certain Celtiberian currencies. Don Casto Sampedro,
a distinguished archaeologist who spends his life collecting Celtic and Roman curiosities
to the museum of Pontevedra, there should be a plow and with little effort, and would provide a sympathetic
and unquestionably old institution.

The Galician cars have not progressed much further than the plow. Going forward, its wheels produce
a shrill sound that gradually modulates into slow and plaintive inflections. They say that this
sound encourages the horse and makes them move on. One could also argue that a noise encourages
new boots that leads and drives him to continue his journey ... They say it serves as horn to warn
cars coming in the opposite direction, and it is clear that new boots noise could also attribute
to an object very similar ... I have spent hours and hours listening to the voice of the cars
in Galicia. It seemed a familiar voice, and had feeling of having already heard, many centuries
ago.

D'ye squeak Ponte d'cars Sad bells d'Herbón ...

Galician carts sing and the poets sing the song of the cars in Galicia. They do not speak you to
the poets of mechanical planters or harvesters cars.

Such gossip destroy the poetry of the field, and then there is no literary contests, and flowers,
or anything. Smart girls, lost all hope that it's named for queens in some gay party know
not a jot as they would case the poor poets, who would to limit their empleíllo prosaic life
of the tax office or the provincial council. The illustrious son of the province, several times
ex-minister, it would not anymore maintainer a grandiloquent speeches, and aesthetic views
would be unprecedented in future ... Would ruin the poetry, and, what is going to do without
poetry in capitals second and third order?

No. The poets want the truck and plow Virgilian original. I have a strong suspicion Virgil that
if he lived today, would sing the threshing machine, but Virgil is dead, and his plow is an
inheritance that they had left all his successors.

Ploughing Virgilian!

The venerable car!

The Arcadian countryside, where the river gently glide! ... In Basically, it is possible that
the poets are right and more than worth the business as usual well. The bad thing is competition.
When the rivers of other parties have to work full and are constantly moving cargo and transporting
turbines, ours must prepare a defense. With a lazy river and a prehistoric agricultural equipment
can not get and nothing more natural than a flower in a provincial literary contest, a writing
silver or a collection of the complete works of the Marquis de Figueroa.

X

PROPERTY

ABOGADISMO, POLITICS

Except the author of these lines, all Galicians are proprietary. Can the poor get poorer always
harvest a cabbage and bring to the boil in pot four tiles under family. Can hardly find any
country where the property is so distributed as Galicia. There are farms as a bedroom and another
as a hallway.

In some orchards hardly achieved potatoes a year removed enough for a banquet of thirty covered.
Who will buy to farm tractors or cars seeders?

This subdivision of property does not believe that Court, or fewer, the problem of feeding
the farmer, but instead keeps the lawyer. Each field Ferrando Galician is always in litigation
with one of the ferrous neighboring fields. Just because the entrance to a farm which often is surrounded
by twenty or thirty, often a hotbed of issues and while the farmer is ruined, the fat lawyer.
It is true that farmers are also some lawyers. All are lawyers here, some with title and others
without. I do not cunning know if Galicia is a consequence of the subdivision of property, or
if Galician have ensured that the property is subdivided by their proverbial cunning. What I
do know is that both relate to and support, giving rise to a third: politics. This environment
of constant intrigues abogadil and small skills can not be more purpose for the formation of the
Spanish political.

Montero Ríos left him, his representative maximum, with all that crowd of children, nephews,
sons, friends and fellow members bully us still ...

Some believe that subdividing the property is a way to abolish it, and no difference between
the property belongs to everyone and anyone who is not. It is as if each of us should give
a breath of fresh air to breathe and that should tell us exactly equivalent to using free atmosphere.
The socialization of ownership will in Spain rather than Galicia, where there are some who now consider
it done.

In Galicia, the land belongs to everyone, but as soon as a Galician
Ferrer himself transposed the rainfed or irrigated, every step you
have to pay a lawsuit.

The Andalusians have a reputation for generous contrary to the Galician
and it is very possible that this reputation is justified.

Andalusia is a nation of proletarians, where the spirit of ownership has not had a chance to
spread. Galicia, however, is a country where everyone has something, with the exception of
some more or less original writer, as the author of this disease.

XI

THE IMMIGRATION CELTA

Does emigration? - A friend tells me -. But do you believe that emigration
is an evil?

All Galician earn money in America comes after here, to move our industry. And money is just what the
Indians are circulated among us, but also a spirit of progress and
tolerance.

With its emphasis absurd, saying San Jorge de Bolsas instead of San George Sacks, and so forth, Galician
returning from America are modernizing Galicia. Undeceive you. Emigration
is a good ...

I was completely disappointed. I think migration is
a good, but this is precisely is wrong. There are circumstances in
which a man has no recourse but to catch service of another man if
he does not want to die: the common man is servant should do, but
undoubtedly raised the status is not an enviable state. Migration
is a well, and this is bad. It is also good out of prison, but would
be much better not to have entered it.

Some attributed the emigration
of the Galician Celtic blood to and supports this opinion the fact
that Ireland, one of the villages where the breed remains pure Celtic,
is also prodigal emigrants. I do not want to deny the adventurous
spirit of the Celtic race, which, apparently, I have the honor to
belong, but why is this race so adventurous? In 1845 the Irish potato
was parched and I do not know what illness, and from then to 1850
more of a million Irish fled to the United States. The Irish were
felt in those Celtic years ever. After missing the potato disease,
and emigration Irish declined by 80 100. Dear reader, when you see
a Celtic migration offer a potato and, in the next, you convert it
to a European sedentary. Races adventurous simply lack of potatoes,
for lack of bread, no freedom. Is lacking home to Jews, Poles and
Armenians, and once they have been thrown at see them run the world,
is said to have a very adventurous spirit. If indeed they do, that
God preserve him, because they lack good causes ...

Migration is
good for Galicia and Spain, but mainly it is for America. For every
thousand pesetas in cash that migrants send it here, how many there
will not at work? Unfortunately, here the work does not produce anything,
and emigration continues. In Galicia are not just more than women,
old men are back from America, children waiting to go, chiefs and
priests. For every magazine that comes to Galicia Madrid, there are
five or six magazines of Argentina. Not lacking in Galicia who take
their mate in the evening reading faces and Masks o Mundo Argentino.
And to me the political separatism does not scare me, but this separatism
I think Practical something very serious.

XII

GREAT MEN

The provinces
are filled with statues of great men, not counting the great women
as Concepción Arenal and Dona Emilia Pardo Bazán. And, to this phenomenon,
I can not unless wondering:

- Are there many statues because there
are many great men, and there are many great men there are many statues?
Who makes whom? "The sculptor is a consequence of large man, great
man or a consequence of the sculptor?

Since then, it seems clear
that the great men, if necessary, could, well evil, to do without
sculptors. In contrast, the sculptors would be quite a rush the day
had a major strike men.

A sculptor friend of mine was telling me
about how to solve your life man, told me recently:

- I have plenty
to do. Before there was only working in Spain for half a dozen sculptors.
Now Working around a hundred.

I then remembered Mr. Salaverría and
their imprecations against pessimism. Certainly - I I - Mr. Salaverría
is right. We are in a period of great prosperity.  They
look as if made for decoration only, and with a flirt of their sleeves they bring out a surprise
that turns your ideas a double somersault.  Here they were, laughing and chatting like a bunch
of fresh schoolgirls for whom life was one long holiday.  Yet ten out of the number had recently
packed away their gorgeous clothes, and laid on a high shelf all royal ranks and rights, for
a nurse's dress and kit.  Apparently delicate and shy they can be, if emergency demands, as
grim as war or as tender as heaven.

It was a blithesome day and if it had n't been for that "all gone" sort of a feeling, that
possesses me when evening draws near and Jack is far away, content might have marked me as
her own.  As it was I put off playing a single at dinner as long as possible by calling on
a month-old bride whom I had known as a girl.  With glee I accepted the offer of an automobile
to take me for the visit, and repented later.  Two small chauffeurs and a diminutive footman
raced me through the narrow, crowded streets, scattering the populace to any shelter it could
find.  The only reason we didn't take the fronts out of the shops is that Japanese shops are
frontless.  I looked back to see the countless victims of our speed.  I saw only a crowd coming
from cover, smiling with curiosity and interest.  We hit the top of the hill with a flourish,
and when I asked what was the hurry my attendants looked hurt and reproachfully asked if that
wasn't the way Americans liked to ride.

Mate, this is a land of contrasts and contradictions.  At the garden all had been life and
color.  At this home, where the wrinkled old servitor opened the heavily carved gates for me,
it was as if I had stepped into a bit of ancient Japan, jealously guarded from any encroachment
of new conditions or change of custom.

Like a curious package, contents unknown, I was passed from one automatic servant to another
till I finally reached the Torishihimari or mistress of ceremonies.  By clock-work she offered
me a seat on the floor, a fan and congratulations.  This last simply because I was me.  The
house was ancient and beautiful. The room in which I sat had nothing in it but matting as fine
as silk, a rare old vase with two flowers and a leaf in formal arrangement, and an atmosphere
of aloofness that lulled mind and body to restful revery.  After my capacity for tea and sugared
dough was tested, the little serving maid fanning me, bowing every time I blinked, the paper
doors near by divided noiselessly and, framed by the dim light, sat the young bride, quaint
and oriental as if she had stepped out of some century-old kakemono.  In contrast to my recent
hostesses it was like coming from a garden of brilliant flowers into the soft, quiet shadows
of a bamboo grove. No modern touch about this lady.  She had been reduced by rule from a romping
girl to a selfless creature fit for a Japanese gentleman's wife and no questions asked.  Her
hair, her dress, and even her speech were strictly by the laws laid down in a book for the
thirty-first day of the first month after marriage.  But I would like to see the convention
with a crust thick enough to entirely obliterate one woman's interest in another whose clothes
and life belong to a distant land.  When I told her I had come to Japan against Jack's wishes
and was going to follow him to China if I could, she paled at my rashness.  How could a woman
dare disobey? Would not my husband send me home, take my name off the house register and put
somebody in my place?

Well now, wouldn't you like to see the scientist play any such tricks with me--that blessed
old Jack who smiles at my follies, asks my advice, and does as he pleases, and for whom there
has never been but the one woman in the world!  I struggled to make plain to her the attitude
of American men and women and the semi-independence of the latter.  As well explain theology
to a child.  To her mind the undeviating path of absolute obedience was the only possible way.
Anything outside of a complete renunciation of self-interest and thought meant ruin and was
not even to be whispered about.  I gave it up and came back to her sphere of poetry and mothers-in-law.

When I said good-by there was a gentle pity in her eyes, for she was certain her long-time
friend was headed for the highroad of destruction.  But instead I turned into the dim solitude
of Shiba Park.  I had something to think about.  To-day's experiences had painted anew in naming
colors the difference in husbands.  How prone a woman is, who is free and dearly beloved, to
fall into the habit of taking things for granted, forgetting how one drop of the full measure
of happiness, that a good husband gives her, would turn to rosy tints the gray lives of hundreds
of her kind who are wives in name only.  Her appreciation may be abundant but it is the silent
kind.  Her bugaboo is fear of sentiment and when it is too late, she remembers with a heart-break.

I can think of a thousand things right now I want to say to Jack and while storing them away
for some future happy hour, I walked further into the deep shadows of twilight.

Instantly the spell of the East was over me.  Real life was not. In the soft green silences
of mystery and fancy, I found a seat by an ancient moss-covered tomb.  Dreamily I watched a
great red dragon-fly frivol with the fairy blue wreaths of incense-smoke that hovered above
the leaf shadows trembling on the sand.  The deep melody of a bell, sifted through a cloud
of blossom, caught up my willing soul and floated out to sea and Jack far from this lovely
land, where stalks unrestrained the ugly skeleton of easy divorce for men.  The subject always
irritates me like prickly heat.

NIKKO, July, 1911.

Summer in Japan is no joke, especially if you are waiting for letters.  I know perfectly well
I can't hear from you and Jack for an age, and yet I watch for the postman three times a day,
as a hungry man waits for the dinner-bell.

The days in Yokohama were too much like a continuous Turkish bath, and I fled to Nikko, the
ever moist and mossy.  Two things you can always expect in this village of "roaring, wind-swept
mountains,"--rain and courtesy.  One is as inevitable as the other, and both are served in
quantities.

I am staying in a semi-foreign hotel which is tucked away in a pocket in the side of a mountain
as comfy as a fat old lady in a big rocker who glories in dispensing hospitality with both
hands. Just let me put my head out of my room door and the hall fairly blossoms with little
maids eager to serve.  A step toward the entrance brings to life a small army of attendants
bending as they come like animated jack-knives on a live wire.  One struggles with the mystery
of my overshoes, while the Master stands by and begs me to take care of my honorable spirit.
As it is the only spirit I possess I heed his advice and bring it back to the hotel to find
the entire force standing at attention, ready to receive me.  I pass on to my room with a procession
of bearers and bearesses strung out behind me like the tail of a kite, anything from a tea-tray
to the sugar tongs being sufficient excuse for joining the parade.

When dressing for dinner, if I press the button, no less than six little, picture maids flutter
to my door, each begging for the honor of fastening me up the back.  How delighted Jack would
be to assign them this particular honor for life.  Such whispers over the wonders of a foreign-made
dress as they struggle with the curious fastenings!  (They should hear my lord's fierce language!)
Each one takes a turn till some sort of connection is made between hook and eye.  All is so
earnestly done I dare not laugh or wiggle with impatience.  I may sail into dinner with the
upper hook in the lower eye and the middle all askew, but the service is so graciously given,
I would rather have my dress upside down than to grumble.  Certainly I pay for it.  I tip everything
from the proprietor to the water-pitcher.  But the sum is so disproportionate to the pleasure
and the comfort returned that I smile to think of the triple price I have paid elsewhere and
the high-nosed condescension I got in return for my money.  Japanese courtesy may be on the
surface, but the polish does not easily wear off and it soothes the nerves just as the rain
cools the air.  It goes without saying that I did not arrive in Nikko without a variety of
experiences along the way.

Two hours out from Yokohama, the train boy came into the coach, and with a smile as cheerful
as if he were saying, "Happy New Year," announced that there was a washout in front of us and
a landslide at the back of us.  Would everybody please rest their honorable bones in the village
while a bridge was built and a river filled in.  The passengers trailed into a settlement of
straw roofs, bamboo poles and acres of white and yellow lilies.  I went to a quaint little
inn--that was mostly out!--built over a fussy brook; and a pine tree grew right out of the
side of the house.  My room was furnished with four mats and a poem hung on the wall.  When
the policeman came in to apologize for the rudeness of the storm in delaying me, the boy who
brought my bags had to step outside so that the official would have room to bow properly. 
I ate my supper of fish-omelet and turnip pickle served in red lacquer bowls, and drank tea
out of cups as big as thimbles.  Jack says Japanese teacups ought to be forbidden; in a moment
of forgetfulness they could so easily slip down with the tea.

It had been many a year since I was so separated from my kind and each hour of isolation makes
clearer a thing I 've never doubted, but sometimes forget, that the happiest woman is she whose
every moment is taken up in being necessary to somebody; and to such, unoccupied minutes are
like so many drops of lead.  That, with a telegram I read telling of the increasing dangers
of the plague in Manchuria, threatened to send me headlong into a spell of anxiety and the
old terrible loneliness.

Happily the proprietor and his wife headed it off by asking me if I would be their guest for
this evening to see the Bon Matsuri, the beautiful Festival of the Dead.  On the thirteenth
day of the seventh month, all the departed spirits take a holiday from Nirvana or any other
seaport they happen to be in and come on a visit to their former homes to see how it fares
with the living.  Poor homesick spirits!  Not even Heaven can compensate for the separation
from beloved country and friends.  As we passed along, the streets were alight with burning
rushes placed at many doors to guide the spiritual excursionists.  Inside, the people were
praying, shrines were decorated and children in holiday dress merrily romped.  Why, Mate, it
was worth being a ghost just to come back and see how happy everybody was.  For on this night
of nights, cares and sorrows are doubly locked in a secret place and the key put carefully
away.  You couldn't find a coolie so heartless as to show a shadow of trouble to his ghostly
relatives when they return for so brief a time to hold happy communion with the living.  He
may be hungry, he may be sick, but there is a brave smile of welcome on his lips for the spirits.

The crazy old temple at the foot of the mountain, glorified by a thousand lights and fluttering
flags, reaped a harvest of rins and rens paid to the priests for paper prayers and bamboo flower-holders
with which to decorate the graves.  The cemetery was on the side of the hill, and every step
of the way somebody stopped at a stone marker to fasten a lantern to a small fishing-pole and
pin a prayer near by.  This was to guide the spirit to his own particular spot.

A breeze as soft as a happy sigh came through the pines and gently rocked the lanterns.  The
dim figures of the worshipers moved swiftly about, as delighted as children in the shadow-pictures
made by the twinkling lights, eagerly seeking out remote spots that no grave might be without
its welcoming gleam.  A long line of white-robed dancing girls came swaying by with clapping
hands to soft-voiced chanting.

I, too, though an alien, was moved with the good-will and kindness that sung through the very
air and fearlessly I would have decorated any festive ghost that happened along.  I looked
to see where I might lay the offering I held in my hand.  My hostess plucked my sleeve and
pointed to a tiny tombstone under a camellia tree.  I went closer and read the English inscription,
"Dorothy Dale.  Aged 2 years."  There was a tradition that once in the long ago a missionary
and his wife lived in the village.  Through an awful epidemic of cholera they stuck to their
posts, nursed and cared for the people.  Their only child was the price they paid for their
constancy.  To each generation the story had been told, and through all the years faithful
watch had been kept over the little enclosure.  Now it was all a-glimmer with lanterns shaped
like birds and butterflies.  I added my small offering and turned hotelwards reluctantly.

My ancient host and hostess trotted along near by, eager to share all their pathetic little
gaieties with me.  Their lives together had about as much real comradeship as a small brown
hen and a big gray owl, and they had been married sixty years!  They had toiled and grown old
together, but that did not mean that wifey was to walk anywhere but three feet to the rear,
nor to speak except when her lord and ruler stopped talking to take a whiff of his pipe.  I
tried to walk behind with the old lady but she threatened to stand in one spot for the rest
of the night.  Then I vainly coaxed her to walk with me at her husband's side.  But her face
was so full of genuine horror at such disrespect that I desisted.  Think, Mate, of trying to
puzzle out the make-up of a nation which for the sake of a long-ago kindness will for years
keep a strange baby's grave green and yet whose laws will divorce a woman for disobedience
to her husband's mother and where the ancient custom of "women to heel" still holds good.

And this is the land where the Seeker came for the truth!

Sada thinks it paradise and I, as before, am sending to Jack

  A heart of love for thee
  Blown by the summer breezes
  Ten thousand miles of sea.

July, 1911.

Mate:

There ought to be some kind of capital punishment for the woman who has nothing to do but kill
time.  It's an occupation that puts crimps in the soul and offers the supreme moment in which
the devil may work his rabbit foot.  No, I cannot settle down or hustle up to anything until
I hear from Jack or you.  Very soon I will be reduced to doing the one desperate thing lurking
in this corner of the woods, flirting with the solitary male guest, who has a strong halt in
his voice and whose knees are not on speaking terms.

Of course it is raining.  If the sun gets gay and tries the bluff of being friendly, a heavy
giant of a cloud rises promptly up from behind a mountain and puts him out of business.  Still,
why moan over the dampness?  It makes the hills look like great green plush sofa-cushions and
the avenues like mossy caves.

I have read till my eyes are crossed and I have written to every human I know.  I have watched
the giggling little maids patter up to a two-inch shrine and, flinging a word or two to Buddha,
use the rest of their time to gossip.  And the old lady who washes her vegetables and her clothes
in the same baby-lake just outside my window amuses me for at least ten minutes.  Then, Mate,
for real satisfaction, I must turn to you, whose patience is elastic and enduring.  It is one
of my big joys that your interest and love are just the same, as in those other days when you
packed me off to Japan for the good of my country and myself; and then sent Jack after me.
Guess I should have stayed at home, as Jack told me, but I am glad I did not.

Though it has poured every minute I have been here, there have been bursts of sunshine inside,
if not out.  The other day my table boy brought me the menu and asked for an explanation of
assorted fruits.  I told him very carefully it meant mixed, different kinds.  He is a smart
lad.  He understands my Japanese!  He grasped my meaning immediately, and wrote it down in
a little book. This morning he came to my room and announced: "Please, Lady, some assorted
guests await you in the audience chamber; one Japanese and two American persons."

I have had my first letter from Sada too, simply spilling over with youth and enthusiasm. 
The girl is stark mad over the fairy-landness of it all.  Says her rooms are in Uncle's private
house, which is in quite a different part of the garden from the tea-house.  (Thank the Lord
for small mercies!)  She says Uncle has given her some beautiful clothes and is so good to
her.  I dare say.  He has taken her to see a lovely old castle and wonderful temple.  The streets
are all pictures and the scenery is glorious! That is true, but the girl cannot live off scenery
any more than a nightingale can thrive on the scent of roses.  What is coming when the glamour
of the scenery wears off and Uncle puts on the pressure of his will?

I have not dared to give her any suggestion of warning.  She is deadly sure of her duty, so
enthralled is she with the thought of service to her mother's people.  If I am to help her,
the shock of disillusionment must come from some other direction.  The disillusioner is seldom
forgiven.  I do not know what plans are being worked out behind Uncle's lowered eyelids.  But
I do know his idea of duty does not include keeping such a valuable asset as a bright and beautiful
niece hid away for his solitary joy.  In fact, he would consider himself a neglectful and altogether
unkind relative if he did not marry Sada off to the very best advantage to himself.  In the
name of all the Orient, what else is there to do with a girl, and especially one whose blood
is tainted with that of the West? 

We expect catastrophes, revolutions, wars, devastation and fiery evil.

- Do you see? - Tell me a Germanophile -.

If the Germans had won, nothing would happen this.

And the fact is that, for the first time since August 14, this Germanophile right. If the Germans
had won, in fact, the problem of nationalities would not be a conflict because we would all be
German. We'd all be Germans, and may even we were all blond. And since Germans all men, not
only would not conflict international, but also would not have private discussions. We would
all have the same ideas.

The philosophers would run for us, and who can doubt that the ideas made at the Universities
are always better results than those made at home?

The city will provide ideas as well as sausages. The issue of languages ​​- Polish, Armenian,
Catalan, etc .-- disappear completely, because everyone speak German. All things are classified. Dogs
are banned from barking, and socialists be denied the use of the word. In the public walks have
benches for children, Nanny benches, benches for the elderly, and
may also have special benches Candidates for Parliament: the kids
of three years, when they were tired of playing, would go from bank
to bank, and, by donning a pair of glasses, would study the different
signs:

- Am I a candidate? - Would wonder Manolín -.

  It is called "Baku, the eater of evil
dreams."  My word! but I could furnish him a feast that would give him the fanciest case of
indigestion he ever knew!

Mate, you would have to see Nikko, with its majestic cryptomarias, sheltering the red and gold
lacquer temples; you would have to feel the mystery of the gray-green avenues, and have its
holy silences fall like a benediction upon a restless spirit, to realize what healing for soul
and body is in the very air, to understand why I joyfully loitered for two hours and came back
sane and hungry, but wet as a fish.

Write me about the only man, the kiddies and your own blessed happy self.

I agree with Charity.  "Ef you want to spile a valuable wife, tu'n her loose in a patch of
idlesomeness."

STILL AT NIKKO, August, 1911.

You beloved girl, I have heard from Jack and my heart is singing a ragtime tune of joy and
thanksgiving.  How he laughed at me for being too foolishly lonesome to stay in America without
him.  Oh, these, men!  Does he forget he raged once upon a time, when he was in America without
me?  As long as I am here though, he wants me to have as good a time as possible.  Do anything
I want, and--blessed trusting man!--buy anything I see that will fit in the little house at home.

Can you believe it?  After a fierce battle the sun won out this morning, and even the blind
would know by the dancing feel of the air that it was a glorious day.  At eight o'clock, when
the little maids went up to the shrine, happy as kittens let out for a romp, they forgot even
to look Buddha-ward and took up their worship time in playing tag.  The old woman who uses
the five-foot lake as the family wash-tub, brought out all her clothes, the grand-baby, and
the snub-nosed poodle that wears a red bib, to celebrate the sunshine by a carnival of washing.

I could not stand four walls a minute longer.  I am down in the garden writing you, in a tea-house
made with three fishing-poles and a bunch of straw.  It is covered with pink morning-glories
as big as coffee cups.

It has been three weeks since my last letter and I know your interest in Jack and germs is
almost as great as mine.  Jack has been in Peking.  He thinks the revolution of the Chinese
against the Manchu Government is going to be something far more serious this time than a flutter
of fans and a sputter of shooting-crackers.  The long-suffering worm with the head of a dragon
is going to turn, and when it does, there will not be a Manchu left to tell the pig tale.

Jack is in Mukden now, where he is about to lose his mind with joy over the prospect of looking
straight in the eye--if it has one--this wicked old germ with a new label, and telling it what
he thinks.  The technical terms he gives are as paralyzing as a Russian name spelled backwards.

In a day's time this fearful thing wipes out entire families and villages.  It has simply ravaged
northern Manchuria and the country about.  Jack says so deadly are the effects of these germs
in the air that if a man walking along the street happens to breathe in one, he is a corpse
on the spot before he is through swallowing. The remains are gathered up by men wearing shrouds
and net masks, and the peaceful Oriental who was not doing a thing hut attending strictly to
his own business, is soon reduced to ashes.  All because of a pesky microbe with a surplus
of energy.

You know perfectly well, Mate, Jack does not speak in this frivolous manner of his beloved
work.  The interpretation is wholly mine.  But I dare not be serious over it.  I must push
any thought of his danger to the further ends of nowhere.

Jack thinks the native doctors have put up a brave fight, but so far the laugh has been all
on the side of the frisky germ.

It blasts everything it touches and is most fastidious.  Nobody can blame it for choosing as
its nesting-place the little soft furred Siberian marmots, which the Chinese hunt for their
skin.  If only the hunters could be given a dip in a sulphur vat before they lay them down
to sleep in the unspeakable inns with their spoils wrapped around them, the chance for infection
would not be so great.  Of course the bare suggestion of a bath might prove more fatal than
the plague, for oftener than not the hunters are used only as a method of travel by the merry
microbe and are immune from the effects.  Of course Jack has all sorts of theories as to why
this is so.  But did you ever see a scientist who didn't have a workable theory for everything
from the wrong end of a carpet-tack to the evolution of a June bug?

From the hunters and their spoils the disease spreads and their path southwards can be traced
by desolated villages and piles of bones.

Jack tells me he is garbed in a long white robe effect (I hope he won't grow wings), with a
good-sized mosquito net on a frame over his head and face.  He works in heavy gloves.  Mouth
and nose being the favorite point of attack, everybody who ventures out wears over this part
of the face a curiously shaped shield, whose firm look says, "No admittance here."  But all
the same, that germ from Siberia is a wily thief and steals lives by the thousands, in spite
of all precautions.

Jack is as enthusiastic over the fight against the scourge as a college boy over football.
His letter has so many big technical words in it, I had to pay excess postage.

I 've read his letter twice, but to save me I cannot find any suggestion of the remotest possibility
of my coming nearer.  Yes, I know I said Japan only.  But way down in the cellar of my heart
I hoped he would say nearer.

What a happy day it has been.  Here is your letter, just come.  The priests up at the temple
have asked me to see the ceremony of offering food to the spirits, in the holy of holies.

There is not time for me to add another word to this letter.  What a dear you are, to love
while you lecture me.  What you say is all true.  A woman's place is in her home.  But just
now out of the East, I 've had a call to play silent partner to science and while it 's a lonesome
sport, at least it 's far more entertaining than caring for a husbandless house.  Anyhow I
am sending you a hug and a thousand kisses for the babies.

SHOJI LAKE, August, 1911.

Mate, think of the loveliest landscape picture you ever saw, put me in it and you will know
where I am.  With some friends from Honolulu and a darling old man--observe I say old!--from
Colorado, we started two days ago, to walk around the base of Fuji. Everything went splendidly
till a typhoon hit us amidships and sent us careening, blind, battered and soaked into this
red and white refuge of a hotel, that clings to the side of a mountain like a woodpecker to
a telephone pole.  I have seen storms, but the worst I ever saw was a playful summer breeze
compared with the magnificent fury of this wind that snapped great trees in two as if they
had been young bean-poles, and whipped the usually peaceful lake into raging waves that swept
through a gorge and greedily licked up a whole village.

Our path was high up, but right over the water.  Sometimes we were crawling on all fours. 
Mostly we were flying just where the wind listed.  If a tree got in our way as we flew, so
much the worse for us.  It is funny now, but it was not at the time!  Seriously, I was in immediate
peril of being blown to glory via the fierce green foam below.  My Colorado Irishman is not
only a darling, but a hero.  Once I slipped, and stopped rolling only when some faithful pines
were too stubborn to let go.

I wag many feet below the reach of any arm.  In a twinkling, my friend had stripped the kimono
off the baggage coolie's back, and made a lasso with which he pulled me up.  Then shocked to
a standstill by the shortcomings of the coolie's birthday suit, he snatched off his coat and
gave it to him, with a dollar.  Such a procession of bedraggled and exhausted pleasure-seekers
as we were, when three men stood behind our hotel door and opened it just wide enough to haul
us in.  But hot baths and boiling tea revived us and soon we were as merry as any people can
be who have just escaped annihilation.

The typhoon passed as suddenly as it came, and now the world--or at least this part of it--is
as glowing and beautiful as if freshly tinted by the Master Hand.

A moment ago I looked up to see my rescuer gazing out of the window.  I asked, "How do you
feel, Mr. Carson?" His voice trembled when he answered: "Lady, I feel glorified, satisfied
and nigh about petrified.  Look at that!"

Below lay Shoji, its shimmering waters rimmed with velvety green. Every raindrop on the pines
was a prism; the mountain a brocade of blossom.  To the right Fuji, the graceful, ever lovely
Fuji; capricious as a coquette and bewitching in her mystery, with a thumbnail moon over her
peak, like a silver tiara on the head of a proud beauty; at her base the last fleecy clouds
of the day, gathered like worshipers at the feet of some holy saint.

The man's face shone.  For forty years he had worked at harness-making, always with the vision
before him that some day he might take this trip around the world.  He has the soul of an artist,
which has been half starved in the narrow environment of his small town life.  Cannot you imagine
the mad revel of his soul in this pictureland?

He is going to Mukden.  Of course I told him all about Jack's work. The old fellow, he must
be all of seventy, was thrilled.  I am going to give him a letter to Jack.  Also to some friends
in Peking; they will be good to him.  If anybody deserves a merry-go-round sort of a holiday,
he does.  Think of sewing on saddles and bridles all these years, when his heart was withering
for beauty!

I am glad of your eager interest in Sada.  How like you!  Never too absorbed in your own life
to share other people's joys and sorrows and festivities.

If your wise head evolves a plan of action, send by wireless, for if I read aright her message
received to-day, the time is fast coming when the red lights of danger will be flashing.  I
will quote: "Last night Uncle asked me to sing to some people who were giving a dinner at the
tea-house.  I put on my loveliest kimono and a hair-dresser did my hair in the old Japanese
style and stuck a red rose at the side.  For the first time I went into that beautiful, beautiful
place my Uncle calls "the Flower Blooming" tea-house.  It was more like a fairy palace.  How
the girls, who live there, laughed at my guitar.  They had never seen one before. How they
whispered over the color of my eyes.  Said they matched my kimono, and they tittered over my
clumsiness in sitting on the floor.  But I forgot everything when the door slid open and I
looked into the most wonderful dream-garden that ever was, and people everywhere.  I finished
singing, there was clapping and loud banzais.  I looked up and realized there were only men
at this dinner and I never saw so many bottles in all my life.  I felt very strange and so
far away from dear Susan West.  After I had sung once more I started back to my home.  Uncle
met me.  I told him I was going to bed.  For the first time he was cross and ordered me back
to the play place, where I was to stay until he came for me. There never was anything so lovely
as the green and pink garden and the lily-shaped lights, and the flowers; and such pretty girls
who knew just what to do.  But I cannot understand the men who come here.  When dear old Billy"--thank
heaven she says dear Billy!--"talks I know just what he means.  But these men use so many words
Susan never taught me, and laugh so loud when they say them.

"There was one man named Hara whose clothes were simply gorgeous. The girls say he is very
rich, and a great friend of Uncle's!  He may have money, but he is not over-burdened with manners.
He can out-stare an owl."

There was more.  But that is enough to show me Uncle's hand as plainly as if I were a palmist.
If nothing happens to prevent, the man promises to do what thousands of his kind have done
before: regardless of obstacles and consequences marry the girl off to the highest bidder;
rid himself of all responsibility and make a profit at the same time.  From his point of view
it is the only thing to do.  He would be the most astonished uncle in Mikado-land if anybody
suggested to him that Sada had any rights or feelings in the matter.  He would tell you that
as Sada's only male relative, custom gave him the right to dispose of her as he saw fit, and
custom is law and there is nothing back of that!

So far I have played only a thinking part in the drama.  But I will not stand by and see the
girl, whose very loneliness is a plea, sacrificed without some kind of a struggle to help her.
At the present writing I feel about as effective as a February lamb, and every move calls for
tact.  Wish I had been born with a needle wit instead of a Roman nose!  For if Uncle has a
glimmer of a suspicion that I would befriend Sada at the cost of his plans, so surely as the
river is lost in the sea, Sada would disappear from my world until it was too late for me to
lend a hand.

Good-by, Mate.  At eventide, as of old, look my way and send me strength from your vast store
of calm courage and common sense. The odds are against me, but the god of luck has never yet
failed to laugh with me.

September, 1911.

I am in a monastery, Mate, but only temporarily, thank you.  It is a blessing to the cause
that Fate did not turn me into a monk or a sister or any of those inconvenient things with
a restless religion, that wakes you up about 3 A.M.  on a wintry dawn to pray shiveringly to
a piece of wood, to the tune of a thumping drum. Some morning when the frost was on the cypress
that carven image would disappear!

For one time at least I would have a nice fire, and my prayers would not be decorated with icicles.

For two weeks my friends and I have been tramping through picture-book villages and silk-worm
country, and over mountain winding ways, sleeping on the floor, sitting on our feet and giving
our stomachs surprise parties with hot, cold and lukewarm rice, seaweed and devil-fish.

It has been one hilarious lark of outdoor life, with nothing to pin us to earth but the joy
of being a part of so beautiful a world.

The road led us through superb forests, over the Bridge of Paradise to Koyo San, whose peak
is so far above the mist-wreathed valleys that it scrapes the clouds as they float by.  But
I want to say right here; Kobo Daishi, who founded this monastery in the distant ages and built
a temple to his own virtues, may have been a saint, but he was not much of a gentleman!  Else
he would not have been so reckless of the legs and necks of the coming generations, as to blaze
the trail to his shrine over mountains so steep that our pack-mule coming up could easily have
bitten off his own tail if he had so minded.

Later.

This afternoon I must hustle down.  I suppose the only way to get down is to roll.  Well; anyway
I am in a hurry.  My mail beat me up the trail and a letter from Sada San begs me to come to
Kioto to see her as soon as I can.  She only says she needs help and does not know what to
do.  And blessed be the telegram that winds up from Hiroshima; the school is in urgent need
of an assistant at the Kindergarten and they ask me to come.  The principal, Miss Look, has
gone to America on business, for three months.  Hooray!  Here is my chance to resign from the
"Folded Hands' Society" and do something that is really worth while, as long as I cannot go
to my man.  How good it will seem once again to be in that dear old mission school, where in
the long ago I toiled and laughed and suffered while I waited for Jack.

The prospect of being with the girls and the kiddies again makes me want to do a Highland Fling,
even if I am in a monastery with a sad-faced young priest serving me tea and mournful sighs
between prayers.

What a flirtatious old world it is after all.  It smites you and bruises you, then binds up
the hurts by giving you a desire or so of your heart.  Just now the desire of my heart is to
catch that train for Kioto.

So here goes a prayer, pinned to a shrine, for a body intact as I tread the path that drops
straight down the mountain, through the crimson glory of the maples and the blazing yellow
of the gingko tree, to the tiny little station far away that looks like a decorated hen-coop.

KIOTO, September, 1911.

Dearest Mate:

I cannot spend a drop of ink in telling you how I got here.  How the baggage beast ran away
and decorated the mountain shrubbery with my belongings.  And how after all my hurry of dropping
down from Koyo San, the brakesman forgot to hook our car to the train and started off on a
picnic while the engine went merrily on and left us out in the rice-fields.  Suffice it to
say I landed in a whirl that spun me down to Uncle's house and back to the hotel. And by the
way my thoughts are going, for all I know I may be booked to spin on through eternity.

My visit to Sada was so full of things that did not happen.  When I reached the house, I sent
in my card to Sada.  Uncle came gliding in like a soft-footed panther.  He did it so quietly
that I jumped when I saw him.  We took up valuable time repeating polite greetings, as set
down on page ten of the Book of Etiquette, in the chapter on Calls Made by Inconvenient Foreigners.

When our countless bows were finished, I asked in my coaxingest voice if I might see Sada.
Presently she came in, dressed in Japanese clothes and beautiful even in her pallor.  She was
changed--sad, and a little drooping.  The conflict of her ideals of duty to her mother's people
and the real facts in the case, had marked her face with something far deeper than girlish
innocence. It was inevitable.  But above the evidences of struggle there was a something which
said the dead and gone Susan West had left more than a mere memory.  Silently I blessed all
her kind.

Sada was unfeignedly glad to see me, and I longed to take her in my arms and kiss her.  But
such a display would have marked me in Uncle's eyes as a dangerous woman with unsuppressed
emotions, and unfit for companionship with Sada.  I had hoped his Book of Etiquette said, "After
this, bow and depart."  But my hopes had not a pin-feather to rest on.  He stayed right where
he was.  All right, old Uncle, thought I, if stay you will, then I shall use all a woman's
power to beguile you and a woman's wit to out-trick you, so I can make you show your hand.
It is going to be a game with the girl as the prize.  It is also going to be like playing leap-frog
with a porcupine.  He has cunning and authority to back him, and I have only my love for Sada.

For a time I talked at random, directing my whole conversation to him as the law demands. 
By accident, or luck, I learned that the weak point in his armor of polite reserve was color
prints.  Just talk color prints to a collector and you can pick his pocket with perfect ease.

My knowledge of color prints could be written on my thumb nail. But I made a long and dangerous
shot, by looking wise and asking if he thought Matahei compared favorably with Moronobo as
painters of the same era.  I choked off a gasp when I said it, for I would have you know that
for all I knew, Matahei might have lived in the time of Jacob and Rebecca, and Moronobo a thousand
years afterwards. But I guessed right the very first time and Mura San, with a flash of appreciation
at my interest, said that my learning was remarkable.  It was an untruth and he knew that I
knew it, but it was courteous and I looked easy.  Then he talked long and delightfully as only
lovers of such things can.  At least, it would have been delightful had I not been so anxious
to see Sada alone. But it was not to be.  At least, not then.  But mark one for me, Mate: Uncle
was so pleased with my keen and hungry interest in color prints and my desire to see his collection,
that he invited me to a feast and a dance at the house the next night.

The following evening I could have hugged the person, male or otherwise, who called my dear
host away for a few minutes just before the feast began.

Sada told me hurriedly that Uncle had insisted on her singing every night at the tea-house.
She had first rebelled, and then flatly refused, for she did not like the girls.  She hated
what she saw and was afraid of the men.  Her master was furiously angry; said he would teach
her what obedience meant in this country.  He would marry her off right away and be rid of
a girl who thought her foreign religion gave her a right to disobey her relatives.  She was
afraid he would do it, for he had not asked her to go to the tea-house again.  Neither had
he permitted her to go out of the house.  Once she was sick with fear, for she knew Uncle had
been in a long consultation with the rich man Hara and he was in such good humor afterwards.
But Hara, she learned, had gone away.

She would not sing at these dinners again, not if Uncle choked her and what must she do!  I
saw the man returning but I quickly whispered, "What about Billy?"

Ah, I knew I was right.  The rose in her hair was no pinker than her cheeks.  If Billy could
only have seen her then, I would wager my shoes--and shoes are precious in this country--that
her duty to her mother's people would have to take a back seat.

Before Uncle reached us I whispered, "Keep Billy in your heart, Sada.  Write him.  Tell him."
And in the same breath I heartily thanked Uncle for inviting me.

It was a feast, Mate--the most picturesque, uneatable feast I ever sat on my doubly honorable
feet to consume.  There were opal-eyed fish with shaded pink scales, served whole; soft brown
eels split up the back and laid on a bed of green moss; soups, thin and thick; lotus root and
mountain lily, and raw fish.  Each course--and their name was many--was served on a little
two-inch-high lacquer table, with everything to match.  Sometimes it was gold lacquer, then
again green, once red and another black.  But it was all a dream of color that shaded in with
the little maids who served it; and they, swift, noiseless and pretty, were trained to graceful
perfection. The few furnishings of the room were priceless.  Uncle sat by in his silken robes,
gracious and courteous, surprising me with his knowledge of current events.  In the guise of
host, he is charming. That is, if only he would not always talk with dropped eyelids, giving
the impression that he is half dreaming and is only partly conscious of the world and its follies.
And all the time I know perfectly well that he sees everything around him and clean on to the
city limits.

Again and again in his talks he referred to his color prints and the years of patience required
to collect them.  Right then, Mate, I made a vow to study the pesky things as they have seldom
been attacked before--even though I never had much use for pictures in which you cannot tell
the top side from the bottom, without a label.  But then, Jack says, my artistic temperament
will never keep me awake at night.  Now I decided all at once to make a collection.  Heaven
knows what I will do with it.  But Uncle grew so enthusiastic he included his niece in the
conversation, and while his humor was at high tide I coaxed him into a promise that Sada might
come down to Hiroshima very soon, and help me look for prints.

Yes, indeed there was a dance afterwards, and everything was deadly, hysterically solemn--so
rigidly proper, so stiffly conventional that it palled.  It was the most maleless house of
revelry I ever saw.  Why, even the kakemono were pictures of perfect ladies and the gate-man
was a withered old woman.

There was absolutely nothing wrong I could name.  It was all exquisitely, daintily, lawfully
Japanese.  But I sat by my window till early morning.  There was a very ghost of a summer moon.
Out of the night came the velvety tones of a mighty bell; the sing-song prayers of many priests;
the rippling laugh of a little child and the tinkling of a samisen.  Every sound made for simple
joy and peace.  But I thought of the girl somewhere beyond the twinkling street lights, who,
with mixed races in her blood and a strange religion in her heart, had dreamed dreams of this
as a perfect land, and was now paying the price of disillusionment with bitter tears.

Eight o 'clock the next morning.

I cabled Jack, "Hiroshima for winter."

He answered, "Thank the Lord you are nailed down at last."

P.S.--I have bought all the books on color prints I could find.

October, 1911.

Hiroshima!  Get up and salute, Mate!  Is not that name like the face of an old familiar friend?
I have to shake myself to realize that it is not the long ago, but now.  A recent picture of
Jack and one of you and the babies is about the only touch of the present. Everything is just
as it was in the old days, when the difficulties of teaching in a foreign kindergarten in a
foreigner language was the least of the battle that faced me.  Well, I thought I 'd finished
with battles, but there 's a feeling of fight in the air.

Same little room, in the same old mission school.  Same wall paper, so blue it turned green.
And, Lord love us, from the music-rooms still come the sounds like all the harmonies of a baby
organ-factory gone on a strike.

But bless you, honey, there is an eternity of difference in having to stand a thing and doing
it of your own free will.  As Black Charity would remark, "I don't pay 'em no mind," and let
them wheeze out their mournful complaints to the same old hymns.

Had you been here the night my dinky little train pulled into the station, you would have guessed
that it was a big Fourth of July celebration or the Emperor's birthday.  I would not dare guess
how many girls there were to meet me.  It seemed like half a mile of them lined up on the platform,
and each carried a round red lantern.

Until they had made the proper bow with deadly precision, there was not a smile or a sound.
That ceremony over, they charged down upon me in an avalanche of gaiety.  They waved their
lanterns, they called banzai, they laughed and sung some of the old time foolish songs we used
to sing.  They promptly put to rout all legends of their excessive modesty and shyness.  They
were just young and girlish.  Plain happy.  Eager and sweet in their generous welcome. It warmed
every fiber of my being.  When they thinned out a little, I saw at the other end of the platform
a figure flying towards me, with the sleeves of her kimono out-stretched like the wings of
a gray bird, and a great red rose for a top-knot.  It was Miss First River, a little late,
but more than happy, as she sobbed out her welcome on the front of my clean shirt-waist.

It was she, you remember, who in all those other years was my faithful secretary and general
comforter.  The one who slept across my door when I was ill and who never forgot the hot water
bag on a cold night.  For years she has supported a drunken father and a crazy mother; has
sent one brother to America and made a preacher of another.

Now she is to be married, she told me in a little note she slipped into my hand as we walked
up the Street of the Upper Flowing River to the school, adding, "Please guess my heart."

And miracle of the East!  She has known the man a long time and they are in love!  I am so
glad I am going to be here for the wedding.  It comes off in a few weeks.

I started work in the kindergarten this morning.  It has been said that when the Lord ran out
of mothers he made kindergartners. Surely he never did a better job--for the kindergartners.
Mate, when I stepped into that room, it was like going into an enchanted garden of morning-glories
and dahlias.  What a greeting the regiment of young Japlings gave me!  I just drank in all
the fragrance of joy in the eager comradeship and sweet friendliness of the small Mikados and
Mikadoesses with a keen delight that made the hours spin like minutes.

And would you believe it?  The first sound that greeted my ears after their whole duty had
been accomplished in the very formal bow, was--"Oh--it is the skitten Sensei (skipping teacher)
A skit!  A skit!  We want to skit!" Of course, they were not the same children by many years.
But things die slowly in Hiroshima.  Even good reputations.  Everything was pushed aside, and
work or no work, teachers and children celebrated by one mad revel of skipping.

There are many things to do, and getting into the old harness of steady routine work and living
on the tap of a bell, is not so easy as it sounds, after years of live-as-you-please.  But
it is good for the constitution and is satisfying to the soul.

I once asked my friend Carson from Colorado if he could choose but one gift in all the world,
what would it be?  "The contintment of stidy work," answered the wise old philosopher from
out of the West; and my heart echoes his wisdom.

Had a big fat letter from Jack, and the reputation he gives those germs he is associating with,
is simply disgraceful.  He gives me statistics also.  Wish he wouldn't.  It takes so much time
and I always have to count on my fingers.

He tells me, too, of an English woman who has joined the insect expedition.  Says she is the
most brilliant woman he ever met. Thanks awfully.  And he has to sit up nights studying, to
keep up with her.  I dare say.

I 'll wager she 's high of color and mighty of muscle and with equal vehemence says a thing
is "strawdn'ry" whether it 's a dewdrop or a spouting volcano.

I can't help feeling a little bit envious of her--out there with my Jack!  Well!  I will not
get agitated till I have to.

A note from Sada says Uncle has had another outburst.  He still consents for her to come down
here.  Her beautiful ideals have been smashed to smithereens, and the fact that nothing has
ever been invented that will stick them together, adds no comfort to the situation.  Her disappointment
is heart-breaking.  I cannot make a move till I get her to myself and have a life-and-death
talk with her. Do you see this drive?

Well here goes ...

Once this is done, the man looked around, count the shillings, one by one and stores them in
a deep pocket ...

Little money and bad. Angry men. Thick ladies always put down, or heat or by tantrums, which is fanned
continuously. Many priests. Many military ... Large domino games and billiards. Questions
of honor. Toros. Revelry. Fights.

Cloud Shine, of selling of tickets in the lottery, saying gypsy fortune
of traveling musicians, the blind, the lame, the paralyzed ... Certainly,
Spain has not changed.

And it is possible we ourselves have not changed either.

II

THE TEMPLE OF ETERNITY

Here we are in Madrid, in our house, as they say ... Bernard Shaw, to show that in the music
halls has not operated any progress, that one night I was in one of them watching a magician
doing exercises with a ball. Bored, Bernard Shaw went to the street, and ten years later he went
back into the same music-hall.

- The magician - added Bernard Shaw - was still going out there playing to the audience with the
same balls ...

In my time, I tell you that one night I said goodbye to some friends
who had been dining in a cafe in the Puerta del Sol I think they said
I would return immediately, and returned seven years later, but what
are seven years in a cafe in Madrid?

The friends were still there and the discussion continued.

The ideas were the same, and the average wet toast Fulánez in the
cafe, we said the same half also toasted seven years ago and in my
own presence had served the waiter.

One of the friends intended to read me a drama.

The friend is the same, and the drama has not changed a single comma.

-
Going to be released in two weeks - says my friend.

The same, exactly the same thing seven years ago!

The bartender called me by my name:

- Hello, D. July! What are you going to take?

Choose a paella, as dish castizo, and I met privately for a long time.

- This paella - see someone who knows - is the same as yesterday.

I think that is the same for seven years with the same crabs and all.

- And what? - I tell my friends -. Speak. Give news. Academics, are immortal yet? Pio Baroja,
is it still a young writer? Fulanito, "continues with this beautiful future before him? And
the So-and-so and Mengana, is that there are still a young and beautiful
actresses?

Tell me about politics.

The revolution I suppose, like seven years ago will be an immediate
thing.

Spain will soon become even six months, giving reason to which, for half a century, have been announcing
this change so fast ...

Everything is the same, and I, that I thought I changed, I also encounter the same as before.
As this cup of coffee rush recovery, as it were, my true nature. A number of things that I believed
in me noticed that grafted fade and go away.

I'm like Darwin's wild that was civilized and that by returning to his tribe, he turned again Wild
lose in a few hours of contact with his family he had acquired in ten years effort. And this coffee
from the Puerta del Sol represents eternity.

Paris, London, Berlin ... the European spirit ... the World War ... All that is transitory, everything
changes and turns, while the café remains unchanged, with the same sofas, with same waiters,
with the same customers, with the same menu, with the same ideas, with same smoke, with the
same dramas and with the same crabs.

III

A STAR TURN

My arrival in Madrid had some biblical. Coinciding with her, appeared in the sky a star bright.
A new star and a new bug! To then say that in Madrid not discovered anything!

The star in question was found by Mr. Roso de Luna, who had found another a few years ago and
we had presented familiarly, as it could introduce variétés star: "The modest star I've had
the honor of discovering ..."

How will you handle Mr. Roso de Luna to find as many stars?

I have made numerous travel and I have never encountered any. It is true that I have not searched,
ignoring utility that could report.

Mr. Roso de Luna found his star to the two or three in the morning, and ran to a newspaper
for readers of the first edition had news the finding. I do not know how much you have given
the star the popular colleague. I, for Mr. Roso de Luna, I would have gone with her to New York and
would have offered to Mr. Hearst for any of its many newspapers. Mr. Hearst, who is a specialist
in patriotism, could then add a star American flag, but perhaps preferred to exploit the new star to
make neon signs. And if I need to hurry, then had my star led to the German embassy in Madrid.
Those Germans used everything and pay splendidly.

I've been very flattered to see my arrival ignited a new star in the Madrid sky. Unfortunately,
the new star was something like the new microbe, that everyone thought was Spanish and who come
from central Europe. Not just discovered anything completely, or in the region of the infinitely
small, nor that of the infinitely large.

Our new stars and our new microbes are more or less, as old as our new politicians.

IV

A NEW THEORY OF CLIMATE

What is going to you - I ask from abroad - in that beautiful land
of sunshine and sky blue?

Because in this beautiful land of sunshine and blue sky we spend our lives taking bromo-quinine
to combat constipation. Madrid is one of the coldest towns in Europe, and it is for one simple
reason: that no heaters. In Paris, as in Berlin, London and St. Petersburg, has been a time
when the climate was extremely cold, but gradually, has been artificially transformed natural
environment in those cities. Of course not warmed the atmosphere, it offered, for the moment,
insurmountable difficulties even for the same German chemical.

Have warmed, however, housing, facilities public trams and cars, etc., etc. Today we can say
that while Madrid shiver in the Berlin and London spend their winters at an average temperature
of 17 degrees. On the Friedrichstrasse and Oxford Street will now certainly colder than Alcalá street,
but not in the homes of Oxford Street or the Friedrichstrasse. Y as it is in the streets but in houses,
where you actually live, is that Madrid are living in a cold country,
while Londoners and Berliners are countries warm.

With that basis, it could form a theory against those who study influence of environment on men: the
theory of the artificial environment.

This new theory show that the character of each country depends on
its heating, and such demonstration would be of great importance because
it would lead to the following conclusion: for eliminate racial differences
that separate one people from another, and both have contributed the
origin of the European war, simply that everyone warms to the same
procedure heating their homes and put an identical temperature ...

I
have not found enough to represent the theory is outlined, or dispose
not time to deal in a matter so momentous and so little profit, but
I do not tell me that Spain, because of its climate, will always be
what is now.

Not I say that in this land of sunshine and blue sky men will, for
ever and centuries, a lazy nature, violent and incapable of discipline.

Do not tell me, finally, that the theater of Ibsen is not here because
it never understood the theater of a foggy country, and that English
laws are so unadaptable to the Spanish character as are waterproof
British climate of Spain.

Because Spain is a country not nothing but warm for a few months a
year, and because since they have invented the electric fans and central
heating, no countries warm and cold countries.

The climate no longer exists as a determinant of the character of
men. They are, in contrast, men who influence the climate.

Recognize that, fortunately, Madrid is already beginning to worry about improving yours.

V

TIME AND SPACE

I have an urgent matter to be ventilated with a friend. Since then, the friend who is opposed
to ventilate today.

- Does it seem to you that we meet tomorrow?

- Okay.

What time?

- Anytime. After lunch, for example ...

I do watch my friend that's not an hour.

After lunch is something too vague, too elastic.

- What time did you have lunch? - I ask.

- What what time lunch? As the lunch hour when all the world: a lunchtime ...

- But what time is lunch time for you?

"Noon? "The one in the afternoon? Do both ...?

- Over there, over there says my friend ...-- -. I lunch from one
to two.

Sometimes I sit at the table about three ... Anyway, at four am always free.

- Perfectly. Then we could cite us for four.

My friend nods.

- Of course, if I delay a few minutes - add - you wait for me.

Who says the four said a quarter past four or four and a half. In short, four to five I'll be
without fault in coffee. Do you agree?

I want to point out:

- Let's say five.

- What five?

Okay.

At five ... That is, from 5:00 to 5:30 ... One is not a train, what the devil! I suppose you
break a leg ...

- For citémonos for five and a half - I propose.

Then my friend comes up with a brilliant idea.

- Why do not quote us at snack time? - Suggests.

There is a new discussion to set the clock in terms of cocktail hour. Finally, we agreed to
meet seven to eight. The next day give the eight, and of course, my friend does not appear. Arrives
at half past eight throwing up the lights, and the waiter tells me I gone.

- No right - exclaims days later to find me on the street -. I do you fix a time, you make me run,
and it awaits you I do not even ten minutes. At eight average point I was in coffee.

And the strangest thing is that the indignation of my friend is real.

That of two men cited at eight have to meet at eight, he seems completely
absurd.

The logical thing for him is that look half-hour, three quarters of an hour or an hour later.

-
But you look good - I say -.

A quote is something that has to be so limited in time and space. What would you say if having
mentioned me in Gate Sun, found out that I had come to the appointment in the Cuatro Caminos?
Well I say that you when, having referred to the eight, I see that
you appear at eight-thirty.

From time to waste, you also despise space. And to respect the space, why why not also save
time some consideration?

- But with such precision that well, life would be impossible - says
my friend.

How do you explain that the accuracy and precision are used, contrary
to simplify life?

How do I convince him, coming on time for appointments, it saves time to invest in what you
want?

Impossible. The Spanish do not come on time for appointments, not because I consider that the
time is a precious thing, but on the contrary, because time does not matter to anyone in Spain.
Are not superior, while we are inferior. We are not above, but below, punctuality.

VI

WOMEN exotic

In Spain there is talk of men and women's conversations.

Matters of church for example, are women's issues. Not that the Spanish
hate the church.

On the contrary. When married woman looking for a religious feelings. You think that women should
have feelings religious, and must also have pretty eyes.

Religious feelings are feelings woman.

Without them, the woman would not be truly feminine.

With that women have feelings religious for their own ornament and dignity of home, husband and
satisfied, and goes quietly to coffee, variétés theater and even
a casino Republican ...

The policy, however, is men.

The woman who talks about politics in a circle men going through a tomboy, and the man who
talks about politics in front of a woman is considered almost as if he had spoken to the Linnet
policy. Positively Spanish politics is quite boring. This, however, consider it an issue for
single men, it will be increasingly. The same political writers should adopt a style more enjoyable
the day that our policy could comment in the presence of ladies.

But the conversations of men, the most common is that a careful review
of women.

Elsewhere, only if men talk about women.

The constant presence of women prevents it. Before them the topic is useless and unworkable. What
is going to talk about women? Best is to talk to them.

The Spanish, however, women could talk about travel:

- I have known
a woman once ...

And it comes a description reminiscent of descriptions
of exotic countries.

Some people, hearing the story has such a feeling like you're listening to a browser that has its
adventures in lands completely ignored ...

Outside Spain, and men
give much importance to women and girls did not give so important
to men.

These stakeholders have found that they need each other and have
decided to agree.

And such an agreement is imposed in Spain.

For while the agreement does not become established, not only will a Spanish life inharmonious
thing, but nobody will do anything this way. The women will always constitute for us the most important
thing.

VII

PROPERTIES

You can not live in Madrid - a friend tells me -. Why do not you an article from houses?

- It is impossible - I answered -.

How do you want me to do an article against houses in a place where there are none?

But, all things considered, if Madrid had houses, no need to write against them. All defects
in the houses of Madrid are condensed into one: the shortage. Because you can not move, the tenant
has had to adapt constantly. Madrid houses are bad are expensive because they are few. Of course the
government could intervene in this matter, but I more relying on a new epidemic that reduced
to fifty percent of our population capital.

Houses of Madrid!

Some time ago I threw myself to get one, and I do not remember having experienced ever greater abuse.

-
Is there heating? - I asked the concierge of a building where they
rented a room floor.

This hypothesis seemed to seriously offend the dignity of woman.

- No, sir - he said with pride -. Here are the old Spanish ...

And when I reached the corner and, after I fired, the concierge brought me back my steps.

    - What? - I cried.
    
    - That neither heating nor bathroom
    - I replied.

That said, the good lady stood me up. On his face was written the satisfaction that comes from
always made to give a lesson to anyone impertinent.

Then I set to explore the outlying neighborhoods, where modern buildings.

Tan these buildings are modern, that wood that are built, still green,
widened with delight the first scents of spring.

Under the veneer of wrist circular feel the sap, and one man - urban
and prosaic - is concerned that the doors will cover foliage and the
birds come to nest in the hallway.

All these houses have elevator, and all these lifts have a sign that says: "It does not work." In
one, however, the elevator had no sign, it made me think very bad service.

- This house is not working well - I thought.

And, speaking to the concierge, I questioned on the subject. I was wrong. The elevator going
admirably, and to prove it, the concierge told me that three days
before that perfect machinery had killed the occupant of the third.

-
Why we have off the floor - he said.

The history of the floor was not very seductive, but a tenant is willing to be in Madrid everything.

-
How much rent the vacated apartment? - I asked.

- Income thirty dollars, but have risen to thirty-eight. What do you want! The flat very good
and has a wonderful lift ...

Definitely, we can only hope that an epidemic to end half Madrid residents.
Of course, if this epidemic attacked the home only, no need that so
many people died.

VIII

GENDER PATRIOTISM tiny

I think a cupletista
is much more patriotic than a deputy or a senator. In Gender our tiny
theaters such thing as a vague belief, but very strong, that the woman
is an invention exclusively Spanish. A foreign not category of women
are recognized. Very little fat, little black, little illiterate.
They have an Andalusian accent or shawls, or Roma Grace or anything
...

- I'm Spanish, olé! - Sings a cupletista.

And to assert their
Spanish, bangs the table with a foot, and is engaged in one year,
to make flexure of kidneys to the beat of the music. Then he says
he was born, that is, or in the neighborhood of Wonders, or Vistillas,
or Triana, or Grenada. At times, to the sound of the jack, an Aragon
pleads cupletista, but who has heard of one that has born in the district
of Mr. Rahola? The lowest gender Spain is very limited, and my province
For example, the beautiful province of Pontevedra, so fertile in sailors,
politicians and crabs, not on it ...

- Spanish I - insists cupletista.

Then
in verses more or less consistent, adds:

- Where would be if not?
Where is this grace, this salt, these wanderings, these makings? ...

The
public will slowly swell into a mixed feeling of patriotism and enthusiasm
by cupletista.

- Viva Spain! - Screams the girl at the end.

- Viva!
- Answered several voices.

But I do not think anyone in Sagunto and
in Covadonga. We have said in what is Spain in the tiny genre: Wonderland
Vistillas, Triana, Granada ... If anything, some Aragon. And never
Manresa, and Getafe, and Santa Marta de Ortigueira, or a thousand
other people who pay, however, their contributions to the state and
law-abiding Quintas.

Miss Mary-Focela introduced into this kind of
couplets is considerable variation. It seems his verses were these:

I
fight like a lioness the cry of Viva Spain! And it runs through my
veins Malasaña blood ...

Couplet singers knew of strange people who
were fighting, we knew of others who struggled with rage, but that
Malasaña is quite a find. The public, seeing it, also due to feel
in their veins the blood flow of a heroic, capable of all the sacrifices.
Viva Spain! Viva grace! Mary-Focela Viva! ...

IX

STRIKE THE FALLEN
HORNS

Undeceive you - I told an old lover -. There's no bull ...

The
old fan, as all the old fans, thought that the bulls were divided
into meek and brave, and that the latter species is extinct. For my
part, I have acquired the belief that all bulls are equally tame,
and that if the space is treated, sometimes kill the fighters, is
for the same reason by which bullfighters try - also sometimes - to
kill the bull: to entertain the public. Days ago I was in a herd.
The bulls were grazing there's a perfectly bucolic, leaving the pet
cowboys and visitors.

- And these are the beasts? - I said.

- Man!
- They said -. What do you do here? And you will see in the square
...

This assumed that the bull does not develop its true nature until
it gets fierce the square, is like imagining that the tiger does not
develop his own until he lead to a circus. If the interior of Africa
to teach us about tigers very sociable, and if to our amazement we
were told that sociability was natural and that we expected to see
the tigers in Price, this answer would seem quite absurd. Therefore
also absurd it seemed to me the answer I gave in livestock on the
ferocity of bulls.  Billy saw and bided his time till the small Croesus
was alone.  He nabbed him, chucked him in a chicken-coop and stood guard for an hour while
Sada rode gloriously.

Through college they were comrades and rivals.  Billy had to work his way, for he was the poor
son of an invalid mother.  From college he had gone straight to a firm of rich manufacturers
and was now one of the big buyers.

He had pleaded with her not to come to Japan.  He loved her.  He wanted her.  When she had
persisted, he was furious and they had quarreled.  But she had thought she was right, then;
she did not know how dear Billy was, how big and splendid.  She had written to him but seldom,
nothing of her disappointment.  Maybe he had married.  She could not write now.  It would be
too much like begging, when she was at bay, for the love she had refused when all was well.
No, she could not tell him.

We talked long and earnestly in that old garden, and the wind that sifted through the pine-needles
and the waxy leaves was as gentle as if the spirit of Susan West had come to watch and to bless.

I gained a half promise from her that she would write to Billy at once, but I didn't stop there.

Unsuspected by Sada I learned his full address, and Mate, I wrote a letter to the auburn-haired
lover in Nebraska, in which I painted a picture that is going to cause something to happen,
else I am mistaken in my estimate of the spirit of the West in general and William Weston Milton
in particular.

I told him if he loved the girl to come as fast as steam would bring him; that I would help
him at the risk of anything, though I have no idea how.  I have just returned from a solitary
promenade to the post-office through the dark and lonely streets, so that letter will catch
to-morrow's American mail.

Sada told me that for some reason she had never mentioned Billy's name to Uncle.  Now isn't
that a full hand nestling up my half-sleeve?  Uncle thinks the way clear as an empty race-track,
and all he has to do is to saunter down the home stretch and gather in the prize-money.

Any scruple on the girl's part will be relentlessly and carelessly brushed aside as a bothersome
insect.  If she persists, there is always force.  He fears nothing from me.  I am a foreigner--from
his standpoint too crudely frank to be clever.

He doubtless argues, if he gives it any thought, that if I could I would not dare interfere.
And then I am so absorbed in color-prints!  So I am, and, I pray Heaven, in some way to his
undoing. No dancing. No There
are restaurants at night ... not just during the day. The police, on the slightest pretext,
closure here all the more fun and is only to dispute the vacationer these two powers superhuman: Nature
and Casino. Jean Jacques Rousseau would experience a serious annoyance to see that the casino
is due. Anatole France, however, for whom civilization a constant struggle of man against nature,
happy smile.

Sada goes to Kioto in the morning.  She promises not to show resistance, but to keep quiet
and alert, writing me at every opportunity.

I am sure Uncle's delight in securing so rich a prize as Hara will burst forth in a big wedding-feast
and many rich clothes for the trousseau.  I hope so.  Preparation will take time.  I would
rather gain time than treasure.

I put Sada to bed.  Tucked her in and cuddled her to sleep as if she had been my own daughter.

There she lies now.  Her face startlingly white against the mass of black hair.  The only sign
of her troubled day is a frequent half-sob and the sadness of her mouth, which is constantly
reading the riot act to her laughing eyes in the waking hours. 

And Julio Antonio, which was really very bad, he died. Probably could have pulled season yet,
but I do not know whether out of kindness or good taste, he died in full apotheosis. You did
well! Not die, he would have named scholar. He allegedly forced philanthropists make statues
of nasty, generals on horseback, politicians of his coat. Would have to model, with all its
vulgar and coarse like the face of the illustrious son each city, which is generally the chief
of it. Would have had to change their a broad brimmed hat, and bohemian life for a life serious
and respectable, and free art and official art. Did well to die, and, moreover, so long ago
that no one died here romantically! ...

But those who come back, I would advise you to follow the same procedure.

He organized a banquet to which only I refused to go. "Do not go - I said - and not because I am
one of those men who hesitate long before attending a banquet, but on the contrary, because
I do not usually hesitate ever. I just have a friend debuts a drama either, to publish novel, or,
simply, to be appointed minister for me to come to the inevitable
rush tribute banquet, but Julio Antonio is in a very different case.

If Julio Antonio had made a statue of the Earl of Romanones, dressed in top hat and frock coat,
a monument to the victims of the December 8 or a group dedicated to the heroes of April 13
I banquetearía without any problem. The omelet would be as bad as usual and yet, I resign to eat
thinking that there was a disproportion between she and the object whose event had made. Would
in a local minister more or less solemn, read letters and telegrams hear accession, listen to speeches
filled common places and all I seem to be gliding in perfect harmony and was fully natural.
But Julio Antonio has done a work either. He has not done anything passable, median one thing,
not a good thing, but very probably a great thing. And I, who Banquet Hall have any problem if you consider
an oyster, and you may Facilities but also earned him some talent, I absolutely refuse to
curb after have seen that wonderful statue lying to exhibit at the National Library building. That
is, I did not pay tribute to Julio Antonio for the simple reason that Julio Antonio is not stupid,
and this, which might seem a touch of humor, is not, after all, neither more nor less than
what is being done in so-called official circles. "

XIII

THE PHILOSOPHER'S STONE

Don Germain Botella, Alicante young physicist, says it has found a method decomposing the mercury
for gold, and gives us evidence. Why not give us some notes of one thousand pesetas? Handing
out gold, Mr. Botella we could easily convince anything but, above
all, we could convince them that had gold.

As the extrajese gold as mercury or any embassy, ​​it would be perfect for us secondary.

Excuse me Mr. Botella this observation from a layman, and not despise me too much about it.
If he considered the gold from a purely scientific standpoint, there
may not be among he and I as much difference as it seems at first
sight.

To me, Mr. Bottle, gold is also a theory ...
But Mr. bottle should be prepared for the news of his discovery is
greeted with a skepticism. There is nothing to find gold in Spain!  The tailless pink cat and the purple fish with the pale blue eyes are for the kiddies.

I am inclosing an original recipe sent in by Miss Turtle Swamp of Clear Water Village:

  Cake.

  1 cup of Desecrated coconut
  5 cup flowers
  1 small spoon and barmilla [vanilla]
  3 eggs skinned and whipped
  1 cup sugar
  Stir and pat in pan to cook.

HIROSHIMA, December, 1911.

Mate:

I would be ashamed to tell you how long it is between Jack's letters.  He says the activity
of the revolutionists in China is seriously interfering with traffic of every kind.  All right,
let it go at that!  Now he has gone way up north of Harbin.  In the name of anything why cannot
he be satisfied?  England is with him. I do not know who also is in the party.  Neither do
I care.  I do not like it a little bit.  Jealous?  The idea.  Just plain furious. I am no more
afraid of Jack falling in love with another woman than I am of Saturn making Venus a birthday
present of one of his rings. The trouble is she may fall in love with him, and it is altogether
unnecessary for any other woman to get her feelings disturbed over Jack.

I fail to see the force of his argument that it is not safe nor wise for any woman in that
country, and yet for him to show wild enthusiasm over the presence of the Britisher.  No, Jack
has lost his head over intellect.  It may take a good sharp blow for him to realize that intellect,
pure and simple, is an icy substitute for love.  Like most men he is so deadly sure of one,
he is taking a holiday with the other.

Of course you are laughing at me.  So would Jack.  And both would say it is unworthy.  That's
just it.  It is the measly little unworthies that nag one to desperation.  Besides, Mate, I
shrink from any more trouble, any more heart-aches as I would from names. The terror of the
by-gone years creeps over me and covers the present like a pall.

There is only one thing left to do.  Work.  Work and dig, till there is not an ounce of strength
left for worry.  I stay in the kindergarten every available minute.  The unstinted friendship
of the kiddies over there, is the heart's-ease for so many of life's hurts.

There are always the long walks, when healing and uplift of spirit can be found in the beauty
of the country.  I tramp away all alone. The little Swede begs often to go.  At first I rather
enjoyed him. But he is growing far too affectionate.  I am not equal to caring for two young
things; a broken-hearted girl and a homesick fat boy are too much for me.  He is improving
so rapidly I think it better for him to talk love stories and poetry to some one more appreciative.
I am not in a very poetical mood.  He might just as well talk to the pretty young teacher as
to talk about her all the time.

I have scores of friends up and down the many country roads I travel.  The boatmen on the silvery
river, who always wave their head rags in salute, the women hoeing in the fields with babies
on their backs, stop long enough to say good day and good luck.  The laughing red-cheeked coolie
girls pause in their work of driving piles for the new bridge to have a little talk about the
wonders of a foreigner's head.  With bated breath they watch while I give them proof that my
long hatpins do not go straight through my skull.

The sunny greetings of multitudes of children lift the shadows from the darkest day, and always
there is the glorious scenery; the shadowed mystery of the mountains, a turquoise sky, the
blossoms and bamboo.  The brooding spirit of serenity soon envelops me, and in its irresistible
charm is found a tender peace.

On my way home, in the river close to shore, is a crazy little tea-house.  It is furnished
with three mats and a paper lantern. The pretty hostess, fresh and sweet from her out-of-door
life, brings me rice, tea and fresh eel.  She serves it with such gracious hospitality it makes
my heart warm.  While I eat, she tells me stories of the river life.  I am learning about the
social life of families of fish and their numerous relatives that sport in the "Thing of Substance
River"; the habits of the red-headed wild ducks which nest near; of the god and goddesses who
rule the river life, the pranks they play, the revenge they take.  And, too, I am learning
a lesson in patience through the lives of the humble fishermen.  In season seven cents a day
is the total of their earnings.  At other times, two cents is the limit.  On this they manage
to live and laugh and raise a family.  It is all so simple and childlike, so free from pretension,
hurry and rush.  Sometimes I wonder if it is not we, with our myriad interests, who have strayed
from the real things of life.

On my road homeward, too, there is a crudely carved Buddha.  He is so altogether hideous, they
have put him in a cage of wooden slats. On certain days it is quite possible to try your fortune,
by buying a paper prayer from the priest at the temple, chewing it up and throwing it through
the cage at the image.  If it sticks you will be lucky.

My aim was not straight or luck was against me to-day.  My prayers are all on the floor at
the feet of the grinning Buddha.

Jack is in Siberia and Uncle has Sada.  I have not heard from her since she left.  I am growing
truly anxious.

January, 1912.

Dearest Mate:

At last I have a letter from Jack.  Strange to say I am about as full of enthusiasm over the
news he gives me as a thorn-tree is of pond-lilies.

He says he has something like a ton of notes and things on the various stunts of the bubonic
germ in Manchuria when it is feeling fit and spry.  But he is seized with a conviction that
he must go somewhere in northwest China where he thinks there is happy hunting-ground of evidence
which will verify his report to the Government.  Suppose the next thing I hear he will be chasing
around the outer rim of the old world hunting for somebody to verify the Government.

There is absolutely no use of my trying to say the name of the place he has started for.  Even
when written it looks too wicked to pronounce.  It is near the Pass that leads into the Gobi
Desert.

Jack wrote me to go to Shanghai and he would join me later.  I am writing him that I can't
start till the fate of Sada San is settled for better or for worse. They had been classmates Philosophy
in the College of San Carlos from 1827 to 1828, in whose last O'Reilly had left to go to Spain
and continue his studies until he received a lawyer, as received, making the patriotic dollars
just a few months before the day that we are speaking, with the use of Mayor. After two years away,
this was the first time who were, having had no occasion or mood Leonardo went to greet him,
perhaps because, While former classmates, he had not stopped being a member of a family the
proudest Havana, the first greatness of Spain. On the other hand, broke single and married again
a Madrid, a source of more to their tastes and interests were very different now than they were
when they were attending together to hear the eloquent philosopher friendly lessons Francisco
Javier de la Cruz.

The occasion of that influx of gentlemen and their servants was none other than the table dance
to be held in the evening the same day, at the top of the palace in the street San Ignacio at
the corner of Teniente Rey, hired for their duties by the Philharmonic Society in 1828. Since the days
of Carnival, in late February, when the celebrations coincided public through the marriage
of the Princess of Naples, María Cristina Fernando VII Spain, the Company aforesaid had not
reopened their classrooms.

A ring of ossified men, women and children have formed about me, staring with unblinking eyes,
till I feel as if I was full of peep holes.  It is not life, for neither youth nor love nor
sorrow has ever passed this way.  The tiniest emotion would shrivel if it dared begin to live.
Maybe they are better so.  But then, they have never known Jack.

How true it is that one big heart-ache withers up all the little ones and the joy of years
as well.  With this terror upon me, even Sada's desperate trouble has faded and grown pale
as the memory of a dream.  Jack is ill and I must get to him, though my body is racked with
the rough travel, and the ancient road holds the end of love and life for me.

Around the sad old world I am stretching out my arms to you, Mate, for the courage to face
whatever comes, and your love which has never failed me.

KALGAN.

Such wild unbelievable things have happened!

After twenty miles of intolerable shaking on the back of a camel, my battered body fell off
at the last stopping-place, which happened to be here.  There is no hotel.  But three blessed
European hoys living at this place--agents for a big tobacco firm--took me into their little
home.  From that time--ten days ago--till now, they have served and cared for me as only sons
who have not forgotten their mothers could do.

On that awful night I came, while forcing food on me, they said that Jack had stopped with
them on his way out to the desert, where he was to complete his work for the Government.  He
was to go part of the distance with the English woman, who, with her camels and her guides,
was traveling to the Siberian railroad.  The next day they heard the whole caravan had returned.
Four days out Jack had been taken ill.  The only available shelter was an old monastery about
a mile from the village.  To this he had been moved.  My hosts opened a window and pointed
to a far-away, high-up light.  It was like the flicker of a match in a vast cave of darkness.
They told me wonderful things of the rooms in the monastery, which were cut in the solid rock
of the mountain-side, and the strange dwarf priest who kept it.

They lied beautifully and cheerfully as to Jack's condition, and all the time in their hearts
they knew that he had the barest chance to live through the night.

The woman doctor had nursed him straight through, permitting no one else near.  The dwarf priest
brought her supplies.

Her last message for the day had been, "The crisis will soon be passed."

Even now something grips my throat when I remember how those dear boys worked to divert me,
until my strength revived.  They rigged up a battered steamer-chair with furs and bath robes,
put me in it, promising that as soon as I was rested they would see what could be done to get
me up to the monastery.  But I was not to worry.  All of them set about seeing I had no time
to think.  Each took his turn in telling me marvelous tales of the life in that wild country.
One boy brought in the new litter of puppies, begging me to carefully choose a name for each.
The two ponies were trotted out and put through their pranks before the door in the half light
of a dim lantern.

They showed me the treasures of their bachelor life, the family photographs and the various
little nothings which link isolated lives to home and love.  They even assured me they had
had the table-cloth and napkins washed for my coming.  Household interests exhausted, they
began to talk of boyhood days.  Their quiet voices soothed me.  Prom exhaustion I slept.  When
I woke, my watch said one o'clock.  The house was heavy with sleeping-stillness.

Through my window, far away the dim light wavered.  It seemed to be signaling me.  My decision
was quick.  I would go, and alone.  If I called, my hosts would try to dissuade me, and I would
not listen. For life or for death, I was going to Jack.  The very thought lent me strength
and gave my feet cunning stealthiness.  A high wall was around the house but, thank Heaven,
they had forgotten to lock the gate.

Soon I was in the deserted, deep-rutted street shut in on either side by mud hovels, low and
crouching close together in their pitiful poverty.  There was nothing to guide me, save that
distant speck of flame.  Further on, I heard the rush of water and made out the dim line of
an ancient bridge.  Half way across I stumbled. From the heap of rags my foot had struck, came
moans, and, by the sound of it, awful curses.  It was a handless leper.  I saw the stumps as
they flew at me.  Sick with horror, I fled and found an open place.

The light still beckoned.  The way was heavy with high, drifted sand.  The courage of despair
goaded me to the utmost effort. Forced to pause for breath, I found and leaned against a post.
It was a telegraph pole.  In all the blackness and immeasurable loneliness, it was the solitary
sign of an inhabited world.  And the only sound was the wind, as it sang through the taut wires
in the unspeakable sadness of minor chords.  A camel caravan came by, soft-footed, silent and
inscrutable.  I waited till it passed out to the mysteries of the desert beyond the range of hills.

I began again to climb the path.  It was lighter when I crept through a broken wall and found
myself in a stone courtyard, with gilded shrines and grinning Buddhas.  One image more hideous
than the rest, with eyes like glow-worms, untangled its legs and came towards me.  I shook
with fright.  But it was only the dwarf priest--a monstrosity of flesh and blood, who kept
the temple.  I pointed to the light which seemed to be hanging to the side of the rocks above.
He slowly shook his head, then rested it on his hands and closed his eyes.  I pushed him aside
and painfully crawled up the shallow stone stairs, and found a door at the top.  I opened it.
Lying on a stone bed was Jack, white and still.  A woman leaned over him with her hand on his
wrist.  Her face was heavily lined with a long life of sorrow.  On her head was a crown of
snow-white hair.  She raised her hand for silence.  I fell at her feet a shaking lump of misery.

I could not live through it again, Mate--those  remaining  hours of agony, when every second
seemed the last for Jack.  But morning dawned, and with the miracle of a new-born day came
the magic gift of life.  When Jack opened his eyes and feebly stretched out his hand to me,
my singing heart gave thanks to God.

And so the crisis was safely passed.  And the hateful science I believed was taking Jack from
me, in the skilful hands of a good woman, gave him back to me.

The one comfort left me in the humiliation of my petty, unreasoning jealousy--yes, I had been
jealous--was to tell her.

And she, whose name was Edith Bowden, opened to me the door of her secret garden, wherein lay
the sweet and holy memories of her lover, dead in the long ago.

For forty long and lonesome years she had unfalteringly held before her the vision of her young
sweetheart and his work, and through them she had toiled to make real his ideals.

I take it all back, Mate.  A career that makes such women as this is a beautiful and awesome thing.

In spite of all my pleadings to come with us, Miss Bowden started once again on her lonely
way across the wind-swept plains, back to Europe and her work, leaving me with a never-to-be-forgotten
humility of spirit and an homage in my heart that never before have I paid a woman.

I am too polite to say it, but I have had a taste of the place you spell with four letters.
Also of Heaven.  Just now, with Jack's thin hand safely in mine, I am hovering around the doors
of Paradise in the house of the boys in Kalgan.  If you could see the dusty little Chinese-Mongolian
village, hanging on the upper lip of the mouth of the Gobi Desert, you would think it a strange
place to find bliss.  But joy can beautify sand and Sodom.

Yesterday my hosts made me take a ride out into the Desert.  Oh, Mate, in spots these glittering
golden sands are sublime.  My heart was so light and the air so rare, it was like flying through
sunlit space on a legless horse.

Life, or what answers to it, has been going on in the same way since thousands of years before
Pharaoh went on that wild lark to the Red Sea.  Every minute I expected to see Abraham and
Sarah trailing along with their flocks and their families, hunting a place to stake out a claim,
and Noah somewhere on a near-by sand-hill, taking in tickets for the Ark Museum, while the
"two by two's" fed below.  I never heard of these friends being in this part of the country,
but you can never tell what a wandering spirit will do.

Jack is getting fat laughing at me.  But Jack never was a lady and does not know what havoc
imagination and the spell of the East can play with a loving but lonesome wife.  And take it
from me, beloved, he never will.  Nothing gained in exposing all your follies.  He sends love
to you.  So do I--from the joyful heart of a woman whose most terrible troubles never happened.

PEKING, February, 1912.

Mate:

I do not know whether I can write you sanely or not.  But write you I must.  It is my one outlet
in these days of anxious waiting.  I have just cabled Billy Milton, in Nebraska, to come by
the first steamer.  I have not an idea what he will do when he gets to Japan, or how I will
help him; but he is my one hope.

Yesterday, on our arrival here, I found a desperate letter from Sada San, written hurriedly
and sent secretly.  She finds that the man Hara, whom her uncle has promised she shall marry,
has a wife and three children!

The man, on the flimsiest pretest, has sent the woman home to clear his establishment for the
new wife.  And, Mate, can you believe it, he has kept the children--the youngest a nursing
baby, just three months old!

One of the geisha girls in the tea-house slipped in one night and told Sada.  She went at once
to Uncle and asked him if it was true. He said that it was, and that Sada should consider herself
very lucky to be wanted by such a man.  Upon Sada telling him she would die before she would
marry the man, he laughed at her.  Since then she has not been permitted to leave her room.

The lucky day for marriage has been found and set.  Thank goodness, it is seventeen days from
now, and if Billy races across by Vancouver he can make it.  In the meantime Nebraska seems
a million miles away.  I know the heartbeats of the fellow who is riding to the place of execution,
with a reprieve.  But seventeen days is a deadly slow nag.

I had already told Jack of my anxiety for Sada San and of the fate that was hanging over her,
but now that the blow has suddenly fallen I dare not tell him.  In a situation like this I
know what Jack would want to do; and in his present weakened condition it might be fatal.

It is useless for me to appeal to anybody out here.  Those in Japan who would help are powerless.
Those who could help would smile serenely and tell me it was the law.  And law and custom supersede
any lesser question of right or wrong.  By it the smallest act of every inhabitant is regulated,
from the quantity of air he breathes to the proper official place for him to die.  But, imagine
the majesty of any law which makes it a ghastly immorality to mildly sass your mother-in-law,
and a right, lawful and moral act for a man, with any trumped-up excuse, to throw his legal
wife out of the house, that room may be made for another woman who has appealed to his fancy.

Japan may not need missionaries, but, by all the Mikados that ever were or will be, her divorce
laws need a few revisions more than the nation needs battleships.  You might run a country
without gunboats, but never without women.

This case of Hara is neither extreme nor unusual.  I have been face to face in this flowery
kingdom with tragedies of this kind when a woman was the blameless victim of a man's caprice,
and he was upheld by a law that would shame any country the sun shines on.  By a single stroke
of a pen through her name, on the records at the courthouse, the woman is divorced--sometimes
before she knows it. Then she goes away to hide her disgrace and her broken heart--not broken
because of her love for the man who has cast her off, but because, from the time she is invited
to go home on a visit and her clothes are sent after her, on through life, she is marked. 
If she has children, the chances are that the husband retains possession of them, and she is
seldom, if ever, permitted to see them. In my second career should have come to general as my services fajaron than
others making them very weak against the fatherland, but he was son of a Member: quitáronme epaulets,
envolviéronme in common misfortune, and circumstances led me to Ceuta, God knows where I wanted
to go, where did the life of inmate and bad married any of these nooses alone enough to kill
a man. You see I had no guilt. Who the hell I married? Who made me military? Who gave me opinions?
In prison is not race but is much resentment. However, we in prison, and since I was a good man, contúveme,
pretended, but as I walked by cafes, or rant, means that the circumstances so required to thrive,
not only employed, but I sang swallow it. Irriteme: heaven is my witness, I was not born to a journalist;
but circumstances put me pen in hand: I articles against that government; and as it was then
a free to think as that was over, I took several stabs a few fans, which were up to riots in the
streets. This was the crown bay circumstances that led to my writing career. Escapeme, and went
to meet with those of the faith: They told me there that the circumstances did not allow rows
to admit a man who was husband of the daughter of a member of the courts of Cadiz, and I hanged
much favor.

"Not being able to live as a realist, we went to France, where liberal as I put in a tank, with six
rooms per day.

Finally came the amnesty, Mr Figaro. Eh! Thanks a gracious Queen, and there are no colors,
no more games. Now I used, I say to Me: I have talent, my lights are known, I'm useful ... But
alas! Mr. Figaro, I have no mother, I have no wife, I have no money, I have no friends, the circumstances
of my life prevented me from purchasing relationships. If it should become visible for power,
perhaps achieved: their intentions are the best in the world, but how to break through the
cloud of porters and messengers who take cover and defend the arrival at the destination? Applications
presented papers alone are wet. There are many who ask for asking! So many refuse to deny! -
Hundred memorials have given so many backs I've seen .-- Let you, we will see if these circumstances
are set, I say some .-- Wait, I meet the others: there are so many suitors in these circumstances
.-- But, sir, "replied I, it must also live in these circumstances. And there are no circumstances
for which they do it?

"This, Mr Figaro, my position or the circumstances I do not understand,
or am I the man unhappiness of the world.

The son of English, should have been rich, judge, writer, general, male outside opinions, you
will probably end its three different races in a only real hospital, thanks to circumstances,
while others were not born for nothing, and have had really all possible opinions, walked,
walk and walk always raised on stilts by the same circumstances .-- Edward Priestley, or man the
circumstances. "

I can only answer to Mr. Priestley that his injury was, if we are
to speak commonly, to be born poor, evil has no choice: if we have
to reason, to bring always bartered the circumstances, not knowing
that while there are men the true circumstances is intriguing, be
well related, look over what you have, lie more than you know; smear
can not answer; abuse of good faith, writing for, not against of the
commander, have a very strong opinion, but inside all is despised,
seeking that opinion which has always be there to win, and shouting
in time and place relevant, known to men, look at them indoors as
instruments, and treat as friends, cultivate the friendship of the
fine, as productive land, marry early, and not by honesty, gratitude
and other illusions, not love but lip service and that of things that
can be used ...

But, holy God, cry a rigid moralist, what a picture!

Machiavellian principles! - Figaro does not say they are good, Mr. Morales, but neither made
the world Figaro as it is, or what has to amend or change the human heart to reach all possible
sentences. The circumstances make business men what they want to be, and can with men weak, strong men
make them at his pleasure, or taking them as they come, make sábenlas to their advantage. What
are therefore the circumstances? Just as the fortune words empty of meaning that is downloaded
to man responsibility ideal beings of his blunders, the most times, nothing. Almost always the
talent is everything.

BOARD-O-CASTEL BRANCO

There is no such thing as a Board, if it is, above all, to join those
whom God raised him.

Can not do anything the people in a board may have nothing to do either, but nothing is more necessary
than a board, so that, as a party is born, when pónenle on board as they had to put in nurse,
and no sooner opens his eyes to the light is and coupled, which is no small advantage. The
Board, therefore, is the precursor of a game usually, and this kind of joints are always those
roads intercepting, or intercepted when are not taking air out of the realm, or taking ran away
and that all taken together.

The day that draws our attention is that of o-Castel-Branco.

Begin to dusk in O-Castel-Branco, and stood thus obscure the horizon
when happened to pass by there one of these healthy Spanish of the
last century, and little or no government can be cured; of those who
say I always have to rule, take it everywhere.

Which was the Spanish to Castel-Branco-o, that inquiry would be to slow down. Just know that going
and coming, when it was found stopped in the middle of the way by a Portuguese, with broken
voice and expensive lost cause:

- Casteçao - he said - is vassal Emperor 'Carlos Senhor do you? "Vien de Castella?

Entendíasele a little closer to Castilian Galician government that
aches, and a calm voice and peaceful continent

- I do not know who
I am vassal - said, - and urges me know, but I'm going to my business:
I did not get king or remove the king, who walks the road be careful
...

Enfadábase and Portuguese, and was something dreadful.

Conocíalo the farmer, and prior to cast the house through the window, although there was no
house or window:

- Do not be angry, Sir Portuguese - said - that I will always be a vassal of whom send, it
is known that I and my party will never decompose. But who is my king in this land?

- Eu Senhor Carlos V.

- Well, congratulations are - said the Castilian, - for me out there let me back to reign my lady the
queen ...

- Casteçao! - Do not be angry with your grace ... and there came some
buddies and the Portuguese people from the bad side and Spanish on
the good words.

They had gone a few steps when the news spread around Castel-Branco, or how had become a vassal
of His Imperial Majesty. It should be noted that as every day does not proportion is His Imperial
Majesty to see a vassal, go for it because the subjects by clouds,
it was natural decidiose and was in the order of things, and was so
as a nation of vassals usually solemnize the entrance of a king, so
it seemed fitting that a kings village solemnize the entry of a vassal.

They fell, then, flying the Bell: on this occasion there were those
who said they want to start things, and he added that the rule does
not just begun.

I say, who took to flight the bells, and the farmer is stunned; truth is that the noise was
not for nothing.

- What party is tomorrow? - Asked the good man.

- Celebrate the arrival of your worship casteçao.

- Does my arrival? You see what a difference! Back in Spain no one ever celebrated my comings
and goings, and that you always walked mint in Mecca, I see that in this country are paying
more in each.

In these and entertaining purposes came to a house with a large sample, where fat lyrics said:

SUPREME
GOVERNING BOARD ALL SPAIN WITH INDIAN

The farmer would not enter, but caused him to force the Portuguese.

Bent, then the head, and from step to step he found himself in a large room as a kingdom, if we
consider that there realms are like rooms.

Hallab of this stuff to the spartan room, because I was naked, lying
around Messrs. Board seats, but out of position, it is said in honor
of the truth.

        Lights were few and dim.
    A bad mirror were served two purposes, to see many being few, and
comfort thus the afflicted soul, and to say from time to time each
other: "Look Excellence in the mirror.

"Because it is of note that is given every one to two things, namely, goodnight and excellence.

Porter
had not, truth is that neither had doors, as the home of this bad place that, or not have, or
have not closed.

A bad table in the middle, and a bad secretary, were the furniture that made up the whole outfit.

I
do not know where I read that some Indian land the tribe's supreme congress meets, to deliberate,
in large jugs of fresh water, where its members are immersed naked, leaving only his head out of
the jar to deliberate. There is no denying that there is great similarity between the Board
of Castel-o-Branco and the congress of the pitchers, and that the Carlist that make up a wild
form and the other are equally fresh.

Dominated the box end of the meeting room of the treasurer general of the suitor, Don Matías Jarana,
because in times of trouble having money is the chief clerk, who,
if there was a great treasurer was great canon.

That said, I think a lot of toilet stop to describe, we are confident that the intelligent reader
will have figured it as already era. Pressed to his side the Minister of Finance a bad sidewalk,
moaning not so much weight noble holding, for the bad state it was. Therefore Tambaleábase
His Excellency the moment: the farmer figurósele oscillating shaking movement of His Excellence,
but is found out that it was the wrong seat.

Thin, dry, and faced contradiction Notary of kingdoms was Mr. George Pick, who had been de Coria.

Elsewhere could be seen standing in an attitude of flight to the first order, one end of the reservation,
supporter of the year was 23. It represented the Minister of War, and was called Square, well
be.

A clerk of council of Coria and two characters, as supreme advisors Board, pretended to meditate on
the good looks in a corner of the room.

Unspeakable was the joy of the Supreme Council when the Portuguese were presented to our poor peasant
as a vassal of His Imperial Majesty.

- Excellencies, - said Mr.
Treasurer in a loud voice, - to recognize in that vassal finger of
the Lord has already come the day of the triumph of His Imperial Majesty,
and now is a vassal at the same time, all has come.

I think that in view of this development we deliberate.

- As for what to discuss - then said Mr notary, - I remember Mr President this is a Board.

-
I do not remember - then the president said, - note that this is
the first Board of I have the honor of an individual.

- It is known
- said the notary - and write it down in the record.

Speak, then, if you know and if you have what His Excellency the Minister of Finance.

- Awaken you - then the president told the Portuguese that made Usher
- wake him up you, it seems that His Excellency sleep.

Portuguese drew near to His Excellency that actually slept, and said in their language:

- Ignore that His Excellency is on board, it is time to talk.

Dreamed at the time His Excellency that he came over all the armies of the queen and getting up
from her nightmare with difficulty

- Do I speak? - Said, - we shall see.

The improvements, therefore, although we do not touch the say, improvements ...

- In order, the order - interrupted the president: - what is it improvement?

- I dreamed we were in Spain - said His Excellency troubled .-- Pardon Board. Therefore speaks another,
I'm not for the step. My intermission otherwise not urgent. My ministry ...

- His Excellency - the president said, - true, but just arrived ...

- Has reached the ranch, has become my ministry? - Asked bewildered
Mr. Noodle, seeking eyes everywhere if he would see a weight ...

-
Not yet, but.

- Ah! since then - said the minister, - I repeat, no
hurry, - and turning in sidewalk and to the Portuguese: - Let me know
you Don Ambrosio de Castro y Pajares, Almendrugo, Albuquerque Oliveira
and Caraballo and Santarém, on the arrival of the estate.

That said, His Excellency again to tie the broken thread of his happy dream, where it is known
that dreamed was indeed a minister.

- I hab ... b. .. blare - then told a counselor who was a stutterer supreme, - I speak, I s.
.. s. .. s. .. gone pro ... pr ... pr ... pro ... curator.

- Better
not talk anyone - then the notary said the president's ear - if it
about the Lord ...

- Di ... di ... well said sir not ... Notary -
then told the counselor sat down, - p ... p. .. by ... because it
would never end ...

- I ask the word - said he was at his side.

-
Who the hell has to give to you - said the president then piqued,
- if anyone have it?

- Remember to His Excellency - said the lawyer,
- that the government order of His Imperial Majesty can not ask to
speak, and that is bad sounding phrase, or talking at once, or not
talk.

- If Mr. Cuadrado is not to talk - said the president then,
- we will go home.

- More than I am to do that to speak - said His
Excellency, - but force will therefore not Some talk.

I say first that I do not give a step forward unless it is agreed in tomorrow morning to sign
a decree by His Imperial Majesty ... Huh?

- Adelante.

- Well.

I declare as a faithful and obedient vassal of His Imperial Majesty
Mr. Carlos V, for who selflessly to pour the first drop of my blood,
do not follow the party if His Majesty does not sign.

- Mal may prevent
the Board to such generosity.

- I therefore propose - excellency
continued out, Minister of War, - the following order to bring to
the firm.

"I, Don Carlos V, by the grace of the Reverend Father Vaca, and His Excellency Square, emperor,
etc. all the kingdoms here .-- .-- Without I-command on reasons as
to eliminate the coastal and border police, and reorganize the old
guard, leaving all the funds available to the most excellent Mr. Square
"Emperor .-- I .-- The Secretary of War Square.

And the soon to be Mr. vassal of the guard is present, in charge for now and until further, to obey
government orders.

- High - said when he arrived here Mr. Canon president - which I will bring my decree also
and reads the blur, mutatis mutandis.

(We could not have at hand any copy of this most exquisite blur of
errands we've practiced, but infer left more or less its tenor.

Good God, and what things get lost in this world!)

Scored the notary in the minutes the second decree, and went on to
propose the following that had of writing as the Minister of Gracia
y Justicia, apart from the grace and justice: he said and the blur:

"Art
1. º In view of the ease with which owns and governs His Imperial
Majesty the Lord Don Carlos V these her realms, all who see and understand
the present, will be excited spontaneously and is filled with sincere
and voluntary joy, sorrow of life, on arrival to his knowledge this
decree: enthusiasm must take three consecutive days without intermission,
from six o'clock on the dot, which begin until ten at night at least,
that may keep everyone calm.

Section 2. º Unable to conceive of the Supreme Board of Castel-Branco, or abuse of lights introduced
in these realms of some time now, and assumes zero suppresses all lit highlights and light, considering
that only serve to impress more often than their beloved subjects, and orders that no victory
was not solemnized, although could potentially one day casually with that kind of joy in sports
than anyone but the oil planters.

Section 3.

No prohibited as harmful all improvements made, should be considered no that was done either
unintentionally, wishing it will not do.

Article 4. º Convinced the Board that nothing is out of the schools,
but noise, and to warm head of the beloved children vassals of Don
Carlos V, which are closed would open: should forget every neighbor
in the non-renewable period of three days, from the date it knew little
or much, lest you forget where you have it unless you appropriate.

  Alas! he reckoned without a woman.  She knew a man outside the city walls--a
leader of an organization--half soldiery, half bandits--who thirsted for the chance to pay
off countless scores against officers and private citizens inside.  After a vain effort to
win back her lover, the flower-girl communicated with the captain of the rebel band, who had
only been deterred from entering the city by a high wall twenty feet thick.  She told him to
be ready to come in on a certain night--the gates would be open.  The night came. She slipped
from doorway to doorway through the guarded streets till she reached the appointed place. 
Even the sentries unconsciously lent a hand to her plan, in leaving their posts and seeking
a tea-house fire by which to warm their half-frozen bodies. The one-time jewel of the harem,
who had seldom lifted her own teacup, tugged at the mighty gates with her small hands till
the bars were raised and in rushed the mob.  She raced to her home, decked herself in all the
splendid jewels he had given her, stuck red roses in her black hair, and stood on a high roof
and jeered her lover as he fled for his life through the narrow streets.

The city is bright with the fires started by the rabble.  The yellow roofs, the pink walls
and the towering marble pagodas catch the reflection of the flames, making a scene of barbaric
splendor that would reduce the burning of Rome to a feeble little bonfire.

The pitiful, the awful and the very funny are so intermixed, my face is fatally twisted trying
to laugh and cry at the same time. Right across from my window, on the street curbing, a Chinaman
is getting a hair-cut.  In the midst of all the turmoil, hissing bullets and roaring mobs,
he sits with folded hands and closed eyes as calm as a Joss, while a strolling barber manipulates
a pair of foreign shears.  For him blessed freedom lies not in the change of Monarchy to Republic,
but in the shearing close to the scalp the hated badge of bondage--his pigtail.

And, Mate, the first thing the looters do when they enter a house is to snatch down the telephones
and take them out to burn; for, as one rakish bandit explained, they were the talking-machines
of the foreign devils and, if left, might reveal the names of the looters!

High-born ladies with two-inch feet stumble by, their calcimined faces streaked with tears
and fright.  Gray-haired old men shiver with terror and try to hide in any small corner.  Lost
children and deserted ones, frantic with fear, cling to any passer-by, only to be shoved into
the street and often trampled underfoot.  And through it all, the mob runs and pitilessly mows
down with sword and knife as it goes, and plunders and sacks till there is nothing left.

As I stood watching only a part of this horror, I heard a long-haired brother near me say,
as he kept well under cover, "Inscrutable Providence!"  But (my word!) I don't think it fair
to lay it all on Providence.

So far the foreign Legations have been well guarded.  But there is no telling how long the
overworked soldiers can hold out.  When they cannot, the Lord help the least one of us.

Jack's friends are working day and night, guarding their property.

I guess the Seeker found more of the plain unvarnished Truth in the East than he bargained
for.  He and Dolly have disappeared from Peking.

Nobody undresses these nights and few go to bed.  Our bodyguard is the room-boy.  I asked him
which side he was on, and without a change of feature he answered, "Manchu Chinaman.  Allee
samee bimeby, Missy, I make you tea."  I have a suspicion that he sleeps across our door, for
his own or our protection, I am not sure which; but sometimes, when the terrible howls of fighters
reach me, as I doze in a chair, I turn on the light and sit by my fire to shake off a few shivers,
trying to make believe I 'm home in Kentucky, while Jack sleeps the sleep of the convalescent.
Then a soft tap comes at my door and a very gentle voice says, "Missy, I make you tea."  Shades
of Pekoe!  I 'll drown if this keeps up much longer.  He comes in, brews the leaves, then drops
on his haunches and looks into the fire.  Not by the quiver of an eyelash does he give any
sign, no matter how close the shots and shouts. Inscrutable and immovable, he seems a thing
utterly apart from the tremendous upheaval of his country.  And yet, for all anybody knows,
he may be chief plotter of the whole movement.  His unmoved serenity is about the most soothing
thing in all this Hades.  I am not really and truly afraid.  Jack is with me, and just over
there, above the crimson glare of the burning city, gently but surely float the Stars and Stripes.

Good night, beloved Mate.  I will not believe we are dead till it happens.  Besides, I simply
could not die till Jack and I have saved Sada San.

By the way, I start for Japan tomorrow.  The prayers of the congregation are requested!

KIOTO HOTEL, KIOTO, March, 1912.

Beloved Mate:

Rejoice with me!  Sing psalms and give thanks.  Something has happened.  I do not know just
what it is, but little thrills of happiness are playing hop-scotch up and down my back, and
my bead is lighter than usual.

Be calm and I will tell you about it.

In the first place, I got here this morning, more dead than alive, after days of travel that
are now a mere blur of yelling crowds, rattling trains and heaving seas.  A wire from Yokohama
was waiting.  Billy had beat me here by a few hours.  At noon, to-day, a big broad-shouldered
youth met me, whom I made no mistake in greeting as Mr. Milton.  Billy's eyes are beautifully
brown. William's chin looks as if it was modeled for the purpose of dealing with tea-house Uncles.

Not far from the station is a black-and-tan temple--ancient and restful.  To that we strolled
and sat on the edge of the Fountain of Purification, which faces the quiet monastery garden,
while we talked things over.  That is, Billy did the questioning; I did the talking to the
mystic chanting of the priests.

I quickly related all that I knew of what had happened to Sada, and what was about to happen.
There was no reason for me to adorn the story with any fringes for it to be effective.  Billy's
face was grim.  He said little; put a few more questions, then left me saying he would join
me at dinner in the hotel.

I passed an impatient, tedious afternoon.  Went shopping, bought things I can never use, wondering
all the time what was going to be the outcome.  Got a reassuring cable from Jack in answer
to mine, saying all was well with him.

Mr. Milton returned promptly this evening.  He ordered dinner, then forgot to eat.  He did
not refer to the afternoon; and long intimacy with science has taught me when not to ask questions.
There was only a fragment of a plan in my mind; I had no further communication from Sada, and
knew nothing more than that the wedding was only a day off.

We decided to go to Uncle's house together.  I was to get in the house and see Sada if possible,
taking, as the excuse for calling, a print on which, in an absent-minded moment, I had squandered
thirty yen.

Billy was to stay outside, and, if I could find the faintest reason for so doing, I was to
call him in.  This was his suggestion.

I found Uncle scintillating with good humor and hospitality. Evidently his plans were going
smoothly; but not once did he refer to them.  I asked for Sada.  Uncle smiled sweetly and said
she was not in.  Ananias died for less!  He was quite capable of locking her up in some very
quiet spot.  I was externally indifferent and internally dismayed.  I showed him my print.
At once he was the eager, interested artist and he went into a long history of the picture.

Though I looked at him and knew he was talking, his words conveyed no meaning.  I was faint
with despair.  It was my last chance.  I could have wagered Uncle's best picture that Billy
was tearing up gravel outside.  I had been in the house an hour, and had accomplished nothing.
Surely if I stayed long enough something had to happen.

Suddenly out of my hopelessness came a blessed thought.  Uncle had. once promised to show me
a priceless original of Hokusai.  I asked if I might see it then.  He was so elated that without
calling a servant to do it for him he disappeared into a deep cupboard to find his treasure.

For a moment, helpless and desperate, I was swayed with a mad impulse to lock him up in the
cupboard; but there was no lock.

It was so deadly still it hurt.  Then, coming from the outside, I heard a low whistle with
an unmistakable American twist to it, followed by a soft scraping sound.  My heart missed two
beats.  I did not know what was happening; nor was I sure that Sada was within the house; but
something told me that my cue was to keep Uncle busy.  I obeyed with a heavy accent.  When
he appeared with his print, I began to talk.  I recklessly repeated pages of text-books, whether
they fitted or not; I fired technical terms at him till he was dizzy with mental gymnastics.

He smoothed out his precious picture.  I fell upon it.  I raved over the straight-front mountains
and the marceled waves in that foolish old woodcut as I had never gushed over any piece of
paper before, and I hope I never will again.  Not once did he relinquish his hold of that faded
deformity in art, and neither did I.

Surely I surprised myself with the new joys I constantly found in the pigeon-toed ladies and
slant-eyed warriors.  Uncle needed absorption, concentration and occupation.  Mine was the
privilege to give him what he required.

No further sound from the garden and the silence drilled holes into my nerves.  I was so fearful
that the man would see my trembling excitement, I soon made my adieux.

Uncle seemed a little surprised and graciously mentioned that tea was being prepared for me.
I never wanted tea less and solitude more.  I said I must take the night train for Hiroshima.
It was a sudden decision; but to stay would be useless.

I said, "Sayonara," and smiled my sweetest.  I had a feeling I would never see dear Uncle Mura
on earth again and doubtless our environment will differ in the Beyond.

I went to the gate.  It faced two streets.  Both were empty.  Not a sign of Billy nor the jinrickshas
in which we had come.  I trod on air as I tramped back to the hotel.

HIROSHIMA, Five Days Later, 1912.

Mate dear:

I am back in my old quarters--safe.  Why should n't I be!  A detective has been my constant
companion since I left Kioto, sitting by my berth all night on the train, and following me
to the gates of the School!

I had planned to start back to Peking as soon as Sada and Billy were clear and away.  But this
detective business has made me very wary--not to say weary--and I 've had to postpone my return
to Jack to await the Emperor's pleasure and lest I bring more trouble on Sada's head, by following
too closely on her heels; for I suspect the blessed elopers are themselves on the way to China.

When I took my walk into the country the afternoon after I got here, I saw the detective out
of the back of my head, and a merry chase I led him--up the steepest paths I knew, down the
rocky sides, across the ferry, and into the remote village, where I let him rest his body in
the stinging cold while I made an unexpected call.  For once he earned his salary and his supper.

That night I was in the sitting-room alone.  A glass door leads out to an open porch.  Conscious
of a presence, I looked up to find two penetrating eyes fixed on me.  It made me creepy and
cold, yet I was amused.  I sat long and late, but a quiet shadow near the door told me I was
not alone.  Even when in bed I could hear soft steps under my window.

I have just come from an interview that was deliciously illuminating.

Sada San has disappeared; and, so goes their acute reasoning, as I was the last person in Uncle's
house, before her absence was discovered, the logical conclusion is that I have kidnapped her.

Two hours ago the scared housemaid came to announce that "two Mr. Soldiers with swords wanted
to speak to me."

I went at once, to find my guardian angel and the Chief of Police for this district in the
waiting-room.  We wasted precious minutes making inquiries about one another's health, accentuating
every other word with a bow and a loud indrawn breath.  We were tuning up for the business in hand.

The chief began by assuring me that I was a teacher of great learning.  I had not heard it
but bowed.  It was poison to his spirit to question so honorable, august, and altogether wise
a person, but I was suspected of a grave offense, and I must answer his questions.

Where was my home?

Easy.

How did I live?

Easier.

Who was my grandfather?

Fortunately I remembered.

Was I married?

Muchly.

Where was my master?

Did not have any.  My husband was in China.

Was I in Japan by his permission?

I was.

Had I been sent home for disobedience?  Please explain.

No explanation.  I was just here.

Did I know the penalty for kidnaping?

No, color-prints interested me more.

Had any of my people ever been in the penitentiary?

No, only the Legislature.

At this both men looked puzzled.  Then the Chief made a discovery.

"Ah-h," he sighed, "American word for crazysylum!"

Would Madame positively state that she knew nothing of the girl's whereabouts.  Madame positively
and truthfully so stated.  I did not know.  I only knew what I thought; but, Mate, you cannot
arrest a man for thinking.  After a grilling of an hour or so they left me, looking worried
and perplexed.  They had never heard of Billy, and I saw no use adding to their troubles. 
Nobody seems to have noticed him at dinner with me; and now that I think of it, he had men
strange to the hotel pulling the jinrickshas.

It was dear of Billy not to implicate me.  I am ignorant of what really happened, but wherever
they are I am sure Sada is in the keeping of an honorable man.

Last night, after I closed this letter, I had a cable.  It said:

  "Married in heaven,
    "BILLY AND SADA."

But the cables must have been crossed, for it was dated Shanghai; or else the operator was
so excited over repeating such a message he forgot to put in the period.

March 15.

Just received a letter from Billy and Sada.  It is a gladsome tale they tell.  Young Lochinvar,
though pale with envy, would how to Billy's direct method.  I can see you, blessed Mate that
you are, smiling delightedly at the grand finale of the true love story I have been writing
you these months.  Billy says on the night it all happened he tramped up and down, waiting
for me to call him, till he wore "gullies in the measly little old cow-path they call a street."

The passing moments only made him more furious.  Finally he decided to walk right into the
house, unannounced, and find Sada if he had to knock Uncle down and make kindling wood of the
bamboo doll-house.  But as he came into the side garden he saw in the second story a picture
silhouetted on the white paper doors.  It was Sada and her face was buried in her hands.  That
settled Billy. He would save Uncle all the worry of an argument by simply removing the cause.
There in the dusk, he whistled the old college call, then swung himself up on a fat stone lantern,
and in a few minutes he swung down a suitcase and Sada in American clothes.  They caught a
train to Kobe, which is only a short distance, and sailed out to the same steamer he had left
in Yokohama and which arrived in Kobe that day. I'm interested in both directions.

- Who will be in that room? - I wonder -. Will a patient who is rolling on its bed of pain? Could
it be a miser counting his treasure? Will it be a holidaymaker in a struggle with donostiarras
famous flea? Is it, perhaps, a poet who sacrifices his dream to write, the back of an unpaid
bill, poems and more poems in honor of a loved one that does not exist? Is it a beautiful admiring
herself in the mirror, or will be, perhaps, a beautiful hardcover ex wrinkles and gray hair
pulling?

Will newlyweds? Is it wise? Is it a German spy ...?
I would bet that a player dedicated to the practice of Kabbalah on
a plane of the wheel. The spinner has to be something of a second
planetary.

And now that my task is finished I shall follow them as fast as the next steamer can carry me.

PEKING, APRIL, 1912.

Back once again, Mate, in the City of Golden Dusts.  Glorious spring sunshine, and the whole
world wrapped in a tender haze. Everything has little rainbows around it and the very air is
studded with jewels.

Soldiers are still marching; flags are flying; drums are thumping and it is all to the tune
of Victory for the Revolutionists.  But best of all Jack is well!  To me Peking is like that
first morning of Eve's in the Garden of Eden.

What crowded, happy weeks these last have been.  Waiting for Jack; amusing him when time hangs
heavy--even unto reading pages of scientific books with words so big the spine of my tongue
is threatened with fracture.

And in between times?  Well, I am thanking my stars for the chance to doubly make up for any
little tenderness I may have passed by. The first at that time began to wear shoes or white satin
slippers to China, with ribbons to tie at the throat of the foot and show silk stockings fishnet
stockings, even though the dress was worn over the short.

Billy and Sada are with us, still with the first glow of the enchanted garden over them.  Bless
their happy hearts!  I am going to give them my collection of color prints to start housekeeping
with.  How I'd love to see Uncle--through a telescope.

To-night we are having our last dinner here. Man no skull,
the man of talent and love trial and thus a victim of women: on the contrary, women are the
victims of the skull. Dígasenos now if man of talent and trial is not a fool at his side.
 Love is n't a dream,
Mate--not the kind I know; it's all of life and beyond.

I know what they are playing!

THE END

