THE CURLY-HAIRED HEN

TEXT AND ILLUSTRATIONS

BY

A. VIMAR

TRANSLATED BY

NORA K. HILLS

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I Mother Etienne's Farm

CHAPTER II A Mother's Devotion

CHAPTER III Yollande's Trousseau

CHAPTER IV Father Gusson's Secret

CHAPTER V Sir Booum Calls upon Mother Etienne

CHAPTER VI The Separation

CHAPTER VII Sir Booum's Circus

CHAPTER VIII Mother Etienne's Dream

CHAPTER IX Mother Etienne's Fortune

CHAPTER X Triumph of the Ointment

CHAPTER I

MOTHER ETIENNE'S FARM

"Oh Grandfather, tell us a story, do. You know, the one you began the other evening about Mother
Etienne's big farm. You remember. The weather is so bad and we can't go out. Go on, Grandfather,
please."

Coaxingly the three children clung round their grandfather, looking at him beseechingly. He
adoring the children as he did, loved to hear them plead.

At last he began:

Since you have been very good, and you want it so much, I will tell you the wonderful story
of Mother Etienne's farm and the still more wonderful story of what happened to one of its
occupants.

Love animals, my children, be kind to them, care for them, and you will surely have your reward.

Mother Etienne was a good stout woman with a very kind heart. While still young she was so
unfortunate as to lose her husband and her son of whom she was very fond. This made her, as
you can imagine, very, very sad. She wouldn't listen to any new offers of marriage though she
had plenty of them. Instead, she devoted her life, her whole existence, to the attentive, nay
I ought to say, the maternal care, of the animals on her farm, making them as comfortable as
could be.

She had, as I said before, a most excellent heart, the good Mother Etienne. You shall see that
presently.

This good woman then lived on her big farm, very spacious and admirably situated. A slate roof
covered the large house; the granaries, stables and outhouses were sheltered by old thatching
upon which grew moss and lichen.

Let me tell you now, dear children, who were the chief occupants of the farm. First there was
big "Coco"--a fine Normandy horse--bay-coloured and very fat, whose silky coat had a purple
sheen; he had a star on his forehead and a pink mark between his eyes. He was very gentle and
answered to the voice of his mistress. If Mother Etienne passed by his stable he never failed
to scent her and whinnied at once. That was his way of showing his friendliness and saying,

"Good morning."

His good mistress spoiled him with all sorts of dainties. Sometimes a crust of bread, sometimes
a handful of carrots, but what he loved best of all was sugar. If you had given him a whole
loaf he would soon have eaten it up.

Coco had for stable companions three fine Swiss cows. Their names were La Blonde, Blanchotte,
and Nera. You know what the colours were for the names, don't you?

Petit-Jacques, the stable boy, took care of them. On fine days he led them to pasture into
a bog paddock near the farm up against a pretty wood of silver beeches. A large pond of clear
water covered one corner of the meadow and lost itself in the reeds and iris. There the fine
big cows went to quench their thirst; quantities of frogs went there, too, to play leap-frog.
It was a veritable earthly Paradise.

From the farm Mother Etienne caught the sound of the large bronze bells each with its different
low note, which hung round the necks of the cows; thus she could superintend their comings
and goings without interrupting her various occupations. For the farm was very big, as I told
you, and had many animals on it.

After the stables and coachhouses came the piggery, the rabbit hutches, and finally an immense
poultry-yard divided into a thousand compartments, and sheltering a whole horde of poultry
of all sorts; fowls of all kinds and of all breeds, geese, guineafowl, pigeons, ducks, and
what all besides. What wasn't there in that prodigious poultry-yard?

Mother Etienne spent most of her time there, for the smaller and more delicate the creatures
the more interest and care she gave them.

"The weak need so much protection," this excellent woman would say, and she was right.

So for the baby ducks her tenderness was limitless. What dangers had to be avoided to raise
successfully all these tiny folks!

Did a pig escape? Immediately danger threatened the poultry-yard. For a pig has terrible teeth
and he doesn't care what he eats--he would as soon crunch a little duckling as a carrot. So
she had to watch every minute, every second even. For besides, in spite of the vigilance of
"Labrie," the faithful watchdog, sometimes rats would suck the blood of the young pigeons.
Once even a whole litter of rabbits was destroyed that way.

To dispose of the products of her farm, Mother Etienne drove twice a week to market in her
market-cart drawn by Coco.

She was famed for the best vegetables, the purest and creamiest milk; in short, the eggs she
sold were the freshest, the poultry and rabbits the tenderest and most juicy to be had. As
soon as she and Coco came trotting into the market there was a rush to get to her first.

There, as everywhere, everyone loved Mother Etienne.

CHAPTER II

A MOTHER'S DEVOTION

Thus time passed peacefully at the big farm.

One day, however, the quiet was disturbed by a little drama which convulsed the calm but busy spot.

Mother Etienne had given to a Cochin-China hen, which she had christened Yollande, some white
duck's eggs to sit on. The batch of fifteen eggs had all come out. It was really wonderful
to see these fifteen baby ducks, yellow as canaries, beaks and webbed feet pink, swarming around
the big patient sitting mother, ducking under her wings, to come out presently and clamber
helter-skelter onto her broad back. As often happens with nurses, Yollande loved the ducklings
as her own children, and without worrying about their shape or plumage, so different from her
own, she showered upon them proofs of the tenderest affection. Did a fly pass within their
reach, all these little ones jumped at it--tumbling in their efforts to catch it. The little
yellow balls with their wide-awake air never took a second's rest.

Well cared for and well fed, they grew so rapidly that soon they had to have more space. Mother
Etienne housed them then on the edge of the pond in a latticed coop opening onto a sloping
board which led down to the water. It was, as it were, a big swimming bath, which grew gradually
deeper and deeper. The ducks and geese loved to plunge in and hardly left the water except
to take their meals.

Yollande felt very out of place in this new dwelling. The ducklings on the contrary, urged
on by their instinct, madly enjoyed it and rushed pell-mell into the water.

This inexplicable impulse terrified their mama. She was, in fact, "as mad as a wet hen."

She ran up and down, her feathers on end, her face swollen, her crest red, clucking away, trying
to persuade her babies not to venture into the water. For hens, like cats, hate the water.
It was unspeakable torture to her. The children would not listen; deaf to her prayers, her
cries, these rascally babies ventured farther and farther out. They were at last and for the
first time in their favourite element, lighter than little corks, they floated, dived, plunged,
raced, fought, playing all sorts of tricks.

Meanwhile, Yollande was eating her heart out. She rushed to and fro, keeping her eyes glued
on the disobedient ones. Suddenly she saw a mother-duck chasing her darlings. This was more
than she could bear,--driven by her maternal instinct she leapt like a fury to the aid of her
family.

A flap or two of her wings and she was above the water into which she fell at the deepest part.

Splashing,--struggling madly in the midst of her frightened brood,--she was soon exhausted
and succumbing to syncope, she sank to the bottom.

The surface of the water closed above her. The little ones did not realize what had happened--very
quickly recovering from their momentary fright, they went on with their games--splashing the
water with their beaks and amusing themselves as though nothing were the matter.

Mother Etienne, busy giving green apples to the pigs, bran to the rabbits, and corn to the
pigeons, came back presently, and could not see the big Yollande beside the pond, only her
children floating far, far away on the water. Surprised she drew nearer, called, but in vain.
The mother-hen had disappeared. Then only did she understand the tragedy that had occurred.
She called for help. Petit-Jacques immediately opened the big sluice and the water ran out,
but much too slowly for their impatience. At last they began to see the bottom, and soon the
body of poor Yollande was discovered stiff and motionless.

There was general consternation at the farm. Petit-Jacques, by means of a long pole, seized
her and drew her to land at Mother Etienne's feet. Labrie came up and sniffed sadly at the
body of the unhappy hen. In vain they dried her and rubbed her,--nothing did any good.

"She's quite dead, alas," said Mother Etienne with tears in her eyes, "but it was my own fault.
I ought to have closed down the lattice and this misfortune would not have happened. It really
is a great pity--such a fine hen. She weighs at least eight pounds. There, Germaine, take her
and weigh her."

Germaine was the maid and also the cousin of Petit-Jacques--of whom she was very fond. She
was a fine buxom girl of eighteen, strong and well-grown. She loved animals, too, but her feeling
for them could not be compared to Mother Etienne's.

"Germaine, take away poor Yollande, I am quite upset by this trouble. You will bury her this
evening, in a corner of the kitchen-garden--deep enough to prevent any animal digging her up.
I leave it to you--do it carefully."

The girl bore away the fine hen in her apron. "How heavy she is--it is a shame," and blowing
apart the feathers, she saw the skin underneath as yellow and plump as you could wish. Mechanically
she plucked a few feathers.

"After all," she said, "it isn't as though she had died--she was drowned, quite a clean death;
she's firm and healthy, only an hour ago she was as strong and well as could be. Why shouldn't
we eat her?--We'll stew her because, though she is not old, she is not exactly in her first
youth--but there's a lot on her--with a dressing of carrots and nutmeg, a bunch of herbs and
a tomato, with a calf's foot to make a good jelly, I believe she'd make a lovely dinner."

Saying this she went on plucking Yollande. All the feathers, large and small, gone, a little
down was left, so to get rid of this she lit an old newspaper and held her over it.

"Madame won't know anything and will enjoy her as much as we shall. There's enough on her for
two good meals."

Quite decided, instead of burying her, she wrapped the future stew carefully in a perfectly
clean cloth and put it on a shelf in the kitchen out of the way of flies or accident.

During this time Mother Etienne was busy making as warm a home as she could for the fifteen
little orphans. Poor darlings. In a wicker-basket she covered a layer of straw with another
of wadding and fine down. Upon this she put the ducklings one by one, and covered the whole
with feathers; then closing the lid, she carried the basket to the stable where the air was
always nice and warm. All this took time; it was about six o'clock in the evening, the sun
was going down, throwing a last oblique smile into the kitchen, gleaming here and there on
the shining copper which hung on the walls.

CHAPTER III

YOLLANDE'S TROUSSEAU

