It is threatening rain as I pick my way through a mile or so of mud ruins, tumble-down walls,
and crooked paths, leading from the umbar to the house of the Persian telegraph-jee, who has
been requested, from Teheran, to put me up, and, in view of the threatening aspect of the weather,
I conclude to remain till morning. The English Government has taken charge of the Teheran and
Meshed telegraph-line, during the delimitation of the Afghan and Turkestan boundary, and, besides
guaranteeing the native telegraph-jees their regular salary-which is not always forthcoming
from the Persian Government-they pay them something extra. In consequence of this, the telegraph-jees
are at present very favorably disposed toward Englishmen, and Mirza Hassan readily tenders
me the hospitality of the little mud office where he amuses himself daily clicking the keys
of his instrument, smoking kalians, drinking tea, and entertaining his guests. Mr. Mclntire
and Mr. Stagno are somewhere between here and Meshed, inspecting and repairing the line for
the English Government, for they received it from the Persians in a wretched, tumble-down condition,
and Mr. Gray, telegraphist for the Afghan Boundary Commission, is stationed temporarily at
Meshed, so that, thanks to the boundary troubles, I am pretty certain of meeting three Europeans
on the first six hundred miles of my journey.

Mirza Hassan is hospitable and well meaning, but, like most Persians, he is slow about everything
but asking questions. Being a telegraph-jee, he is, of course, a comparatively enlightened
mortal, and, among other things, he is acquainted with the average Englishman's partiality
for beer. One of the first questions he asks, is whether I want any beer. It strikes me at
once as a rather strange question to be asked in a Persian village, but, thinking he might
perchance have had a bottle or two left here by one of the above-mentioned telegraph-inspectors,
I signify my willingness to sample a little. True to the peculiar inconsistency of his fellows,
he replies: "Ob-i-jow neis" (beer, no). If he hasn't ob-i-jow, however, he has tea, and in
about an hour after my arrival he produces the samovar, a bowl of sugar, and the tiny glasses
in which tea is always served in Persia.

Visitors begin dropping in as usual, and, before long, hundreds of villagers are swarming about
the telegraph-khana, anxious to see me ride. It is coming on to rain, but, in order to rid
the telegraph-office of the crowd, I take the bicycle out. Willing men carry both me and the
bicycle across a stream that runs through the village, to smooth ground on the opposite side,
where I ride back and forth several times, to the wild and boisterous delight of the entire
population.

In this manner I succeed in ridding the telegraph-office of the crowd; but there is no getting
rid of the visitors. Everybody in the place who thinks himself a little better than the ragamuffin
ryots comes and squats on his hams in the little hut-like office, sips the telegraph-jee's
sweetened tea, smokes his kalians, and spends the afternoon in staring wonderingly at me and
the bicycle. Having picked up a little Persian during the winter, I am able to talk with them,
and understand them, rather better than last season, and, Persian-like, they ply me mercilessly
with questions. Often, when some one asks a question of me, Mirza Hassan, as becomes a telegraphies,
and a person of profound erudition, thoughtfully saves me the trouble of replying by undertaking
to furnish the desired information himself. One old mollah wants to know how many farsakhs
it is from Aivan-i-Kaif to Yenghi Donia (New World-America); ere I can frame a suitable reply,
Mirza Hassan forestalls my intentions by answering, in a decisive tone of voice that admits
of no appeal, "Khylie!" "Khylie" is a handy word that the Persians always fall back on when
their knowledge of great numbers or long distances is vague and shadowy; it is an indefinite
term, equivalent to our word "many." Mirza Hassan does not know whether America is two hundred
farsakhs away or two thousand, but he knows it to be "khylie farsakhs," and that is perfectly
satisfactory to himself, and the white-turbaned questioner is perfectly satisfied with "khylie"
for an answer.

A person from the New World is naturally a rara avis with the simple villagers of Aivan-i-Kaif,
and their inquisitiveness concerning Yenghi Donia and Yenghi Donians fairly runs riot, and
shapes itself into all manner of questions. They want to know whether the people smoke kalians
and ride horses--real horses, not asps-i-awhans-in Yenghi Donia, and whether the Valiat smoked
the kalian with me at Hadji Agha. Mirza Hassan explains about the kalian and horses; he enlightens
his wondering auditors to the extent that Yenghi Donians smoke nargilehs and chibouques instead
of kalians, and he contemptuously pooh-poohs the idea of them keeping riding-horses when they
are clever enough to make iron horses that require nothing to eat or drink and no rest. About
the question of the Heir Apparent smoking the kalian with me he betrays as lively an interest
as anybody in the room, but he maintains a discreet silence until I answer in the negative,
when he surveys his guests with the air of one who pities their ignorance, and says, "Kalian neis."

A lusty-lunged youngster of about three summers has been interrupting the genial flow of conversation
by making "Rome howl" in an adjoining room, and Mirza Hassan fetches him in and consoles him
with sundry lumps of sugar. The advent of the limpid-eyed toddler leads the thoughts and questions
of the company into more domestic channels. After exhaustive questioning about my own affairs,
Mirza Hassan, with more than praiseworthy frankness and becoming gravity, informs me that,
besides the embryo telegraphjee and sugar-consumer in the room, he is the happy father of "yek
nim" (one and a half others). I cast my eye around the room at this extraordinary announcement,
expecting to find the company indulging in appreciative smiles, but every person in the room
is as sober as a judge; plainly, I am the only person present who regards the announcement
as anything uncommon.

After an ample supper of mutton pillau, Mirza Hassan proceeds to say his prayers, borrowing
my compass to get the proper bearings for Mecca, which I have explained to him during the afternoon.
With no little dismay he discovers that, according to my explanations, he has for years been
bobbing his head daily several degrees east of the holy city, and, like a sensible fellow,
and a person who has become convinced of the infallibility of telegraph instruments, compasses,
and kindred aids to the accomplishment of human ends, he now rectifies the mistake.

Everybody along this route uses a praying-stone, a small cake of stone or hardened clay, containing
an inscription from the Koran. These praying-stones are obtained from the sacred soil of Meshed,
Koom, or Kerbela, and are placed in position on the ground in front of the kneeling devotee
during his devotions, so that, instead of touching his forehead to the carpet or the common
ground of his native village, he can bring it in contact with the hallowed soil of one of these
holy cities. Distance lends enchantment to a holy place, and adds to the efficacy of a prayer-stone
in the eyes of its owner, and they are valued highly or lightly according to the distance and
the consequent holiness of the city they are brought from. For example, a Meshedi values a
prayer-stone from Kerbela, and a Kerbeli values one from Meshed, neither of them having much
faith in the efficacy of one from his own city; familiarity with sacred things apparently breeds
doubts and indifference. The prayer-stone is reverently touched to lips, cheeks, and forehead
at the finish of prayers, and then carefully wrapped up and stowed away until praying-time
comes round again. To a sceptical and perhaps irreverent observer, these praying-stones would
seem to bear about the same relation to a pilgrimage to Meshed or Kerbela as a package of prepared
sea-salt does to a season at the sea-side.

CHAPTER II.

PERSIA AND THE MESHED PILGRIM ROAD

It rains quite heavily during the night, but clears off again in the early morning, and at
eight o'clock I take my departure, Mirza Hassan refusing to allow his son and heir to accept
a present in acknowledgment of the hospitality received at his hands. The whole male population
of the village is assembled again at the spot where their experience of yesterday has taught
them I should probably mount; and the house-tops overlooking the same spot, and commanding
a view of the road across the plain to the eastward, are crowded with women and children. The
female portion of my farewell audience present quite a picturesque appearance, being arrayed
in their holiday garments of red, blue, and other bright colors, in honor of Friday, the Mohammedan
Sabbath.

Pour miles of most excellent camel-path lead across a gravelly plain, affording a smooth, firm,
wheeling surface, notwithstanding the heavy rains of the previous night; but beyond the plain
the road leads over the pass of the Sardara Kooh, one of the many spurs of the Elburz range
that reach out toward the south. This spur consists of saline hills that present a very remarkable
appearance in places; the rocks are curiously honey-combed by the action of the salt, and the
yellowish earthy portion of the hills are fantastically streaked and seamed with white. A trundle
of a couple of miles brings me to the summit, from which point I am able to mount, and, with
brake firmly in hand, glide smoothly down the eastern slope. After descending about a mile,
I am met by a party of travellers who give me friendly warning of deep water a little farther
down the mountain. After leaving them, my road follows down the winding bed of a stream that
is probably dry the greater part of the year; but during the spring thaws, and immediately
after a rain-storm, a stream of brackish, muddy water a few inches deep trickles down the mountain
and forms a most disagreeable area of sticky salt mud at the bottom. The streak this morning
can more truthfully be described as yellow liquid mud than as water, and both myself and wheel
present anything but a prepossessing appearance in ten minutes after starting down its grimy
channel. I am, however, congratulating myself upon finding it so shallow, and begin to think
that, in describing the water as nearly over their donkeys' backs, the travellers were but
indulging their natural propensity as subjects of the Shah, and worthy followers in the footsteps
of Ananias.

About the time I have arrived at this comforting conclusion, I am suddenly confronted by a
pond of liquid mud that bars my farther progress down the mountain. A recent slide of land
and rock has blocked up the narrow channel of the stream, and backed up the thick yellow liquid
into a pool of uncertain depth. There is no way to get around it; perpendicular walls of rock
and slippery yellow clay rise sheer from the water on either side. There is evidently nothing
for it but to disrobe without more ado and try the depth. Besides being thick with mud, the
water is found to be of that icy, cutting temperature peculiar to cold brine, and after wading
about in it for fifteen minutes, first finding a fordable place, and then carrying clothes
and wheel across, I emerge on to the bank formed by the land-slip looking as woebegone a specimen
of humanity as can well be imagined. Plastered with a coat of thin yellow mud from head to
foot, chilled through and through, and shivering like a Texas steer in a norther, feet cut
and bleeding in several places from contact with the sharp rocks, and no clean water to wash
off the mud! With the assistance of knife, pocket-handkerchief, and sundry theological remarks
which need not be reproduced here, I finally succeed in getting off at least the greater portion
of the mud, and putting on my clothes. The discomfort is only of temporary duration; the agreeable
warmth of the after-glow exhilarates both mind and body, and with the disappearance of the
difficulty to the rear cornea the satisfaction of having found it no harder to overcome.

A little good wheeling is encountered toward the bottom of the pass, and then comes an area
of wet salt-flats, interspersed with saline rivulets--those innocent-looking little streamlets
the deceptive clearness of which tempts the thirsty and uninitiated wayfarer to drink. Few
travellers in desert countries but have been deceived by these innocuous-looking streamlets
once, and equally few are the people who suffer themselves to be deceived by their smooth,
pellucid aspect a second time; for a mouthful of either strongly saline or alkaline water from
one of them creates an impression on the deceived one's palate and his mind that guarantees
him to be wariness personified for the remainder of his life. Since a certain experience in
the Bitter Creek country, Wyoming, the writer prides himself on being able to distinguish drinkable
water from the salty or alkaline article almost as far as it can be seen, and a stream about
which the least suspicion is entertained is invariably tasted with gingerly hesitancy to begin
with.

Soon after noon I reach the village of Kishlag, where a halt of an hour or so is made to refresh
the inner man with tea, raw eggs, and figs--a queer enough bill of fare for dinner, but no
more queer than the people from whom it is obtained. Some of my readers have doubtless heard
of the Milesian waiter who could never be brought to see any inconsistency in asking the guests
of the restaurant whether they would take tea or coffee, and then telling them there was no
tea, they would have to take coffee. The proprietor of the little tchai-khan at Kishlag asks
me if I want coffee, and then, in strict conformity with the curious inconsistency first discovered
and spoken of at Aivan-i-Kaif, he informs me that he has nothing but tea. The country hereabout
is evidently the birthplace of Irish bulls; when the ancestors of modern Handy Andys were running
wild on the bogs of Connemara, the people of Aivan-i-Kaif and Kishlag were indulging in Irish
bulls of the first water.

The crowd at Kishlag are good-natured and comparatively well-behaved. In reply to their questionings,
I tell them that I am journeying from Yenghi Donia to Meshed. The New World is a far-away,
shadowy realm to these ignorant Persian villagers, almost as much out of their little, unenlightened
world as though it were really another planet; they evidently think that in going to Meshed
I am making a pilgrimage to the shrine of Imam Riza, for some of them commence inquiring whether
or no Yenghi Donians are Mussulmans.

The weather-clerk inaugurates a regular March zephyr in the east, during the brief halt at
Kishlag; and in addition to that doubtful favor blowing against me, the road leading out is
lumpy as far as the cultivated area extends, and then it leads across a rough, stony plain
that is traversed by a network of small streams, similar to those encountered yesterday at
Sherifabad. To the left, the abutting front of the Elburz Mountains is streaked and frescoed
with salt, that in places vies in whiteness with the lingering-patches of snow higher up; to
the right extends the gray, level plain, interspersed with small cultivable areas for a farsakh
or two, beyond which lies the great dasht-i-namek (salt desert) that comprises a large portion
of the interior of Persia.

Wild asses abound on the dasht-i-namek, and wandering bands of these animals occasionally stray
up in this direction. The Persians consider the flesh of the wild donkey as quite a delicacy,
and sometimes hunt them for their meat; they are said to be untamable, unless caught when very
young, and are then generally too slender-limbed to be of any service in carrying weights.
Wild goats abound in the Elburz Mountains; the villagers hunt them also for their meat, but
the flesh of the wild goat is said to contribute largely to the prevalence of sore eyes among
the people. The Persian will eat wild donkey, wild goat, and the flesh of camels, but only
the very poor people--people who cannot afford to be fastidious--ever touch a piece of beef;
gusht-i-goosfang (mutton) is the staple meat of the country.

The general aspect of the country immediately south of the Elburz Mountains, beyond the circumscribed
area of cultivation about the villages, is that of a desert, desolate, verdureless, and forbidding.
One can scarcely realize that by simply crossing this range a beautiful region is entered,
where the prospect is as different as is light from darkness. An entirely different climate
characterizes the Province of Mazanderan, comprising the northern slopes of these mountains
and the Caspian littoral. With a humid climate the whole year round, and the entire face of
the country covered with dense jungle, the northern slopes of the Elburz Mountains present
a striking contrast to the barren, salt-frescoed foot-hills facing the south hereabout. Here,
as at Resht, the moisture from the Caspian Sea does for the province of Mazanderan what similar
influences from the Pacific do for California. It makes all the difference between California
and Nevada in the one case, and Mazanderan and the desert-like character of Central Persia
in the other.

In striking and effective contrast to the general aspect of death and desolation that characterizes
the desert wastes of Persia--an effect that is heightened by the ruins of caravansaries or
villages, that are seldom absent from the landscape--are the cultivated spots around the villages.
Wherever there is a permanent supply of water, there also is certain to be found a mud-built
village, with fields of wheat and barley, pomegranate orchards, and vineyards. In a country
of universal greenness these would count for nothing, but, situated like islands in the sea
of sombre gray about them, they often present an appearance of extreme beauty that the wondering
observer is somewhat puzzled to account for; it is the beauty of contrast, the great and striking
contrast between vegetable life and death.

These impressions are nowhere more strongly brought into notice than when approaching Aradan,
a village I reach about five o'clock. Like almost all Persian towns and villages, Aradan has
evidently occupied a much larger area at one time than it does at present; and the mournful-looking
ruins of mosques, gateways, walls, and houses are scattered here and there over the plain for
a mile before reaching the present limits of habitation. The brown ruins of a house are seen
standing in the middle of a wheat-field; the wheat is of that intense greenness born of irrigation
and a rich sandy soil, and the mud ruins, dead, desolate, and crumbling to dust, look even
more deserted and mournful from the great contrast in color, and from the myriad stems of green
young life that wave and nod about them with every passing breeze. The tumble-down windows
and doorways form openings through which the blue sky and the green waving sea of vegetation
beyond are seen as in a picture, and the ruined mud mosque, its dome gone, its windows and
doorways crumbled to shapeless openings, seems like a weather-beaten skeleton of Persia's past,
while the ever-moving waves of verdant life about it, seem to be beating against it and persistently
assailing it, like waves of the sea beating against an isolated rock.

While engaged in fording a stream on the stony plain between road. The shagird-chapar is with
them, on a third "bag of bones," worse, if possible, than the others. Taking the world over,
there is perhaps no class of horses that are, subject to so much cruelty and ill-treatment
as the chapar horses of Persia, With back raw, ribs countable a hundred yards away, spavined,
blind of an eye, fistula, and cursed with every ill that horseflesh in the hands of human brutes
is subject to, the chapar horse is liable to be taken out at any hour of the day or night,
regardless of previous services being but just finished. He is goaded on with unsparing lash
to the next station, twenty, or perhaps thirty miles away, staggering beneath the weight of
the traveller, or his servant, with ponderous saddlebags.

This chapar, or post-service, is established along the great highways of travel between Teheran
and Tabreez, Teheran and Meshed, and Teheran and Bushire, with a branch route from the Tabreez
trail to the Caspian port of Enzeli; the stations vary from four to eight farsakhs apart. Not
all the chapar horses are the wretched creatures just described, however, and by engaging beforehand
the best horses at each station along the route, certain travellers have made quite remarkable
time between points hundreds of miles apart. In addition to horses for himself and servants,
the traveller is required to pay for one to carry the shagird-chapar who accompanies them to
the next station to bring back the horses. The ordinary charge is one keran a farsakh for each
horse. It wouldn't be a Persian institution, however, if there wasn't some little underhanded
arrangement on hand to mulct the traveller of something over and above the legitimate charges.
Accordingly, we find two distinct measurements of distance recognized between each station--the
"chapar distance" and the correct distance. If, for instance, the actual distance is six farsakhs,
the "chapar distance" will be seven, or seven and a half; the difference between the two is
the chapar-jee's modokal; without modokal there is no question but that a Persian would feel
himself to be a miserable, neglected mortal.

Aradan is another telegraph control station, and Mr. Stagno informs me that the telegraph-jee
is looking forward to my arrival, and is fully prepared to accommodate me over night; and,
furthermore, that all along the line the people of the telegraph towns are eagerly anticipating
the arrival of the Sahib, with the marvellous vehicle, of which they have heard such strange
stories. Aradan is reached about five o'clock; the road leading into the village is found excellent
wheeling, enabling me to keep the saddle while following at the heels of a fleet-footed ryot,
who voluntarily guides me to the telegraph-khana. The telegraph-jee is temporarily absent when
I arrive, but his farrash lets me inside the office yard, spreads a piece of carpet for me
to sit on, and with commendable thoughtfulness shuts out the crowd, who, as usual, immediately
begin to collect. The quickness with which a crowd collects in a Persian town has to be seen
to be fully comprehended. For the space of half an hour, I sit in solitary state on the carpet,
and endure the wondering gaze and the parrot-like chattering of a thin, long row of villagers,
sitting astride the high mud wall that encloses three sides of the compound, and during the
time find some amusement in watching the scrambling and quarrelling for position. These irrepressible
sight-seers commenced climbing the wall from the adjoining walls and houses the moment the
farash shut them out of the yard, and in five minutes they are packed as close as books on
a shelf, while others are quarreling noisily for places; in addition to this, the roof of every
building commanding a view into the chapar-khana compound is swarmed with neck-craning, chattering
people.

Soon the telegraph-jee puts in an appearance; he proves to be an exceptionally agreeable fellow,
and one of the very few Persians one meets with having blue eyes. He appears to regard it as
quite an understood thing that I am going to remain over night with him, and proceeds at once
to make the necessary arrangements for my accommodation, without going to the trouble of extending
a formal invitation. He also wins my eternal esteem by discouraging, as far as Persian politeness
and civility will admit, the intrusion of the inevitable self-sufficients who presume on their
"eminent respectability" as loafers, in contradistinction to the half-naked tillers of the
soil, to invade the premises and satisfy their inordinate curiosity, and their weakness for
kalian, smoking and tea-drinking at another's expense. After duly discussing between us a samovar
of tea, we take a stroll through the village to see the old castle, and the umbars that supply
the village with water. The telegraph- gee cleared the walls upon his arrival, but the housetops
are out of his jurisdiction, and before starting he wisely suggests putting the bicycle in
some conspicuous position, as an inducement for the crowd to remain and concentrate their curiosity
upon it, otherwise there would be no keeping them from following us about the village. We set
it up in plain view on the bala-khana, and returning from our walk, are amused to find the
old farrash delivering a lecture on cycling.

The fortress at Aradan is the first one of the kind one sees when travelling eastward from
Teheran, but as we shall come to a larger and better preserved specimen at Lasgird, in a couple
of days, it will, perhaps, be advisable to postpone a description till then. They are all pretty
much alike, and were all built to serve the same purpose, of affording shelter and protection
from Turkoman raiders. The Aradan umbars are nothing extraordinary, except perhaps that the
conical brick-work roofs are terraced so that one can walk, like ascending stairs, to the summit;
and perhaps, also, because they are in a good state of repair --asufficiently unusual thing
in a Persian village to merit remark. These umbars are filled by allowing the water to flow
in from a street ditch connecting with the little stream to which every village owes its existence;
when the umbar is full, a few spadefuls of dirt shut the water off.

The chief occupation of the Eastern female is undoubtedly carrying water; the women of Oriental
villages impress the observant Occidental, as people who will carry water-worlds may be created
and worlds destroyed; all things else may change, and habits and costumes become revolutionized
by the march of time, but nothing will prevent the Oriental female from carrying water, and
carrying it in huge earthenware jugs! At any hour of the day--I won't speak positively about
the night--women may be seen at the unbars filling large earthenware jugs, coming and going,
going and coming. I don't remember ever passing one of these cisterns without seeing women
there, filling and carrying away jars of water. No doubt there are occasional odd moments when
no women are there, but any person acquainted with village life in the East will not fail to
recognize this as simply the plain, unvarnished truth. As the ditch from which the umbar is
filled not infrequently runs through half the length of the village first, the personal habits
of a Mohammedan population insure that it reaches the umbar in anything but a fit condition
for human consumption. But the Koran teaches that flowing water cannot be contaminated or defiled,
consequently, when he takes a drink or fills the village reservoir, your thoroughbred Mussulman
never troubles his head about what is going on up-stream. The Koran is to him a more reliable
guide for his own good than the evidence of all his seven senses combined.

Stagnant pools of water, covered, even this early in the season (March 12th), with green scum,
breed fever and mosquitoes galore in Aradan; the people know it, acknowledge it readily, and
suffer from it every summer, but they take no steps to remedy the evil; the spirit of public
enterprise has dwindled to such dimensions in provincial Persia, that it is no longer equal
to filling up a few fever-breeding pools of water in the centre of a village. The telegraph-jee
himself acknowledges that the water-holes cause fever and mosquitoes, but, intelligent and
enlightened mortal though he be in comparison with his fellow-villagers, when questioned about
it, he replies: "Inshalla! the water don't matter; if it is our kismet to take the fever and
die, nothing can prevent it; if it is our kismet not to take it, nothing can give it to us."
Such unanswerable logic could only originate in the brain of a fatalist; these people are all
fatalists, and--as we can imagine--especially so when the doctrine comes in handy to dodge
doing anything for the public weal.

All Persian villages, except those clustered about the immediate vicinity of a large city,
have some peculiarity of their own to offer in the matter of the people's dress. The pantaloons
of any Persian village are not by any means stylish garments, according to Western ideas; but
the male bipeds of Aradan have something really extraordinary to offer, even among the many
startling patterns of this garment met with in Eastern lands. To note the quantity of material
that enters into the composition of a pair of Aradan pantaloons, would lead an uninitiated
person into thinking the people all millionaires, were it not likewise observed that the material
is but coarse blue cotton, woven and dyed by the wearer's wife, mother, or sister. One of the
most conspicuous features about them is that their shape--if they can truthfully be said to
have any shape--seems to be a wild, rambling pattern of our own ideas concerning the shape
this garment ought to assume. The legs, instead of being gathered, Oriental fashion, at the
ankles, dangle loosely about the feet; and yet it is these same legs that are the chief distinguishing
feature of the pants. One of the legs, cut off and sewed up at one end, would make the nicest
kind of an eight-bushel grain sack; rather too wide, perhaps, in proportion to the depth, to
make a shapely grain sack, but there is no question about the capacity for the eight bushels.
No doubt these people would be puzzled to say why they are wearing yards and yards of stuff
that is not only useless, but positively in the way, except that it has been the fashion in
Aradan from time immemorable to do so. These simple Persian peasants, when they make any pretence
of sprucing up, probably find themselves quite as much enslaved by fashion as our very fastidious
selves; a wide difference betaken ourselves and them, however, being, that while they cling
tenaciously to some prehistoric style of garment, and regard innovations with abhorrence, fashion
demands of us to be constantly changing.

