COBB'S ANATOMY

By Irvin S. Cobb

          To G. H. L.

          Who stood godfather to these contents

Preface

This Space To-Let to Any Reputable Party Desiring a Good Preface

Contents

     I.   Tummies
     II.  Teeth
     III. Hair
     IV.  Hands and feet

TUMMIES

Dr. Woods Hutchinson says that fat people are happier than other people. How does Dr. Woods
Hutchinson know? Did he ever have to leave the two top buttons of his vest unfastened on account
of his extra chins? Has the pressure from within against the waistband where the watchfob is
located ever been so great in his case that he had partially to undress himself to find out
what time it was? Does he have to take the tailor's word for it that his trousers need pressing?

He does not. And that sort of a remark is only what might be expected from any person upward
of seven feet tall and weighing about ninety-eight pounds with his heavy underwear on. I shall
freely take Dr. Woods Hutchinson's statements on the joys and ills of the thin. But when he
undertakes to tell me that fat people are happier than thin people, it is only hearsay evidence
with him and decline to accept his statements unchallenged. He is going outside of his class.
He is, as you might say, no more than an innocent bystander. Whereas I am a qualified authority.

I will admit that at one stage of my life, I regarded fleshiness as a desirable asset. The
incident came about in this way. There was a circus showing in our town and a number of us
proposed to attend it. It was one of those one-ring, ten-cent circuses that used to go about
over the country, and it is my present recollection that all of us had funds laid by sufficient
to buy tickets; but if we could procure admission in the regular way we felt it would be a
sinful waste of money to pay our way in.

With this idea in mind we went scouting round back of the main tent to a comparatively secluded
spot, and there we found a place where the canvas side-wall lifted clear of the earth for a
matter of four or five inches. We held an informal caucus to decide who should should go first.
The honor lay between two of us--between the present writer, who was reasonably skinny, and
another boy, named Thompson, who was even skinnier. He won, as the saying is, on form. It was
decided by practically a unanimous vote, he alone dissenting, that he should crawl under and
see how the land lay inside. If everything was all right he would make it known by certain
signals and we would then follow, one by one.

Two of us lifted the canvas very gently and this Thompson boy started to wriggle under. He
was about halfway in when--zip!--like a flash he bodily vanished. He was gone, leaving only
the marks where his toes had gouged the soil. Startled, we looked at one another. There was
something peculiar about this. Here was a boy who had started into a circus tent in a circumspect,
indeed, a highly cautious manner, and then finished the trip with undue and sudden precipitancy.
It was more than peculiar--it bordered upon the uncanny. It was sinister. Without a word having
been spoken we decided to go away from there.

Wearing expressions of intense unconcern and sterling innocence upon our young faces we did
go away from there and drifted back in the general direction of the main entrance. We arrived
just in time to meet our young friend coming out. He came hurriedly, using his hands and his
feet both, his feet for traveling and his hands for rubbing purposes. Immediately behind him
was a large, coarse man using language that stamped him as a man who had outgrown the spirit
of youth and was preeminently out of touch with the ideals and aims of boyhood.

At that period it seemed to me and to the Thompson boy, who was moved to speak feelingly on
the subject, and in fact to all of us, that excessive slimness might have its drawbacks. Since
that time several of us have had occasion to change our minds. With the passage of years we
have fleshened up, and now we know better. The last time I saw the Thompson boy he was known
as Excess-Baggage Thompson. His figure in profile suggested a man carrying a roll-top desk
in his arms and his face looked like a face that had refused to jell and was about to run down
on his clothes. He spoke longingly of the days of his youth and wondered if the shape of his
knees had changed much since the last time he saw them.

Yes sir, no matter what Doctor Hutchinson says, I contend that the slim man has all the best
of it in this world. The fat man is the universal goat; he is humanity's standing joke. Stomachs
are the curse of our modern civilization. When a man gets a stomach his troubles begin. If
you doubt this ask any fat man--I started to say ask any fat woman, too. Only there aren't
any fat women to speak of. There are women who are plump and will admit it; there are even
women who are inclined to be stout. But outside of dime museums there are no fat women. But
there are plenty of fat men. Ask one of them. Ask any one of them. Ask me.

This thing of acquiring a tummy steals on one insidiously, like a thief in the night. You notice
that you are plumping out a trifle and for the time being you feel a sort of small personal
satisfaction in it. Your shirts fit you better. You love the slight strain upon the buttonholes.
You admire the pleasant plunking sound suggestive of ripe watermelons when you pat yourself.
Then a day comes when the persuasive odor of mothballs fills the autumnal air and everybody
at the barber shop is having the back of his neck shaved also, thus betokening awakened social
activities, and when evening is at hand you take the dress-suit, which fitted you so well,
out of the closet where it has been hanging and undertake to back yourself into it. You are
pained to learn that it is about three sizes too small. At first you are inclined to blame
the suit for shrinking, but second thought convinces you that the fault lies elsewhere. It
is you that have swollen, not the suit that has shrunk. The buttons that should adorn the front
of the coat are now plainly visible from the rear.

You buy another dress-suit and next fall you have out-grown that one too. You pant like a lizard
when you run to catch a car. You cross your legs and have to hold the crossed one on with both
hands to keep your stomach from shoving it off in space. After a while you quit crossing them
and are content with dawdling yourself on your own lap. You are fat! Dog-gone it--you are fat!

You are up against it and it is up against you, which is worse. You are something for people
to laugh at. You are also expected to laugh. It is all right for a thin man to be grouchy;
people will say the poor creature has dyspepsia and should be humored along. But a fat man
with a grouch is inexcusable in any company--there is so much of him to be grouchy. He constitutes
a wave of discontent and a period of general depression. He is not expected to be romantic
and sentimental either. It is all right for a giraffe to be sentimental, but not a hippopotamus.
If you doubt me consult any set of natural history pictures. The giraffe is shown with his
long and sinuous neck entwined in fond embrace about the neck of his mate; but the amphibious,
blood-sweating hippo is depicted as spouting and wallowing, morose and misanthropic, in a mud
puddle off by himself. In passing I may say that I regard this comparison as a particularly
apt one, because I know of no living creature so truly amphibious in hot weather as an open-pored
fat man, unless it is a hippopotamus.

Oh how true is the saying that nobody loves a fat man! When fat comes up on the front porch
love jumps out of the third-story window. Love in a cottage? Yes. Love in a rendering plant?
No. A fat man's heart is supposed to lie so far inland that the softer emotions cannot reach
it at all. Yet the fattest are the truest, if you did but know it, and also they are the tenderest
and a man with a double chin rarely leads a double life. For one thing, it requires too much
moving round.

A fat man cannot wear the clothes he would like to wear. As a race fat men are fond of bright
and cheerful colors; but no fat man can indulge his innocent desires in this direction without
grieving his family and friends and exciting the derisive laughter of the unthinking. If he
puts on a fancy-flowered vest, they'll say he looks like a Hanging Garden of Babylon. And yet
he has a figure just made for showing off a fancy-flowered vest to best effect. He may favor
something in light checks for his spring suit; but if he ventures abroad in a checked suit,
ribald strangers will look at him meaningly and remark to one another that the center of population
appears to be shifting again. It has been my observation that fat men are instinctively drawn
to short tan overcoats for the early fall. But a fat man in a short tan overcoat, strolling
up the avenue of a sunny afternoon, will be constantly overhearing persons behind him wondering
why they didn't wait until night to move the bank vault. That irks him sore; but if he turns
round to reproach them he is liable to shove an old lady or a poor blind man off the sidewalk,
and then, like as not, some gamin will sing out: "Hully gee, Chimmy, wot's become of the rest
of the parade? 'Ere's the bass drum goin' home all by itself."

I've known of just such remarks being made and I assure you they cut a sensitive soul to the
core. Not for the fat man are the snappy clothes for varsity men and the patterns called by
the tailors confined because that is what they should be but aren't. Not for him the silken
shirt with the broad stripes. Shirts with stripes that were meant to run vertically but are
caused to run horizontally, by reasons over which the wearer has no control, remind others
of the awning over an Italian grocery. So the fat man must stick to sober navy blues and depressing
blacks and melancholy grays. He is advised that he should wear his evening clothes whenever
possible, because black and white lines are more becoming to him. But even in evening clothes,
that wide expanse of glazed shirt and those white enamel studs will put the onlookers in mind
of the front end of a dairy lunch or so I have been cruelly told.

When planning public utilities, who thinks of a fat man? There never was a hansom cab made
that would hold a fat man comfortably unless he left the doors open, and that makes him feel
undressed. There never was an orchestra seat in a theater that would contain all of him at
the same time--he churns up and sloshes out over the sides. Apartment houses and elevators
and hotel towels are all constructed upon the idea that the world is populated by stock-size
people with those double-A-last shapes.

Take a Pullman car, for instance. One of the saddest sights known is that of a fat man trying
to undress on one of those closet shelves called upper berths without getting hopelessly entangled
in the hammock or committing suicide by hanging himself with his own suspenders. And after
that, the next most distressing sight is the same fat man after he has undressed and is lying
there, spouting like a sperm-whale and overflowing his reservation like a crock of salt-rising
dough in a warm kitchen, and wondering how he can turn over without bulging the side of the
car and maybe causing a wreck. Ah me, those dark green curtains with the overcoat buttons on
them hide many a distressful spectacle from the traveling public!

If a fat man undertakes to reduce nobody sympathizes with him. A thin man trying to fatten
up so he won't fall all the way through his trousers when he draws 'em on in the morning is
an object of sympathy and of admiration, and people come from miles round and give him advice
about how to do it. But suppose a fat man wants to train down to a point where, when he goes
into a telephone booth and says "Ninety-four Broad," the spectators will know he is trying
to get a number and not telling his tailor what his waist measure is.

Is he greeted with sympathetic understanding? He is not. He is greeted with derision and people
stand round and gloat at him. The authorities recommend health exercises, but health exercises
are almost invariably undignified in effect and wearing besides. Who wants to greet the dewy
morn by lying flat on his back and lifting his feet fifty times? What kind of a way is that
to greet the dewy morn anyhow? And bending over with the knees stiff and touching the tips
of the toes with the tips of the fingers--that's no employment for a grown man with a family
to support and a position to maintain in society. Besides which it cannot be done. I make the
statement unequivocally and without fear of successful contradiction that it cannot be done.
And if it could be done--which as I say it can't--there would be no real pleasure in touching
a set of toes that one has known of only by common rumor for years. Those toes are the same
as strangers to you--you knew they were in the neighborhood, of course, but you haven't been
intimate with them.

Maybe you try dieting, which is contrary to nature. Nature intended that a fat man should eat
heartily, else why should she endow him with the capacity and the accommodations. Starving
in the midst of plenty is not for him who has plenty of midst. To-day they took five little
children out of the water; they were playing "Ring around a rosy," and their hands were clasped
in a clasp which even death did not loosen, and their faces were still smiling.

One man identified his wife among those who came ashore here, and Rose said that he was nearly
crazy, and that her face was the most beautiful thing she ever saw, and that she had very
handsome pearls in her ears and was so young looking. The dead are all taken from here to Johnstown
and Nineveh and other places, where they will be most likely to be identified; about thirty have been
identified here and taken away. I feel hardened to a great deal, and feel God has been so merciful
to me I must do all I can for the unfortunate ones. I hope soon to have some help from you all, for
I have given willingly of my little and my means are exhausted. I expect we will have to live
on ham and eggs next week, but we are thankful to have that, as I
would rather live low and give all I can, than not to give.

All I care about is that Andrew gets enough to eat, as he needs a great deal to keep his strength
up, working as hard as he does. Now I will close as it is nearly time for him to be home. Lovingly,

BETT.

Feeding
the Hungry.

There are over 30,000 people at Johnstown who must be fed from the outside world. Of these 18,000
are natives of the town that a week ago had 29,500 inhabitants; all the others are dead or
have gone away. Over 12,000 people are here clearing the streets, burying the dead, attending the
sick, and feeding and sheltering the homeless; all these people have to be fed at least three
times a day, for days are very long in Johnstown just now. They begin at five o'clock in the morning,
two hours before the whistles in the half-mired Cambria Iron Company's building blow, and end
just about the time the sun is going down. If the people who are on the outside and who are engaged
in the labor of love of sending the food that is keeping strength in Johnstown's tired arms
and the clothing that is covering her nakedness could understand the situation as it is they
would redouble their efforts. Johnstown cannot draw on the country
immediately around about her, for that was drained days ago.

To be safe, there should be a week's supply of food ahead. At no time has there been a day's
supply or anything like it.

A Crisis in the Commissary.

Twice within the last forty-eight hours the commissary department at the Pennsylvania Railroad
Depot, where nearly 10,000 people are furnished with food, have been in a state of mind bordering
on panic. They had run out of food; people who had trudged down the hill with expectant faces
and empty baskets had to trudge back again with hearts heavy and baskets still empty. That was the
case on Wednesday night. Then the Citizens' Committee had to send to the refugee camp, the
smallest food station in the city, and take away 1500 loaves of bread. The bread supply in the central
portion of the town had suddenly given out and there was a clamoring crowd demanding to be
fed.

The same thing happened again last night. It was not so bad as on the night before, but there
were anxious faces enough among the men under the direction of Major Spangler, who realized the awful
responsibility of providing the mouths of the thousands with food. The supply had given out,
but fortunately not until almost everybody had been supplied. Telegrams announced that eight
carloads of provisions had been shipped from the West and were somewhere in the line between Pittsburgh
and Johnstown. At midnight nothing could be heard of them. The delay was maddening. If the
food did not arrive it meant fully 10,000 breakfastless and possibly
dinnerless people in Johnstown to-day, with consequent suffering and
possible disorder among the rough and rowdy element.

The Danger Tided Over.

Before daylight the expected cars came in from Ohio and Pittsburgh and the danger was over for
the time being. This serves, however, to show the perilous condition the town is in, living
as it is in a hand-to-mouth fashion.

It should be remembered that the only direct access to Johnstown from the West is by way of
the Pennsylvania, which is handicapped as she has never been before, and from the East and South,
of the Baltimore and Ohio. If the Pennsylvania were opened through to the East a steady stream
of 200 cars already loaded for the sufferers would pour over the Alleghenies, but the Pennsylvania
does not see light ahead much more clearly than yesterday. The terrible breaks and washouts will
require days yet to repair, and supplies that come from the interior of the State must come by
means of wagons.

Crowding in the Supplies.

The Baltimore and Ohio is piling the supplies in to-day faster than the men can unload them.
In the neighborhood of 100 carloads were received.

The Pennsylvania during to-day has handled something like twenty-eight carloads all told.
In the way of food the articles most needed are fresh, salt meats, sugar, rice, coffee, tea, and
dried and canned fruits. The supply of sugar gave out entirely to-day. Twenty thousand pounds
of Cincinnati hams arrived to-day and they melted like 20,000 pounds of ice beneath the scorching
heat of this afternoon's sun. Much of the clothing that is received here is new and serviceable,
but thousands of pieces are so badly worn that, to use the words of General Axline, of Ohio, who
is doing noble service here with the thousands of other self-sacrificing men, "it is unfit
to be worn by tramps." Many old shoes with the soles half torn off have been received. Shoes
are badly needed at once or all Johnstown will be barefooted.

Eighteen Carloads of Relief.

Even in the rush of distribution the officials who have it in charge
can find time to say a hearty word of praise for those towns which
have contributed to the sufferers.

Philadelphia's first installment was the first to arrive from the East, and more goods have been
coming in steadily ever since. W.H. Tumblestone, the president of the Retail Grocers' Association
of Pennsylvania, who was appointed first lieutenant of the Philadelphia relief by the Mayor,
arrived here first. He set at work handling coffins, but as soon as the first freight car of
goods arrived he was put in charge of their distribution and has been working like threemen
ever since. The eight freight cars from Philadelphia which arrived with the relief party on
Monday, at 4 o'clock, were distributed from a great storehouse at the terminus of the Baltimore
and Ohio Railroad. The goods are carried in bulk from the cars to the warehouse by a gang of twenty-eight
men, who are identified by red flannel hat-bands. When they fail to enthuse over their work Mr.
Tumblestone gets off his coat and shoves boxes himself.

Distributing Supplies.

Inside the warehouse a score of volunteers and Pittsburgh policemen break open the boxes and
pile the goods in separate heaps; the women's clothing, the men's, the children's and the different
sizes being placed in regular order. Then the barriers are opened and the crowd surges in like
depositors making a run on a savings bank. The police keep good order and the ubiquitous Tumblestone
and his assistants dole out the goods to all who have orders.

Special orders call for stoves, mattrasses and blankets.

If the Philadelphians could see the faces of the people they are helping before and after they
have passed the distribution windows they would feel well repaid for their visible sympathy.
Chairman Scott says the class of goods from Philadelphia have been of the highest quality. "We
have been delighted with the thought and excellence of the selections and amiable nature of
the contributions.

The two miles of track lying between here and Morrellville are still blocked with cars stretched
from one end to the other, and fresh arrivals are coming in daily over the Baltimore and Ohio."
Although it is impossible to say how much has been received from Philadelphia, Mr. Tumblestone
says that so far as many as eighteen freight cars, each filled from the sides to the roof, have arrived
from the Quaker City, and their contents have been distributed.

How Rival Hotels were Crushed Together.

The principal hotels of the town were bunched in a group about the corner of Main and Clinton streets.
They were the Merchants', a large old-fashioned, three-story tavern, with a stable yard behind,
a relic of staging days; the Hurlburt House, the leading hotel of the place, a fine four-story
brick structure with a mansard roof and all the latest wrinkles in furnishing inside and out; the
Fritz House, a narrow, four-story structure, with an ornate front, and the Keystone, a smaller
hotel than any of the others.

These few inns stood in the path of the flood. The Hurlburt, the largest and handsomest, was absolutely
obliterated. The Keystone's ruin was next in completion. It stood across Clinton Street from
Fritz's, and Landlord Charles West has not yet recovered from the surprise of seeing the rival
establishment thrown bodily across the street against his second story front, tearing it completely
out.

After the water subsided it fell back upon the pavement in front of
its still towering rival, and in the meantime Landlord West had saved
mine host of the Keystone and his family from the roof which was thrust
in his windows.

Back of Fritz's there was a little alley, which made a course for a part of the torrent. Fully
half a dozen houses were sent swimming in here. They crushed their way through the small hotel's
outhouses straight to the rear of the Merchants', and sliced the walls off the old inn as a
hungry survivor to-day cut a Philadelphia cheese. You can see the interior of the rooms. The
beds were swept out into the flood, but a lonesome wardrobe fell face downward on the floor
and somehow escaped. There are bodies under the rear wall. How many is not known, but Landlord
West, of Fritz's, says he is certain there were people on the rear porch of the Merchants'. The
story of Landlord West's rival being thrown into his front windows
has its parallels.

Colonel Higgins, the manager of the Cambria Club House, was in the third story of the building
with his family. Suddenly a man was hurled by the torrent rapidly through the window. He was rescued,
then fainted, and upon inspection was found to have a broken leg. The leg was bandaged and
the man resuscitated, and when this last act of kindness was accomplished
he said faintly: "This ain't so bad.

I've been in a blow-up."

A Cool Request.

This remark showed the greatest sang-froid known to be exhibited during the flood, but the
most irreverent was that of an old man who was saved by E.B. Entworth, of the Johnson works. On
Saturday morning Mr. Entworth rowed to a house near the flowing débris at the bridge, and found
a woman, with a broken arm, and a baby. After she had got into the boat she cried: "Come along,
grandpap." Whereupon an old man, chilled but chipper, jumped up from the other side of the roof,
slid down into the boat, and ejaculated: "Gentlemen, can any of you give me a chew of tobacco?"

Scenes
Amid the Ruins.

One of the curious finds in the débris yesterday was two proofs from cabinet-size negatives of two
persons--a man and a woman. The prints were found within two feet of each other in the ruins
near the Merchants' Hotel. They were immediately recognized as portraits of Mamie Patton,
formerly a Johnstown girl, and Charles DeKnight, once a Pullman palace
car conductor.

The two were found dying together in a room in a Pittsburgh hotel several months ago, the woman
having shot the man and then herself. She claimed that he was her husband. The dress in which
the picture showed her was the same that she wore when she killed DeKnight.

Tracks that were Laid in a Hurry.

If Pennsylvania Railroad trains ever ran over tougher-looking tracks than those used now through
Johnstown it must have been before people began to ride on it. The section from the north end
of the bridge to the railroad station has a grade that wabbles between 50 and 500 feet to the
mile and jerks back and forth sideways as though laid by a gang of intoxicated men on a dark
night. When the first engine went over it everybody held his breath and watched to see it tumble.
These eccentricities are being straightened out, however, as fast as men and broken stones
can do it.
The railroad bridge at Johnstown deserves attention beyond that which
it is receiving on account of the way it held back the flood. It is
one of the most massive pieces of masonry ever set up in this country.
In a general way it is solid masonry of cut sandstone blocks of unusual
size, the whole nearly 400 feet long, forty wide, and averaging about
forty deep. Seven arches of about fifty feet span are pierced through
it, rising to within a few feet of the top and leaving massive piers
down to the rock beneath. As the bridge crosses the stream diagonally,
the arches pierce the mass in a slanting direction, and this greatly
adds to the heavy appearance of the bridge. There has been some disposition
to find fault with the bridge for being so strong, the idea being
that if it had gone out there would have been no heaping up of buildings
behind it, no fire, and fewer deaths. This is probably unfair, as
there were hundreds of persons saved when their houses were stopped
against the bridge by climbing out or being helped out upon the structure.
If the bridge had gone, too, the flood would have taken the whole
instead of only half of Cambria City.

Photographers Forced to Work.

The
camera fiend has about ceased his wanderings. An order was issued
yesterday from headquarters to arrest and put to work the swarms of
amateur photographers who are to be found everywhere about the ruins.
Those who will not work are to be taken uptown under guard. This order
is issued to keep down the number of useless people and thus save
the fast diminishing provisions for the workers.

A man who stood
on the bluff and saw the first wave of the flood come down the valley
tried to describe it. "I looked up," he said, "and saw something that
looked like a wall of houses and trees up the valley. The next moment
Johnstown seemed coming toward me. It was lifted right up and in a
minute was smashing against the bridge and the houses were flying
in splinters across the top and into the water beyond."

A 13-year-old
girl, pretty and with golden hair, wanders about from morgue to morgue
looking for ten of a family of eleven, she being the sole survivor.

There
were half a dozen bulldogs in one house that was heaped up in the
wreck some distance above the bridge. They were loose among the débris,
and it is said by those who claim to have seen it that after fighting
among themselves they turned upon the people near them and were tearing
and biting them until the flames swept over the place.

Slow Time
to Pittsburgh.

Irregular is a weak word for the manner in which passenger
trains run between this place and Pittsburgh. The distance is seventy
miles and the ordinary time is two hours. The train that left here
at 4.30 yesterday afternoon reached there at midnight. This is ordinarily
good time nowadays. A passage in five hours is an exceptional one.

Engine
1309, the one that faced the flood below Conemaugh and stood practically
unharmed, backed down to the station as soon as the tracks were laid
up to where it stood and worked all right. Only the oil cups and other
small fittings, with the headlight, were broken.

But just about the time they are becoming acclimated and we are getting used to them, the interior
of our mouth for private reasons best known to itself changes around materially and we either
have to go back and start all over and go through the whole thing again, or else haply we die
and pass on to the bourne from which no traveller returneth either with his teeth or without
them. If Shakespeare had only thought of it--and he did think of a number of things from time
to time--he might have divided his Seven Ages of Man much better by making them the Seven Ages
of Teeth as follows: First age--no tooth; second age--milk teeth; third age--losing 'em; fourth
age--getting more teeth; fifth age--losing 'em; sixth age--getting false teeth and finding
they aren't satisfactory; seventh age--toothless again.

I knew a man once who was a gunsmith and lost all his teeth at a comparatively early age. He
went along that way for years. He had to eschew the tenderloin for the reason that he couldn't
chew it, and he had to cut out hickory nut cake and corn on the ear and such things. But there
is nothing about the art of gunsmithing which seems to call for teeth, so he got along very
well, living in a little house with the wife of his bosom and a faithful housedog named Ponto.
But when he was past sixty he went and got himself some teeth from the dentist. He did this
without saying anything about it at home; he was treasuring it up for a surprise. The corner
stone was laid in May and the scaffolding was all up by July and in August the new teeth were
dedicated with suitable ceremonies.

They altered his appearance materially. His nose and chin which had been on terms of intimacy
now rubbed each other a last fond good-bye and his face lost that accordion-pleated look and
straightened out and became about six or seven inches longer from top to bottom. He now had
a sort of determined aspect like the iron jawed lady in a circus, whereas before his face had
the appearance of being folded over and wadded down inside of his neck band, so his hat could
rest comfortably on his collar. He knew he was altered, but he didn't realize how much he was
altered until he went home that evening and walked proudly in the front gate. His wife who
was timid about strangers, slammed the door right in his face and faithful Ponto came out from
under the porch steps and bit him severely in the calf of the leg. There was only one consolation
in it for him--for the first time in a long number of years he was in position to bite back.

And that's how it is with teeth--with your teeth let us say--for right here I'm going to drop
the personal pronoun and speak of them as your teeth from now on. If anybody has to suffer
it might as well be you and not me; I expect to be busy telling about it. As I started to say
awhile ago, you--remember it's you from this point--you get your regular teeth and they start
right in giving you trouble. Every little while one of them bursts from its cell with a horrible
yell and in the lulls between pangs you go forth among men with the haunted look in your eye
of one who is listening for the footfalls of a dread apparition, and one half of your head
is puffed out of plumb as though you were engaged in the whimsical idea of holding an egg plant
in the side of your jaw. A kind friend meets you, and, speaking with that high courage and
that lofty spirit of sacrifice which a kind friend always exhibits when it's your tooth that
is kicking up the rumpus and not his, he tells you you ought to have something done for it
right away. You know that as well as he does, but you hate to have the subject brought up.
It's your toothache anyhow. It originated with you. You are its proud parent but not so awfully
proud at that. Mother and child doing as well as could be expected, but not expected to do
very well.

But these friends of yours keep on shoving their free advice on you and the tooth keeps on
getting worse and worse until the pain spreads all through the First Ward and finally you grab
your resolution in both hands to keep it from leaking out between your fingers and you go to
the dentist's.

This happens so many times that after awhile you lose count and so would the dentist, if he
didn't write your name down every time in his little red book with pleasingly large amounts
entered opposite to it. It seems to you that you are always doing something for your teeth?
You have them pulled and pushed and shoved and filled and unfilled and refilled and excavated
and blasted and sculptured and scroll-sawed and a lot of other things that you wouldn't think
could be done legally without a building permit. As time passes on, the inside of your once
well-tilled and commodious head becomes but little more than a recent site. Your vaults have
been blown and most of your contents abstracted by Amalgam Mike and Dental Slim, the Demon
Yeggmen of the Human Face. You are merely the scattered clews left behind for the authorities
to work on; you are the faint traces of the fiendish crime. You are the point marked X.

But all along there is generally one tooth that has behaved herself like a lady. Other teeth
may have betrayed your confidence but Old Faithful has hung on, attending to business, asking
only for standing room and kind treatment. The others you may view with alarm, but to this
tooth you can point with pride. But have a care--she is deceiving you.

Some night you go to bed and have a dream. In your dream it seems to you that a fox terrier
is chasing a woodchuck around and around the inside of your head. In that tangled sort of fashion
peculiar to dreams your sympathy seems to go out first to the fox terrier and then to the woodchuck
as they circle about nimbly, leaping from your tonsils to your larynx and then up over the
rafters in the roof of your mouth and down again and pattering over the sub-maxillary from
side to side. But about then you wake up with a violent start and decide that any sympathy
you may have in stock should be reserved for personal use exclusively, because at this moment
the dog trees the woodchuck at the base of that cherished tooth of yours and starts to dig
him out. He is a very determined dog and very active, but he needs a manicure. You are struck
by that fact almost immediately.

Uttering some of those trite and commonplace remarks that are customary for use under such
circumstances and yet are so futile to express one's real sentiments, you arise and undertake
to pacify the infuriated creature with household remedies. You try to lure him away with a
wad of medicated cotton stuck on the end of a parlor match. But arnica is evidently an acquired
taste with him. He doesn't seem to care for it any more than you do. You begin to dress, using
one hand to put your clothes on with and the other to hold the top of your head on. At this
important juncture, the dog tears down the last remaining partitions and nails the woodchuck.
The woodchuck is game--say what you will about the habits and customs of the woodchuck you
have to hand it to him there--he's game as a lion. He fights back desperately. Intense excitement
reigns throughout the vicinity. While the struggle wages you get your clothes on and wait for
daylight to come, which it does in from eight to ten weeks. Norway is not the only place where
the nights are six months long.

There is nobody waiting at the dentist's when you get there, it being early. You are willing
to wait. At a barber shop it may be different but at a dentist's you are always willing to
wait, like a gentleman. But the sinewy young man who is sitting in the front parlor reading
the Hammer Thrower's Gazette, welcomes you with a false air of gaiety entirely out of keeping
with the circumstances and invites you to step right in. He tells you that you are next. This
is wrong--if you were next you would turn and flee like a deer. Not being next, you enter.
Right from the start you seem to take a dislike to this young man. You catch him spitting in
his hands and hitching his sleeves up as you are hanging up your hat. Besides he is too robust
for a dentist. With those shoulders he ought to be a boiler maker or a safe mover or something
of that sort. You resolve inwardly that next time you go to a dentist you are going to one
of a more lady-like bearing and gentler demeanor. It seems a brutal thing that a big strong
man should waste his years in a dental establishment when the world is clamoring for strong
men to do the heavy lifting jobs. But before you can say anything, this muscular athlete has
laid violent hands on your palpitating form and wadded it abruptly into the hideous embraces
of a red plush chair, which looks something like the one they use up at Sing Sing, only it's
done more quickly up there and with less suffering on the part of the condemned. On one side
of you you behold quite a display of open plumbing and on the other side a tasty exhibit of
small steel tools of assorted sizes. No matter which way your gaze may stray you'll be seeing
something attractive.

You also take notice of an electric motor about large enough, you would say, to run a trolley
car, which is purring nearby in a sinister and forbidding way. They are constantly making these
little improvements in the dental profession. I have heard that fifty years ago a dentist traveled
about over the country from place to place, sometimes pulling a tooth and sometimes breaking
a colt. He practiced his art with an outfit consisting of two pairs of iron forceps--one pair
being saber-toothed while the other pair was merely saw-fretted--and he gave a man the same
kind of treatment he gave a horse, only he tied the horse's legs first. But now electricity
is in general use and no dentist's establishment is complete without a dynamo attachment which
makes a crooning sound when in operation and provides instrumental accompaniment to the song
of the official canary.

I know why a barber in a country town is always learning to play on the guitar and I know why
a man with an emotional Adam's apple always wears an open front collar. I know these things,
but am debarred from telling them by reason of a solemn oath. But I have not yet been able
to discover why every dentist keeps a canary in his office. Nor do I know why it is, just as
you settle your neck back on a head rest that's every bit as comfortable as an anvil, and just
as a dentist climbs into you as far as the arm pits and begins probing at the bottom of a tooth
which has roots extending back behind your ears, like an old-fashioned pair of spectacles,
that the canary bird should wipe his nose on a cuttle bone and dash into a melodious outburst
of two hundred thousand twitters, all of them being twitters of the same size, shape, and color.
For that matter, I don't even know what kind of an animal a cuttle is, although I should say
from the shape of his bone as used by the canary instead of a pocket handkerchief, that he
is circular and flat and stands on edge only with the utmost difficulty. If you will pardon
my temporary digressions into the realm of natural history, we will now return to the main
subject, which was your tooth.

The moment the muscular young man starts up his motor and gives the canary its music cue and
begins pawing over his tool collection to pick out a good sharp one, you recover. All of a
sudden you feel fine, and so does the tooth. Neither one of you ever felt better. The fox terrier
must have killed the woodchuck and then committed suicide. You are about to mention this double
tragedy and beg the young man's pardon for causing him any trouble and excuse yourself and
go away, but just then he quits feeling of his biceps and suddenly seizes you by your features
and undoes them. If you are where you can catch a glimpse of yourself in a mirror you will
immediately note how much the human face divine can be made to look like an old-fashioned red
brick Colonial fire place.

There are likely to be several things you would like to talk about. You are full of thoughts
seeking utterance. For one thing you want to tell him you don't think the brand of soap he
uses on his hands is going to agree with you at all. You probably don't care personally for
the way your barber's thumb tastes either, but a barber's thumb is Peaches Melba alongside
of a dentist's. Before you can say anything though he discovers a cavity or orifice of some
sort in the base of your tooth. It seems to give him pleasure. Filled with intense gratification
by this discovery and fired moreover by the impetuous ardor of the chase, he grabs up a crochet
needle with a red hot stinger on the end of it and jabs it down your tooth to a point about
opposite where your suspenders fork in the back.

You have words with him then, or at least you start to have words with him, but he puts his
knee in your chest and tells you that it really doesn't hurt at all, but is only your imagination,
and utters other soothing remarks of that general nature. He then exchanges the crochet needle
for a kind of an instrument with a burr on the end of it. This instrument first came into use
at the time of the Spanish Inquisition but has since been greatly improved on and brought right
up to date. He takes this handy little utensil and proceeds to stir up your imagination some
more. You again try to say something, speaking in a muffled tone, but he is not listening.
He is calling to a brother assassin in the adjoining room to come and see a magnificent example
of a prime old-vatted triple X exposed nerve. So the Second Grave Digger rests his tools against
the palate of his victim and comes in.

As nearly as you can gather from hearsay evidence, you not being an eye witness yourself, one
of them harpoons the nerve just back of the gills with a nutpick--remember please it is your
nerve that they are taking all these liberties with--and pulls it out of its retreat and the
other man takes a tack hammer and tries to beat its brains out. Any time he misses the nerve
he hits you, so his average is still a thousand, and it is fine practice for him. A pleasant
time is had by everybody present except you and the nerve. The nerve wraps its hind legs around
your breastbone and hangs on desperately. You perspire freely and make noises like a drunken
Zulu trying to sing a Swedish folk song while holding a spoonful of hot mush in his mouth.

In time becoming wearied even of these congenial diversions and tiring of the shop talk that
has been going on, the second dentist returns to his original prey and the party who has you
in charge tries a new experiment. He arms himself with a kind of an automatic hammering machine,
somewhat similar to the steam riveter used in constructing steel office buildings, except that
this one is more compact and can deliver about eighty-five more blows to the second. Thus equipped,
he descends far below your high water mark and engages in aquatic sports and pastimes for a
considerable period of time. It seems to you that you never saw a man who could go down and
stay down as long as this young man can. You begin to feel that you misjudged his real vocation
in life when you decided that he ought to be a boiler maker. You know that he was intended
for pearl fishing. He's a natural born deep sea diver. He doesn't even have to come up to breathe,
but stays below, knee deep in your tide wash, merrily knocking chunks off your lowermost coral
reefs with his little steam riveter and having a perfectly lovely time.

You are overflowing copiously and you wish he would take the time to stop and bail you out.
You abhor the idea of being drowned as an inside job. But no, he keeps right on and along about
here it is customary for you to swoon away.

On recovering, you observe that he has changed his mind again. He is now going in for amateur
theatricals and is using you for a theatre. First thoughtfully draping a little rubber drop
curtain across your proscenium arch to keep you from seeing what is going on behind your own
scenes, he is setting the stage for the thrilling sawmill scene in Blue Jeans. You can distinctly
feel the circular saw at work and you can taste a hod of mortar and a bucket of hot tar and
one thing and another that have been left in the wings. You also judge that the insulation
is burning off of an electric fixture somewhere up stage.

All this time the tooth is still offering resistance, and eventually the dentist comes out
in front once more and makes a little curtain speech to you. He has just ascertained that what
the tooth really needed was not filling but pulling. He thought at first that it should be
filled and that is what he has been doing--filling it--but now he knows that pulling is the
indicated procedure. He does not understand how a tooth that seemed so open could have deceived
him. Nevertheless he will now pull the tooth.

He pulls her. She does her level best but he pulls her. He harvests small sections of the gum
from time to time and occasionally he stops long enough to loosen up the roots as far down
as your floating ribs. But he pulls her. He spares no pains to pull that tooth. Or if he spares
any you are not able subsequently to remember what they were. You utter various loud sounds
in a strange and incomprehensible language and he lays back and braces his knees against your
lower jaw, and the tooth utters the death rattle and begins picking the cover-lid. And then
he gives one final heave and breaks the roots away from the lower part of your spinal column
to which they were adhering, and emerges into the open panting but triumphant, and holds his
trophy up for you to look at. If you didn't know it was your tooth you would take it for an
old-fashioned china cuspidor that had been neglected by the janitor.

It was a tooth that you had been prizing for years, but now you wouldn't have it as a gracious
gift. You are through with that tooth forever. You never want to see it again.

As for the dentist, he collects the fixed charge for stumpage and corkage and one thing and
another and you come away with a feeling in the side of your jaw like a vacant lot. Your tongue
keeps going over there to see if it can recognize the old place by the hole where the foundations
used to be. You never realized before what a basement there was to a tooth.

As you come out you pass a fresh victim going in and you see the dentist welcome him and then
turn to crank up his motor and you hear the canary tuning up with a new line of v-shaped twitters.
And you are glad that he is the one who is going in and that you are the one who is coming out.

Science tells us that the teeth are the hardest things in the human composition, which is all
very well as far as it goes, but what science should do is to go on and finish the sentence.
It means the hardest to keep.

HAIR

As I remarked in the preceding chapter of this work, one of the pleasantest features about
being born is that we are born without teeth and other responsibilities. Teeth, like debts
and installment payments, come along later on. It is the same way with hair.

Born, we are, hairless or comparatively so. We are in a highly incomplete state at that period
of our lives. It takes a fond and doting parent to detect evidences of an actual human aspect
in us. Only the ears and the mouth appear to be up to the plans and specifications. There is
a mouth which when opened, as it generally is, makes the rest of the face look like a tire,
and there is a pair of ears of such generous size that only a third one is needed, round at
the back somewhere, to give us the appearance of a loving cup. And we are smocked and hem-stitched
with a million wrinkles apiece, more or less, which partly accounts for the fact that every
newborn infant looks to be about two hundred years old. And uniformly we have the nice red
complexion of a restaurant lobster. You know that live-broiled look?

As for our other features, they are more or less rudimentary. Of a nose there is only what
a chemist would call a trace. It seems hard to imagine that a dinky little nubbin like that,
a dimple turned inside out, as it were, will ever develop into a regular nose, with a capacity
for freckling in the summer and catching cold in the winter--a nose that you can sneeze through
and blow with. There are no eyebrows to speak of either, and the skull runs up to a sharp point
like a pineapple cheese. Just back of the peak is a kind of soft, dented-in place like a Parker
House roll, and if you touch it we die. In some cases this spot remains soft throughout life,
and these persons grow up and go through railroad trains in presidential years taking straw votes.

And, as I said before, there isn't any hair; only on the slopes of the cheese are some very
pale, faint, downy lines, which look as though they had been sketched on lightly with a very
soft drawing pencil and would wipe off readily. That, however is the inception and beginning
of what afterward becomes, among our race, hair. To look at it you could hardly believe it,
but it is. Barring accidents or backwardness, it continues to grow from that time on through
our childhood, but its behavior is always a profound disappointment. If the child is a girl
and, therefore, entitled to curly hair, her hair is sure to come in stiff and straight. If
it's a boy, to whom curls will be a curse and a cross of affliction, he is morally certain
to be as curly as a frizzly chicken, and until he gets old enough to rebel he will wear long
ringlets and boys of his acquaintance will insert cockle-burs and chewing gum into his tresses,
and he will be known popularly as Sissie and otherwise his life with be made joyous and carefree
for him. If a reddish tone of hair is desired it is certain to grow out yellow or brown or
black; and if brown is your favorite shade you are absolutely sure to be nice and red-headed,
with eyebrows and lashes to match, and so many cowlicks that when you remove your hat people
will think you're wearing two or three halos at once. Hair rarely or never acts up to its advance
notices.

One of the earliest and most painful recollections of my youth is associated with hair. I still
tingle warmly when I think of it. I should say I was about eight years old at the time. My
mother sent me down the street to the barber's to have my hair trimmed--shingled was the term
then used. Some of my private collection of cowlicks had begun to stand up in a way that invited
adverse criticism and reminded people of sunbursts. They made me look as though my hair were
trying to pull itself out by the roots and escape. So I was sent to the barber's. My little
cousin, two years younger, went along in my charge. It was thought that the performance might
entertain her. I was mounted in a chair and had a cloth tucked in round my neck, like a self-made
millionaire about to eat consomme. The officiating barber got out a shiny steel instrument
with jaws--the first pair of clippers I had ever seen--and he ran this up the back of my neck,
producing a most agreeable feeling. He reached the top of my head and would have paused but
I told him to go right ahead and clip me close all over, which he did. When he had finished
the job I was so delighted with the sensation and with the attendant result as viewed in a
mirror that I suggested he might give my little cousin a similar treat. From a mere child I
was ever so--willing always to share my simple pleasures with those about me, especially where
it entailed no inconvenience on my part. I told him my father would pay the bill for both of
us when he came by that night.

The barber fell in with the suggestion. It has ever been my experience that a barber will fall
in readily with any suggestion whereby the barber is going to get something out of it for himself.
In this instance he was going to get another quarter, and a quarter went farther in those days
than it does now. I dismounted from the chair and my innocent little cousin was installed in
my place. As I now recall she made no protest. The barber ran his clippers conscientiously
and painstakingly over her tender young scalp, while I stood admiringly by and watched the
long yellow curls fall writhing upon the floor at my feet. It seemed to me that a great and
manifest improvement was produced in her general appearance. Instead of being hampered by those
silly curls dangling down all round her face, she now had a round, slick, smooth dome decorated
with a stiff yellowish stubble, and the skin showed through nice and pink and the ears were
well displayed, whereas before they had been practically hidden. She was also relieved of those
foolish bangs hanging down in her eyes. This, I should have stated, occurred in the period
when womankind of whatsoever age and also some men wore bangs, a disease from which all have
since recovered with the exception of racehorses and princesses of the various reigning houses
of Europe. And now my little cousin was shut of those annoying bangs, and her forehead ran
up so high that you had to go round behind her to see where it left off.

Filled with a joyous sense of achievement and conscious of a kindly deed worthily performed,
I took my little cousin by her hand and led her home.

My mother was waiting for us at the front door. She seemed surprised when I took off my hat
and gave her a look, but that wasn't a circumstance to her surprise when I proudly took off
my little cousin's cap. She uttered a kind of a strangled cry and my cousin's mother came running,
and the way she carried on was scandalous and ill-timed. I will draw a veil over the proceedings
of the next few minutes. At the time it would have been a source of great personal gratification
and comfort to me if I could have drawn a number of veils, good, thick, woolen ones, over the
proceedings. My mother wept, my aunt wept, my little cousin wept, and I am not ashamed to state
that I wept quite copiously myself. But I had more provocation to weep than any of them.

When this part of the affair was over my mother sent me back to the barber with a message.
I was to say that a heart-broken woman demanded to have the curls of which her darling child
had been denuded. I believe that there was some idea entertained of sewing them into a cap
and requiring my cousin to wear the cap until new ones had sprouted. Even to me, a mere child
of eight, this seemed a foolish and totally unnecessary proceeding, but the situation had already
become so strained that I thought it the part of prudence to go at once without offering any
arguments of my own. I felt, anyhow, that I would rather be away from the house for a while,
until calmer second judgment had succeeded excitement and tumult.

The man who owned the barber shop seemed surprised when I delivered the message, but he told
me to come back in a few minutes and he'd do what he could. I drifted on down to the confectionery
store at the corner to forget my sorrows for the moment in a worshipful admiration of a display
of prize boxes and cracknels in glass-front cases--you should be able to fix the period by
the fact that cracknels and prize boxes were still in vogue among the young. When I returned
the head barber handed me quite a large box--a shoebox--with a string tied round it. It did
not seem possible to me that my cousin could have had a whole shoebox full of curls, but things
had been going pretty badly that afternoon and my motives had been misjudged and everything,
so without any talk I took the box and hurried home with it. My mother cut the string and my
aunt lifted the lid.

I should prefer again to draw a veil over the scenes that now ensued, but the necessity of
finishing this narrative requires me to state that it being a Saturday and the head barber
being a busy man, he had not taken time to sort out my cousin's curls from among the flotsam
and jetsam of his establishment, but had just swept up enough off the floor to make a good
assorted boxful. I think the oldest inhabitant had probably dropped in that day to have himself
trimmed up a little round the edges. I seem to remember a quantity of sandy whiskers shot with
gray. There was enough hair in that box and enough different kinds and colors of hair and stuff
to satisfy almost any taste, you would have thought, but my mother and aunt were anything but
satisfied. On the contrary, far from it. And yet my cousin's hair was all there, if they had
only been willing to spend a few days sorting it out and separating it from the other contents.

In this particular instance I was the exception to the rule, that hair generally gives a boy
no great trouble from the time he merges out of babyhood until he puts on long pants and begins
to discern something strangely and subtly attractive about the sex described by Mr. Kipling
as being the more deadly of the species. During this interim it is a matter of no moment to
a boy whether he goes shaggy or cropped, shorn or unshorn. At intervals a frugal parent trims
him to see if both his ears are still there, or else a barber does it with more thoroughness,
often recovering small articles of household use that have been mysteriously missing for months;
but in the main he goes along carefree and unbarbered, not greatly concerned with putting anything
in his head or taking anything off of it.

In due season, though, he reaches the age where adolescent whiskers and young romance begin
to sprout out on him simultaneously--and from that moment on for the rest of his life his hair
is giving him bother, and plenty of it.

Your hair gives you bother as long as you have it and more bother when it starts to go. You
are always doing something for it and it is always showing deep-dyed ingratitude in return;
or else the dye isn't deep enough, which is even worse. Hair is responsible for such byproducts
as dandruff, barbers, wigs, several comic weeklies, mental anguish, added expense, Chinese
revolutions, and the standard joke about your wife's using your best razor to open a can of
tomatoes with. Hair has been of aid to Buffalo Bill, Little Lord Fauntleroy, Samson, The Lady
Godiva, Jo-Jo, the Dog-Faced Boy, poets, pianists, some artists and most mattress makers, but
a drawback and a sorrow to Absalom, polar bears in captivity and the male sex in general.

This assertion goes not only for hair on the head but for hair on the face. Let us consider
for a moment the matter of shaving. If you shave yourself you excite a barber's contempt, and
there is nobody whose contempt the average man dreads more than a barber's, unless it is a
waiter's. And on the other hand, if you let a barber shave you he excites not your contempt
particularly, but your rage and frequently your undying hatred. Once in a burst of confidence
a barber told me one of the trade secrets of his profession--he said that among barbers every
face fell into one of three classes, it being either a square, a round or a squirrel. I know
not, reader, whether yours be a square or a round or a squirrel, but this much I will chance
on a venture, sight unseen--that you have your periods of intense unhappiness when you are
being shaved.

I do not refer so much to the actual process of being shaved. Indeed there is something restful
and soothing to the average male adult in the feel of a sharp razor being guided over a bristly
jowl by a deft and skillful hand, to the accompaniment of a gentle grating sound and followed
by a sensation of transient silken smoothness. Nor do I refer to the barber's habit of conversation.
After all, a barber is human--he has to talk to somebody, and it might as well be you. If he
didn't have you to talk to he'd have to talk to another barber, and that would be no treat to him.

What I do refer to is that which precedes a shave and more especially that which follows after
it. You rush in for a shave. In ten minutes you have an engagement to be married or something
else important, and you want a shave and you want it quick. Does the barber take cognizance
of the emergency? He does not. Such would be contrary to the ethics of his calling. Knowing
from your own lips that you want a shave and that's positively all, he nevertheless is instantly
filled with a burning desire to equip you with a large number of other things. In this regard
the barbering profession has much in common with the haberdashering or gents'-furnishing profession
as practiced in our larger cities. You invade a haberdashering establishment for the purpose,
let us say, of investing in a plain and simple pair of half hose, price twenty-five cents.
That emphatically is all that you do desire. You so state in plain, simple language, using
the shorter and uglier word socks.

Does the youth in the pale mauve shirt with the marquise ring on the little finger of the left
hand rest content with this? Need I answer this question? In succession he tries to sell you
a fancy waistcoat with large pearl buttons, a broken lot of silk pajamas, a bath-robe, some
shrimp-pink underwear--he wears this kind himself he tells you in strict confidence--a pair
of plush suspenders and a knitted necktie that you wouldn't be caught wearing at twelve o'clock
at night at the bottom of a coal mine during a total eclipse of the moon. If you resist his
blandishments and so far forget that you are a gentleman as to use harsh language, and if you
insist on a pair of socks and nothing else, he'll let you have them, but he will never feel
the same toward you as he did.

'Tis much the same with a barber. You need a shave in a hurry and he is willing that you should
have a shave, he being there for that purpose, but first and last he can think of upward of
thirty or forty other things that you ought to have, including a shampoo, a hair cut, a hair
singe, a hair tonic, a hair oil, a manicure, a facial massage, a scalp massage, a Turkish bath,
his opinion on the merits of the newest White Hope, a shoeshine, some kind of a skin food,
and a series of comparisons of the weather we are having this time this month with the weather
we were having this time last month. Not all of us are gifted with the power of repartee by
which my friend Frisbee turned the edge of the barber's desires.

"Your hair," said the barber, fondling a truant lock, "is long."

"I know it is," said Frisbee. "I like it long. It's so Roycrofty."

"It is very long," said the barber with a wistful expression.

"I like it very long," said Frisbee. "I like to have people come up to me on the street and
call me Mr. Sutherland and ask me how I left my sisters? I like to be mistaken for a Russian
pianist. I like for strangers to stop me and ask me how's everything up at East Aurora. In
short, I like it long."

"Yes, sir," said the barber, "quite so, sir; but it's very long, particularly here in the back--it
covers your coat collar."

"Indeed?" said Frisbee. "You say it covers my coat collar?"

"Yes, sir," said the barber. "You can't see the coat collar at all."

"Have you got a good sharp pair of shears there?" said Frisbee.

"Oh, yes, sir," said the barber.

"All right then," said Frisbee; "cut the collar off."

But not all of us, as I said before, have this ready gift of parry and thrust that distinguishes
my friend Frisbee. Mostly we weakly surrender. Or if we refuse to surrender, demanding just
a shave by itself and nothing else, what then follows? In my own case, speaking personally,
I know exactly what follows. I do not like to have any powder dabbed on my face when I am through
shaving. I believe in letting the bloom of youth show through your skin, providing you have
any bloom of youth to do so. I always take pains to state my views in this regard at least
twice during the operation of being shaved--once at the start when the barber has me all lathered
up, with soapsuds dripping from the flanges of my shell-like ears and running down my neck,
and once again toward the close of the operation, when he has laid aside his razor and is sousing
my defenseless features in a liquid that smells and tastes a good deal like those scented pink
blotters they used to give away at drug-stores to advertise somebody's cologne.

Does the barber respect my wishes in this regard? Certainly not. He insists on powdering me,
either before my eyes or surreptitiously and in a clandestine manner. If he didn't powder me
up he would lose his sense of self-respect, and probably the union would take his card away
from him. I think there is something in the constitution and by-laws requiring that I be powdered
up. I have fought the good fight for years, but I'm always powdered. Sometimes the crafty foe
dissembles. He pretends that he is not going to powder me up. But all of a sudden when my back
is turned, as it were, he grabs up his powder swab and makes a quick swoop upon me and the
hellish deed is done. I should be pleased to hear from other victims of this practice suggesting
any practical relief short of homicide. I do not wish to kill a barber--there are several other
orders in ahead, referring to the persons I intend to kill off first--but I may be driven to it.

After he has gashed me casually hither and yen, and sluiced down my helpless countenance with
the carefree abandon of a livery-stable hand washing off a buggy, and after, as above stated,
he has covered up the traces of his crime with powder, the barber next takes a towel and folds
it over his right hand, as prescribed in the rules and regulations, and then he dabs me with
that towel on various parts of my face nine hundred and seventy-four--974--separate and distinct
times. I know the exact number of dabs because I have taken the trouble to keep count. I may
be in as great a hurry as you can imagine; I may be but a poor nervous wreck already, as I
am; I may be quivering to be up and away from there, but he dabs me with his towel--he dabs
me until reason totters on her throne--sometimes just a tiny tot, as the saying goes, or it
may be that the whole cerebral structure is involved--and then when he is apparently all through
the Demoniac Dabber comes back and dabs me one more fiendish, deliberate and premeditated dab,
making nine hundred and seventy-five dabs in all. He has to do it; it's in the ritual that
I and you and everybody must have that last dab. I wonder how many gibbering idiots there are
in the asylum today whose reason was overthrown by being dabbed that last farewell dab. I know
from my own experience that I can feel the little dark-green gibbers sloshing round inside
of me every time it happens, and some day my mind will give away altogether and there'll be
a hurry call sent in for the wagon with the lock on the back door. Yet it is of no avail to
cavil or protest; we cannot hope to escape; we can only sit there in mute and helpless misery
and be filled with a great envy for Mexican hairless dogs.

For quite a spell now we have been speaking of hair on the face; at this point we revert to
hair in its relation to the head. There are some few among us, mainly professional Southerners
and leading men, who retain the bulk of the hair on their heads through life; but with most
of us the circumstances are different. Your hair goes from you. You don't seem to notice it
at first; then all of a sudden you wake up to the realization that your head is working its
way up through the hair. You start in then desperately doing things for your hair in the hope
of inducing it to stick round the old place a while longer, but it has heard the call of the
wild and it is on its way. There's no detaining it. You soak your skull in lotions until your
brain softens and your hat-band gets moldy from the damp, but your hair keeps right on going.

After a while it is practically gone. If only about two-thirds of it is gone your head looks
like a great auk's egg in a snug nest; but if most of it goes there is something about you
that suggests the Glacial Period, with an icy barren peak rising high above the vegetation
line, where a thin line of heroic strands still cling to the slopes. You are bald then, a subject
fit for the japes of the wicked and universally coupled in the betting with onions, with hard-boiled
eggs and with the front row of orchestra chairs at a musical show.

At this time of writing baldness is creeping insidiously up each side of my head. It is executing
flank movements from the temples northward, and some day the two columns will meet and after
that I'll be considerably more of a highbrow than I am now. At present I am craftily combing
the remaining thatch in the middle and smoothing it out nice and flat, so as to keep those
bare spots covered--thinly perhaps, but nevertheless covered. It is my earnest desire to continue
to keep them covered. I am not a professional beauty; I am not even what you would call a good
amateur beauty; and I want to make what little hair I have go as far as it conveniently can.
But does the barber to whom I repair at frequent intervals coincide with my desires in this
respect? Again I reply he does not. Every time I go in I speak to him about it. I say to him:
"Woodman, spare that hair, touch not a single strand; in youth it sheltered me and I'll protect
it now." Or in substance that.

He says yes, he will, but he doesn't mean it. He waits until he can catch me with my guard
down. Then he seizes a comb, and using the edge of his left hand as a bevel and operating his
right with a sort of free-arm Spencerian movement, he roaches my hair up in a scallop effect
on either side, and upon reaching the crest he fights with it and wrestles with it until he
makes it stand erect in a feather-edged design. I can tell by his expression that he is pleased
with this arrangement. He loves to send his victims forth into the world tufted like the fretful
cockatoo. He likes to see surging waves of hair dash high on a stern and rockbound head. His
sense of the artistic demands such a result.

What cares he how I feel about it so long as the higher cravings of his own nature are satisfied?
But I resent it--I resent it bitterly. I object to having my head look like a real-estate development
with an opening for a new street going up each side and an ornamental design in fancy landscape
gardening across the top. If I permit this I won't be able to keep on saying that I was twenty-seven
on my last birthday, with some hope of getting away with it. So I insist that he put my front
hair right back where he found it. He does so, under protest and begrudgingly, it is true,
but he does it. And then, watching his opportunity, he runs in on me and overpowers me and
roaches it up some more.

If I weaken and submit he is happy as the day is long. If he gets it roached up on both sides
that will make me look like a horizontal-bar performer, which is his idea of manly beauty.
Or if he gets it roached up on one side only there is still some consolation in it for him
I'm liable to be mistaken anywhere for a trained-animal performer. But once in a very great
while he doesn't get it roached up on either side, but has to stand there and suffer as he
sees me walk forth into the world with my hair combed to suit me and not him. I can tell by
his look that he is grieved and downcast, and that he will probably go home and be cross to
the children. He has but one solace--he hopes to have better luck with me next time. And probably
he will.

The last age of hair is a wig. But wigs are not so very satisfactory either. I've seen all
the known varieties of wigs, and I never saw one yet that looked as though it were even on
speaking terms with the head that was under it. A wig always looks as though it were a total
stranger to the head and had just lit there a minute to rest, preparatory to flying along to
the next head. Nevertheless, I think on the whole I'll be happier when my time comes to wear
one, because then no barber can roach me up.

HANDS AND FEET

Nearly every boy has a period in his life when he is filled with an envious admiration for
the East India god with the extra set of arms--Vishnu, I think this party's name is. To a small
boy it seems a grand thing to have a really adequate assortment of hands. He considers the
advantage of such an arrangement in school--two hands in plain view above the desk holding
McGuffy's Fourth Reader at the proper angle for study and the other two out of sight, down
underneath the desk engaged in manufacturing paper wads or playing crack-a-loo or some other
really worth while employment.

Or for robbing birds' nests. There would be two hands for use in skinning up the tree, and
one hand for scaring off the mother bird and one hand for stealing the eggs. And for hanging
on behind wagons the combination positively could not be beaten. Then there would be the gaudy
conspicuousness of going around with four arms weaving in and out in a kind of spidery effect
while less favored boys were forced to content themselves with just an ordinary and insufficient
pair. Really, there was only one drawback to the contemplation of this scheme--there'd be twice
as many hands to wash when company was coming to dinner.

Generally speaking a boy's hands give him no serious concern during the first few years of
his life except at such times as his mother grows officious and fussy and insists that they
ought to be washed up as far as the regular place for washing a boy's hands, to wit, about
midway between the knuckles and the wrist. The fact that one finger is usually in a state of
mashedness is no drawback, but a benefit. The presence of a soiled rag around a finger gives
to a boy's hand a touch of distinctiveness--singles it out from ordinary unmaimed hands. Its
presence has been known to excuse its happy possessor from such chores as bringing in wood
for the kitchen stove or pulling dock weeds out of the grass in a front yard where it would
be much easier and quicker to pull the grass out of the dock weeds. It may even be made a source
of profit by removing the wrappings and charging two china marbles a look. I seem to recall
that in the case of a specially attractive injury, such as a thumb nail knocked off or a deep
cut which has refused to heal by first intention or an imbedded splinter in process of being
drawn out by a scrap of fat meat, that as much as four china marbles could be charged.

On the Fourth of July you occasionally burned your hands and in cold winters they chapped extensively
across the knuckles but these were but the marks and scars of honorable endeavor and a hardy
endurance. In our set the boy whose knuckles had the deepest cracks in them was a prominent
and admired figure, crowned, as you might say, with an imaginary chaplet by reason of his chaps.

With girls, of course, it was different.

Girls were superfluous and unnecessary creatures with a false and inflated idea of the value
of soap and water. Their hands weren't good for much anyway. Later on we discovered that a
girl's hands were excellent for holding purposes in a hammock or while coming back from a straw
ride, but I am speaking now of the earlier stages of our development, before the presence of
the ostensibly weaker sex began to awaken responsive throbs in our several bosoms--in short
when girls were merely nuisances and things to be ignored whenever possible. In that early
stage of his existence hands have no altruistic or sentimental or ornamental value for a boy--they
are for useful purposes altogether and are regarded as such.

It is only when he has reached the age of tail coats and spike-fence collars that he discovers
two hands are frequently too many and often not enough. They are too many at your first church
wedding when wearing your first pair of white kids and they are not enough at a five o'clock
tea. There is a type of male who can go to a five o'clock tea and not fall over a lot of Louie
Kahn's furniture or get himself hopelessly tangled up in a hanging drapery and who can seem
perfectly at ease while holding in his hands a walking stick, a pair of dove colored gloves,
a two-quart hat, a cup of tea with a slice of lemon peel in it, a tea spoon, a lump of sugar,
a seed cookie, an olive, and the hand of a lady with whom he is discussing the true meaning
of the message of the late Ibsen but these gifted mortals are not common. They are rare and
exotic. There are also some few who can do ushing at a church wedding with a pair of white
kids on and not appear overly self-conscious. These are also the exceptions. The great majority
of us suffer visibly under such circumstances. You have the feeling that each hand weighs fully
twenty-four pounds and that it is hanging out of the sleeve for a distance of about one and
three-quarters yards and you don't know what to do with your hands and on the whole would feel
much more comfortable and decorative if they were both sawed off at the wrists and hidden some
place where you couldn't find 'em. You have that feeling and you look it. You look as though
you were working in a plaster of paris factory and were carrying home a couple of large sacks
of samples. It would be grand to be a Vishnu at a five o'clock tea, but awful to be one at
a church wedding.

About the time you find yourself embarking on a career of teas and weddings you also begin
to find yourself worrying about the appearance of your hands. Up until now the hands have given
you no great concern one way or the other, but some day you wake to the realization that you
need to be manicured. Once you catch that disease there is no hope for you. There are ways
of curing you of almost any habit except manicuring. You get so that you aren't satisfied unless
your nails run down about a quarter of an inch further than nails were originally intended
to run, and unless they glitter freely you feel strangely distraught in company. Inasmuch as
no male creature's finger nails will glitter with the desired degree of brilliancy for more
than twenty-four short and fleeting hours after a treatment you find yourself constantly in
the act of either just getting a manicure or just getting over one. It is an expensive habit,
too; it takes time and it takes money. There's the fixed charge for manicuring in the first
place and then there's the tip. Once there was a manicure lady who wouldn't take a tip, but
she is now no more. Her indignant sisters stabbed her to death with hat pins and nail-files.
Manicuring as a public profession is a comparatively recent development of our civilization.
The fathers of the republic and the founders of the constitution, which was founded first and
has been foundering ever since if you can believe what a lot of people in Congress say--they
knew nothing of manicuring. Speaking by and large, they only got their thumbs wet when doing
one of three things--taking a bath, going in swimming or turning a page in a book. Washington
probably was never manicured nor Jefferson nor Franklin; it's a cinch that Daniel Boone and
Israel Putnam and George Rogers Clark weren't and yet it is generally conceded that they got
along fairly well without it. But as the campaign orators are forever pointing out from the
hustlers and the forum, this is an age calling for change and advancement. And manicuring is
one of the advancements that likewise calls for the change--for fifty cents in change anyhow
and more if you are inclined to be generous with the tip.

Shall you ever forget your first manicure? The shan'ts are unanimously in the majority. It
seems an easy thing to walk into a manicure parlor or a barber shop and shove your hands across
a little table to a strange young woman and tell her to go ahead and shine 'em up a bit--the
way you hear old veteran manicurees saying it. It seems easy, I say, and looks easy; but it
isn't as easy as it seems. Until you get hardened, it requires courage of a very high order.
You, the abashed novice, see other men sitting in the front window of the manicure shop just
as debonair and cozy as though they'd been born and raised there, swapping the ready repartee
of the day with dashing creatures of a frequently blonde aspect, and you imagine they have
always done so. You little know that these persons who are now appearing so much at home and
who can snap out those bright, witty things like "I gotcher Steve," and "Well, see who's here?"
without a moment's hesitation and without having to stop and think for the right word or the
right phrase but have it right there on the tip of the tongue--you little reck that they too
passed through the same initiation which you now contemplate. Yet such is the case.

You have dress rehearsals--private ones--in your room. In the seclusion of your bed chamber
you picture yourself opening the door of the marble manicure hall and stepping in with a brisk
yet graceful tread--like James K. Hackett making an entrance in the first act--and glancing
about you casually--like John Drew counting up the house--and saying "Hello girlies, how're
all the little Heart's Delights this afternoon?" just like that, and picking out the most sumptuous
and attractive of the flattered young ladies in waiting; and sinking easily into the chair
opposite her--see photos of William Faversham and throwing the coat lapels back, at the same
time resting the left hand clenched upon the upper thigh with the elbow well out--Donald Brian
asking a lady to waltz--and offering the right hand to the favored female and telling her to
go as far as she likes with it. It sounds simple when you figuring it out alone, but it rarely
works out that way in practice. It is my belief that every woman longs for the novelty of a
Turkish bath and every man for the novelty of a manicure long before either dares to tackle
it. I may be wrong but this is my belief. And in the case of the man he usually makes a number
of false starts.

You go to the portals and hesitate and then, stumbling across the threshold, you either dive
on through to the barber shop--if there is a barber shop in connection--or else you mumble
something about being in a hurry and coming back again, and retreat with all the grace and
ease that would be shown by a hard shell crab that was trying to back into the mouth of a milk-bottle.
You are likely to do this several times; but finally some day you stick. You slump down into
one of those little chairs and offer your hands or one of them to a calm and slightly arrogant
looking young lady and you tell her to please shine them up a little. You endeavor to appear
as though you had been doing this at frequent periods stretching through a great number of
years, but she--bless her little heart!--she knows better than that. The female of the manicuring
species is not to be deceived by any such cheap and transparent artifices. If you wore a peekaboo
waist she couldn't see through you any easier. Your hands would give you away if your face
didn't. In a sibulent aside, she addresses the young lady at the next table--the one with the
nine bracelets and the hair done up delicatessen store mode--sausages, rolls and buns--whereupon
both of them laugh in a significant, silvery way, and you feel the back of your neck setting
your collar on fire. You can smell the bone button back there scorching and you're glad it's
not celluloid, celluloid being more inflammable and subject to combustion when subjected to
intense heat.

When both have laughed their merry fill, the young woman who has you in charge looks you right
in the eye and says:

"Dearie me; you'll pardon me saying so, but your nails are in a perfectly turrible state. I
don't think I've seen a jumpman's nails in such a state for ever so long. Pardon me again--but
how long has it been since you had them did?"

To which you reply in what is meant to be a jaunty and off-hand tone:

"Oh quite some little while. I've--I've been out of town."

"That's what I thought," she says with a slight shrug. It isn't so much what she says--it's
the way she says it, the tone and all that, which makes you feel smaller and smaller until
you could crawl into your own watch pocket and live happily there ever after. There'd be slews
of room and when you wanted the air of an evening you could climb up in a buttonhole of your
vest and be quite cosy and comfortable. But shrink as you may, there is now no hope of escape,
for she has reached out and grabbed you firmly by the wrist. She has you fast. You have a feeling
that eight or nine thousand people have assembled behind you and are all gazing fixedly into
the small of your back. The only things about you that haven't shrivelled up are your hands.
You can feel them growing larger and larger and redder and redder and more prominent and conspicuous
every instant.

The lady begins operations. You are astonished to note how many tools and implements it takes
to manicure a pair of hands properly. The top of her little table is full of them and she pulls
open a drawer and shows you some more, ranged in rows. There are files and steel biters and
pigeon-toed scissors and scrapers and polishers and things; and wads of cotton with which to
staunch the blood of the wounded, and bottles of liquid and little medicinal looking jars full
of red paste; and a cut glass crock with soap suds in it and a whole lot of little orange wood
stobbers.

In the interest of truth I have taken the pains to enquire and I have ascertained that these
stobbers are invariably of orange wood. Say what you will, the orange tree is a hardy growth.
Every February you read in the papers that the Florida orange crop, for the third consecutive
time since Christmas has been entirely and totally destroyed by frost and yet there is always
an adequate supply on hand of the principal products of the orange-phosphate for the soda fountains,
blossoms for the bride, political sentiment for the North of Ireland and little sharp stobbers
for the manicure lady. Speaking as an outsider I would say that there ought to be other varieties
of wood that would serve as well and bring about the desired results as readily--a good thorny
variety of poison ivy ought to fill the bill, I should think. But it seems that orange wood
is absolutely essential. A manicure lady could no more do a manicure properly without using
an orange wood stobber at certain periods than a cartoonist could draw a picture of a man in
jail without putting a ball and chain on him or a summer resort could get along without a Lover's
Leap within easy walking distance of the hotel. It simply isn't done, that's all.

Well, as I was saying, she gets out her tool kit and goes to work on you. You didn't dream
that there were so many things--mainly of a painful nature--that could be done to a single
finger nail and you flinch as you suddenly remember that you have ten of them in all, counting
thumbs in with fingers. She takes a finger nail in hand and she files it and she trims it and
she softens it with hot water and hardens it with chemicals and parboils it a little while
and then she cuts off the hang nails--if there aren't any hang nails there already she'll make
a few--and she shears away enough extra cuticle to cover quite a good-sized little boy. She
goes over you with a bristle brush, and warms up your nerve ends until you tingle clear back
to your dorsal fin and then she takes one of those orange wood stobbers previously referred
to, and goes on an exploring expedition down under the nail, looking for the quick. She always
finds it. There is no record of a failure to find the quick. Having found it she proceeds to
wake it up and teach it some parlor tricks. I may not have set forth all these various details
in the exact order in which they take place, but I know she does them all. And somewhere along
about the time when she is half way through with the first hand she makes you put the other
hand in the suds.

Later on when you have had more practice at this thing you learn to wait for the signal before
plunging the second hand into the suds, but being green on this occasion, you are apt to mistake
the moving of the crock of suds over from the right hand side to the left hand side as a notice
and to poke your untouched hand right in without further orders, hoping to get it softened
up well so as to save her trouble in trimming it down to a size which will suit her. But this
is wrong--this is very wrong, as she tells you promptly, with a pitying smile for your ignorance.
Manicure girls are as careful about boiling a hand as some particular people are about bailing
their eggs for breakfast of a morning. A two minute hand is no pleasure to her absolutely if
she has diagnosed your hand as one calling for six minutes, or vice versa. So, should you err
in this regard she will snatch the offending hand out and wipe it off and give it back to you
and tell you to keep it in a dry place until she calls for it. Manicure girls are very funny
that way.

Thus time passes on and on and by degrees you begin to feel more and more at home. Your bashfulness
is wearing off. The coherent power of speech has returned to you and you have exchanged views
with her on the relative merits of the better known brands of chewing gum and which kind holds
the flavor longest, and you have swapped ideas on the issue of whether ladies should or should
not smoke cigarettes in public and she knows how much your stick pin cost you and you know
what her favorite flower is. You are getting along fine, when all of a sudden she dabs your
nails with a red paste and then snatches up a kind of a polishing tool and ferociously rubs
your fingers until they catch on fire. Just when the conflagration threatens to become general
she stops using the polisher and proceeds to cool down the ruins by gently burnishing your
nails against the soft, pink palm of her hand. You like this better than the other way. You
could ignite yourself by friction almost any time, if you got hold of the right kind of a chamois
skin rubber, but this is quite different and highly soothing. You are beginning to really enjoy
the sensation when she roguishly pats the back of your hand--pitty pat--as a signal that the
operation is now over. You pay the check and tip the lady--tip her fifty cents if you wish
to be regarded as a lovely jumpman or only twenty-five cents if you are satisfied with being
a vurry nice fella--and you secure your hat and step forth into the open with the feeling of
one who has taken a trip into a distant domain and on the whole has rather enjoyed it. 

There is nothing that I have which can be so well employed as to his use, from whom I first received
it; and if your convenience can leave me nothing else, I shall have a head, and hands, and
industry still left me, which alone have been able to raise sufficient fortunes. Pray, sir, therefore,
make your life as comfortable and lasting as you can; let not any consideration of us cast
you into the least despondency. If I have any reflections on, or desires of free and competent
subsistence, it is more in reference to another (whom you may guess)
to whom I am very much obliged, than for myself: but no thoughts,
how important soever, shall make me forget my duty; and a father is
more than all other relations; and the greatest satisfaction I can
propose to myself in the world, is my hopes that you may yet live
to receive the return of some comfort, for all that care and indulgence
you have placed in,

"Sir, your most obedient son,

"J.L."

Locke, it appears, originally applied himself to the study of physic; and he became essentially
serviceable in his medical capacity to Lord Ashley, afterwards the celebrated Earl of Shaftesbury,
to whom he was introduced in 1666, and who was led to form so high an opinion of Locke's general
powers, that he prevailed upon Locke to take up his residence at his house, and urged him to apply
his studies to politics and philosophy.

This proved the stepping-stone to his subsequent greatness; and it is gratifying to learn that
his career, literary and political, was closed as honourably as it had been commenced. His
last publications were in a controversy with the celebrated Bishop Stillingfleet, who had
censured some passages in Locke's immortal "Essay." The prelate yielded to the more powerful reasoning
of the philosopher, yet Locke's writing was uniformly distinguished by mildness and urbanity.
At this time he held the post of commissioner of trade and plantations. An asthmatic complaint,
with which he had long been afflicted, now began to increase, and,
with the rectitude which distinguished the whole of his conduct, he
resigned: the sovereign, (William) was very unwilling to receive Locke's
resignation; but the philosopher, who made his precepts his own rule
of life, pressed the point, observing that he could not in conscience
hold a situation to which a considerable salary was attached without
performing the duties of it.

Would that such political philosophy were more common in our days! From this time, Locke lived
wholly in retirement, where he applied himself to the study of the Scriptures, till, in 1704,
after nearly two years' declining health, he fell asleep. He was buried at Oates, where there
is a neat monument erected to his memory, with a modest Latin inscription indited by himself.

* * * * *

THE KNIGHT OF TOGGENBURG.

FROM THE GERMAN OF SCHILLER.

(For the Mirror.)
"Knight, a sister's truest love, This mine heart devotes to thee--
Ask no other love to prove; Marriage! no, that ne'er can be. Nearly every male
who lives to reach the voting age has a period of mental weakness in his youth when he wears
those pointed shoes that turn up at the ends, like sleigh runners; and spends the rest of his
life regretting it. Feet are certainly ungrateful things. I might say that they are proverbially
ungrateful. You do for them and they do you. You get one corn, hard or soft, cured up or removed
bodily and a whole crowd of its relatives come to take its place. I imagine that Nature intended
we should go barefooted and is now getting even with us because we didn't. Our poor, painful
feet go with us through all the years and every step in life is marked by a pang of some sort.
And right on up to the end of our days, our feet are getting more infirm and more troublesome
and more crotchety and harder to bear with all the time. How many are there right now who have
one foot in the grave and the other at the chiropodist's? Thousands, I reckon.

Napoleon said an army traveled on its stomach. He and all his family got into the flouring mill
just below the woolen mill and upon the roof. The woolen mill was totally wrecked, though not carried
away, and the flouring mill was badly damaged, but the roof held and all were saved.
 As what man has not? Once the green-corn
dance was an exclusive thing with the Sioux Indians, but it may now be witnessed when one man
steps on another man's toes in a crowd.

We are accustomed to make fun of the humble worm of the dust but in one respect the humble
worm certainly has it on us. He goes through existence without any hands and any feet to bother
him. Indeed in this regard I can think of but one creature in all creation who is worse off
than we poor humans are. That is the lowly ear wig. Think of being an ear wig, that suffers
from fallen arches himself and has a wife that suffers from cold feet!

