[Note 3: Silver chloride should not be heated to complete fusion, since a slight loss by volatilization
is possible at high temperatures. 1.12) has been added (Note 2). Heat the solution to boiling,
and while at the boiling point add concentrated nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.42), !drop by drop!
(noting the volume used), until the brown coloration, which appears after the addition of a
part of the nitric acid, gives place to a yellow or red (Note 3). Avoid a large excess of nitric
acid, but be sure that the action is complete. Pour this solution cautiously into about 200
cc. of water, containing a slight excess of ammonia. Calculate for this purpose the amount
of aqueous ammonia required to neutralize the hydrochloric and nitric acids added (see Appendix
for data), and also to precipitate the iron as ferric hydroxide from the weight of the ferrous
ammonium sulphate taken for analysis, assuming it to be pure (Note 4). The volume thus calculated
will be in excess of that actually required for precipitation, since the acids are in part
consumed in the oxidation process, or are volatilized. Heat the solution to boiling, and allow
the precipitated ferric hydroxide to settle. Decant the clear liquid through a washed filter
(9 cm.), keeping as much of the precipitate in the beaker as possible. Wash twice by decantation
with 100 cc. of hot water. Reserve the filtrate. Dissolve the iron from the filter with hot,
dilute hydrochloric acid (sp. gr. 1.12), adding it in small portions, using as little as possible
and noting the volume used. Collect the solution in the beaker in which precipitation took
place. Add 1 cc. of nitric acid (sp. gr. 1.42), boil for a few moments, and again pour into
a calculated excess of ammonia.

Wash the precipitate twice by decantation, and finally transfer it to the original filter.
Wash continuously with hot water until finally 3 cc. of the washings, acidified with nitric
acid (Note 5), show no evidences of the presence of chlorides when tested with silver nitrate.
The filtrate and washings are combined with those from the first precipitation and treated
for the determination of sulphur, as prescribed on page 112.

[Note 1: If a selection of pure material for analysis is to be made, crystals which are cloudy
are to be avoided on account of loss of water of crystallization; and also those which are
red, indicating the presence of ferric iron. If, on the other hand, the value of an average
sample of material is desired, it is preferable to grind the whole together, mix thoroughly,
and take a sample from the mixture for analysis.]

[Note 2: When aqueous solutions of ferrous compounds are heated in the air, oxidation of the
Fe^{++} ions to Fe^{+++} ions readily occurs in the absence of free acid. But, in the end, they
said that Arthur had done right valiantly: nevertheless, they said that Oliver had done best unto
their seeming. And therefore it was concluded that the pryce should
be given unto Oliver, as for the best of them of within. Moreover, at the boiling temperature, the
ferric sulphate produced by the oxidation hydrolyzes in part with the formation of a basic
ferric sulphate, which also tends to separate from solution. The addition of the hydrochloric
acid prevents the formation of ferric hydroxide, and so far reduces the ionization of the water
that the hydrolysis of the ferric sulphate is also prevented, and no precipitation occurs on
heating.]

