"I will remember," said Chapeau, "that he sent us word to Chatillon, that he would not leave
alive in La Vendee a father or mother to lament their children, or a child to lament its parents:
those were bitter words; maybe he will be sorry to have them brought to his memory just at
present."

"Remember what I tell you, Chapeau," said his master; "whatever he may have said, it is not
now your duty to sit in judgment on him."

"For God's sake, gentlemen, don't do him a harm here," said the old woman; "for mercy's sake,
Monsieur," and she turned to Henri, "don't let them take his life; to tell you the truth, when
he begged for some hole to hide in, I bid him to go upstairs; I could do no less. I should
have done the same if it had been one of you."

Henri said what he could to tranquillize her, assuring her that the man should, at any rate,
not be killed before her eyes; and this seemed to be sufficient to reassure her. Chapeau and
four others had gone upstairs; and those below were not kept waiting long, before the heavy
tread of the men descending was heard on the stairs, as though they were carrying down a weight
among them. Such was the case: Henri stepped forward and opened the door; and as he did so,
the men staggered into the room with their burden, and then gently dropped upon the floor the
dead body of the republican General. The unfortunate man had shot himself.

Henri turned out of the shop without saying a word; and as the others prepared to follow him,
one of the men knelt down beside the body, and wrenched from the hand, which still held it
fast, the fatal pistol which had so lately done its work. "At any rate," said he," there is
no use in leaving this behind us; I doubt not but I can make a better use of it than General
Lechelle has done."

The Chevalier had said but the truth, in declaring that Adolphe Denot's wound was mortal; the
musket ball had passed right through his lungs, passing out between his shoulders; and his
limbs had been dreadfully torn and bruised by the feet of the horses which had passed over
him. Still, however, he had been carried alive into the town, had been laid in a settle-bed
in the little inn, and had his wounds dressed with such surgical skill as the town afforded. Nothing,
however, is further from the designs of the republicans of Europe than this course: as many of
them owe their hatred of tyranny to the sufferings which they have
personally undergone, it is oppression, and not the extent of the
executive power, which excites their hostility, and they attack the
former without perceiving how nearly it is connected with the latter.

Hitherto no citizen has shown any disposition to expose his honor and his life in order to become
the President of the United States; because the power of that office is temporary, limited, and
subordinate. The prize of fortune must be great to encourage adventurers in so desperate a
game. No candidate has as yet been able to arouse the dangerous enthusiasm or the passionate
sympathies of the people in his favor, for the very simple reason that when he is at the head of
the Government he has but little power, but little wealth, and but little glory to share amongst
his friends; and his influence in the State is too small for the success or the ruin of a
faction to depend upon the elevation of an individual to power.

The great advantage of hereditary monarchies is, that as the private
interest of a family is always intimately connected with the interests
of the State, the executive government is never suspended for a single
instant; and if the affairs of a monarchy are not better conducted
than those of a republic, at least there is always some one to conduct
them, well or ill, according to his capacity.

In elective States, on the contrary, the wheels of government cease to act, as it were, of their
own accord at the approach of an election, and even for some time previous to that event.


Henri advanced up to the bed on tiptoe, and gazed into Denot's face; he had been shocked before,
but he now thought that never in his life had he seen so sad a sight: the colour of his skin
was no longer pale, but livid; his thin, dry lips were partially open, and his teeth, close
set together, were distinctly visible; his eyes were at the moment closed, as though he were
in a stupor, and his long black matted hair hung back over the folded cloak on which his head
rested: his sallow, bony hands lay by his side, firmly clenched, as though he had been struggling,
and his neck and breast, which had been opened for the inspection of the surgeon, was merely
covered with a ragged bloody towel.

"Is he asleep?" asked Henri, in a whisper, such as seems to come naturally to every one, when
speaking by the bed-side of those who are in great danger, but which is generally much more
painfully audible to a sick man than the natural voice.

Denot opened his eyes, and showed, by the slight motion of his head, that he had heard his
friend's voice, but he was at the moment unable to speak.

Plume made a signal to Henri to be quiet, and he therefore sat himself down at the other side
of the bed, to watch till Adolphe should gain strength to speak to him, or till the breath
should have passed from his body. Plume, in the meantime, continued his occupation, causing
a few drops of water to fall from time to time between those thin shrivelled lips; and in this
way a long half-hour passed over them.

At last Henri heard his name scarcely pronounced by the dying man, and the dull eyes opened,
though it was evident that the film of death had nearly hidden all objects from their view;
still it was evident that he knew who it was that sat by his bed-side, and he faintly returned
the pressure of the hand which grasped his own. Henri stooped down his ear to catch the words
which might fall from his lips; but for a while he made no farther attempt to speak--an inexpressible
look of confused trouble passed across his face and forehead, as he attempted to collect his
disordered thoughts, and again he closed his eyes, as though the struggle was useless; at last
he again muttered something, and Henri caught the words 'de Lescure,' and 'bridge of Saumur.'

"Yes, yes, he shall," said Henri, trying to comfort him, but still not understanding what it
was that weighed so heavily on his breast; he felt, however, that a promise of compliance would
give him comfort. "He shall, indeed; I will tell him, and I know he will."

Again the eyes were closed, and the struggle to speak was discontinued. Plume gave over his
task, for it was evident that no care of his could any longer be of avail, and he walked away
from the bed, that he might not overhear the words which his Captain strove to speak to his
friend; but Henri remained, still holding Denot's hand: then a thought struck him, which had
not earlier occurred to him, and beckoning to Plume to come to him, he dismissed him, in a
whisper, to endeavour to find a priest, without the loss of another moment, and bring him to
the aid of the dying man.

Though Denot's sight and speech were almost gone, the sense of hearing was still left to him,
and he understood what Henri said. He again moved his head in token of dissent; again pulled
his friend towards him by the hand, and again muttered out a word, the last that he ever attempted
to utter; that one word Henri heard as plainly as though it had been spoken with the full breath
of a strong man--it was his sister's name.

Adolphe Denot survived this last effort of his troubled spirit, but a few moments; the sepulchral
rattle in his throat soon told the sad tale of his dissolution; and Plume hurrying up to the
bed-head, assisted Henri in composing the limbs of the dead man.

For three months Denot and Plume had consorted together; they had been a strange fantastic
pair of comrades, but yet not altogether ill-matched: nothing could be more dissimilar than
they had been in age, in birth, and previous habits, but they had met together with the same
wishes, the same ambition, the same want of common sense, and above all the same overweening
vanity; they had flattered each other from the moment of their first meeting to the present
day, and thus these two poor zealous maniacs, for in point of sanity the Lieutenant was but
little better than his Captain, had learnt to love each other.

And now Plume, having carefully completed what the exigencies of the moment required, gave
way to his sincere grief, and bewailed his friend with no silent sorrow. Henri, who had totally
forgotten the little that he had heard of the martial baker, was at a loss to conceive who
could be the man, a stranger to himself who found cause for so much sorrow in the death of
Adolphe Denot. As for himself, he had tenderly loved Denot as a brother; he had truly forgiven
him his gross treachery; and he had determined to watch over him, and if possible protect him
from farther sorrow: but after the interview he had had with him, he could not conceal from
himself that Adolphe was still insane; and he felt that death had come to him in an honourable
way, atoning for past faults, and relieving him from future sufferings. He could not grieve
that his friend had fallen in battle, bravely doing his duty in the cause to which he was bound
by so many ties.

"He was the bravest man, and the best soldier, and the most honourable gentleman in the whole
army," said Plume, sobbing; "and now there's no one left but myself," and then recovering himself
he made to the manes of the departed warrior a loyal promise, which he fully determined to
keep. "Thou art gone, my brave commander, my gallant commander," he said, standing suddenly
upright, and stretching his long arms over the corpse, "thou art gone, and I doubt not I shall
follow thee: but till that moment shall come, till a death, as honourable as thine own, shall
release me from my promise, I swear that I will not disgrace the high station which thy departure
obliges me to fill. It was thou who first tutored my unaccustomed arm to wield the sword; it
was thou who badest me hear unmoved the thunder of an enemy's artillery; it was thou who taughtest
me all I know of military tactics, and the art of war. Rest in peace, dear friend, dearest
of instructors, I will not disgrace thy precepts." And so finishing, he stooped down, kissed
the face of the dead body which he apostrophized, made a cross on the bosom, and muttered a
fervent prayer for the welfare of the departed soul.

If Henri was surprised before, he was now perfectly astounded; nothing could be less poetical,
less imposing, or have less of military grandeur about it than the figure of poor Auguste Plume.
What could he mean by saying that he was now called on to fill a high station? Who could it
be that confessed to owe so deep a debt of gratitude to the dead man?

"Had you known M. Denot long?" asked Henri, when he conceived that Plume was sufficiently composed
to. hear and answer a question.

"What's that you say his name was?" said Plume, eagerly, pricking up his ears. "I beg your
pardon, Sir, I didn't exactly catch the word."

"And didn't you know the name of the friend, whom you seem to have valued so highly?"

"Indeed, to tell you the truth, Sir, I did not. We two used to have a good deal of talk together:
for hours and hours we've sat and talked over this war, and he has told me much of what he
used to do in Poitou, when he served with the Vendeans; but I could never get him to tell me
his name. It was a question he didn't like to be asked; and yet I am sure he never did anything
to disgrace it."

"His name was Adolphe Denot," said Henri.

"Adolphe Denot--Adolphe Denot! well, I am very glad I know at last. One doesn't like not to
know the name of the dearest friend one ever had; especially after he's dead. But wasn't he
Count Denot, or Baron Denot, or something of that sort?"

"No, he had no title; but yet he was of noble blood."

"I suppose then we must call him General Denot--simple General; it sounds as well as Count
or Marquis in these days. Was he a General when you knew him in La Vendee?"

"I have known him all my life," replied Henri.

"Indeed!" said Plume: and then gazing at his companion, from head to foot, he continued, "An't
you the gentleman that came with Chapeau to see him last night? An't you the Commander-in-Chief
of the Vendeans?"

Henri gave him to understand that he was.

"Then this meeting is very lucky," said Plume, "most exceedingly fortunate! I am now the Commander-in-Chief
of La Petite Vendee. We must unite our forces. I am not ambitious--at least not too ambitious;
you shall be the chief, I will be next to you. Chapeau, I am sure, will be contented to be
third. here, over the body of our friend, let us concert our measures for utterly exterminating
the republicans. We have now been victorious, proudly, grandly victorious; my voice shall be
for a march to Paris. Come, General, give me your hand. Hand in hand, like true comrades, let
us march to Paris, and thunder at the doors of the Convention."

As he spoke, Auguste Emile Septimus held out his hand to the young Commander; and Henri could
not refuse the proffered grasp. He now remembered Chapeau's description of the martial baker;
and as he underwent the merciless squeeze which Plume inflicted on him, the young Marquis meditated,
with something like vexation, on the ridiculous figure and language of him who now claimed
his friendship and confidence. He had before been on terms of perfect equality with men equally
low in station with poor Plume. Cathelineau had been a postillion; Stofflet, a game-keeper;
but he had admired the enthusiastic genius of Cathelineau, he had respected the practical iron
energy of Stofflet--he could neither admire nor respect Auguste Plume--and yet he could not
reject him.

He endeavoured, in as few words as he could, to make his companion understand, that highly
as he appreciated his disinterested offer, he could not, at the present moment, accede to it.
That many officers, high in the confidence of the whole army, must be consulted before any
important step was taken; that, as for himself his duty required him to hurry back to Laval
as quick as he could. That, as regarded him, Plume, he advised him to return to his own men,
and endeavour to organize them into a regular corps, in doing which he promised him that practical
assistance should not be wanting; and that, as regarded the body of their mutual friend, he,
Henri, would give orders for its immediate burial; and having said so much as quickly as he
could speak, Henri Larochejaquelin hurried from the room, leaving the unfortunate Plume to
renew his lamentations over his friend. He had cause to lament; the only man likely to flatter
his vanity was gone. He would never again be told that he was born for great achievements--never
again promised that bravery, fidelity to his commander, and gallant demeanour among his comrades,
would surely lead him to exalted duties. Such were the precepts with which the insanity of
Denot had inflamed the mad ambition of his poor follower. He now felt--not his own unfitness,
for that he could not suspect--but the difficulty, the impossibility to get his talents and
services acknowledged; and he again sat down to weep, partly for his friend, and partly for
himself.

Henri passed the remainder of the night in Chateau-Gonthier, and early on the next morning
he returned towards Laval. The road was covered with swarms of Vendeans, now returning from
the pursuit in which they had nearly exterminated the unfortunate army which had followed them
across the Loire. They had crossed that river panic-stricken and hopeless; now they were shouting
with triumph, and exulting with joy, confident of success. None of those who returned were
without some token of success; some carried back with them the muskets of the republican infantry;
others, the sabres of the cavalry; and others, more joyful in their success than any, were
mounted on their horses. They all loudly greeted Henri as he passed, and declared that nothing
should ever conquer them, now that they had the General over them, whom they themselves had chosen.

Henri, though he well knew the difficulties which were before him, could not but be triumphant
as he listened to the cheers of his followers; he had certainly been pre-eminently successful
in the first attempts which had been made under his own sole command; and it is not surprising
that this, joined to the confidence of youth, should have made him feel himself equal almost
to any enterprise. Then another subject of joy filled his heart; Marie had promised that if
the Vendeans were now successful, if they could look forward to spending one quiet week in
Laval, she would no longer refuse to join her hand to his and become bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh--that promise she would now realize; and therefore as he rode back through
the gate of Laval, Henri felt happier than he had done for many a long, weary, tedious day.

CHAPTER XII

VENDEAN MARRIAGES

The young General's good news had preceded him, and when he entered the room where his friends
were assembled, they were one and all ready to embrace and congratulate their successful soldier;
he received the blessing of his father, the praises of de Lescure, the thanks and admiration
of Madame de Lescure, and what he valued more than all, Marie's acknowledgments of the promise
she gave him, when last he left her side. 

It recalled men from slovenly prejudices to the study of the real facts of the living world. It
narrowed the front of battle, but it strengthened it enormously. The volume on Romanism and
Popular Protestantism is not an exhaustive survey of the controversy with Rome or of the theory
of the Church. There are great portions of the subject, both theological and historical, which it
did not fall within the scope of the book to touch. It was unsystematic and incomplete. But
so far as its argument extended, it almost formed an epoch in this kind of controversial writing.
It showed the command of a man of learning over all the technical points and minutiae of a question
highly scholastical in its conceptions and its customary treatment, and it presented this question
in its bearings and consequences on life and practice with the freedom and breadth of the most
vigorous popular writing. The indictment against Rome was no vague or general one. It was one
of those arguments which cut the ground from under a great established
structure of reasonings and proofs.

And its conclusions, clear and measured, but stern, were the more impressive, because they
came from one who did not disguise his feeling that there was much in what was preserved in
the Roman system to admire and to learn from.

The point which he chose for his assault was indeed the key of the Roman position--the doctrine
of Infallibility. He was naturally led to this side of the question by the stress which the movement
had laid on the idea of the Church as the witness and teacher of
revealed truth: and the immediate challenge given by the critics or
opponents of the movement was, how to distinguish this lofty idea
of the Church, with its claim to authority, if it was at all substantial,
from the imposing and consistent theory of Romanism.

He urged against the Roman claim of Infallibility two leading objections.
 They could not, however, start quite immediately; nor
was it necessary for them to do so; and the few days of secure rest which so many of them anxiously
desired, was given to the army.

At length Henri found leisure to tell them all the sad, but still pleasing story of Denot's
conduct and fate--of the gallantry by which he had redeemed so many sins, and of the death
by which he had set a seal to the forgiveness of them all. Each of them had already learnt
that Adolphe was the mysterious leader, the Mad Captain of La Petite Vendee, and they listened
with deep attention to the story which they now heard of the way in which he had been living,
and of the manner of his death.

"Poor fellow," said Henri, "I understand it all, except about the bridge of Saumur; from the
time when I found him in his wretched chamber, to the moment of his death, he was talking of
that, and connecting your name, Charles, with everything he said; I do not at all know what
was in his thoughts, but something connected with the bridge of Saumur was either a great trouble
to him, or a great triumph."

And then de Lescure told him what had happened; how the poor fellow's heart had failed him,
at the moment when courage was so necessary; how he had feared to advance at the decisive moment,
and had shrunk back, appalled, conquered, and disgraced. Henri now understood why de Lescure
had not allowed Denot to be chosen at Saumur, as one of the twelve leaders of the army; why
he had subsequently so generally distrusted him; and expressed so little surprise of the conduct
of which he had been guilty at Durbelliere.

"His history," said de Lescure, "gives us a singular insight into the intricacies of a man's
character; Adolphe was not naturally a coward, for madness aggravates the foibles of our nature,
and no one can have shown himself more capable of gallantry than he did yesterday; but he wanted
that sustained courage which is only given by principle, and trust in God. May He forgive his
sins, mercifully remembering his infirmities!"

Some time after this, preparations were made for the marriage of Henri and Marie--such preparations
as the time and place allowed. There was now neither inclination nor opportunity for a fete,
such as would have graced the nuptials of Marie de Lescure at a happier time; she now neither
desired, nor could have endured it. Father Jerome had promised to perform the ceremony; Agatha
would be her bridesmaid; and her brother and her father-in-law, both on their sick couches,
would be her wedding-guests. Still she was happy and cheerful; she loved Henri Larochejaquelin
with her whole heart, the more probably on account of the dangers through which they had already
passed together, and she had firmly resolved to endure, without complaining, those which were
still before them.

Two days before the ceremony was to take place, Chapeau came up to his master, as they were
together leaving the quarters of some of the troops, and with a very serious face, begged permission
to speak to him. Now, as it usually happened that Chapeau passed a considerable portion of
the day talking to his master in a most unconstrained way, on every conceivable subject, Henri
felt sure that something very much out of the common way was going to be said; however, he
at once gave the desired permission.

"And Monsieur is positively going to be married on Wednesday morning?" commenced Chapeau.

"Why you know as well as myself that I am," said Henri.

"Oh, of course, yes--of course I know it, as Monsieur has been condescending enough to tell
me; and will Madame, that is Mademoiselle as she is at present, go with Monsieur to Granville."

"What the deuce are you about, Chapeau, with all this rhodomontade? didn't I tell you that
she would go with me."

"And the other ladies, Mademoiselle Agatha and Madame de Lescure, they will remain in Laval?"

"Yes, they will remain in Laval with my father and M. de Lescure: but you know all that already,
as well as I do."

"But Madame de Larochejaquelin, that is, when she is Madame, she will want some young woman
to attend her. Madame, of course, cannot go to Granville without some decent female to be near
her; of course it will be quite impossible, will it not, Monsieur?"

"Now, Chapeau, tell me at once what you are coming to, and don't pretend to be so considerate
and modest. You know that it is arranged that your own fiancee, Annot Stein, should accompany
my wife."

"Yes--but, M. Henri, Annot Stein has some scruples; or rather--"

"Scruples! Oh, by all means, let her stay behind then. I'll have no one with me who has any
scruples; tell her to stay with her father. I'll speak to Mademoiselle de Lescure."

"But Monsieur is in such a hurry," said Chapeau, who had not the slightest intention to have
the matter arranged in this way. "I was wrong to say that Annot has scruples; indeed she hasn't
got any--not one at all--it is I that have them."

"You! Now, Chapeau, may I ask the particular favour of you, to let me know at once, what you
mean to ask of me?"

"Why, you see, M. Henri, Annot is a poor lone girl, quite unprotected as any one may say, though,
of course, she will not be unprotected, when she will have the protection of Monsieur and Madame;
but still she is a poor lone girl, and as such, she won't have the--the--the what d'ye call
it, you know, which she would have as a married woman--the confidence and station, you know:
she wouldn't be half so useful to Madame; and, therefore, perhaps, Monsieur will think that
she and I had better be married at the same time as Madame."

Chapeau had it all his own way; his arguments were unanswerable; and as no good reason could
be given, why a wife would not be as serviceable to the man as it was to the master, it was
agreed that they both should be married on the same day, at the same hour, in the same room,
and by the same priest. The honour of this was almost too much for poor Annot, and quite upset
her father, Michael Stein, who did not at all like the idea of not having his own way, after
his own fashion, at hi own only daughter's wedding. However, he was ultimately reconciled to
the melancholy grandeur of the ceremony, by arrangements which were made for some substantial
evening comfort below stairs; and although no banquet was prepared for the wedding of the master
and the mistress, the valet and the lady's maid were as well provided, as though they had been
united in peaceful times, and in a quiet church.

And now the sun had risen brightly on the morning which was to add another care to those which
already burthened the shoulders of Henri Larochejaquelin. They all sat down together and eat
their quiet breakfast in the parlour, to which a fortnight's habitation had now accustomed
them. Henri wore no bridal dress. He had on the uniform of a Vendean officer, and round his
waist was fastened a white scarf with a black knot, the distinguishing mark which he now bore
of his rank in the army as Commander-in-Chief. Marie de Lescure was dressed in white, but her
dress was as simple and unadorned as it could be well made; no bride, young, beautiful, and
noble was ever prepared for the altar with less costly care, with less attention to the generally
acknowledged proprieties of hymeneal decoration. Agatha and Madame de Lescure had in no respect
altered their usual attire. It may easily be understood that leaving their homes in the manner
they had done, they had not brought with them a full wardrobe; and since their arrival in Laval,
they had had more pressing cares than that of supplying it.

De Lescure was daily getting weaker; but still the weaker he got the less he suffered, and
the more capable he became of assuming his accustomed benevolent demeanour and anxious care
for others. Both he and his wife knew that he was approaching the term of his mortal sufferings;
but others, and among them Henri was the most sanguine, still hoped that he would recover;
and there certainly was nothing in his cheery manner On the morning of the wedding, to make
any one think that such hopes were misplaced. The old Marquis was more sad and melancholy than
he had used to be among his beloved birds and cherry trees at Durbelliere; and, on this occasion,
he was probably the saddest of the party, for he was the one who would have rejoiced the most
that the wedding of his son should be an occasion of joy to relatives, servants, tenants, and
the numerous neighbours among whom he had always lived with so much mutual affection.

The most singular figure of the whole party was Father Jerome, the Cure of St. Laud's. He still
wore the same long grey coat in which he was first introduced to the reader at Durbelliere;
which had since that time figured at Saumur and many another scene of blood and violence, and
which we last saw when he was found by Madame de Lescure in the chapel at Genet. It had now
been so patched and darned, that its oldest friends could not have recognized it. But Father
Jerome still maintained that it was good enough for the ordinary run of his present daily duties,
though he jocosely apologized to Marie for appearing, on such an occasion, in so mean a garment.

As soon as the breakfast was over, the table on which it had been eaten, was converted into
a rude altar, and the ceremony was commenced. Jacques Chapeau and Annot, whose turn was immediately
to follow, stood close up to the table, opposite to their master and mistress; but Michael
Stein and his two sons, who of course were to be present at Annot's marriage, and who had prepared
to seat themselves on the stairs till their presence should be required, had also been invited
to attend; and they now sat but very ill at their ease, on three chairs, in the very farthest
corner of the room. Michael Stein, though chance had thrown him among the loyal Vendeans, had
in his heart but little of that love and veneration for his immediate superiors, which was
the strong and attractive point in the character of the people of Poitou. Though he had lived
all his life in the now famous village of Echanbroignes, he had in his disposition, much of
the stubborn self-dependence of the early republicans; and he did not relish his position,
sitting in the back- ground as a humble hanger-on in the family of a nobleman and an aristocrat.
He was, however, unable to help himself; his sons were Vendeans; his daughter was just going
to marry the confidential follower of the Vendean Commander-in-Chief; and he himself had been
seen fighting for La Vendee: there he sat, therefore, quiet, though hardly happy, between his
two stalwart sons, with his thin hair brushed over his forehead, and his huge swarthy hands
crossed on his knees before him.

The marriage ceremonies were soon performed: and then Henri and Chapeau, each in their turn,
led their brides from the altar; and all went on as quietly in the one room which they occupied,
as though nothing beyond their daily occupations had occurred.

"God bless you, my children!" said the old Marquis, "this is but a sad wedding; but it is useless
to regret the happy times which are gone, it seems for ever."

"Not for ever, father," said Marie, kissing the old man's face, "Henri and I still look forward
to having our wedding fete; perhaps in Paris--perhaps in dear La Vendee, when we shall once
more be able to call our old homes our own; then we will make you, and Agatha, and Victorine,
make up fivefold for all that has been omitted now. Will we not, Henri?"

Below stairs, Chapeau and Annot, wisely thinking that no time was like the present, endeavoured
to be as gay as they would have been had they enjoyed their marriage-feast in the smith's own
cottage; one or two of Chapeau's friends were asked on the occasion, and among them, Plume
condescended to regale himself though the cheer was spread in the kitchen instead of in the
parlour. Michael, now relieved from the presence of aristocracy, eat and drank himself into
good humour; and even received, with grim complacency, the jokes of his Sons, who insisted
on drinking to his health as a new recruit to the famous regiment which was drawn from the
parish of Echanbroignes.

"Well, my girl, may heaven take care of you!" said he, kissing his daughter, "and of you too,
Jacques," and he extended the caress to his son-in-law. "I won't say but what I wish you were
a decent shoe-maker, or--"

"Oh, laws, father," said Annot, "I'm sure I should never have had him, if he had been."

"The more fool you, Annot; but I wish it all the same; and that Annot had had a couple of cows
to mind, and half-a-dozen pigs to look after; but it's too late to think of that now; they'll
soon have neither a cow nor a pig in La Vendee; and they'll want neither smiths nor shoemakers;
however, my boy, God bless you! God bless you! ladies and gentlemen, God bless you all!" and
then the smith completed the work he had commenced, and got as tipsy as he could have done,
had his daughter been married in Poitou.

CHAPTER XIII

CONCLUSION

We have told our tale of La Vendee; we have married our hero and our heroine; and, as is usual
in such cases, we must now bid them adieu. We cannot congratulate ourselves on leaving them
in a state of happy prosperity, as we would have wished to have done; but we leave them with
high hopes and glorious aspirations. We cannot follow the Vendeans farther in their gallant
struggle, but we part from them, while they still confidently expect that success which they
certainly deserved, and are determined to deserve that glory, which has since been so fully
accorded to them.

In the foregoing pages much fiction has been blended with history, but still the outline of
historical facts has been too closely followed to allow us now to indulge the humanity of our
readers by ascribing to the friends we are quitting success which they did not achieve, or
a state of happiness which they never were allowed to enjoy. It would be easy to speak of the
curly haired darlings, two of course, who blessed the union of Henri Larochejaquelin and Marie
de Lescure; and the joy with which they restored their aged father to the rural delights of
his chateau at Durbelliere. We might tell of the recovery of that modern Paladine, Charles
de Lescure, and of the glorious rebuilding of the house of Clisson, of the ecclesiastical honours
of Father Jerome, and of the happy marriage, or with more probability, the happier celibacy
of the divine Agatha. But we cannot do so with propriety: facts, stern, untoward, cruel facts,
stare us in the face, and would make even the novelist blush, were he, in total disregard of
well-thumbed history, to attempt so very false a fiction.

Still it is necessary that something should be said of the subsequent adventures of those with
whom we have for a while been so intimate, some short word spoken of the manner in which they
adhered to the cause which was so dear to them. We cannot leave them in their temporary sojourn
at Laval, as though a residence there was the goal of their wishes, the end of their struggle,
the natural and appropriate term of their story; but as, unfortunately, their future career
was not a happy one, we will beg the reader to advance with us at once over many years; and
then, as he looks back upon La Vendee, through the softening vista of time, the melancholy
termination of its glorious history will be lees painful.

On the 7th July, 1815, the united English and Prussian armies marched into Paris, after the
battle of Waterloo, and took military possession of the city. It was a remarkable but grievous
day for Paris; the citizens generally stayed within their houses, and left the streets to the
armed multitude, whom they could not regard as friends, and with whom they were no longer able
to contend as enemies. In spite of the enthusiasm with which Napoleon was greeted in Paris
on his return from Elba, there were very many royalists resident in the city; men, who longed
to welcome back to France the family of the Bourbons, and to live again beneath the shelter
and shade of an ancient throne. But even these could not greet with a welcome foreigners, who
by force had taken possession. of their capital. It was a sad and gloomy day in Paris, for
no man knew what would be the fate, either of himself or of his country: shops were closed,
and trade was silenced; the clanking of arms and the jingling of spurs was heard instead of
the busy hum of busy men.

On the evening of this day, a stout, fresh-coloured, good-looking woman, of about forty years
of age, was sitting in a perruquier's shop, at the corner of the Rue St. Honore and the Rue
St. Denis, waiting for the return of her husband, who had been called upon to exercise his
skill on the person of some of the warriors with whom Paris was now crowded. The shutters of
the little shop were up, as were those of all the houses in the street, and the place was therefore
dark and triste; and the stout, good-looking woman within was melancholy and somewhat querulous.
A daughter, of about twenty years of age, the exact likeness of her mother, only twenty years
less stout, and twenty years more pretty, sat with her in the shop, and patiently listened
to her complaints.

"Well, Annot," she said, "I wonder at your father. He had a little spirit once, but it has
all left him now. Had he been said by me, he wouldn't have raised a bit of steel over an English
chin for the best day's hire that ever a man was paid--unless, indeed, it was to cut the fellow's
throat!"

"If he didn't, mother, another would; and what's the good of throwing away their money?"

"No matter--it's a coward's work to go and shave one's country's enemies. At the approach of
an election the head of the executive government is wholly occupied by the coming struggle;
his future plans are doubtful; he can undertake nothing new, and the he will only prosecute with
indifference those designs which another will perhaps terminate.

"I am so near the time of my retirement from office," said President Jefferson on the 21st of
January, 1809 (six weeks before the election), "that I feel no passion, I take no part, I express
no sentiment.

It appears to me just to leave to my successor the commencement of those measures which he will
have to prosecute, and for which he will be responsible."

On the other hand, the eyes of the nation are centred on a single
point; all are watching the gradual birth of so important an event.

The wider the influence of the executive power extends, the greater and the more necessary is
its constant action, the more fatal is the term of suspense; and
a nation which is accustomed to the government, or, still more, one
used to the administrative protection of a powerful executive authority
would be infallibly convulsed by an election of this kind.

    In the United States the action of the Government may be slackened
with impunity, because it is always weak and circumscribed.

    *u

[Footnote u: [This, however, may be a great danger. The period during which Mr. Buchanan retained
office, after the election of Mr. Lincoln, from November, 1860, to March, 1861, was that which
enabled the seceding States of the South to complete their preparations for the Civil War, and
the Executive Government was paralyzed.

No greater evil could befall a nation.--Translator's Note.]]

One of the principal vices of the elective system is that it always introduces a certain degree
of instability into the internal and external policy of the State. But this disadvantage is less
sensibly felt if the share of power vested in the elected magistrate is small. In Rome the
principles of the Government underwent no variation, although the
Consuls were changed every year, because the Senate, which was an
hereditary assembly, possessed the directing authority.

If the elective system were adopted in Europe, the condition of most of the monarchical States
would be changed at every new election. In America the President exercises a certain influence
on State affairs, but he does not conduct them; the preponderating power is vested in the representatives
of the whole nation.



Madame Chapeau was considering within herself whether there would be any imprudence in confessing
to the English officer the important part her husband had played in La Vendee, when the officer's
question was answered by another person, whose head and shoulders now dimly appeared upon the
scene.

These were the head and shoulders of Chapeau's assistant, who had been summoned from his own
region by the sound of his mistress's bell; the stairs from this subterraneous recess did not
open on to any passage, but ascended at once abruptly into the shop, so that the assistant,
when called on, found himself able to answer, and to make even a personal appearance, as far
as his head was concerned, without troubling himself to mount the three or four last stairs.
From this spot he was in the habit of holding long conversations with his master and mistress;
and now perceiving that neither the head nor chin of the strange gentleman were to be submitted
to his skill, he arrested his steps, and astonished the visitor by a voice which seemed to
come out of the earth.

Indeed he did, Monsieur, more than any one now alive--more even than myself, and that is saying
a great deal. Jacques Chapeau was an officer high in command through the whole Vendean war;
and I, even I, humble as I am now, I also was thought not unworthy to lead brave men into battle.
I, Monsieur, am Auguste Plume; and though now merely a perruquier's poor assistant, I was once
the officer second in command in the army of La Petite Vendee.

The gentleman turned round and gazed at the singular apparition, which the obscurity of the
shop only just permitted him to distinguish. Auguste Flume was now above sixty years old, and
completely bald; his face was thin, lanternjawed, and cadaverous; and his eyes, which were
weak with age, were red and bleared; still he had not that ghastly, sick appearance, which
want both of food and rest had given him in the glorious days to which he alluded: after the
struggle in La Vendee, he had lived for some time a wretched life, more like that of a beast
than a man; hiding in woods, living on roots, and hunting with the appetite of a tiger after
the blood of stray republicans; his wife and children had perished in Carrier's noyades in
the Loire; he himself had existed through two years of continued suffering, with a tenacity
of life which almost reached to a miracle. He had joined the Chouans, and had taken an active
part in the fiercest of their fierce acts of vengeance. But he had lived through it all; and
now, in his old age, he had plenty and comfort; yet he looked back with a fond regret to the
days of his imagined glory and power; he spoke with continual rapture of his own brave achievements,
and regretted that he had not been allowed to continue a life, the miseries of which it would
be impossible to exaggerate.

"Bah, Auguste," said his mistress; "the gentleman does not care to hear of your La Petite Vendee;
it is of M. Henri--that is, of the young Marquis de Larochejaquelin, and of Madame and of Mademoiselle
Agatha, and of M. de Lescure, and of Charette, and the Prince de Talmont, that Monsieur will
want to hear!"

The stranger was in the act of explaining that the hostess was right in her surmise, when the
master of the house himself returned. In spite of what he had suffered, years had sat lightly
on Chapeau, as they had done on his wife. He was now a fat, good-humoured, middle-aged, comfortable
man, who made the most, in his trade, of the eclat which attended him, as having been the faithful
servant of the most popular among the Vendean leaders. He never wearied his customers with
long tales of his own gallantry; he even had the unusual tact to be able to sink himself, in
speaking, as he was often invited to do, of the civil war: he was known to have been brave,
faithful, and loyal, and he was accordingly very popular among the royalists of Paris, who
generally preferred his scissors and razors to those of any other artist in the city.

The officer, who was now seated in the shop, his wife and daughter, and his assistant, began
at once to explain to him the service which he was required to perform; and Chapeau, bowing
low to the compliments which the stranger paid to him, declared with his accustomed mixture
of politeness and frank good nature, that he would be happy to tell anything that he knew.

The gentleman explained, that in his early years he had known de Lescure intimately; that he
had met Larochejaquelin in Paris, and that he had made one of a party of Englishmen, who had
done their best to send arms, money, and men from his own country into La Vendee. Chapeau was
too well bred to allude to the disappointment which they had all so keenly felt, from the want
of that very aid; he merely bowed again, and said that he would tell Monsieur all he knew.

And so he did. From the time when Henri Larochejaquelin left Laval for Granville, nothing prospered
with the Vendeans; the army, as it was agreed, had left that place for Granville, and their
first misfortune had been the death of de Lescure.

"He died in Laval?" asked the officer.

"No," said Chapeau. "When the moment for starting came, he insisted on being carried with the
army; he followed us in a carriage, but the jolting of the road was too much for him--the journey
killed him. He died at Fougeres, on the third day after we left Laval."

"And Madame?" asked the stranger.

"It is impossible for me now," said Chapeau, "to tell you all the dangers through which she
passed, all the disguises which she had to use, and the strange adventures which for a long
time threatened almost daily to throw her in the hands of those who would have been delighted
to murder her; but of course you know that she escaped at last."

"I am told that she still lives in Poitou, and I think I heard that, some years after M. de
Lescure's death, she married M. Louis Larochejaquelin."

"She did so--the younger brother of my own dear lord. He was a boy in England during our hot
work in La Vendee."

"Yes; and he served in an English regiment."

"So I had heard, Monsieur; but you know, don't you, that he also has now fallen."

"Indeed no!--for years and years I have heard nothing of the family."

"It was only two months since: he fell last May at the head of the Vendeans, leading them against
the troops which the Emperor sent down there. The Vendeans could not endure the thoughts of
the Emperor's return from Elba. M. Louis was the first to lift his sword, and Madame is, a
second time, a widow. Poor lady, none have suffered as she has done!" He then paused a while
in his narrative, but as the stranger did not speak, he continued: "but of M. Henri, of course,
Monsieur, you heard the fate of our dear General?"

"I only know that he perished, as did so many hundred others, who were also so true and brave." 

These dangers may be more or less formidable in proportion to the place which the executive
power occupies, and to the importance it possesses in the State; and they may vary according to
the mode of election and the circumstances in which the electors are placed. The most weighty
argument against the election of a chief magistrate is, that it offers so splendid a lure to
private ambition, and is so apt to inflame men in the pursuit of
power, that when legitimate means are wanting force may not unfrequently
seize what right denied.

"Yes," he continued," when the bullet struck him, I was as near to him as I am to her," and
he put his hand to his wife's head. "It might have been me as well as him, only for the chance.
I'll tell you how the manner of it was. You know bow we all strove to cross back into La Vendee,
first at Angers and afterwards at Ancenis; and how M. Henri got divided from the army at Ancenis.
Well, after that, the Vendean army was no more; the army was gone, it had melted away; the
most of those who were still alive were left in Brittany, and they joined the Chouans. Here
is my friend, Auguste, he was one of them."

"Indeed I was, Monsieur, for a year and eight months."

"Never mind now, Auguste, you can tell the gentleman by and bye; but, as I was saying, M. Henri
was left all but alone on the southern bank of the river--there were, perhaps, twenty with
him altogether--not more; and there were as many hundreds hunting those twenty from day to day."

"And you were one of them, Chapeau?"

"I was, Monsieur. My wife here remained with her father in Laval; he was a crafty man, and
he made the blues believe he was a republican; but, bless you, he was as true a royalist all
the time as I was. Well, there we were, hunted, like wolves, from one forest to another, till
about the middle of winter, we fixed ourselves for a while in the wood of Vesins, about three
leagues to the east of Cholet, a little to the south of the great road from Saumur. From this
place M. Henri harassed them most effectually; about fifty of the old Vendeans had joined him,
and with these he stopped their provisions, interrupted their posts, and on one occasion, succeeded
in getting the despatches from Paris to the republican General. We. were at this work for about
six weeks; and he, as he always did, exposed himself to every possible danger. One morning
we came upon two republican grenadiers; there were M. Henri, two others and myself there, and
we wanted immediately to fire upon them; but M. Henri would not have it so; he said that he
would save them, and rushed forward to bid them lay down their arms; as he did so, the foremost
of them fired, and M. Henri fell dead without a groan."

"And the two men--did they escape?"

"No, neither of them," said Chapeau; and for a moment, a gleam of savage satisfaction flashed
across his face; "the man who fired the shot had not one minute spared him for his triumph;
I had followed close upon my master, and I avenged him."

"And where was his young wife all this time?"

"She was with Madame de Lescure, in Brittany; and so was Mademoiselle Agatha; they were living
disguised almost as peasants, at an old chateau called Dreneuf; after that they all escaped
to Spain; they are both still alive, and now in Poitou; and I am told, that though they have
not chosen absolutely to seclude themselves, they both pass the same holy life, as though they
were within the walls of a convent." 

Lord Henley, brother-in-law of Sir Robert Peel, Dr. Burton, and others of name and influence led
the way. Dr. Arnold of Rugby ventured to propose that all sects should
be united by Act of Parliament with the Church of England. The
Prince de Talinont, Charette, Stofflet, Marigny, all of them fell: "And yet," said Chapeau,
with a boast, which evidently gave him intense satisfaction, "La Vendee was never conquered.
Neither the fear of the Convention, nor the arms of the Directory, nor the strength of the
Consul, nor the flattery of the Emperor could conquer La Vendee, or put down the passionate
longing for the return of the royal family, which has always burnt in the bosom of the people.
Revolt has never been put down in La Vendee, since Cathelineau commenced the war in St. Florent.
The people would serve neither the republic nor the empire; the noblesse would not visit the
court; their sons have refused commissions in the army, and their daughters have disdained
to accept the hands of any, who had forgotten their allegiance to the throne. Through more
than twenty years of suffering and bloodshed, La Vendee has been true to its colour, and now
it will receive its reward."

Chapeau himself, however, more fortunate, though not less faithful, than his compatriots, had
not been obliged to wait twenty years for his reward; he owned, with something like a feeling
of disgrace, that he had been carrying on his business in Paris, for the last fifteen years,
with considerable success and comfort to himself; and he frankly confessed, that he had by
practice inured himself to the disagreeable task of shaving, cutting and curling beards and
heads, which were devoted to the empire; "but then, Monsieur," said he apologizing for his
conduct, "there was a great difference you know between them and republicans."

Five-and-thirty years have now passed, since Chapeau was talking, and the Vendeans triumphed
in the restoration of Louis XVIII to the throne of his ancestors. The company were inquisitive
as to the extent of it in the United States.

We informed them that it appeared to be strongest in those states which held no slaves, that it
prevailed among professing Christians, and that it was most manifestly
seen in the house of God. Surely before the expiration of half a century
since the return of Louis, France will congratulate herself on another restoration.

THE END