Before the tropical darkness had fallen upon them Maurice had told the tale of his love,--and
had told it in a manner differing much from that of Marian's usual admirers, he spoke with
passion and almost with violence; he declared that his heart was so full of her image that
he could not rid himself of it for one minute; "nor would he wish to do so," he said, "if she
would be his Marian, his own Marian, his very own.  But if not--" and then he explained to
her, with all a lover's warmth, and with almost more than a lover's liberty, what was his idea
of her being "his own, his very own," and in doing so inveighed against her usual light-heartedness
in terms which at any rate were strong enough.

But Marian here it all well.  Perhaps she knew that the lesson was somewhat deserved; and perhaps
she appreciated at its value the love of such a man as Maurice Cumming, weighing in her judgment
the difference between him and the Ewings and the Grahams.

And then she answered him well and prudently, with words which startled him by their prudent
seriousness as coming from her.  She begged his pardon heartily, she said, for any grief which
she had caused him; but yet how was she to he blamed, seeing that she had known nothing of
his feelings?  Her father and mother had said something to her of this proposed marriage; something,
but very little; and she had answered by saying that she did not think Maurice had any warmer
regard for her than of a cousin.  After this answer neither father nor mother had pressed the
matter further.  As to her own feelings she could then say nothing, for she then knew nothing;--
nothing but this, that she loved no one better than him, or rather that she loved no one else.
She would ask herself if she could love him; but he must give her some little time for that.
In the meantime--and she smiled sweetly at him as she made the promise--she would endeavour
to do nothing that would offend him; and then she added that on that evening she would dance
with him any dances that he liked.  Maurice, with a self-denial that was not very wise, contented
himself with engaging her for the first quadrille.

They were to dance that night in the mess-room of the officers at Newcastle.  This scheme had
been added on as an adjunct to the picnic, and it therefore became necessary that the ladies
should retire to their own or their friends' houses at Newcastle to adjust their dresses. 
Marian Leslie and Julia Davis were there accommodated with the loan of a small room by the
major's wife, and as they were brushing their hair, and putting on their dancing-shoes, something
was said between them about Maurice Cumming.

"And so you are to be Mrs. C. of Mount Pleasant," said Julia.  "Well; I didn't think it would
come to that at last."

"But it has not come to that, and if it did why should I not be Mrs. C., as you call it?"

"The knight of the rueful countenance, I call him."

"I tell you what then, he is an excellent young man, and the fact is you don't know him."

"I don't like excellent young men with long faces.  I suppose you won't be let to dance quick
dances at all now."

"I shall dance whatever dances I like, as I have always done," said Marian, with some little
asperity in her tone.

"Not you; or if you do, you'll lose your promotion.  You'll never live to be my Lady Rue. 
And what will Graham say?  You know you've given him half a promise."

"That's not true, Julia;--I never gave him the tenth part of a promise."

"Well, he says so;" and then the words between the young ladies became a little more angry.
But, nevertheless, in due time they came forth with faces smiling as usual, with their hair
brushed, and without any signs of warfare.

But Marian had to stand another attack before the business of the evening commenced, and this
was from no less doughty an antagonist than her aunt, Miss Jack.  Miss Jack soon found that
Maurice had not kept his threat of going home; and though she did not absolutely learn from
him that he had gone so far towards perfecting her dearest hopes as to make a formal offer
to Marion, nevertheless she did gather that things were fast that way tending.  If only this
dancing were over! she said to herself, dreading the unnumbered waltzes with Ewing, and the
violent polkas with Graham.  So Miss Jack resolved to say one word to Marian--"A wise word
in good season," said Miss Jack to herself, "how sweet a thing it is."

"Marian," said she.  "Step here a moment, I want to say a word to you."

"Yes, aunt Sarah," said Marian, following her aunt into a corner, not quite in the best humour
in the world; for she had a dread of some further interference.

"Are you going to dance with Maurice to-night?"

"Yes, I believe so,--the first quadrille."

"Well, what I was going to say is this.  I don't want you to dance many quick dances to-night,
for a reason I have;--that is, not a great many."

"Why, aunt, what nonsense!"

"Now my dearest, dearest girl, it is all for your own sake. As he recovered from a sort of half
swoon, he cast his eyes eagerly around.

The object which they would most willingly have sought, was already
in the act of vanishing.

Her white garment was just discernible as she followed on the path
which her father had taken.

  The people have come here to dance and you can hardly want
to make me ridiculous by sitting still."  And so that wise word did not appear to be very sweet.

And then the amusement of the evening commenced, and Marian stood up for a quadrille with her
lover.  She however was not in the very best humour.  She had, as she thought, said and done
enough for one day in Maurice's favour.  And she had no idea, as she declared to herself, of
being lectured by aunt Sarah.

"Dearest Marion," he said to her, as the quadrille came to a close, "it is an your power to
make me so happy,--so perfectly happy."

"But then people have such different ideas of happiness," she replied.  "They can't all see
with the same eyes, you know."  And so they parted.

But during the early part of the evening she was sufficiently discreet; she did waltz with
Lieutenant Graham, and polk with Captain Ewing, but she did so in a tamer manner than was usual
with her, and she made no emulous attempts to dance down other couples.  When she had done
she would sit down, and then she consented to stand up for two quadrilles with two very tame
gentlemen, to whom no lover could object.

"And so, Marian, your wings are regularly clipped at last," said Julia Davis coming up to her.

"No more clipped than your own," said Marian.

"If Sir Rue won't let you waltz now, what will he require of you when you're married to him?"

"I am just as well able to waltz with whom I like as you are, Julia; and if you say so in that
way, I shall think it's envy."

"Ha--ha--ha; I may have envied you some of your beaux before now; I dare say I have.  But I
certainly do not envy you Sir Rue."  And then she went off to her partner.

All this was too much for Marian's weak strength, and before long she was again whirling round
with Captain Ewing.  "Come, Miss Leslie," said he, "let us see what we can do.  Graham and
Julia Davis have been saying that your waltzing days are over, but I think we can put them down."

Marian as she got up, and raised her arm in order that Ewing might put his round her waist,
caught Maurice's eye as he leaned against a wall, and read in it a stern rebuke.  "This is
too bad," she said to herself.  "He shall not make a slave of me, at any rate as yet."  And
away she went as madly, more madly than ever, and for the rest of the evening she danced with
Captain Ewing and with him alone.

