Governor Eustis, in the speech before quoted, states that the free colored soldiers entered
the ranks with the whites.  The time of those who were slaves was purchased of their masters,
and they were induced to enter the service in consequence of a law of Congress by which, on
condition of their serving in the ranks during the war, they were made freemen.  This hope
of liberty inspired them with courage to oppose their breasts to the Hessian bayonet at Red
Bank, and enabled them to endure with fortitude the cold and famine of Valley Forge.  The anecdote
of the slave of General Sullivan, of New Hampshire, is well known.  When his master told him
that they were on the point of starting for the army, to fight for liberty, he shrewdly suggested
that it would be a great satisfaction to know that he was indeed going to fight for his liberty.
Struck with the reasonableness and justice of this suggestion, General Sullivan at once gave
him his freedom.

The late Tristam Burgess, of Rhode Island, in a speech in Congress, first month, 1828, said
"At the commencement of the Revolutionary War, Rhode Island had a number of slaves.  A regiment
of them were enlisted into the Continental service, and no braver men met the enemy in battle;
but not one of them was permitted to be a soldier until he had first been made a freeman."

Let us now look forward thirty or forty years, to the last war with Great Britain, and see
whether the whites enjoyed a monopoly of patriotism at that time.

Hon. Charles Miner, of Pennsylvania, in Congress, second month, 7th, 1828, said: "The African
race make excellent soldiers.  Large numbers of them were with Perry, and helped to gain the
brilliant victory of Lake Erie.  A whole battalion of them were distinguished for their orderly
appearance."

General Jackson's proclamations to the free colored inhabitants of Louisiana are well known.

It will thus be seen that whatever honor belongs to the "heroes of the Revolution" and the
volunteers in "the second war for independence" is to be divided between the white and the
colored man.  We have dwelt upon this subject at length, not because it accords with our principles
or feelings, for it is scarcely necessary for us to say that we are one of those who hold that

                    "Peace hath her victories
                    No less renowned than war,"

and certainly far more desirable and useful; but because, in popular estimation, the patriotism
which dares and does on the battle-field takes a higher place than the quiet exercise of the
duties of peaceful citizenship; and we are willing that colored soldiers, with their descendants,
should have the benefit, if possible, of a public sentiment which has so extravagantly lauded
their white companions in arms.  If pulpits must be desecrated by eulogies of the patriotism
of bloodshed, we see no reason why black defenders of their country in the war for liberty
should not receive honorable mention as well as white invaders of a neighboring republic who
have volunteered in a war for plunder and slavery extension.  For the latter class of "heroes"
we have very little respect.  The patriotism of too many of them forcibly reminds us of Dr.
Johnson's definition of that much-abused term "Patriotism, sir!  'T is the last refuge of a
scoundrel."

"What right, I demand," said an American orator some years ago, "have the children of Africa
to a homestead in the white man's country?"  The answer will in part be found in the facts
which we have presented.  Their right, like that of their white fellow-citizens, dates back
to the dread arbitrament of battle.  Their bones whiten every stricken field of the Revolution;
their feet tracked with blood the snows of Jersey; their toil built up every fortification
south of the Potomac; they shared the famine and nakedness of Valley Forge and the pestilential
horrors of the old Jersey prisonship.  Have they, then, no claim to an equal participation
in the blessings which have grown out of the national independence for which they fought? 
Is it just, is it magnanimous, is it safe, even, to starve the patriotism of such a people,
to cast their hearts out of the treasury of the Republic, and to convert them, by political
disfranchisement and social oppression, into enemies?

THE SCOTTISH REFORMERS.

The great impulse of the French Revolution was not confined by geographical boundaries.  Flashing
hope into the dark places of the earth, far down among the poor and long oppressed, or startling
the oppressor in his guarded chambers like that mountain of fire which fell into the sea at
the sound of the apocalyptic trumpet, it agitated the world.

The arguments of Condorcet, the battle-words of Mirabeau, the fierce zeal of St. Just, the
iron energy of Danton, the caustic wit of Camille Desmoulins, and the sweet eloquence of Vergniaud
found echoes in all lands, and nowhere more readily than in Great Britain, the ancient foe
and rival of France.  The celebrated Dr. Price, of London, and the still more distinguished
Priestley, of Birmingham, spoke out boldly in defence of the great principles of the Revolution.
A London club of reformers, reckoning among its members such men as Sir William Jones, Earl
Grey, Samuel Whitbread, and Sir James Mackintosh, was established for the purpose of disseminating
liberal appeals and arguments throughout the United Kingdom.

In Scotland an auxiliary society was formed, under the name of Friends of the People.  Thomas
Muir, young in years, yet an elder in the Scottish kirk, a successful advocate at the bar,
talented, affable, eloquent, and distinguished for the purity of his life and his enthusiasm
in the cause of freedom, was its principal originator. This was one of the errors committed; but I
do not say that the noble lord opposite is answerable for that error. Not only was no communication
kept up with the north, but none was kept up with the south. Neither the Kojuck nor the Bolan pass
was kept open. Can that, my lords, be called a military communication? Could such a state of things
exist? Why, was not this another error--a gross error? The noble lord opposite (Lord Auckland)
had no more to do with this than I have.  He defended himself in a long and eloquent address, which
concluded in the following manly strain:--

"What, then, has been my crime?  Not the lending to a relation a copy of Thomas Paine's works,--not
the giving away to another a few numbers of an innocent and constitutional publication; but
my crime is, for having dared to be, according to the measure of my feeble abilities, a strenuous
and an active advocate for an equal representation of the people in the House of the people,--for
having dared to accomplish a measure by legal means which was to diminish the weight of their
taxes and to put an end to the profusion of their blood.  Gentlemen, from my infancy to this
moment I have devoted myself to the cause of the people.  It is a good cause: it will ultimately
prevail,--it will finally triumph."

He was sentenced to transportation for fourteen years, and was removed to the Edinburgh jail,
from thence to the hulks, and lastly to the transport-ship, containing eighty-three convicts,
which conveyed him to Botany Bay.

The next victim was Palmer, a learned and highly accomplished Unitarian minister in Dundee.
He was greatly beloved and respected as a polished gentleman and sincere friend of the people.
He was charged with circulating a republican tract, and was sentenced to seven years' transportation.

But the Friends of the People were not quelled by this summary punishment of two of their devoted
leaders.  In the tenth month, 1793, delegates were called together from various towns in Scotland,
as well as from Birmingham, Sheffield, and other places in England.  Gerrald and Margarot were
sent up by the London society.  After a brief sitting, the convention was dispersed by the
public authorities.  Its sessions were opened and closed with prayer, and the speeches of its
members manifested the pious enthusiasm of the old Cameronians and Parliament-men of the times
of Cromwell.  Many of the dissenting clergy were present.  William Skirving, the most determined
of the band, had been educated for the ministry, and was a sincerely religious man.  Joseph
Gerrald was a young man of brilliant talents and exemplary character.  When the sheriff entered
the hall to disperse the friends of liberty, Gerrald knelt in prayer.  His remarkable words
were taken down by a reporter on the spot. There is nothing in modern history to compare with
this supplication, unless it be that of Sir Henry Vane, a kindred martyr, at the foot of the
scaffold, just before his execution.  It is the prayer of universal humanity, which God will
yet hear and answer.

"O thou Governor of the universe, we rejoice that, at all times and in all circumstances, we
have liberty to approach Thy throne, and that we are assured that no sacrifice is more acceptable
to Thee than that which is made for the relief of the oppressed.  In this moment of trial and
persecution we pray that Thou wouldst be our defender, our counsellor, and our guide.  Oh,
be Thou a pillar of fire to us, as Thou wast to our fathers of old, to enlighten and direct
us; and to our enemies a pillar of cloud, and darkness, and confusion.

"Thou art Thyself the great Patron of liberty.  Thy service is perfect freedom.  Prosper, we
beseech Thee, every endeavor which we make to promote Thy cause; for we consider the cause
of truth, or every cause which tends to promote the happiness of Thy creatures, as Thy cause.

"O thou merciful Father of mankind, enable us, for Thy name's sake, to endure persecution with
fortitude; and may we believe that all trials and tribulations of life which we endure shall
work together for good to them that love Thee; and grant that the greater the evil, and the
longer it may be continued, the greater good, in Thy holy and adorable providence, may be produced
therefrom.  And this we beg, not for our own merits, but through the merits of Him who is hereafter
to judge the world in righteousness and mercy."

He ceased, and the sheriff, who had been temporarily overawed by the extraordinary scene, enforced
the warrant, and the meeting was broken up. The delegates descended to the street in silence,--Arthur's
Seat and Salisbury Crags glooming in the distance and night,--an immense and agitated multitude
waiting around, over which tossed the flaring flambeaux of the sheriff's train.  Gerrald, who
was already under arrest, as he descended, spoke aloud, "Behold the funeral torches of Liberty!"

Skirving and several others were immediately arrested.  They were tried in the first month,
1794, and sentenced, as Muir and Palmer had previously been, to transportation.  Their conduct
throughout was worthy of their great and holy cause.  Gerrald's defence was that of freedom
rather than his own.  Forgetting himself, he spoke out manfully and earnestly for the poor,
the oppressed, the overtaxed, and starving millions of his countrymen.  That some idea may
be formed of this noble plea for liberty, I give an extract from the concluding paragraphs:--

