"They can't all be got rid off," said Nabatoff, in his cheerful tones. "There will always be
left enough to continue the breed. No, there won't, if we show any pity to them there," Nabatoff
said, raising his voice; and not letting himself be interrupted, "Give me a cigarette."

"Oh, Anatole, it is not good for you," said Mary Pavlovna. "Please do not smoke."

"Oh, leave me alone," he said angrily, and lit a cigarette, but at once began to cough and
to retch, as if he were going to be sick. Having cleared his throat though, he went on:

"What we have been doing is not the thing at all. Not to argue, but for all to unite--to destroy
them--that's it."

"But they are also human beings," said Nekhludoff.

"No, they are not human, they who can do what they are doing-- No-- There, now, I heard that
some kind of bombs and balloons have been invented. Well, one ought to go up in such a balloon
and sprinkle bombs down on them as if they were bugs, until they are all exterminated-- Yes.
Because--" he was going to continue, but, flushing all over, he began coughing worse than before,
and a stream of blood rushed from his mouth.

Nabatoff ran to get ice. Mary Pavlovna brought valerian drops and offered them to him, but
he, breathing quickly and heavily, pushed her away with his thin, white hand, and kept his
eyes closed. When the ice and cold water had eased Kryltzoff a little, and he had been put
to bed, Nekhludoff, having said good-night to everybody, went out with the sergeant, who had
been waiting for him some time.

The criminals were now quiet, and most of them were asleep. Though the people were lying on
and under the bed shelves and in the space between, they could not all be placed inside the
rooms, and some of them lay in the passage with their sacks under their heads and covered with
their cloaks. The moans and sleepy voices came through the open doors and sounded through the
passage. Everywhere lay compact heaps of human beings covered with prison cloaks. Only a few
men who were sitting in the bachelors' room by the light of a candle end, which they put out
when they noticed the sergeant, were awake, and an old man who sat naked under the lamp in
the passage picking the vermin off his shirt. The foul air in the political prisoners' rooms
seemed pure compared to the stinking closeness here. The smoking lamp shone dimly as through
a mist, and it was difficult to breathe. Stepping along the passage, one had to look carefully
for an empty space, and having put down one foot had to find place for the other. Three persons,
who had evidently found no room even in the passage, lay in the anteroom, close to the stinking
and leaking tub. One of these was an old idiot, whom Nekhludoff had often seen marching with
the gang; another was a boy about twelve; he lay between the two other convicts, with his head
on the leg of one of them.

When he had passed out of the gate Nekhludoff took a deep breath and long continued to breathe
in deep draughts of frosty air.

CHAPTER XIX.

WHY IS IT DONE?

It had cleared up and was starlight. Except in a few places the mud was frozen hard when Nekhludoff
returned to his inn and knocked at one of its dark windows. The broad-shouldered labourer came
barefooted to open the door for him and let him in. Through a door on the right, leading to
the back premises, came the loud snoring of the carters, who slept there, and the sound of
many horses chewing oats came from the yard. The front room, where a red lamp was burning in
front of the icons, smelt of wormwood and perspiration, and some one with mighty lungs was
snoring behind a partition. Nekhludoff undressed, put his leather travelling pillow on the
oilcloth sofa, spread out his rug and lay down, thinking over all he had seen and heard that
day; the boy sleeping on the liquid that oozed from the stinking tub, with his head on the
convict's leg, seemed more dreadful than all else.

Unexpected and important as his conversation with Simonson and Katusha that evening had been,
he did not dwell on it; his situation in relation to that subject was so complicated and indefinite
that he drove the thought from his mind. But the picture of those unfortunate beings, inhaling
the noisome air, and lying in the liquid oozing out of the stinking tub, especially that of
the boy, with his innocent face asleep on the leg of a criminal, came all the more vividly
to his mind, and he could not get it out of his head.

To know that somewhere far away there are men who torture other men by inflicting all sorts
of humiliations and inhuman degradation and sufferings on them, or for three months incessantly
to look on while men were inflicting these humiliations and sufferings on other men is a very
different thing. And Nekhludoff felt it. More than once during these three months he asked
himself, "Am I mad because I see what others do not, or are they mad that do these things that
I see?"

Yet they (and there were many of them) did what seemed so astonishing and terrible to him with
such quiet assurance that what they were doing was necessary and was important and useful work
that it was hard to believe they were mad; nor could he, conscious of the clearness of his
thoughts, believe he was mad; and all this kept him continually in a state of perplexity.

This is how the things he saw during these three months impressed Nekhludoff: From among the
people who were free, those were chosen, by means of trials and the administration, who were
the most nervous, the most hot tempered, the most excitable, the most gifted, and the strongest,
but the least careful and cunning. These people, not a wit more dangerous than many of those
who remained free, were first locked in prisons, transported to Siberia, where they were provided
for and kept months and years in perfect idleness, and away from nature, their families, and
useful work--that is, away from the conditions necessary for a natural and moral life. This
firstly. Secondly, these people were subjected to all sorts of unnecessary indignity in these
different Places--chains, shaved heads, shameful clothing--that is, they were deprived of the
chief motives that induce the weak to live good lives, the regard for public opinion, the sense
of shame and the consciousness of human dignity. Thirdly, they were continually exposed to
dangers, such as the epidemics so frequent in places of confinement, exhaustion, flogging,
not to mention accidents, such as sunstrokes, drowning or conflagrations, when the instinct
of self-preservation makes even the kindest, most moral men commit cruel actions, and excuse
such actions when committed by others.

Fourthly, these people were forced to associate with others who were particularly depraved
by life, and especially by these very institutions--rakes, murderers and villains--who act
on those who are not yet corrupted by the measures inflicted on them as leaven acts on dough.

And, fifthly, the fact that all sorts of violence, cruelty, inhumanity, are not only tolerated,
but even permitted by the government, when it suits its purposes, was impressed on them most
forcibly by the inhuman treatment they were subjected to; by the sufferings inflicted on children,
women and old men; by floggings with rods and whips; by rewards offered for bringing a fugitive
back, dead or alive; by the separation of husbands and wives, and the uniting them with the
wives and husbands of others for sexual intercourse; by shooting or hanging them. To those
who were deprived of their freedom, who were in want and misery, acts of violence were evidently
still more permissible. All these institutions seemed purposely invented for the production
of depravity and vice, condensed to such a degree that no other conditions could produce it,
and for the spreading of this condensed depravity and vice broadcast among the whole population.

"Just as if a problem had been set to find the best, the surest means of depraving the greatest
number of persons," thought Nekhludoff, while investigating the deeds that were being done
in the prisons and halting stations. Every year hundreds of thousands were brought to the highest
pitch of depravity, and when completely depraved they were set free to carry the depravity
they had caught in prison among the people. In the prisons of Tamen, Ekaterinburg, Tomsk and
at the halting stations Nekhludoff saw how successfully the object society seemed to have set
itself was attained.

Ordinary, simple men with a conception of the demands of the social and Christian Russian peasant
morality lost this conception, and found a new one, founded chiefly on the idea that any outrage
or violence was justifiable if it seemed profitable. After living in a prison those people
became conscious with the whole of their being that, judging by what was happening to themselves,
all the moral laws, the respect and the sympathy for others which church and the moral teachers
preach, was really set aside, and that, therefore, they, too, need not keep the laws. Nekhludoff
noticed the effects of prison life on all the convicts he knew--on Fedoroff, on Makar, and
even on Taras, who, after two months among the convicts, struck Nekhludoff by the want of morality
in his arguments. Nekhludoff found out during his journey how tramps, escaping into the marshes,
persuade a comrade to escape with them, and then kill him and feed on his flesh. (He saw a
living man who was accused of this and acknowledged the fact.) And the most terrible part was
that this was not a solitary, but a recurring case.

Only by a special cultivation of vice, such as was perpetrated in these establishments, could
a Russian be brought to the state of this tramp, who excelled Nietzsche's newest teaching,
and held that everything was possible and nothing forbidden, and who spread this teaching first
among the convicts and then among the people in general.

The only explanation of all that was being done was the wish to put a stop to crime by fear,
by correction, by lawful vengeance as it was written in the books. But in reality nothing in
the least resembling any of these results came to pass. Instead of vice being put a stop to,
it only spread further; instead of being frightened, the criminals were encouraged (many a
tramp returned to prison of his own free will). Instead of being corrected, every kind of vice
was systematically instilled, while the desire for vengeance did not weaken by the measures
of the government, but was bred in the people who had none of it.

"Then why is it done?" Nekhludoff asked himself, but could find no answer. And what seemed
most surprising was that all this was not being done accidentally, not by mistake, not once,
but that it had continued for centuries, with this difference only, that at first the people's
nostrils used to be torn and their ears cut off; then they were branded, and now they were
manacled and transported by steam instead of on the old carts. The arguments brought forward
by those in government service, who said that the things which aroused his indignation were
simply due to the imperfect arrangements of the places of confinement, and that they could
all be put to rights if prisons of a modern type were built, did not satisfy Nekhludoff, because
he knew that what revolted him was not the consequence of a better or worse arrangement of
the prisons. He had read of model prisons with electric bells, of executions by electricity,
recommended by Tard; but this refined kind of violence revolted him even more.

But what revolted Nekhludoff most was that there were men in the law courts and in the ministry
who received large salaries, taken from the people, for referring to books written by men like
themselves and with like motives, and sorting actions that violated laws made by themselves
according to different statutes; and, in obedience to these statutes, sending those guilty
of such actions to places where they were completely at the mercy of cruel, hardened inspectors,
jailers, convoy soldiers, where millions of them perished body and soul.

Now that he had a closer knowledge of prisons, Nekhludoff found out that all those vices which
developed among the prisoners--drunkenness, gambling, cruelty, and all these terrible crimes,
even cannibalism--were not casual, or due to degeneration or to the existence of monstrosities
of the criminal type, as science, going hand in hand with the government, explained it, but
an unavoidable consequence of the incomprehensible delusion that men may punish one another.
Nekhludoff saw that cannibalism did not commence in the marshes, but in the ministry. He saw
that his brother-in-law, for example, and, in fact, all the lawyers and officials, from the
usher to the minister, do not care in the least for justice or the good of the people about
whom they spoke, but only for the roubles they were paid for doing the things that were the
source whence all this degradation and suffering flowed. This was quite evident.

"Can it be, then, that all this is done simply through misapprehension? Could it not be managed
that all these officials should have their salaries secured to them, and a premium paid them,
besides, so that they should leave off, doing all that they were doing now?" Nekhludoff thought,
and in spite of the fleas, that seemed to spring up round him like water from a fountain whenever
he moved, he fell fast asleep.

CHAPTER XX.

THE JOURNEY RESUMED.

The carters had left the inn long before Nekhludoff awoke. The landlady had had her tea, and
came in wiping her fat, perspiring neck with her handkerchief, and said that a soldier had
brought a note from the halting station. The note was from Mary Pavlovna. She wrote that Kryltzoff's
attack was more serious than they had imagined. "We wished him to be left behind and to remain
with him, but this has not been allowed, so that we shall take him on; but we fear the worst.
Please arrange so that if he should be left in the next town, one of us might remain with him.
If in order to get the permission to stay I should be obliged to get married to him, I am of
course ready to do so."

