    "In 1812 came the second American war, and in 1815 the British
    corn law, which was promptly followed by the high American
    tariff of 1816. For ten years prior to 1830, the annual average
    consumption of merchandize had fallen to 22s. 6d., while the
    population of the States was nearly double, and their capital
    treble that of the ten years preceding 1810. Soon after 1830
    followed the modification of the American tariff, and the
    importations based on the great transatlantic loans of that
    period. But, notwithstanding the stimulation and extravagance of
    the time, the average annual consumption amounted to only 31s.
    per head of foreign produce during the ten years prior to 1840.
    Abating the importation based on the loans of the last few
    years, and the trade of England with the United States has not
    increased in amount for the last thirty years, while the
    population of England has increased from eighteen to
    twenty-seven millions, and that of the States from seven to
    seventeen millions.

    "Let the reader observe this, that in the Eastern States, in
    that of Massachusetts, for instance, in which State Boston is
    situated, the people bring a large part of their food from the
    Western States, where they obtain it in exchange for their
    manufactures. If free trade were allowed, is it possible for any
    man to give a reason why the manufacturer and laborer of
    Manchester would not be able to do as well as the manufacturer
    and laborer of Boston now does, abating the difference of
    transporting goods and grain across the Atlantic? At least, the
    consequence would be an extension of trade, and employment equal
    to the amount of food which would, in such case, be brought from
    America; and the limit to this quantity will be found only when
    the wants of Englishmen are supplied, and their ability to pay
    exhausted. The ability of America to supply any required
    quantity of food has already been shown. There lie the broad
    lands, ready for cultivation as soon as there shall be a demand
    for the produce. And if seventeen millions of people, sent
    chiefly from England, or descended from those who have been
    sent, are not sufficient to raise the requisite quantity of
    provisions demanded of them by those who remain in the parent
    country, then let more be sent, for the land lies equally open
    to the people of all nations.

    "Then, as to the ability of Englishmen to pay for all they want,
    let us ask, what those who produce the food, or those who bring
    it, can want in exchange that England cannot furnish? Gold, it
    is said.[A] But for what do they want gold but to purchase other
    supplies than food? and as they would then have the means to
    pay, England would be the very country which, of all others,
    could supply them to advantage. Whatever was wanted which her
    own artizans do not produce themselves, they could still supply.
    Englishmen would not at all be confined to a direct sale or
    exchange of their goods with the wheat grower, but can give him
    the merchandize of India and China, and the fruits of the
    tropics, for which English manufactures would pay. If the idle
    mills and idle laborers of England could at once be set at work
    to produce food for the people, new activity would be imparted
    to trade in every part of the world--from India to the frozen
    regions of Greenland and Labrador. But, on the other hand, how
    is it possible for England to extend her foreign trade while the
    present restrictions continue? Even with such a country as
    India, reduced under British sway, it cannot be done except by
    diminishing the commerce with other countries to the same
    extent. England cannot, in her present condition, greatly
    increase her consumption of such merchandize as India can
    furnish, or dispose of such merchandize abroad, to any great
    extent, for the reasons already given.

    [Footnote A: "Englishmen, reasoning from a restricted course of
    trade, are constantly prone to the belief that the purchase of
    foreign corn, from some unexplained necessity, must take away
    their gold. Americans, from the same cause, reason in the same
    manner respecting the purchase of foreign goods. Under the
    action of the restrictive system, there may be some truth in the
    reasonings of each party, but they certainly form a beautiful
    running commentary upon each other."]

    "As to any proposed gain by the Colonial trade, it is the very
    thing rejected by the restrictions on the trade with the United
    States. They reached Archangel on the 28th of September 1749.
    What happy meetings may have been anticipated!--what calamities
    may have been dreaded during that voyage!--How may it have fared
    with those who were left? Will they all be there, to greet with
    a joyful welcome? What if Alexis' wife, worn out by suspense
    and anxiety, should have sunk into an early grave?--or if one among
    their children should have died?--or if the three should
    all have been swept away? The approaching sail had been seen;
    and the one who for years had clung to a forlorn-hope, was again
    at the water's edge. Alexis stood on the deck. Affection is quick-sighted;
    he was instantly seen and known by his wife! All was forgotten--all
    but that he was there. The distance between them, the waves that
    separated them, were unheeded! Uttering a wild cry of joy,
    she rushed forward to clasp him in her arms. She sprang into the
    water--a little time, and she was extricated. She was insensible
    when taken up. When she came to herself, she was in her husband's
    arms!--their children were about them!

    What tears of joy were shed!--what prayers of thankfulness were
    offered up!
    
    The foregoing narrative, true in every respect, is drawn up
    by us from documents issued under the authority of the Russian government.
    It shews, in a convincing manner, that subsistence is by no means
    impossible for sailors wrecked and icebound within the polar
    regions.
    
    WILD ANIMALS IN CONFINEMENT.
    
    Were it not that custom reconciles us to everything, a Christian
    community would surely be shocked by the report, and still more
    by the sight, of the sacrifice of innocent and helpless creatures--pigeons
    and rabbits, for instance--to the horrible instincts of snakes,
    who will not eat anything but what is alive. An account was recently
    given of a night-visit to the place of confinement of these disgusting
reptiles, in which the evident horror of their intended victims, confined
in the same cages, was distinctly mentioned.

    The gratification of mere curiosity does not justify the infliction
    of such torture on the lower animals. Surely the sight of a stuffed
    boa-constrictor ought to content a reasonable curiosity. Imagine
    what would be felt if a child were subjected to such a fate,
    or what could be answered if the present victims could tell their
    agonies as well as feel them! Byron speaks of the barbarians
    who, in the wantonness of power, were 'butchered to make a Roman
    holiday;' and verily the horrors exhibited in our public gardens
    and menageries are something akin to the fights of gladiators;
    it is the infliction of misery for mere sport. With reference also
    to lions, tigers, and other ferocious animals kept in cages--if
    retained at all, the space allotted them ought to be much larger
    than it is, so as to allow them full room for healthful exercise.
    At present, they must be wretched; and considering also the quantity
    of food they consume, which might be converted to useful purposes--though
    this is taking a lower view of the matter--it is at least desirable
    that the number should be much smaller, and a much greater space
allowed them to exhibit their natural vivacity.

    These remarks do not, of course, apply to fowls and other animals
    who are allowed a sufficient share of liberty to exist in comfort,
    and to whom it is not necessary to sacrifice the existence of
    other creatures.--Ogden's Friendly Observer.
    
    [We entirely agree in reprobating the practice of placing live
    rabbits and other creatures within the cages of boa-constrictors.
    A recollection of a poor little rabbit cowering in the corner
    of one of these cages, as if aware of its approaching fate, has haunted
us for years. No purpose of science can be answered by this constantly
recurring barbarity. The beds of coal and iron are to a
    great extent contiguous."]

This is not mere theory. The developement is actually begun:

    "A few years since, the country smiths, and the matrons with
    their daughters at the household wheel and loom, were the
    principal manufacturers of America. Now the cotton mills alone
    are computed at one thousand, and the capital invested in
    manufacturing machinery at £23,500,000. The estimated value of
    some of the principal articles of manufacture is as follows:

    Woollens,        £15,750,000
    Cotton,           11,250,000
    Leather,           9,000,000
    Hats and Caps,     3,575,000
    Linen,             1,350,000
    Paper,             1,350,000
    Glass,             1,125,000
    Iron and Steel,   11,250,000

    "Some idea of the rapidity with which the American manufactures
    are now capable of being extended, may be formed from the past
    progress of the cotton manufacture. The consumption of raw
    cotton was,

    In 1833,  196,000 bales.
       1835,  236,700   "
       1837,  246,000   "
       1839,  276,000   "

    "The United States already supply two-thirds of their own
    consumption of cottons. At the above rate of increase--of nearly
    fifty per cent, in five years--America will much more than
    supply its own market in five years to come. Never has the
    manufacturing interest of the United States been in as
    prosperous and sound a condition as at present. They need no
    high tariff to protect them against British competition. The
    English corn law is their best protection."

It is the restrictive policy of Great Britain that has called into existence Lowell and the
manufacturing cities of the United States, producing an immense amount of articles which were
once the sole products of British industry and skill. If the same policy is continued, the
prosperity of the United States will be impeded, but that of England will be destroyed.

The following is an extract from the memorial of Joshua Leavitt to Congress, on the wheat interests
of the North Western States:

    "Should it, indeed, come to be settled that there is to be no
    foreign market for these products, the fine country under
    contemplation is not, therefore, to be despaired of. Let the
    necessity once become apparent, and there will be but one mind
    among the people of the North-west. The same patriotism which
    carried our fathers through the self-denying non-importation
    agreements of the revolution, will produce a fixed determination
    to build up a home market, at every sacrifice. And it can be
    done. What has been done already in the way of manufactures,
    shows that it can be done. The recent application of the
    hot-blast with anthracite coal to the making of iron, and the
    discovery of a mine of natural steel, would be auxiliaries of
    immense value. We could draw to our factories the best workmen
    of Europe, attracted less by the temptation of wages, than by
    the desire to leave liberty and land as the inheritance of their
    children. But it would take a long time to build up a
    manufacturing interest adequate to supply the wants of the
    Northwest, or to consume the produce of these wide fields; and
    the burden of taxation for internal improvements, uncompleted
    and unproductive, would be very heavy and hard to bear: and all
    the population that is concentrated upon manufactures, is so
    much kept back from the occupation of that noble domain; and the
    national treasury would feel the effects of the curtailment of
    imports and the cessation of land sales; and the amount of
    misery which the loss of the American market would occasion to
    the starving operatives and factory children on the other side
    of the Atlantic, is worthy to be taken into the account, by
    every statesman who has not forgotten that he is a man."

If we refuse the Americans as customers, we compel them to become our rivals; and, after supplying
their own wants, they will compete with us for the trade of the world, on more than equal terms.
Our statesmen may yet employ America to build up the prosperity of our country whilst increasing
her own, or they may suffer its rapidly developing and gigantic resources to work out our ruin:
the alternative is before them and before the country--but decision must be prompt, for there
is no pause in the march of events. However unwise the policy, we cannot be surprised that
the American and Continental manufacturer are each applying to his government to follow our
example, and protect home trade by fiscal regulations.

This question of trade with America has also most important anti-slavery bearings--and here,
again, I find my own views anticipated by the able writer already quoted:

    "The present policy of restricting the traffic with America so
    closely to cotton, gives a deceitful appearance to the stated
    imports and exports. From these statements there should, in
    fairness, be deducted the value of all the raw cotton which is
    returned to America; and, in fact, if the true exchange trade
    would be seen, all should be deducted that is exported from
    England. That portion of cotton goods which is of English
    origin, that is, their value above the raw material out of which
    they were made, is, in fact, the only real part of English
    export. Before exclusive importance was bestowed on cotton, the
    exchange with America was in a large proportion of articles not
    to be returned. It would be so again if trade were free."

Again:

    "To one effect which would be produced in America by the repeal
    of the corn and provision laws, no party or class in England can
    profess indifference, and that is, its effect on slavery in the
    United States. At the present time, England gives a premium to
    American slavery by admitting, at low duties, the cotton of the
    slave-holder, which is his staple production, and refusing corn,
    which is mostly the produce of free labor. The slave-holding
    States, to the productions of which Great Britain confines her
    American trade, are less populous and less wealthy than the
    free; yet of their produce England received in 1839, according
    to the American estimates, £11,600,000, while of that of the
    free States she received less than £500,000."

    "It should be remembered that the labor of the slave States, is
    almost wholly expended in agriculture, under the stimulus of a
    good market, while a large part of that of the free States is
    otherwise employed, for the want of such market. The effective
    laborers of the free States are double the number of those in
    the slave States; and were an opportunity given them, they would
    export in as great a proportion. Thus England, by her laws,
    fosters an odious institution abroad, which, in words, she
    loudly condemns, and spends millions to rid the world of; whilst
    she rejects more honorable, profitable, and wealthy customers,
    the fruits of whose free and active industry are in effect made
    contraband in England by law.

    "Not only would England escape this inconsistency and reproach,
    by repealing the corn law, but she would strike a most effectual
    blow at the existence of slavery in the United States. Cotton,
    at present, from being made by the corn law the principal
    exchangeable article in the American trade, assumes an undue and
    unnatural importance in American commerce, legislation, and home
    industry. The slave-owner drives his slaves in its production,
    and purchases supplies of the northern freeman, whose interests
    are thus identified with those of the cotton grower, and the
    slave-holding interest becomes predominant in the country. From
    their habits, the people of the slave-holding States are
    constantly contracting more debts in the free States than they
    have the means of paying; so that, under the present system of
    intercourse, the slaveholders exercise over the free population
    of the north, the same control which an insolvent debtor
    frequently has over his creditor, by threatening to break and
    ruin him, if not allowed his own way. A repeal of the corn laws
    would release the free States from their present commercial and
    consequent political vassalage to the southern slave-holders,
    and thereby take from American slavery, the great citadel of its
    strength, and insure its overthrow by the influences which would
    arise to assail it from all quarters.

    "But as free trade, in destroying the odious monopoly of the
    haughty slave-holder, would benefit and not injure him, so would
    its effects be found universally. It would give peace and plenty
    to England and the world,--it would enlarge and secure trade,
    bind the spreading branches of the Anglo-saxon race by natural
    affinity to England as their acknowledged head, and promote the
    liberty and civilization of the human family at large."

In view of the whole spirit of this discussion of one of the most important questions bearing
upon human interests, I would simply add, that a wise Providence has bound the duty and the
interest, both of individual and social man, firmly together, but for the trial of his virtue
the bands are concealed.

On the 31st, I took my luggage on board the steam packet "Caledonia," for Liverpool, via Halifax,
which was to sail the day following, although it was the first day of the week. The proprietors
of the packets are bound in a heavy fine to sail on the appointed days, whether those fall
on the first day of the week or not. By this arrangement the religious feelings of the people
of Boston are offended, which is the more inexcusable, on the part of the British Government,
as it does not suffer its own mails to depart, either from London or Halifax, on that day.
Some gentlemen, who were interested in the subject, placed in my hands a memorial addressed
to the Lords of the Admiralty in Great Britain, praying for such an alteration of the arrangements
as would prevent this periodical violation of the first day of the week. A gentleman, who was
active in getting it signed, assured me it was received with universal favor. The signatures,
obtained on very short notice, are those of the most influential men in their respective stations
in the city of Boston, and include the names of the mayor of the city, an ex-lieutenant governor
of the State of Massachusetts, one bishop, upwards of forty ministers of religion, of different
denominations, nine gentleman, upwards of one hundred and twenty merchants, seventeen presidents
of insurance companies, the post-master of Boston, five physicians, seven members of the legal
profession, and two editors of newspapers. After my arrival in this country, I presented this
document, through the Secretary of the Admiralty, to the authorities to whom it is addressed,
but regret to state that the request was not complied with. The memorial, and the reply of
the Lords of the Admiralty are given in the Appendix[A]

[Footnote A: .See Appendix L.]

On leaving the shores of the United States, I left the following letter for publication:--

    "To the Friends of Immediate Emancipation in the United
    States.

    "Having visited your country as an humble fellow-laborer in the
    great cause in which you are engaged, and which, through trials
    and difficulties a stranger can scarcely appreciate, you have so
    zealously maintained, I have had a pleasing and satisfactory
    interview with many of you, with reference to future exertions,
    in cooperation with those of other lands, who unite with you in
    regarding slave-holding and slave-trading as a heinous sin in
    the sight of God, which should be immediately abolished. It is
    the especial privilege of those who are laboring in such a
    cause, to feel that 'every country is their country, and every
    man their brother,' and to live above the atmosphere of
    sectional jealousy and national hostility; and hence I feel an
    assurance, that you will receive with kindness a few lines from
    me on the eve of my departure to my native land.

    "You concur generally in opinion, that in endeavoring to obtain
    the great object we have in view, it is very important that the
    friends of the cause should be united, not only in principle,
    but, as far as may be, in the character of the measures which
    they pursue; and I have been much encouraged in finding that you
    have generally adopted the sentiment so rapidly spreading on the
    other side of the Atlantic,--'That there is no reasonable hope
    of abolishing the slave-trade, but, by the abolition of slavery,
    and that no measures should be pursued for its attainment, but
    those which are of a moral, religious, and pacific character.'
    The progress of emancipation in Europe has been, beyond a doubt,
    greatly retarded by leaving slavery and the slave-holder
    unmarked by public reprobation, and concentrating all the
    energies of philanthropy upon a fruitless effort to abolish the
    slave-trade. And in this country the Colonization scheme, with
    its delusive promise of good to Africa, and its vague
    anticipations of putting an end to the slave-trade by armed
    colonies on the coast of that ill-fated continent, has been the
    means of obstructing emancipation at home, of unprofitably
    absorbing the energies and blinding the judgment of many sincere
    friends of the slave, and of strengthening the unchristian
    prejudice against color. The abolitionists of Europe, with few
    exceptions, have seen the error of their former course of
    action, and are now striking directly at the root, instead of
    lopping the branches of slavery; and if further evidence of the
    evil tendency and character of colonization is needed in the
    United States, the recent proceeding of a meeting of the
    Maryland Society at Baltimore, must convince all who are
    friendly to the true interests of the people of color, that it
    is a scheme deserving only the support of the enemies of
    freedom.[A]

    [Footnote A: "The following resolution was passed at the meeting
    of the Maryland Society above alluded to:--'That while it is
    most earnestly hoped that the free colored people of Maryland
    may see that their best and most permanent interests will be
    consulted by their emigration from this State; and while this
    Convention would deprecate any departure from the principle
    which makes colonization dependent upon the voluntary action of
    the free colored people themselves--yet, if, regardless of what
    has been done to provide them with an asylum, they continue to
    persist in remaining in Maryland, in the hope of enjoying here
    an equality of social and political rights, they ought to be
    solemnly warned, that, in the opinion of this Convention, a day
    must arrive when circumstances that cannot be controlled, and
    which are now maturing, will deprive them of choice, and leave
    them no alternative but removal,'"]

    "The rapid progress of public opinion, as to the iniquity of
    slavery, and the entire safety, as well as advantage, of its
    immediate abolition--the attention which has been awakened to it
    in all parts of the civilized world--the movements in France,
    Spain, Brazil, and Denmark, and other countries with
    slave-holding dependencies, all indicating that the days of
    slavery are numbered, should serve to encourage and stimulate us
    to increased exertions; and while it is a cause of profound
    regret, that any thing should have disturbed the harmony and
    unity of the real friends of emancipation in this country--the
    hardest battle field of our moral warfare--I am not without
    hope, that, in future, those who,--from a conscientious
    difference of opinion, not as to the object, but the precise
    mode of obtaining it,--cannot act in one united band, will
    laudably emulate each other in the promotion of our common
    cause, and in Christian forbearance upon points of disagreement;
    and that, where they cannot praise, they will be careful not to
    censure those, who, by a different road, are earnestly pursuing
    the same end. Without entering into the controversies which have
    divided our friends on this side the water, I believe it would
    be nothing more than a simple act of justice for me to state, on
    my return to Europe, my conviction that a large portion of the
    abolitionists of the United States, who approve of the
    proceedings of the late General Anti-Slavery Convention, and are
    desirous of acting in unity with the British and Foreign
    Anti-Slavery Society, from the general identity of their
    practice, as well as principles, with those of the British and
    Foreign Society, are entitled to the sympathies, and deserving
    of the confidence and co-operation of the abolitionists of Great
    Britain. It has been my pleasure to meet, in a kindly
    interchange of opinion, many valuable and devoted friends of
    emancipation; who, while dissenting from the class
    above-mentioned in some respects, are nevertheless disposed to
    cultivate feelings of charity and good will towards all who are
    sincerely laboring for the slaves. And in this connection I may
    state, that neither on behalf of myself, or of my esteemed
    coadjutors in Great Britain, am I disposed to recriminate upon
    another class of abolitionists, who, on some points, have so far
    differed from the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Committee,
    and the great majority of the Convention above mentioned, as to
    sustain their representatives in refusing to act with that
    Convention, and in protesting against its proceedings; and who
    have seen fit to censure the committee in their public meetings
    and newspapers in this country, as 'arbitrary and despotic,' and
    their conduct as 'unworthy of men claiming the character of
    abolitionists.'

    "As a corresponding member of the British and Foreign
    Anti-Slavery Committee, and intimately acquainted with its
    proceedings, I am persuaded that its members have acted wisely,
    and consulted the best interest of the cause in which they were
    engaged, in generally leaving unnoticed any censures that have
    been cast upon them while in the prosecution of their labors. The
    General and Myron W. Whitney always looked as if they were bursting
    with pride, and as they were too fat and lazy to move, we could
    generally count upon their good behavior.
    
    We thought that if we could only get them to look down into
    the pool, which made such a lovely looking-glass, and just see
    for once what a beautiful picture they made,--sitting so straight
    and still, and all so nicely graded as to size,--they
    would like it better and do it a little more willingly.
    
    We thought, too, the baby frogs would be ashamed, when they looked
    in the glass, to see that while the big frogs stayed still of their
    own free will, THEY had to be held down with forked sticks.

    But we could never discover that they were ashamed.
    
    So when everything was complete my little sister used to "let go"
    of the baby frogs (for, as I said, she had to hold them
    down while we were forming the line), and I would begin the
    lesson. Sometimes they would listen a minute, and then
    they would begin their pranks. They would insist on playing leap-frog,
    which is a very nice game, but not appropriate for school. Tiny
    Tim would jump from the foot of the class straight over all
    the others on to Myron W. Whitney's back. Baby Mine would try to
    get between Croaker and Goldilegs, where there wasn't any room.
    Nimblefoot would twist round on the board and turn his back to
    me, which was very impolite, as I was the teacher. Finally, Hop-o'-my-
    Thumb would go splash into the pool, and all the rest, save the good
old General, would follow him, and the lesson would end.

    I suppose you have heard frogs singing just after sunset, when
    you were going to bed? Some people think the big bull-frogs say,
    "JUGO'RUM! JUGO'RUM! JUGO'RUM!" But I don't think this is at all
    likely, as the frogs never drink anything but water in their
    whole lives.
    
    We used to think that some of the frogs said, "KERCHUG! KERCHUG!"
    and that the largest one said, "GOTACRUMB! GOTACRUMB! GOTACRUMB!"
    Perhaps you can't make it sound right, but if you listen to the
    frogs you can very soon do it.
    
    We thought the frogs in our froggery the very best singers in all
    the country round. After our mother had tucked us in our little
    beds and kissed us good-night, she used to open the window, that
we might hear the chirping and humming and kerchugging of our frogs
down in the dear old garden.

As we wandered dreamily off into Sandman's
Land, the very last sound we heard was the cheerful chorus of our
baby frogs, and the deep bass notes of Myron W. Whitney and the old
General.

    "Painful as has been to me the spectacle of many of the leading
    influences of the ecclesiastical bodies in this country, either
    placed in direct hostility to, or acting as a drag upon, the
    wheel of the anti-slavery enterprise--and of the manifest
    preponderance of a slave-holding influence in the councils of
    the State--I am not one of those who despair of a healthful
    renovation of public sentiment which shall purify Church as well
    as State from this abomination. There are decided indications
    that all efforts of councils and synods to unite 'pure religion
    and undefiled,' with a slave-trading and slave-holding
    counterfeit of Christianity, must ere long utterly fail. And it
    is to me a matter of joy, as it must be to every friend of
    impartial liberty and free institutions, that the citizens of
    this republic are more and more feeling that the plague-spot of
    slavery, as with the increased facilities of communication its
    horrors and deformity become more apparent in the eyes of the
    world, is fixing a deep disgrace upon the character of their
    country, and paralyzing the beneficial influence which might
    otherwise flow from it as an example of a well-regulated free
    government. May each American citizen who is desirous of washing
    away this disgrace, to whatever division of the anti-slavery
    host he may attach himself, ever bear in mind that the cause is
    of too tremendous and pressing a nature to admit of his wasting
    his time in censuring and impeding the progress of those who may
    array themselves under a somewhat different standard from his
    own; and that any energies thus wasted, which belong to the one
    great object, so far as human instrumentality is concerned, is
    not only deferring the day of freedom to two and a half millions
    of his countrymen, but inasmuch as the fall of American slavery
    must be the death-blow to the horrid system, wherever it exists,
    the result of the struggle here involves the slavery or freedom
    of millions in other parts of the world, as well as the
    continuance or suppression of that slave-trade, to the foreign
    branch of which alone more than one thousand victims are daily
    sacrificed; and in reference to which it has justly been said,
    'that all that has been borne to Africa of the boasted
    improvements of civilized life, is a masterly skill in the
    contrivance, and an unhesitating daring in the commission of
    crimes, which the mind of the savage was too simple to devise,
    and his heart too gentle to execute.' There are no doubtful
    indications that it is the will of Him, who has the hearts of
    all at His disposal, that, either in judgment or in mercy, this
    dreadful system shall ere long cease. It is not for us to say
    why, in His inscrutable wisdom, He has thus far permitted one
    portion of His creatures so cruelly to oppress another; or by
    what instrumentality He will at length redress the wrongs of the
    poor, and the oppression of the needy; but should the worst
    fears of one of your most distinguished citizens, who in view of
    this subject, acknowledged that he 'trembled for his country,
    when he remembered that God was just,' be finally realized, may
    each one of you feel that no exertions on his part have been
    wanting to avert the Divine displeasure, and preserve your land
    from those calamities which, in all ages, have rebuked the
    crimes of nations.

    "Your sincere friend,

    "JOSEPH STURGE.

    "Boston, Seventh Month 31st, 1841."

My dear friend John G. Whittier, whose pleasant company and invaluable aid I had enjoyed, as
much as his health would permit, during my stay in the United States, kindly accompanied me
on board. Had he been less closely identified with the transactions of which the present volume
is a record, I should have felt it due to his station among the earliest and most distinguished
advocates of the anti-slavery cause in America, to attempt some delineation, however imperfect,
of that rare and consecrated union of consistent Christian character, fine talents, and sound
and impartial judgment, which give him so much weight in the councils of his fellow-laborers.
We set sail about noon on the 1st of the Eighth month, (August,) and arrived off Liverpool
about eleven o'clock, P.M. on the 13th, which interval included ten hours delay at Halifax.
We had about ninety passengers from Halifax to Liverpool, and with the exception of a severe
gale on the 10th, almost amounting to a hurricane, we had a very favorable voyage. The time
from Halifax to within sight of the light house off the south coast of Ireland was announced
to be only nine days and thirteen minutes.

