  The judicial use of torture
to extort confession is supposed to be a relic of darker ages; but whilst these pages are being
written an English judge has sentenced a forger to twenty years penal servitude with an open
declaration that the sentence will be carried out in full unless he confesses where he has
hidden the notes he forged.  And no comment whatever is made, either on this or on a telegram
from the seat of war in Somaliland mentioning that certain information has been given by a
prisoner of war "under punishment." Even if these reports are false, the fact that they are
accepted without protest as indicating a natural and proper course of public conduct shews
that we are still as ready to resort to torture as Bacon was.  As to vindictive cruelty, an
incident in the South African war, when the relatives and friends of a prisoner were forced
to witness his execution, betrayed a baseness of temper and character which hardly leaves us
the right to plume ourselves on our superiority to Edward III. at the surrender of Calais.
And the democratic American officer indulges in torture in the Philippines just as the aristocratic
English officer did in South Africa.  The incidents of the white invasion of Africa in search
of ivory, gold, diamonds, and sport, have proved that the modern European is the same beast
of prey that formerly marched to the conquest of new worlds under Alexander, Antony, and Pizarro.
Parliaments and vestries are just what they were when Cromwell suppressed them and Dickens
derided them.  The democratic politician remains exactly as Plato described him; the physician
is still the credulous impostor and petulant scientific coxcomb whom Molière ridiculed; the
schoolmaster remains at best a pedantic child farmer and at worst a flagellomaniac; arbitrations
are more dreaded by honest men than lawsuits; the philanthropist is still a parasite on misery
as the doctor is on disease; the miracles of priestcraft are none the less fraudulent and mischievous
because they are now called scientific experiments and conducted by professors; witchcraft,
in the modern form of patent medicines and prophylactic inoculations, is rampant; the landowner
who is no longer powerful enough to; set the mantrap of Rhampsinitis improves on it by barbed
wire; the modern gentleman who is too lazy to daub his face with vermilion as a symbol of bravery
employs a laundress to daub his shirt with starch as a symbol of cleanliness; we shake our
heads at the dirt of the middle ages in cities made grimy with soot and foul and disgusting
with shameless tobacco smoking; holy water, in its latest form of disinfectant fluid, is more
widely used and believed in than ever; public health authorities deliberately go through incantations
with burning sulphur (which they know to be useless) because the people believe in it as devoutly
as the Italian peasant believes in the liquefaction of the blood of St Januarius; and straightforward
public lying has reached gigantic developments, there being nothing to choose in this respect
between the pickpocket at the police station and the minister on the treasury bench, the editor
in the newspaper office, the city magnate advertizing bicycle tires that do not side-slip,
the clergyman subscribing the thirty-nine articles, and the vivisector who pledges his knightly
honor that no animal operated on in the physiological laboratory suffers the slightest pain.
Hypocrisy is at its worst; for we not only persecute bigotedly but sincerely in the name of
the cure-mongering witchcraft we do believe in, but callously and hypocritically in the name
of the Evangelical creed that our rulers privately smile at as the Italian patricians of the
fifth century smiled at Jupiter and Venus.  Sport is, as it has always been, murderous excitement;
the impulse to slaughter is universal; and museums are set up throughout the country to encourage
little children and elderly gentlemen to make collections of corpses preserved in alcohol,
and to steal birds' eggs and keep them as the red Indian used to keep scalps. Coercion with
the lash is as natural to an Englishman as it was to Solomon spoiling Rehoboam: indeed, the
comparison is unfair to the Jews in view of the facts that the Mosaic law forbade more than
forty lashes in the name of humanity, and that floggings of a thousand lashes were inflicted
on English soldiers in the XVIII and XIX centuries, and would be inflicted still but for the
change in the balance of political power between the military caste and the commercial classes
and the proletariat.  In spite of that change, flogging is still an institution in the public
school, in the military prison, on the training ship, and in that school of littleness called
the home.  The lascivious clamor of the flagellomaniac for more of it, constant as the clamor
for more insolence, more war, and lower rates, is tolerated and even gratified because, having
no moral ends in view, we have sense enough to see that nothing but brute coercion can impose
our selfish will on others. Cowardice is universal; patriotism, public opinion, parental duty,
discipline, religion, morality, are only fine names for intimidation; and cruelty, gluttony,
and credulity keep cowardice in countenance.  We cut the throat of a calf and hang it up by
the heels to bleed to death so that our veal cutlet may be white; we nail geese to a board
and cram them with food because we like the taste of liver disease; we tear birds to pieces
to decorate our women's hats; we mutilate domestic animals for no reason at all except to follow
an instinctively cruel fashion; and we connive at the most abominable tortures in the hope
of discovering some magical cure for our own diseases by them.

Now please observe that these are not exceptional developments of our admitted vices, deplored
and prayed against by all good men.  Not a word has been said here of the excesses of our Neros,
of whom we have the full usual percentage.  With the exception of the few military examples,
which are mentioned mainly to shew that the education and standing of a gentleman, reinforced
by the strongest conventions of honor, esprit de corps, publicity and responsibility, afford
no better guarantees of conduct than the passions of a mob, the illustrations given above are
commonplaces taken from the daily practices of our best citizens, vehemently defended in our
newspapers and in our pulpits.  The very humanitarians who abhor them are stirred to murder
by them: the dagger of Brutus and Ravaillac is still active in the hands of Caserio and Luccheni;
and the pistol has come to its aid in the hands of Guiteau and Czolgosz.  Our remedies are
still limited to endurance or assassination; and the assassin is still judicially assassinated
on the principle that two blacks make a white.  The only novelty is in our methods: through
the discovery of dynamite the overloaded musket of Hamilton of Bothwellhaugh has been superseded
by the bomb; but Ravachol's heart burns just as Hamilton's did.  The world will not bear thinking
of to those who know what it is, even with the largest discount for the restraints of poverty
on the poor and cowardice on the rich.

All that can be said for us is that people must and do live and let live up to a certain point.
Even the horse, with his docked tail and bitted jaw, finds his slavery mitigated by the fact
that a total disregard of his need for food and rest would put his master to the expense of
buying a new horse every second day; for you cannot work a horse to death and then pick up
another one for nothing, as you can a laborer.  But this natural check on inconsiderate selfishness
is itself checked, partly by our shortsightedness, and partly by deliberate calculation; so
that beside the man who, to his own loss, will shorten his horse's life in mere stinginess,
we have the tramway company which discovers actuarially that though a horse may live from 24
to 40 years, yet it pays better to work him to death in 4 and then replace him by a fresh victim.
And human slavery, which has reached its worst recorded point within our own time in the form
of free wage labor, has encountered the same personal and commercial limits to both its aggravation
and its mitigation.  Now that the freedom of wage labor has produced a scarcity of it, as in
South Africa, the leading English newspaper and the leading English weekly review have openly
and without apology demanded a return to compulsory labor: that is, to the methods by which,
as we believe, the Egyptians built the pyramids.  We know now that the crusade against chattel
slavery in the XIX century succeeded solely because chattel slavery was neither the most effective
nor the least humane method of labor exploitation; and the world is now feeling its way towards
a still more effective system which shall abolish the freedom of the worker without again making
his exploiter responsible for him.

Still, there is always some mitigation: there is the fear of revolt; and there are the effects
of kindliness and affection.  Let it be repeated therefore that no indictment is here laid
against the world on the score of what its criminals and monsters do.  The fires of Smithfield
and of the Inquisition were lighted by earnestly pious people, who were kind and good as kindness
and goodness go.  And when a negro is dipped in kerosene and set on fire in America at the
present time, he is not a good man lynched by ruffians: he is a criminal lynched by crowds
of respectable, charitable, virtuously indignant, high-minded citizens, who, though they act
outside the law, are at least more merciful than the American legislators and judges who not
so long ago condemned men to solitary confinement for periods, not of five months, as our own
practice is, but of five years and more.  The things that our moral monsters do may be left
out of account with St. Bartholomew massacres and other momentary outbursts of social disorder.
Judge us by the admitted and respected practice of our most reputable circles; and, if you
know the facts and are strong enough to look them in the face, you must admit that unless we
are replaced by a more highly evolved animal--in short, by the Superman--the world must remain
a den of dangerous animals among whom our few accidental supermen, our Shakespears, Goethes,
Shelleys, and their like, must live as precariously as lion tamers do, taking the humor of
their situation, and the dignity of their superiority, as a set-off to the horror of the one
and the loneliness of the other.

IX

THE VERDICT OF HISTORY

It may be said that though the wild beast breaks out in Man and casts him back momentarily
into barbarism under the excitement of war and crime, yet his normal life is higher than the
normal life of his forefathers.  This view is very acceptable to Englishmen, who always lean
sincerely to virtue's side as long as it costs them nothing either in money or in thought.
They feel deeply the injustice of foreigners, who allow them no credit for this conditional
highmindedness.  But there is no reason to suppose that our ancestors were less capable of
it than we are.  To all such claims for the existence of a progressive moral evolution operating
visibly from grandfather to grandson, there is the conclusive reply that a thousand years of
such evolution would have produced enormous social changes, of which the historical evidence
would be overwhelming.  But not Macaulay himself, the most confident of Whig meliorists, can
produce any such evidence that will bear cross-examination.  Compare our conduct and our codes
with those mentioned contemporarily in such ancient scriptures and classics as have come down
to us, and you will find no jot of ground for the belief that any moral progress whatever has
been made in historic time, in spite of all the romantic attempts of historians to reconstruct
the past on that assumption.  Within that time it has happened to nations as to private families
and individuals that they have flourished and decayed, repented and hardened their hearts,
submitted and protested, acted and reacted, oscillated between natural and artificial sanitation
(the oldest house in the world, unearthed the other day in Crete, has quite modern sanitary
arrangements), and rung a thousand changes on the different scales of income and pressure of
population, firmly believing all the time that mankind was advancing by leaps and bounds because
men were constantly busy.  And the mere chapter of accidents has left a small accumulation
of chance discoveries, such as the wheel, the arch, the safety pin, gunpowder, the magnet,
the Voltaic pile and so forth: things which, unlike the gospels and philosophic treatises of
the sages, can be usefully understood and applied by common men; so that steam locomotion is
possible without a nation of Stephensons, although national Christianity is impossible without
a nation of Christs.  But does any man seriously believe that the chauffeur who drives a motor
car from Paris to Berlin is a more highly evolved man than the charioteer of Achilles, or that
a modern Prime Minister is a more enlightened ruler than Cæsar because he rides a tricycle,
writes his dispatches by the electric light, and instructs his stockbroker through the telephone?

Enough, then, of this goose-cackle about Progress: Man, as he is, never will nor can add a
cubit to his stature by any of its quackeries, political, scientific, educational, religious,
or artistic.  What is likely to happen when this conviction gets into the minds of the men
whose present faith in these illusions is the cement of our social system, can be imagined
only by those who know how suddenly a civilization which has long ceased to think (or in the
old phrase, to watch and pray) can fall to pieces when the vulgar belief in its hypocrisies
and impostures can no longer hold out against its failures and scandals.  When religious and
ethical formulae become so obsolete that no man of strong mind can believe them, they have
also reached the point at which no man of high character will profess them; and from, that
moment until they are formally disestablished, they stand at the door of every profession and
every public office to keep out every able man who is not a sophist or a liar.  A nation which
revises its parish councils once in three years, but will not revise its articles of religion
once in three hundred, even when those articles avowedly began as a political compromise dictated
by Mr Facing-Both-Ways, is a nation that needs remaking.

