"Well now, Mr. Blue, it's better to have a little help than none at all.  Why, indeed, you'll
have to lift the heavy kettles off the fire yourself.  The boy can peel potatoes and wash dishes."

"Yes, and break more than his neck is worth in Brothers.  I understand.--Now, little one, come
here and get into this apron, and begin work.--Oh, wait a moment.  You have not had any breakfast.
There, take that bowl of rice; you are more accustomed to that than to our bread and coffee.
When you have finished get at those dishes, and wash and wipe them quicker than scat, and for
every one you break a precious good thump you'll get."

With tears in his eyes poor little Peppo choked down his rice, and went to work.  "Oh, dear,"
he said to himself, as he dipped the plates in hot water and burned his fingers trying to get
them out, "Oh, dear, how God is punishing me for my disobedience!  If I had only stayed where
I was told.  Father Somazzo must have known what Lihoa was going to do. This is what I get
for running off and having my own way.  And who knows whether I'll ever see Hongkong and the
good Fathers again so long as I live?"

Poor little Peppo's cup was full to overflowing.  As with trembling fingers he kept on fishing
the hot plates out of the dishpan, he noticed that all the plates had on them the word "St.
George"; then he recalled that that was the name of Willy's father's boat.  Just as it was
dawning on him that he must be on the "St. George" the kitchen door opened and he heard a well-known
voice say, "Give me some breakfast quicker than a wink, dear cook, for I've got to go to work
as cabin-boy right away."

Peppo was walking across the floor to the crockery chest to put away a dozen or more clean
plates which he had in his hands, when at the sound of the voice he turned and saw Willy whom
the Captain had given a push that sent him half across the kitchen.  The small Chinaman gave
a cry of surprise and let the plates fall on the floor where they broke into a thousand rattling
pieces.  Angrily the cook sprang at him, and would have struck him with the big wooden cooking
spoon, if Willy had not come between them and received the blow meant for Peppo.

"Peppo, Peppo," he cried, "are you here?"

"Yes, Willy, as a punishment for my disobedience.  And now see what more mischief I have done,
and what more punishment I shall get.  The cook will beat me half to death for breaking all
the beautiful plates," moaned Peppo.

"But I was all to blame for that," said Willy.  "I frightened you so that you let them fall.
That's so, isn't it, dear cook?  You won't punish him, will you?"

The cook's anger was somewhat mollified.  The good-natured man was pleased with the boys, and
gave them both some breakfast on a little table.  Peppo told of his adventures, and Willy comforted
him by saying, "You have been disobedient and you'll have to take your punishment, but the
dear God ordained it that you should come to me. We'll pray together and be good, so that our
holy guardian angels will take us back to Hongkong again to the Fathers."

Just here the boatswain came in and ordered Willy on deck, or they would have continued talking
indefinitely.

CHAPTER VIII.

A Very Real Danger.

Meanwhile the "St. George" under full sail and well over on her side was running before a strong
west wind.  The waves washed over the deck; the sea was so rough that it was hard for an experienced
seaman to make his way, and only those sure of foot and hand dared venture on the rigging.
Nevertheless Redfox ordered Willy to climb the mainmast with him to help unfurl the sail at
the very top.

"If you want to be a good seaman like your father you must learn to climb the rigging not only
in a light breeze like this but also in a hurricane.  You want to get so that you can run around
up there like a squirrel in a Christmas tree.  There is no danger; just hold tight to the rigging
with one hand and don't get frightened when the boat pitches.  You can't learn to do any climbing
that's worth while standing around here on deck.  Up, my little man, let's see if you have
any nerve."

"Yes, I have nerve, and lots of times in pleasant weather I've been up the mast, but when the
ship rocks as it does now, my father would never let me think of going up," answered Willy. 

The mother-tree had gone,--"gone to be useful," said the little Fir; and though he missed her very
much, and the world seemed very empty when he looked up and no longer
saw her thick branches and her strong trunk, yet he was not unhappy,
for he was a brave little Fir.

Still the days grew colder, and often the Fir-tree wondered if the children who had made a ring
and danced about him would remember him when Christmas time came.

He could not grow, for the weather was too cold, and so he had the more time for thinking. He thought
of the birds, of the mother-tree, and, most of all, of the little girl who had lifted her finger,
and said, "Hush! hear the Fir-tree sing."

Sometimes the days seemed long, and he sighed in all his branches, and almost thought he would
never be a Christmas tree.

But suddenly, one day, he heard something far away that sounded like
the ringing of Christmas bells.

It was the children laughing and singing, as they ran over the snow.

Nearer they came, and stood beside the Fir. "Yes," said the little girl, "it is my very tree,
my very singing tree!"

"Indeed," said the father, "it will be a good Christmas tree.

See how straight and well shaped it is."

Then the tree was glad; not proud, for he was a good little Fir, but glad that they saw he had
tried his best.

So they cut him down and carried him away on a great sled; away from the tall dark trees, from the
white shining snow-carpet at their feet, and from all the murmuring and whispering that go on within
the forest.

The little trees stood on tiptoe and waved their green branches for "Good-by," and the great
trees bent their heads to watch him go.

"Not all firs can be Christmas trees," said they; "only those who grow their best."

The good Fir-tree stood in the children's own room. Round about his feet were flowers and mosses
and green boughs. From his branches hung toys and books and candies, and at the end of each
glossy twig was a bright glittering Christmas candle.

The doors were slowly opened; the children came running in; and when they saw the shining lights,
and the Christmas tree proudly holding their presents, they made
a ring, and danced about him, singing.

And the Fir-tree was very
happy!

But by and by, when the sun is low, And birds and babies sleepy
grow, I peep again from my window high, And look at the earth and
clouds and sky. The night dew comes in silent showers, To cool the
hearts of thirsty flowers; The moon comes out,--the slender thing,
A crescent yet, but soon a ring,-- And brings with her one yellow
star; How small it looks, away so far! But soon, in the heaven's shining
blue, A thousand twinkle and blink at you, Like a thousand lamps in
the sky so blue.

And hush! a light breeze stirs the tree, And rocks,
the birdies,--one, two, three. What a beautiful cradle, that soft,
warm nest! What a dear little coverlid, mamma-bird's breast! She's
hugging them close to her,--tight, so tight That each downy head is
hid from sight; But out from under her sheltering wings Their bright
eyes glisten,--the darling things! I lean far out from my window's
height And say, "Dear, lovely world, good-night!

"Good-night, dear,
pretty baby moon! Your cradle you'll outgrow quite soon, And then,
perhaps, all night you'll shine, A grown-up lady moon!--so fine And
bright that all the stars Will want to light their lamps from yours.
Then he thundered at Redfox:

"Thank God, that you lay yourself down to rest tonight without a murder on your conscience.
It is no fault of yours that that boy came down from the rigging alive."

"I forbid any such talk," answered Redfox without meeting the gaze of the helmsman.  "The stupid
youngster got dizzy when I let go of his jacket and started to get a better hold of his belt."

"No, no, Mr. Redfox," answered Willy firmly, "you pushed me instead of getting hold of my bolt.
I did not get dizzy."

"Ridiculous!  Your fear put that notion into your head.  Now if you go to telling that story
round here--even once--I'll have the Captain shut you up in the steerage with the Chinamen.
You go to telling the wrongs you suffer from your superior officer and you'll get yourself
into trouble.  No more of this."

Redfox went to the Captain's cabin.  Indignantly the helmsman looked after him, and then he
again asked the boy if he was very sure that Redfox had pushed him.

"Quite sure," he replied, "and he looked at me more wickedly than I thought any man could look.
What has he against me?  I have never done him any harm.  And my uncle, too, acts so strangely,
he has never once given me a pleasant word or look."

"I understand well enough," answered the helmsman.  "Be on your guard with Redbeard and your
uncle; I don't dare to tell you any more.  I'd like to open your eyes, but I can't.  Trust
in God and your holy guardian angel who saved you almost miraculously today.  In the first
port that we put into Redbeard will answer for what he did today--and for a few other things, too."

To the Captain Redfox reported, "I did not think it possible for that boy to come down from
the rigging alive, and now he is telling that I tried to push him off the yard, and, of course,
that numbskull of a Green is only to ready to believe him.  That fellow has got wind of some
things, too.  We must see to it that he gets no chance to tell what he knows or thinks he knows."

"You are my bad angel, Redfox, and want to drag me deeper and deeper into crime," said the
Captain.  "Haven't I told you again and again that I will not have that boy put out of the way?"

"Oh, you are always for half-way measures.  I take no account of them in my reckonings.  It
would have been very fine for you, if--accidentally--he had fallen from the rigging," growled
Redfox.

"No, no, I won't have any bloodshed," said the Captain most earnestly. "There are enough things
now for which I have to answer,--and there will be more when we wreck the 'St. George' on one
of the many reefs off the east coast of Australia, as we have planned to do.  Now, if against
my will, you do anything to that boy, I'll have you turned over to the authorities, even if
I run the danger of being arrested as your accomplice.  You may know what to expect."

With these words the Captain left Redfox standing at the door of the cabin.  He muttered to
himself, "Well, do you know, I really believe his conscience is troubling him--the mushhead!
I must deal with him more firmly.--No, no, Captain, after what happened this morning the only
thing to do is to get him out of the way,--and the helmsman along with him.  I'll tend to that.
Ha, ha!  Mr. Captain, you'll get up in the morning early to turn Redfox over to the authorities!"

CHAPTER IX.

A New Plan.

Weeks had passed since the happenings told of in the previous chapter took place, and nothing
of any importance had occurred.  Redfox had not again ordered Willy to climb the mast with
him, and even when the ship was becalmed and lay with slackened sails on a sea smooth and clear
as a looking-glass, he would not allow him to go up to the crow's nest.

"Oh, no, no, if you were to get dizzy and fall, you'd tell that I pushed you," he sneered at
every possible opportunity.  Green he avoided as much as possible.

"The boy was perhaps mistaken, and my suspicions of the Captain and Redfox may be wholly unfounded,"
thought honest Green, when week after week went by without their taking revenge on either him
or Willy.  The voyage had been an extraordinarily quick and fortunate one.  The days which
ships usually spend in being becalmed under the Equator the 'St. George' spent under full sail
with favoring winds.  Everything on shipboard was going very well, yet the Captain was always
sullen and morose.  He and Redfox sat in the cabin and gambled and drank most of their time.
Rarely did they finish one debauch before they began on another.  Redfox seemed to exercise
hypnotic power over the Captain.

Willy, the darling of the crew, at first was much grieved over his uncle's behavior and the
aversion which the first officer showed for him, but he soon became accustomed to their ways.
The companionship of Green, who initiated him into the mysteries of the compass and the practical
work of steering the ship, was pleasant, and he had Peppo. The Captain had allowed the boatswain
to put up another hammock in Willy's cabin, so that Peppo could sleep there instead of going
down into the steerage.  Together the boys said their morning and evening prayers, just as
they were accustomed to do in the pension in Hongkong, and slept like nabobs in their little
hammocks while the ship went ploughing its way through the placid ocean.

The "St. George" was at this time in the sea between the New Britain Archipelago, as the group
of islands which now goes by the name of the Bismarck Archipelago was at that time called,
and the Soloman Islands. With full sail the boat was running before a stiff northwest breeze.
The fiery tropical sun burned in the heavens, and far as the eye could reach the waters rolled
in a long swell on the deep blue southern sea. A pair of screaming sea-gulls circled round
the top of the mast, the sails flapped, the rigging creaked, and the waters swished and dashed
against the sides of the vessel.  Other sounds there were none.  The vessel might almost have
been a phantom ship upon an enchanted sea.

Green sat near the wheel in the shade of one of the sails smoking his pipe and with difficulty
keeping his eyes open sufficiently to glance at the big compass and the distant horizon occasionally.
"If our reckonings are right we shall sight the Soloman Islands now at any minute," he said
to himself, and was about to call to the man on watch in the crow's nest to see that he was
not asleep, when Willy came out from the cabin and motioned to Green that he had something
important to tell him.

"Hello, Willy, what's the matter?  Any one would think from the expression on your face that
you had seen 'The Klabautermann'!"

"The Klabautermann" is a spirit of the sea similar to the brownies of the mountains and the
goblins which play such a part in children's stories.  Ordinarily unseen this spirit helps
the sailors in their work when they are good and true, but when he appears with a fiery head
and green teeth, attired in riding boots, yellow hose, and pointed hat,--as the sailors assert
they have seen him--then look out.  Beware of misfortune.  Some awful fate awaits the ship,
so the superstitious sailors solemnly swear.

"I have not seen 'The Klabautermann'," answered Willy, "and I don't believe there is any such
spirit, although you are so positive about it; but I have something to tell you that will surprise
you more than a visit from the Flying Dutchman's haunted ship, that you told me about."

"Well, let's have the surprise."

"Can any one play eavesdropper here?"

"No; no one at all.  We are here all by ourselves aft and who is there that would want to listen
to us?"

"Redbeard and my uncle, but they are in the cabin, drinking and gambling as usual.  Last night,
you know, Peppo had toothache all night and couldn't sleep, so this afternoon I took his place
in the kitchen while he went up to have a nap in his hammock.  He just came and told me that
he had overheard Redbeard plotting some dreadful thing against us.  Peppo couldn't understand
it all, but he got this much, that at the island to which we are coming today, or at the latest
tomorrow morning, he is going to send you ashore for drinking water.  He has let the water
leak out of the casks.  'When Green goes ashore,' he said, 'I haven't a doubt in the world
but that the young one, who stands in your way, will want to go with him, and the little Chinaman,
whom I do not trust, will also want to go--We can just send them, even if you don't hanker
after this plan.  And--well--if they don't come back, why the wild Soloman Islanders will know
what to do with them.'  Peppo heard the first officer say this."

"Oh, the traitor!" said Green.  "And so he is going to furnish the cannibals with a nice juicy
stew for their pots, is he?  And pray tell, what did that nice uncle of yours, the Captain,
say to all this?"

"At first he would not listen to a word of it; then Redfox threatened him with something which
Peppo could not understand, and at last he said, 'Oh, you are my bad angel.  I am in your power.
Do what you must, but I won't have any part in it.'"

"Pontius Pilate made similar remarks when he gave Our Lord over to death, but handwashing of
that sort is of no use.  As for the rest you are right.  Redfox is the chief sinner and forces
the Captain into things which he would never think of doing otherwise.--But what are we to
do?  Here we are helpless in the power of these monsters.  We might give them over to the authorities
at the first port at which we touch, but the trouble with that plan comes in just here: Gray
will not listen to or believe what that little Chinaman says.  It couldn't be done without
a life and death struggle.  I must win over the Chinamen--and if I fail, by so much as a hair-breadth,
I'll go to the gallows as a rebel.--And yet--I must risk my life for you as well as for the
rest of us.  Quick, bring your little friend here.  I'll tell him what to say to the men in
the steerage.  They will be on our side for they have been badly treated."

Willy did not understand all that the honest helmsman said for he was half talking to himself,
but he got enough to realize that they were in great danger, and that Green scarcely knew what
to do.  Why did Redbeard wish their death?  Green had told him a number of times, but the boy
could not understand the question of the property, even after it was explained to him, and
now there was no time to talk about it. "Be quick, go get Peppo for me," repeated the helmsman,
instead of answering his questions.  "The crisis may come any moment.  In the meantime pray
to your guardian angel, who once saved you miraculously from the power of these monsters."

A few minutes later Peppo slipped down to the steerage and delivered Green's message to his
uncle, and he in turn held a secret counsel with the most resolute of his companions.  They
talked much of the warning which the God of the Golden Fish had given them about keeping out
of broils without arriving at any conclusion, though their feelings prompted them to wreak
vengeance on the Captain for his rough treatment of them.  While they were talking a voice
from the crow's nest called, "Land--ahoy!" and in a moment the ship was all life.  The boatswain
sounded his pipe calling every sailor to his place and the Captain came on deck to give orders.
On the left in the South Sea a wooded hill rose from the water, and quickly became larger,
as the ship flew towards it like a bird.  The Captain and Redfox stepped up to the wheel and
the Captain said to Green, "We must heave to."

"What?  Heave to in such a fine breeze as this?  What have we got for the cannibals over there?"

"We must have water," said the Captain without looking at the helmsman. "Redfox says that the
cask has leaked and that there is not enough water to last us through to Australia."

"I saw the cask yesterday, and then there was no leak in it.  If it is empty now there has
been foul play."

"Hello!  What ails the man?" cried Redfox.  "Who has been doing the foul play?"

"Since you ask I'll tell you.  You have.  And as you let the water run out you can see to getting
more to put in.  Under no circumstances will I do it."

"Well, Captain, what do you think of the fellow's impudence?  I say he belongs in chains,"
cried Redfox in a rage.

"Quite right.  Insubordination on shipboard cannot be tolerated. Either you take a small boat
and go for water to fill the cask or I'll put you in irons.  A dozen Chinamen and the small
interpreter are to accompany you."

"Just as I thought.  And your nephew is to go, too, and when we are on shore the 'St. George'
is to take advantage of favoring breezes, and we are to be left for the cannibals.  You'll
have to murder the boy and me right here; we'll not run our heads into any such trap.  Heda!
my little Chinaman, now is the time for your countrymen to defend themselves.  The responsibility
is mine," and with these words he threw himself upon Redfox who drew out his knife with a curse.
Green struck him a blow that knocked him senseless, and then turned on the Captain, who called
loudly for help.  The sailors to a man rushed to his aid, while the Chinamen refused to mix
in the white men's quarrel.  Green was quickly overpowered and was thrown into chains in the
steerage. There the Captain also put the boys who had openly taken the helmsman's part.

CHAPTER X.

The Hurricane.

In utmost astonishment the sailors looked after the helmsman and the two boys as they were
led away. There were many other trees in the forest, as tall and grand as she, and when they
bent and bowed to each other, as the wind played in their branches, you could hear a wonderful
lovely sound, like the great organ when it plays softly in the church.
  Now before their very eyes the helmsman had attacked the first officer
and the Captain, and even commanded the Chinamen to be insubordinate, and the boys openly had
taken sides with the helmsman.

"Green has lost his mind," cried an old sailor.

"It must be so," answered his companion.  "Perhaps he is moonstruck; more than one good fellow
has gone moonstruck in the tropics."

"He must be out of his mind," put in the Captain, "but that's a matter for the judge to find
out.  You can testify as to what he said and did, and if the judge sends him to the mad-house
instead of the gallows, I shall be glad.  Redfox has fortunately recovered himself after the
murderous attack and is going into my cabin."  The Captain started across the deck.  "But hello,
here!--What's the matter?  The wind has changed all of a sudden, or rather the breeze has ceased.
The sails are flapping against the mast, and the pennons are not moving.  Every man to his
post," he shouted.  "I fear the wind will veer suddenly before we have time to turn round,
and blow harder than will be pleasant for us.  Gray, go to the wheel.  The rest of you mount
the rigging, furl the sails, all, even the great topsail.  Oh, here, you Chinamen, get down
stairs."

