When Ring heard that Harald was dead, he gave the signal to his men to break up their line
and cease fighting. Then under cover of truce he made treaty with the enemy, telling them that
it was vain to prolong the fray without their captain. Next he told the Swedes to look everywhere
among the confused piles of carcases for the body of Harald, that the corpse of the king might
not wrongfully lack its due rights. So the populace set eagerly to the task of turning over
the bodies of the slain, and over this work half the day was spent. At last the body was found
with the club, and he thought that propitiation should be made to the shade of Harald. So he
harnessed the horse on which he rode to the chariot of the king, decked it honourably with
a golden saddle, and hallowed it in his honour. Then he proclaimed his vows, and added his
prayer that Harald would ride on this and outstrip those who shared his death in their journey
to Tartarus; and that he would pray Pluto, the lord of Orcus, to grant a calm abode there for
friend and foe. Then he raised a pyre, and bade the Danes fling on the gilded chariot of their
king as fuel to the fire. And while the flames were burning the body cast upon them, he went
round the mourning nobles and earnestly charged them that they should freely give arms, gold,
and every precious thing to feed the pyre in honour of so great a king, who had deserved so
nobly of them all. He also ordered that the ashes of his body, when it was quite burnt, should
be transferred to an urn, taken to Leire, and there, together with the horse and armour, receive
a royal funeral. By paying these due rites of honour to his uncle's shade, he won the favour
of the Danes, and turned the hate of his enemies into goodwill. Then the Danes besought him
to appoint Hetha over the remainder of the realm; but, that the fallen strength of the enemy
might not suddenly rally, he severed Skaane from the mass of Denmark, and put it separately
under the governorship of Ole, ordering that only Zealand and the other lands of the realm
should be subject to Hetha. Thus the changes of fortune brought the empire of Denmark under
the Swedish rule. So ended the Bravic war.

But the Zealanders, who had had Harald for their captain, and still had the picture of their
former fortune hovering before their minds, thought it shameful to obey the rule of a woman,
and appealed to OLE not to suffer men that had been used to serve under a famous king to be
kept under a woman's yoke. They also promised to revolt to him if he would take up arms to
remove their ignominious lot. Ole, tempted as much by the memory of his ancestral glory as
by the homage of the soldiers, was not slow to answer their entreaties. So he summoned Hetha,
and forced her by threats rather than by arms to quit every region under her control except
Jutland; and even Jutland he made a tributary state, so as not to allow a woman the free control
of a kingdom. He also begot a son whom he named Omund. But he was given to cruelty, and showed
himself such an unrighteous king, that all who had found it a shameful thing to be ruled by
a queen now repented of their former scorn.

Twelve generals, whether moved by the disasters of their country, or hating Ole for some other
reason, began to plot against his life. Among these were Hlenni, Atyl, Thott, and Withne, the
last of whom was a Dane by birth, though he held a government among the Sclavs. Moreover, not
trusting in their strength and their cunning to accomplish their deed, they bribed Starkad
to join them. He was prevailed to do the deed with the sword; he undertook the bloody work,
and resolved to attack the king while at the bath. In he went while the king was washing, but
was straightway stricken by the keenness of his gaze and by the restless and quivering glare
of his eyes. His limbs were palsied with sudden dread; he paused, stepped back, and stayed
his hand and his purpose. Thus he who had shattered the arms of so many captains and champions
could not bear the gaze of a single unarmed man. But Ole, who well knew about his own countenance,
covered his face, and asked him to come closer and tell him what his message was; for old fellowship
and long-tried friendship made him the last to suspect treachery. But Starkad drew his sword,
leapt forward, thrust the king through, and struck him in the throat as he tried to rise. One
hundred and twenty marks of gold were kept for his reward. Soon afterwards he was smitten with
remorse and shame, and lamented his crime so bitterly, that he could not refrain from tears
if it happened to be named. Thus his soul, when he came to his senses, blushed for his abominable
sin. Moreover, to atone for the crime he had committed, he slew some of those who had inspired
him to it, thus avenging the act to which he had lent his hand.

Now the Danes made OMUND, the son of Ole, king, thinking that more heed should be paid to his
father's birth than to his deserts. Omund, when he had grown up, fell in nowise behind the
exploits of his father; for he made it his aim to equal or surpass the deeds of Ole.

At this time a considerable tribe of the Northmen (Norwegians) was governed by Ring, and his
daughter Esa's great fame commended her to Omund, who was looking out for a wife.

But his hopes of wooing her were lessened by the peculiar inclination of Ring, who desired
no son-in-law but one of tried valour; for he found as much honour in arms as others think
lies in wealth. Omund therefore, wishing to become famous in that fashion, and to win the praise
of valour, endeavoured to gain his desire by force, and sailed to Norway with a fleet, to make
an attempt on the throne of Ring under plea of hereditary right. Odd, the chief of Jather,
who declared that Ring had assuredly seized his inheritance, and lamented that he harried him
with continual wrongs, received Omund kindly. Ring, in the meantime, was on a roving raid in
Ireland, so that Omund attacked a province without a defender. Sparing the goods of the common
people, he gave the private property of Ring over to be plundered, and slew his kinsfolk; Odd
also having joined his forces to Omund. Now, among all his divers and manifold deeds, he could
never bring himself to attack an inferior force, remembering that he was the son of a most
valiant father, and that he was bound to fight armed with courage, and not with numbers.

Meanwhile Ring had returned from roving; and when Omund heard he was back, he set to and built
a vast ship, whence, as from a fortress, he could rain his missiles on the enemy. To manage
this ship he enlisted Homod and Thole the rowers, the soils of Atyl the Skanian, one of whom
was instructed to act as steersman, while the other was to command at the prow. Ring lacked
neither skill nor dexterity to encounter them. For he showed only a small part of his forces,
and caused the enemy to be attacked on the rear. Omund, when told of his strategy by Odd, sent
men to overpower those posted in ambush, telling Atyl the Skanian to encounter Ring. The order
was executed with more rashness than success; and Atyl, with his power defeated and shattered,
fled beaten to Skaane. Then Omund recruited his forces with the help of Odd, and drew up his
fleet to fight on the open sea.

Atyl at this time had true visions of the Norwegian war in his dreams, and started on his voyage
in order to make up for his flight as quickly as possible, and delighted Omund by joining him
on the eve of battle. Trusting in his help, Omund began to fight with equal confidence and
success. For, by fighting himself, he retrieved the victory which he had lost when his servants
were engaged. Ring, wounded to the death, gazed at him with faint eyes, and, beckoning to him
with his hand, as well as he could--for his voice failed him--he besought him to be his son-in-law,
saying that he would gladly meet his end if he left his daughter to such a husband. Before
he could receive an answer he died. Omund wept for his death, and gave Homod, whose trusty
help he had received in the war, in marriage to one of the daughters of Ring, taking the other
himself.

At the same time the amazon Rusla, whose prowess in warfare exceeded the spirit of a woman,
had many fights in Norway with her brother, Thrond, for the sovereignty. She could not endure
that Omund rule over the Norwegians, and she had declared war against all the subjects of the
Danes. Omund, when he heard of this, commissioned his most active men to suppress the rising.
Rusla conquered them, and, waxing haughty on her triumph, was seized with overweening hopes,
and bent her mind upon actually acquiring the sovereignty of Denmark. She began her attack
on the region of Halland, but was met by Homod and Thode, whom the king had sent over. Beaten,
she retreated to her fleet, of which only thirty ships managed to escape, the rest being taken
by the enemy. Thrond encountered his sister as she was eluding the Danes, but was conquered
by her and stripped of his entire army; he fled over the Dovrefjeld without a single companion.
Thus she, who had first yielded before the Danes, soon overcame her brother, and turned her
flight into a victory. When Omund heard of this, he went back to Norway with a great fleet,
first sending Homod and Thole by a short and secret way to rouse the people of Tellemark against
the rule of Rusla. The end was that she was driven out of her kingdom by the commons, fled
to the isles for safety, and turned her back, without a blow, upon the Danes as they came up.
The king pursued her hotly, caught up her fleet on the sea, and utterly destroyed it, the enemy
suffered mightily, and he won a bloodless victory and splendid spoils. But Rusla escaped with
a very few ships, and rowed ploughing the waves furiously; but, while she was avoiding the
Danes, she met her brother and was killed. So much more effectual for harm are dangers unsurmised;
and chance sometimes makes the less alarming evil worse than that which threatens. The king
gave Thrond a governorship for slaying his sister, put the rest under tribute, and returned home.

At this time Thorias (?) and Ber (Biorn), the most active of the soldiers of Rusla, were roving
in Ireland; but when they heard of the death of their mistress, whom they had long ago sworn
to avenge, they hotly attacked Omund, and challenged him to a duel, which it used to be accounted
shameful for a king to refuse; for the fame of princes of old was reckoned more by arms than
by riches. So Homod and Thole came forward, offering to meet in battle the men who had challenged
the king. Omund praised them warmly, but at first declined for very shame to allow their help.
At last, hard besought by his people, he brought himself to try his fortune by the hand of
another. We are told that Ber fell in this combat, while Thorias left the battle severely wounded.
The king, having first cured him of his wounds, took him into his service, and made him prince
(earl) over Norway. Then he sent ambassadors to exact the usual tribute from the Sclavs; these
were killed, and he was even attacked in Jutland by a Sclavish force; but he overcame seven
kings in a single combat, and ratified by conquest his accustomed right to tribute.

Meantime, Starkad, who was now worn out with extreme age, and who seemed to be past military
service and the calling of a champion, was loth to lose his ancient glory through the fault
of eld, and thought it would be a noble thing if he could make a voluntary end, and hasten
his death by his own free will. Having so often fought nobly, he thought it would be mean to
die a bloodless death; and, wishing to enhance the glory of his past life by the lustre of
his end, he preferred to be slain by some man of gallant birth rather than await the tardy
shaft of nature. So shameful was it thought that men devoted to war should die by disease.
His body was weak, and his eyes could not see clearly, so that he hated to linger any more
in life. In order to buy himself an executioner, he wore hanging on his neck the gold which
he had earned for the murder of Ole; thinking there was no fitter way of atoning for the treason
he had done than to make the price of Ole's death that of his own also, and to spend on the
loss of his own life what he had earned by the slaying of another. This, he thought, would
be the noblest use he could make of that shameful price. So he girded him with two swords,
and guided his powerless steps leaning on two staves.

One of the common people, seeing him, thinking two swords superfluous for the use of an old
man, mockingly asked him to make him a present of one of them. Starkad, holding out hopes of
consent, bade him come nearer, drew the sword from his side, and ran him through. This was
seen by a certain Hather, whose father Hlenne Starkad had once killed in repentance for his
own impious crime. Hatfier was hunting game with his dogs, but now gave over the chase, and
bade two of his companions spur their horses hard and charge at the old man to frighten him.
They galloped forward, and tried to make off, but were stopped by the staves of Starkad, and
paid for it with their lives. Hather, terrified by the sight, galloped up closer, and saw who
the old man was, but without being recognized by him in turn; and asked him if he would like
to exchange his sword for a carriage. Starkad replied that he used in old days to chastise
jeerers, and that the insolent had never insulted him unpunished. But his sightless eyes could
not recognize the features of the youth; so he composed a song, wherein he should declare the
greatness of his anger, as follows:

"As the unreturning waters sweep down the channel; so, as the years run by, the life of man
flows on never to come back; fast gallops the cycle of doom, child of old age who shall make
an end of all. Old age smites alike the eyes and the steps of men, robs the warrior of his
speech and soul, tarnishes his fame by slow degrees, and wipes out his deeds of honour. It
seizes his failing limbs, chokes his panting utterance, and numbs his nimble wit. When a cough
is taken, when the skin itches with the scab, and the teeth are numb and hollow, and the stomach
turns squeamish,--then old age banishes the grace of youth, covers the complexion with decay,
and sows many a wrinkle in the dusky skin. Old age crushes noble arts, brings down the memorials
of men of old, and scorches ancient glories up; shatters wealth, hungrily gnaws away the worth
and good of virtue, turns athwart and disorders all things.

"I myself have felt the hurtful power of injurious age, I, dim-sighted, and hoarse in my tones
and in my chest; and all helpful things have turned to my hurt. Now my body is less nimble,
and I prop it up, leaning my faint limbs on the support of staves. Sightless I guide my steps
with two sticks, and follow the short path which the rod shows me, trusting more in the leading
of a stock than in my eyes. None takes any charge of me, and no man in the ranks brings comfort
to the veteran, unless, perchance, Hather is here, and succours his shattered friend. Whomsoever
Hather once thinks worthy of his duteous love, that man he attends continually with even zeal,
constant to his purpose, and fearing to break his early ties. He also often pays fit rewards
to those that have deserved well in war, and fosters their courage; he bestows dignities on
the brave, and honours his famous friends with gifts. Free with his wealth, he is fain to increase
with bounty the brightness of his name, and to surpass many of the mighty. Nor is he less in
war: his strength is equal to his goodness; he is swift in the fray, slow to waver, ready to
give battle; and he cannot turn his back when the foe bears him hard. But for me, if I remember
right, fate appointed at my birth that wars I should follow and in war I should die, that I
should mix in broils, watch in arms, and pass a life of bloodshed. I was a man of camps, and
rested not; hating peace, I grew old under thy standard, O War-god, in utmost peril; conquering
fear, I thought it comely to fight, shameful to loiter, and noble to kill and kill again, to
be for ever slaughtering! Oft have I seen the stern kings meet in war, seen shield and helmet
bruised, and the fields redden with blood, and the cuirass broken by the spear-point, and the
corselets all around giving at the thrust of the steel, and the wild beasts battening on the
unburied soldier. Here, as it chanced, one that attempted a mighty thing, a strong-handed warrior,
fighting against the press of the foe, smote through the mail that covered my head, pierced
my helmet, and plunged his blade into my crest. This sword also hath often been driven by my
right hand in war, and, once unsheathed, hath cleft the skin and bitten into the skull."

Hather, in answer, sang as follows:

"Whence comest thou, who art used to write the poems of thy land, leaning thy wavering steps
on a frail staff? Or whither dost thou speed, who art the readiest bard of the Danish muse?
All the glory of thy great strength is faded and lost; the hue is banished from thy face, the
joy is gone out of thy soul; the voice has left thy throat, and is hoarse and dull; thy body
has lost its former stature; the decay of death begins, and has wasted thy features and thy
force. As a ship wearies, buffeted by continual billows, even so old age, gendered by a long
course of years, brings forth bitter death; and the life falls when its strength is done, and
suffers the loss of its ancient lot. Famous old man, who has told thee that thou mayst not
duly follow the sports of youth, or fling balls, or bite and eat the nut? I think it were better
for thee now to sell thy sword, and buy a carriage wherein to ride often, or a horse easy on
the bit, or at the same cost to purchase a light cart. It will be more fitting for beasts of
burden to carry weak old men, when their steps fail them; the wheel, driving round and round,
serves for him whose foot totters feebly. But if perchance thou art loth to sell the useless
steel, thy sword, if it be not for sale, shall be taken from thee and shall slay thee."

Starkad answered: "Wretch, thy glib lips scatter idle words, unfit for the ears of the good.
Why seek the gifts to reward that guidance, which thou shouldst have offered for naught? Surely
I will walk afoot, and will not basely give up my sword and buy the help of a stranger; nature
has given me the right of passage, and hath bidden me trust in my own feet. Why mock and jeer
with insolent speech at him whom thou shouldst have offered to guide upon his way? Why give
to dishonour my deeds of old, which deserve the memorial of fame? Why requite my service with
reproach? Why pursue with jeers the old man mighty in battle, and put to shame my unsurpassed
honours and illustrious deeds, belittling my glories and girding at my prowess? For what valour
of thine dost thou demand my sword, which thy strength does not deserve? It befits not the
right hand or the unwarlike side of a herdsman, who is wont to make his peasant-music on the
pipe, to see to the flock, to keep the herds in the fields. Surely among the henchmen, close
to the greasy pot, thou dippest thy crust in the bubbles of the foaming pan, drenching a meagre
slice in the rich, oily fat, and stealthily, with thirsty finger, licking the warm juice; more
skilled to spread thy accustomed cloak on the ashes, to sleep on the hearth, and slumber all
day long, and go busily about the work of the reeking kitchen, than to make the brave blood
flow with thy shafts in war. Men think thee a hater of the light and a lover of a filthy hole,
a wretched slave of thy belly, like a whelp who licks the coarse grain, husk and all.

"By heaven, thou didst not try to rob me of my sword when thrice at great peril I fought (for?)
the son of Ole. For truly, in that array, my hand either broke the sword or shattered the obstacle,
so heavy was the blow of the smiter. What of the day when I first taught them, to run with
wood-shod feet over the shore of the Kurlanders, and the path bestrewn with countless points?
For when I was going to the fields studded with calthrops, I guarded their wounded feet with
clogs below them. After this I slew Hame, who fought me mightily; and soon, with the captain
Rin the son of Flebak, I crushed the Kurlanders, yea, or all the tribes Esthonia breeds, and
thy peoples, O Semgala! Then I attacked the men of Tellemark, and took thence my head bloody
with bruises, shattered with mallets, and smitten with the welded weapons. Here first I learnt
how strong was the iron wrought on the anvil, or what valour the common people had. Also it
was my doing that the Teutons were punished, when, in avenging my lord, I laid low over their
cups thy sons, O Swerting, who were guilty of the wicked slaughter of Frode.

"Not less was the deed when, for the sake of a beloved maiden, I slew nine brethren in one
fray;--witness the spot, which was consumed by the bowels that left me, and brings not forth
the grain anew on its scorched sod. And soon, when Ker the captain made ready a war by sea,
with a noble army we beat his serried ships. Then I put Waske to death, and punished the insolent
smith by slashing his hinder parts; and with the sword I slew Wisin, who from the snowy rocks
blunted the spears. Then I slew the four sons of Ler, and the champions of Permland; and then
having taken the chief of the Irish race, I rifled the wealth of Dublin; and our courage shall
ever remain manifest by the trophies of Bravalla. Why do I linger? Countless are the deeds
of my bravery, and when I review the works of my hands I fail to number them to the full. The
whole is greater than I can tell. My work is too great for fame, and speech serves not for
my doings."

So sang Starkad. At last, when he found by their talk that Hather was the son of Hlenne, and
saw that the youth was of illustrious birth, he offered him his throat to smite, bidding him
not to shrink from punishing the slayer of his father. He promised him that if he did so he
should possess the gold which he had himself received from Hlenne. And to enrage his heart
more vehemently against him, he is said to have harangued him as follows:

"Moreover, Hather, I robbed thee of thy father Hlenne; requite me this, I pray, and strike
down the old man who longs to die; aim at my throat with the avenging steel. For my soul chooses
the service of a noble smiter, and shrinks to ask its doom at a coward's hand. Righteously
may a man choose to forstall the ordinance of doom. What cannot be escaped it will be lawful
also to anticipate. The fresh tree must be fostered, the old one hewn down. He is nature's
instrument who destroys what is near its doom and strikes down what cannot stand. Death is
best when it is sought: and when the end is loved, life is wearisome. Let not the troubles
of age prolong a miserable lot."

So saying, he took money from his pouch and gave it him. But Hather, desiring as much to enjoy
the gold as to accomplish vengeance for his father, promised that he would comply with his
prayer, and would not refuse the reward. Starkad eagerly handed him the sword, and at once
stooped his neck beneath it, counselling him not to do the smiter's work timidly, or use the
sword like a woman; and telling him that if, when he had killed him, he could spring between
the head and the trunk before the corpse fell, he would be rendered proof against arms. It
is not known whether he said this in order to instruct his executioner or to punish him, for
perhaps, as he leapt, the bulk of the huge body would have crushed him. So Hather smote sharply
with the sword and hacked off the head of the old man. When the severed head struck the ground,
it is said to have bitten the earth; thus the fury of the dying lips declared the fierceness
of the soul. But the smiter, thinking that the promise hid some treachery, warily refrained
from leaping. Had he done so rashly, perhaps he would have been crushed by the corpse as it
fell, and have paid with his own life for the old man's murder. But he would not allow so great
a champion to lie unsepulchred, and had his body buried in the field that is commonly called
Rolung.

Now Omund, as I have heard, died most tranquilly, while peace was unbroken, leaving two sons
and two daughters. The eldest of these, SIWARD, came to the throne by right of birth, while
his brother Budle was still of tender years. At this time Gotar, King of the Swedes, conceived
boundless love for one of the daughters of Omund, because of the report of her extraordinary
beauty, and entrusted one Ebb, the son of Sibb, with the commission of asking for the maiden.
Ebb did his work skilfully, and brought back the good news that the girl had consented. Nothing
was now lacking to Gotar's wishes but the wedding; but, as he feared to hold this among strangers,
he demanded that his betrothed should be sent to him in charge of Ebb, whom he had before used
as envoy.

Ebb was crossing Halland with a very small escort, and went for a night's lodging to a country
farm, where the dwellings of two brothers faced one another on the two sides of a river. Now
these men used to receive folk hospitably and then murder them, but were skilful to hide their
brigandage under a show of generosity. For they had hung on certain hidden chains, in a lofty
part of the house, an oblong beam like a press, and furnished it with a steel point; they used
to lower this in the night by letting down the fastenings, and cut off the heads of those that
lay below. Many had they beheaded in this way with the hanging mass. So when Ebb and his men
had been feasted abundantly, the servants laid them out a bed near the hearth, so that by the
swing of the treacherous beam they might mow off their heads, which faced the fire. When they
departed, Ebb, suspecting the contrivance slung overhead, told his men to feign slumber and
shift their bodies, saying that it would be very wholesome for them to change their place.

Now among these were some who despised the orders which the others obeyed, and lay unmoved,
each in the spot where he had chanced to lie down. Then towards the mirk of night the heavy
hanging machine was set in motion by the doers of the treachery. Loosened from the knots of
its fastening, it fell violently on the ground, and slew those beneath it. Thereupon those
who had the charge of committing the crime brought in a light, that they might learn clearly
what had happened, and saw that Ebb, on whose especial account they had undertaken the affair,
had wisely been equal to the danger. He straightway set on them and punished them with death;
and also, after losing his men in the mutual slaughter, he happened to find a vessel, crossed
a river full of blocks of ice, and announced to Gotar the result, not so much of his mission
as of his mishap.

Gotar judged that this affair had been inspired by Siward, and prepared to avenge his wrongs
by arms. Siward, defeated by him in Halland, retreated into Jutland, the enemy having taken
his sister. Here he conquered the common people of the Sclavs, who ventured to fight without
a leader; and he won as much honour from this victory as he had got disgrace by his flight.
But a little afterwards, the men whom he had subdued when they were ungeneraled, found a general
and defeated Siward in Funen. Several times he fought them in Jutland, but with ill-success.
The result was that he lost both Skaane and Jutland, and only retained the middle of his realm
without the head, like the fragments of some body that had been consumed away. His son Jarmerik
(Eormunrec), with his child-sisters, fell into the hands of the enemy; one of these was sold
to the Germans, the other to the Norwegians; for in old time marriages were matters of purchase.
Thus the kingdom of the Danes, which had been enlarged with such valour, made famous by such
ancestral honours, and enriched by so many conquests, fell, all by the sloth of one man, from
the most illustrious fortune and prosperity into such disgrace that it paid the tribute which
it used to exact. But Siward, too often defeated and guilty of shameful flights, could not
endure, after that glorious past, to hold the troubled helm of state any longer in this shameful
condition of his land; and, fearing that living longer might strip him of his last shred of
glory, he hastened to win an honourable death in battle. For his soul could not forget his
calamity, it was fain to cast off its sickness, and was racked with weariness of life. So much
did he abhor the light of life in his longing to wipe out his shame. So he mustered his army
for battle, and openly declared war with one Simon, who was governor of Skaane under Gotar.
This war he pursued with stubborn rashness; he slew Simon, and ended his own life amid a great
slaughter of his foes. Yet his country could not be freed from the burden of the tribute.

Jarmerik, meantime, with his foster-brother of the same age as himself, Gunn, was living in
prison, in charge of Ismar, the King of the Sclavs. At last he was taken out and put to agriculture,
doing the work of a peasant. So actively did he manage this matter that he was transferred
and made master of the royal slaves. As he likewise did this business most uprightly, he was
enrolled in the band of the king's retainers. Here he bore himself most pleasantly as courtiers
use, and was soon taken into the number of the king's friends and obtained the first place
in his intimacy; thus, on the strength of a series of great services, he passed from the lowest
estate to the most distinguished height of honour. Also, loth to live a slack and enfeebled
youth, he trained himself to the pursuits of war, enriching his natural gifts by diligence.
All men loved Jarmerik, and only the queen mistrusted the young man's temper. A sudden report
told them that the king's brother had died. Ismar, wishing to give his body a splendid funeral,
prepared a banquet of royal bounty to increase the splendour of the obsequies.

But Jarmerik, who used at other times to look after the household affairs together with the
queen, began to cast about for means of escape; for a chance seemed to be offered by the absence
of the king. For he saw that even in the lap of riches he would be the wretched thrall of a
king, and that he would draw, as it were, his very breath on sufferance and at the gift of
another. Moreover, though he held the highest offices with the king, he thought that freedom
was better than delights, and burned with a mighty desire to visit his country and learn his
lineage. But, knowing that the queen had provided sufficient guards to see that no prisoner
escaped, he saw that he must approach by craft where he could not arrive by force. So he plaited
one of those baskets of rushes and withies, shaped like a man, with which countrymen used to
scare the birds from the corn, and put a live dog in it; then he took off his own clothes,
and dressed it in them, to give a more plausible likeness to a human being. Then he broke into
the private treasury of the king, took out the money, and hid himself in places of which he
alone knew.

Meantime Gunn, whom he had told to conceal the absence of his friend, took the basket into
the palace and stirred up the dog to bark; and when the queen asked what this was, he answered
that Jarmerik was out of his mind and howling. She, beholding the effigy, was deceived by the
likeness, and ordered that the madman should be cast out of the house. Then Gunn took the effigy
out and put it to bed, as though it were his distraught friend. But towards night he plied
the watch bountifully with wine and festal mirth, cut off their heads as they slept, and set
them at their groins, in order to make their slaying more shameful. The queen, roused by the
din, and wishing to learn the reason of it, hastily rushed to the doors. But while she unwarily
put forth her head, the sword of Gunn suddenly pierced her through. Feeling a mortal wound,
she sank, turned her eyes on her murderer, and said, "Had it been granted me to live unscathed,
no screen or treachery should have let thee leave this land unpunished." A flood of such threats
against her slayer poured from her dying lips.

Then Jarmerik, with Gunn, the partner of his noble deed, secretly set fire to the tent wherein
the king was celebrating with a banquet the obsequies of his brother; all the company were
overcome with liquor. The fire filled the tent and spread all about; and some of them, shaking
off the torpor of drink, took horse and pursued those who had endangered them. But the young
men fled at first on the beasts they had taken; and at last, when these were exhausted with
their long gallop, took to flight on foot. They were all but caught, when a river saved them.
For they crossed a bridge, of which, in order to delay the pursuer, they first cut the timbers
down to the middle, thus making it not only unequal to a burden, but ready to come down; then
they retreated into a dense morass.

The Sclavs pressed on them hard and, not forseeing the danger, unwarily put the weight of their
horses on the bridge; the flooring sank, and they were shaken off and flung into the river.
But, as they swam up to the bank, they were met by Gunn and Jarmerik, and either drowned or
slain. Thus the young men showed great cunning, and did a deed beyond their years, being more
like sagacious old men than runaway slaves, and successfully achieving their shrewd design.
When they reached the strand they seized a vessel chance threw in their way, and made for the
deep. The barbarians who pursued them, tried, when they saw them sailing off, to bring them
back by shouting promises after them that they should be kings if they returned; "for, by the
public statute of the ancients, the succession was appointed to the slayers of the kings."
As they retreated, their ears were long deafened by the Sclavs obstinately shouting their treacherous
promises.

At this time BUDLE, the brother of Siward, was Regent over the Danes, who forced him to make
over the kingdom to JARMERIK when he came; so that Budle fell from a king into a common man.
At the same time Gotar charged Sibb with debauching his sister, and slew him. Sibb's kindred,
much angered by his death, came wailing to Jarmerik, and promised to attack Gotar with him,
in order to avenge their kinsman. They kept their promise well, for Jarmerik, having overthrown
Gotar by their help, gained Sweden. Thus, holding the sovereignty of both nations, he was encouraged
by his increased power to attack the Sclavs, forty of whom he took and hung with a wolf tied
to each of them. This kind of punishment was assigned of old to those who slew their own kindred;
but he chose to inflict it upon enemies, that all might see plainly, just from their fellowship
with ruthless beasts, how grasping they had shown themselves towards the Danes.

When Jarmerik had conquered the country, he posted garrisons in all the fitting places, and
departing thence, he made a slaughter of the Sembs and the Kurlanders, and many nations of
the East. The Sclavs, thinking that this employment of the king gave them a chance of revolting,
killed the governors whom he had appointed, and ravaged Denmark. Jarmerik, on his way back
from roving, chanced to intercept their fleet, and destroyed it, a deed which added honour
to his roll of conquests. He also put their nobles to death in a way that one would weep to
see; namely, by first passing thongs through their legs, and then tying them to the hoofs of
savage bulls; then hounds set on them and dragged them into miry swamps. This deed took the
edge off the valour of the Sclavs, and they obeyed the authority of the king in fear and trembling.

Jarmerik, enriched with great spoils, wished to provide a safe storehouse for his booty, and
built on a lofty hill a treasure-house of marvellous handiwork. Gathering sods, he raised a
mound, laying a mass of rocks for the foundation, and girt the lower part with a rampart, the
centre with rooms, and the top with battlements. All round he posted a line of sentries without
a break. Four huge gates gave free access on the four sides; and into this lordly mansion he
heaped all his splendid riches. Having thus settled his affairs at home, he again turned his
ambition abroad. He began to voyage, and speedily fought a naval battle with four brothers
whom he met on the high seas, Hellespontines by race, and veteran rovers. After this battle
had lasted three days, he ceased fighting, having bargained for their sister and half the tribute
which they had imposed on those they had conquered.

After this, Bikk, the son of the King of the Livonians, escaped from the captivity in which
he lay under these said brothers, and went to Jarmerik. But he did not forget his wrongs, Jarmerik
having long before deprived him of his own brothers. He was received kindly by the king, in
all whose secret counsels he soon came to have a notable voice; and, as soon as he found the
king pliable to his advice in all things, he led him, when his counsel was asked, into the
most abominable acts, and drove him to commit crimes and infamies. Thus he sought some device
to injure the king by a feint of loyalty, and tried above all to steel him against his nearest
of blood; attempting to accomplish the revenge of his brother by guile, since he could not
by force. So it came to pass that the king embraced filthy vices instead of virtues, and made
himself generally hated by the cruel deeds which he committed at the instance of his treacherous
adviser. Even the Sclavs began to rise against him; and, as a means of quelling them, he captured
their leaders, passed a rope through their shanks, and delivered them to be torn asunder by
horses pulling different ways. So perished their chief men, punished for their stubbornness
of spirit by having their bodies rent apart. This kept the Sclavs duly obedient in unbroken
and steady subjugation.

Meantime, the sons of Jarmerik's sister, who had all been born and bred in Germany, took up
arms, on the strength of their grandsire's title, against their uncle, contending that they
had as good a right to the throne as he. The king demolished their strongholds in Germany with
engines, blockaded or took several towns, and returned home with a bloodless victory. The Hellespontines
came to meet him, proffering their sister for the promised marriage. After this had been celebrated,
at Bikk's prompting he again went to Germany, took his nephews in war, and incontinently hanged
them. He also got together the chief men under the pretence of a banquet and had them put to
death in the same fashion.

Meantime, the king appointed Broder, his son by another marriage, to have charge over his stepmother,
a duty which he fulfilled with full vigilance and integrity. But Bikk accused this man to his
father of incest; and, to conceal the falsehood of the charge, suborned witnesses against him.
When the plea of the accusation had been fully declared, Broder could not bring any support
for his defence, and his father bade his friends pass sentence upon the convicted man, thinking
it less impious to commit the punishment proper for his son to the judgment of others. All
thought that he deserved outlawry except Bikk, who did not shrink from giving a more terrible
vote against his life, and declaring that the perpetrator of an infamous seduction ought to
be punished with hanging. But lest any should think that this punishment was due to the cruelty
of his father, Bikk judged that, when he had been put in the noose, the servants should hold
him up on a beam put beneath him, so that, when weariness made them take their hands from the
burden, they might be as good as guilty of the young man's death, and by their own fault exonerate
the king from an unnatural murder. He also pretended that, unless the accused were punished,
he would plot against his father's life. The adulteress Swanhild, he said, ought to suffer
a shameful end, trampled under the hoofs of beasts.

The king yielded to Bikk; and, when his son was to be hanged, he made the bystanders hold him
up by means of a plank, that he might not be choked. Thus his throat was only a little squeezed,
the knot was harmless, and it was but a punishment in show. But the king had the queen tied
very tight on the ground, and delivered her to be crushed under the hoofs of horses. The story
goes that she was so beautiful, that even the beasts shrank from mangling limbs so lovely with
their filthy feet. The king, divining that this proclaimed the innocence of his wife, began
to repent of his error, and hastened to release the slandered lady. But meantime Bikk rushed
up, declaring that when she was on her back she held off the beasts by awful charms, and could
only be crushed if she lay on her face; for he knew that her beauty saved her. When the body
of the queen was placed in this manner, the herd of beasts was driven upon it, and trod it
down deep with their multitude of feet. Such was the end of Swanhild.

Meantime, the favourite dog of Broder came creeping to the king making a sort of moan, and
seemed to bewail its master's punishment; and his hawk, when it was brought in, began to pluck
out its breast-feathers with its beak. The king took its nakedness as an omen of his bereavement,
to frustrate which he quickly sent men to take his son down from the noose: for he divined
by the featherless bird that he would be childless unless he took good heed. Thus Broder was
freed from death, and Bikk, fearing he would pay the penalty of an informer, went and told
the men of the Hellespont that Swanhild had been abominably slain by her husband. When they
set sail to avenge their sister, he came back to Jarmerik, and told him that the Hellespontines
were preparing war.

The king thought that it would be safer to fight with walls than in the field, and retreated
into the stronghold which he had built. To stand the siege, he filled its inner parts with
stores, and its battlements with men-at-arms. Targets and shields flashing with gold were hung
round and adorned the topmost circle of the building.

It happened that the Hellespontines, before sharing their booty, accused a great band of their
men of embezzling, and put them to death. Having now destroyed so large a part of their forces
by internecine slaughter, they thought that their strength was not equal to storming the palace,
and consulted a sorceress named Gudrun. She brought it to pass that the defenders of the king's
side were suddenly blinded and turned their arms against one another. When the Hellespontines
saw this, they brought up a shield-mantlet, and seized the approaches of the gates. Then they
tore up the posts, burst into the building, and hewed down the blinded ranks of the enemy.
In this uproar Odin appeared, and, making for the thick of the ranks of the fighters, restored
by his divine power to the Danes that vision which they had lost by sleights; for he ever cherished
them with fatherly love. He instructed them to shower stones to batter the Hellespontines,
who used spells to harden their bodies against weapons. Thus both companies slew one another
and perished. Jarmerik lost both feet and both hands, and his trunk was rolled among the dead.
BRODER, little fit for it, followed him as king.

The next king was SIWALD. His son SNIO took vigorously to roving in his father's old age, and
not only preserved the fortunes of his country, but even restored them, lessened as they were,
to their former estate. Likewise, when he came to the sovereignty, he crushed the insolence
of the champions Eskil and Alkil, and by this conquest reunited to his country Skaane, which
had been severed from the general jurisdiction of Denmark. At last he conceived a passion for
the daughter of the King of the Goths; it was returned, and he sent secret messengers to seek
a chance of meeting her. These men were intercepted by the father of the damsel and hanged:
thus paying dearly for their rash mission. Snio, wishing to avenge their death, invaded Gothland.
Its king met him with his forces, and the aforesaid champions challenged him to send strong
men to fight. Snio laid down as condition of the duel, that each of the two kings should either
lose his own empire or gain that of the other, according to the fortune of the champions, and
that the kingdom of the conquered should be staked as the prize of the victory. The result
was that the King of the Goths was beaten by reason of the ill-success of his defenders, and
had to quit his kingdom for the Danes. Snio, learning that this king's daughter had been taken
away at the instance of her father to wed the King of the Swedes, sent a man clad in ragged
attire, who used to ask alms on the public roads, to try her mind. And while he lay, as beggars
do, by the threshold, he chanced to see the queen, and whined in a weak voice, "Snio loves
thee." She feigned not to have heard the sound that stole on her ears, and neither looked nor
stepped back, but went on to the palace, then returned straightway, and said in a low whisper,
which scarcely reached his ears, "I love him who loves me"; and having said this she walked away.

The beggar rejoiced that she had returned a word of love, and, as he sat on the next day at
the gate, when the queen came up, he said, briefly as ever, "Wishes should have a tryst." Again
she shrewdly caught his cunning speech, and passed on, dissembling wholly. A little later she
passed by her questioner, and said that she would shortly go to Bocheror; for this was the
spot to which she meant to flee. And when the beggar heard this, he insisted, with his wonted
shrewd questions, upon being told a fitting time for the tryst. The woman was as cunning as
he, and as little clear of speech, and named as quickly as she could the beginning of the winter.

Her train, who had caught a flying word of this love-message, took her great cleverness for
the raving of utter folly. And when Snio had been told all this by the beggar, he contrived
to carry the queen off in a vessel; for she got away under pretence of bathing, and took her
husband's treasures. After this there were constant wars between Snio and the King of Sweden,
whereof the issue was doubtful and the victory changeful; the one king seeking to regain his
lawful, the other to keep his unlawful love.

