  It is the intent to admit to the series only such tales as have for
  years or for generations commended themselves not only to the
  fastidious and the critical, but also to the great multitude of the
  refined reading public,--tales, in short, which combine purity and
  classical beauty of style with perennial popularity.

THE BOOK-LOVER. A Guide to the Best Reading. By James Baldwin, Ph.D. Sixth edition, 16mo, cloth,
gilt top, 201 pages. Price, $1.00.

                  In half calf or half morocco, $2.75.

  Of this book, on the best in English Literature, which has already been
  declared of the highest value by the testimony of the best critics in
  this country, an edition of one thousand copies has just been ordered
  for London, the home of English Literature,--a compliment of which its
  scholarly western author may justly be proud.

  We know of no work of the kind which gives so much useful information
  in so small a space.--Evening Telegram, New York.

  Sound in theory and in a practical point of view. The courses of
  reading laid down are made of good books, and in general, of the
  best.--Independent, New York.

  Mr. Baldwin has written in this monograph a delightful eulogium of
  books and their manifold influence, and has gained therein two classes
  of readers,--the scholarly class, to which he belongs, and the
  receptive class, which he has benefited.--Evening Mail and Express,
  New York. 

  I was much impressed by his letters; but Wainwright was about the only
  other man who was. And as Sims proved to be mistaken in his belief
  that the French had taught the Spaniards how to shoot, and as the Spaniards
  proved to be much worse even than we were, in the service generally
  Sims was treated as an alarmist. But although I at first partly acquiesced
  in this view, I grew uneasy when I studied the small proportion of hits
  to shots made by our vessels in battle.
  

WE TWO ALONE IN EUROPE. By Mary L. Ninde. Illustrated from Original Designs.

                     12mo, 348 pages, price, $1.50.

  The foreign travels which gave rise to this volume were of a novel and
  perhaps unprecedented kind. Two young American girls started for "the
  grand tour" with the father of one of them, and he being compelled to
  return home from London they were courageous enough to continue their
  journeyings alone. They spent two years in travel,--going as far north
  as the North Cape and south to the Nile, and including in their
  itinerary St. Petersburg and Moscow. Miss Ninde's narrative is written
  in a fresh and sprightly but unsensational style, which, with the
  unusual experiences portrayed, renders the work quite unlike the
  ordinary books of travel.

  It is a narrative told so naturally and so vividly that the two gentle
  travellers do not seem to be "alone," but to have taken at least the
  reader along with them.... It is filled with so many interesting
  glimpses of sights and scenes in many lands as to render it thoroughly
  entertaining.--The Congregationalist, Boston.

  As the work of a bright American girl, the book is sure to command wide
  attention. The volume is handsomely bound and copiously illustrated
  with views drawn, if we mistake not, by the author's own fair hands, so
  well do they accord with the vivacious spirit of her
  narrative.--Times, Troy, New York.

THE HUMBLER POETS. A Collection of Newspaper and Periodical Verse. 1870 to 1885. By Slason
Thompson. Crown 8vo, 459 pages, cloth, gilt top. Price, $2.00.

                  In half calf or half morocco, $4.00.

