THE GENTLEMAN FROM INDIANA

By Booth Tarkington

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I. THE YOUNG MAN WHO CAME TO STAY
    II. THE STRANGE LADY
   III. LONESOMENESS
    IV. THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER
     V. AT THE PASTURE BARS: ELDER-BUSHES MAY HAVE STINGS
    VI. JUNE
   VII. MORNING: "SOME IN RAGS AND SOME IN TAGS AND SOME IN VELVET GOWNS"
  VIII. GLAD AFTERNOON: THE GIRL BY THE BLUE TENT POLE
    IX. NIGHT: IT IS BAD LUCK TO SING BEFORE BREAKFAST
     X. THE COURT-HOUSE BELL
    XI. JOHN BROWN'S BODY
   XII. JERRY THE TELLER
  XIII. JAMES FISBEE
   XIV. A RESCUE
    XV. NETTLES
   XVI. PRETTY MARQUISE
  XVII. HELEN'S TOAST
 XVIII. THE TREACHERY OF H. FISBEE
   XIX. THE GREAT HARKLESS COMES HOME

CHAPTER I. THE YOUNG MAN WHO CAME TO STAY

There is a fertile stretch of flat lands in Indiana where unagrarian Eastern travellers, glancing
from car-windows, shudder and return their eyes to interior upholstery, preferring even the
swaying caparisons of a Pullman to the monotony without. The landscape lies interminably level:
bleak in winter, a desolate plain of mud and snow; hot and dusty in summer, in its flat lonesomeness,
miles on miles with not one cool hill slope away from the sun. The persistent tourist who seeks
for signs of man in this sad expanse perceives a reckless amount of rail fence; at intervals
a large barn; and, here and there, man himself, incurious, patient, slow, looking up from the
fields apathetically as the Limited flies by. Widely separated from each other are small frame
railway stations--sometimes with no other building in sight, which indicates that somewhere
behind the adjacent woods a few shanties and thin cottages are grouped about a couple of brick
stores.

On the station platforms there are always two or three wooden packing-boxes, apparently marked
for travel, but they are sacred from disturbance and remain on the platform forever; possibly
the right train never comes along. They serve to enthrone a few station loafers, who look out
from under their hat-brims at the faces in the car-windows with the languid scorn a permanent
fixture always has for a transient, and the pity an American feels for a fellow-being who does
not live in his town. Now and then the train passes a town built scatteringly about a court-house,
with a mill or two humming near the tracks. This is a county-seat, and the inhabitants and
the local papers refer to it confidently as "our city." The heart of the flat lands is a central
area called Carlow County, and the county-seat of Carlow is a town unhappily named in honor
of its first settler, William Platt, who christened it with his blood. Natives of this place
have sometimes remarked, easily, that their city had a population of from five to six thousand
souls. It is easy to forgive them for such statements; civic pride is a virtue.

The social and business energy of Plattville concentrates on the Square. Here, in summer-time,
the gentlemen are wont to lounge from store to store in their shirt sleeves; and here stood
the old, red-brick court-house, loosely fenced in a shady grove of maple and elm--"slipp'ry
ellum"--called the "Court-House Yard." When the sun grew too hot for the dry-goods box whittlers
in front of the stores around the Square and the occupants of the chairs in front of the Palace
Hotel on the corner, they would go across and drape themselves over the court-house fence,
under the trees, and leisurely carve there initials on the top board. The farmers hitched their
teams to the fence, for there were usually loafers energetic enough to shout "Whoa!" if the
flies worried the horses beyond patience. In the yard, amongst the weeds and tall, unkept grass,
chickens foraged all day long; the fence was so low that the most matronly hen flew over with
propriety; and there were gaps that accommodated the passage of itinerant pigs. Most of the
latter, however, preferred the cool wallows of the less important street corners. Here and
there a big dog lay asleep in the middle of the road, knowing well that the easy-going Samaritan,
in his case, would pass by on the other side.

Only one street attained to the dignity of a name--Main Street, which formed the north side
of the Square. In Carlow County, descriptive location is usually accomplished by designating
the adjacent, as, "Up at Bardlocks'," "Down by Schofields'," "Right where Hibbards live," "Acrost
from Sol. Tibbs's," or, "Other side of Jones's field." In winter, Main Street was a series
of frozen gorges land hummocks; in fall and spring, a river of mud; in summer, a continuing
dust heap; it was the best street in Plattville.

The people lived happily; and, while the world whirled on outside, they were content with their
own. It would have moved their surprise as much as their indignation to hear themselves spoken
of as a "secluded community"; for they sat up all night to hear the vote of New York, every
campaign. Once when the President visited Rouen, seventy miles away, there were only few bankrupts
(and not a baby amongst them) left in the deserted homes of Carlow County. Everybody had adventures;
almost everybody saw the great man; and everybody was glad to get back home again. It was the
longest journey some of them ever set upon, and these, elated as they were over their travels,
determined to think twice ere they went that far from home another time.

On Saturdays, the farmers enlivened the commercial atmosphere of Plattville; and Miss Tibbs,
the postmaster's sister and clerk, used to make a point of walking up and down Main Street
as often as possible, to get a thrill in the realization of some poetical expressions that
haunted her pleasingly; phrases she had employed frequently in her poems for the "Carlow County
Herald." When thirty or forty country people were scattered along the sidewalks in front of
the stores on Main Street, she would walk at nicely calculated angles to the different groups
so as to leave as few gaps as possible between the figures, making them appear as near a solid
phalanx as she could. Then she would murmur to herself, with the accent of soulful revel, "The
thronged city streets," and, "Within the thronged city," or, "Where the thronging crowds were
swarming and the great cathedral rose." Although she had never been beyond Carlow and the bordering
counties in her life, all her poems were of city streets and bustling multitudes. She was one
of those who had been unable to join the excursion to Rouen when the President was there; but
she had listened avidly to her friends' descriptions of the crowds. Before that time her muse
had been sylvan, speaking of "Flow'rs of May," and hinting at thoughts that overcame her when
she roved the woodlands thro'; but now the inspiration was become decidedly municipal and urban,
evidently reluctant to depart beyond the retail portions of a metropolis. Her verses beginning,
"O, my native city, bride of Hibbard's winding stream,"--Hibbard's Creek runs west of Plattville,
except in time of drought--"When thy myriad lights are shining, and thy faces, like a dream,
Go flitting down thy sidewalks when their daily toil is done," were pronounced, at the time
of their publication, the best poem that had ever appeared in the "Herald."

This unlucky newspaper was a thorn in the side of every patriot of Carlow County. It was a
poor paper; everybody knew it was a poor paper; it was so poor that everybody admitted it was
a poor paper--worse, the neighboring county of Amo possessed a better paper, the "Amo Gazette."
The "Carlow County Herald" was so everlastingly bad that Plattville people bent their heads
bitterly and admitted even to citizens of Amo that the "Gazette" was the better paper. The
"Herald" was a weekly, issued on Saturday; sometimes it hung fire over Sunday and appeared
Monday evening. In their pride, the Carlow people supported the "Herald" loyally and long;
but finally subscriptions began to fall off and the "Gazette" gained them. It came to pass
that the "Herald" missed fire altogether for several weeks; then it came out feebly, two small
advertisements occupying the whole of the fourth page. It was breathing its last. The editor
was a clay-colored gentleman with a goatee, whose one surreptitious eye betokened both indolence
of disposition and a certain furtive shrewdness. He collected all the outstanding subscriptions
he could, on the morning of the issue just mentioned, and, thoughtfully neglecting several
items on the other side of the ledger, departed from Plattville forever.

The same afternoon a young man from the East alighted on the platform of the railway station,
north of the town, and, entering the rickety omnibus that lingered there, seeking whom it might
rattle to deafness, demanded to be driven to the Herald Building. It did not strike the driver
that the newcomer was precisely a gay young man when he climbed into the omnibus; but, an hour
later, as he stood in the doorway of the edifice he had indicated as his destination, depression
seemed to have settled into the marrow of his bones. Plattville was instantly alert to the
stranger's presence, and interesting conjectures were hazarded all day long at the back door
of Martin's Dry-Goods Emporium, where all the clerks from the stores around the Square came
to play checkers or look on at the game. (This was the club during the day; in the evening
the club and the game removed to the drug, book, and wall-paper store on the corner.) At supper,
the new arrival and his probable purposes were discussed over every table in the town. Upon
inquiry, he had informed Judd Bennett, the driver of the omnibus, that he had come to stay.
Naturally, such a declaration caused a sensation, as people did not come to Plattville to live,
except through the inadvertency of being born there. In addition, the young man's appearance
and attire were reported to be extraordinary. Many of the curious, among them most of the marriageable
females of the place, took occasion to pass and repass the sign of the "Carlow County Herald"
during the evening.

Meanwhile, the stranger was seated in the dingy office upstairs with his head bowed low on
his arms. Twilight stole through the dirty window-panes and faded into darkness. Night filled
the room. He did not move. The young man from the East had bought the "Herald" from an agent;
had bought it without ever having been within a hundred miles of Plattville. He had vastly
overpaid for it. Moreover, the price he had paid for it was all the money he had in the world.

The next morning he went bitterly to work. He hired a compositor from Rouen, a young man named
Parker, who set type all night long and helped him pursue advertisements all day. The citizens
shook their heads pessimistically. They had about given up the idea that the "Herald" could
ever amount to anything, and they betrayed an innocent, but caustic, doubt of ability in any
stranger.

One day the new editor left a note on his door; "Will return in fifteen minutes."

Mr. Rodney McCune, a politician from the neighboring county of Gaines, happening to be in Plattville
on an errand to his henchmen, found the note, and wrote beneath the message the scathing inquiry,
"Why?"

When he discovered this addendum, the editor smiled for the first time since his advent, and
reported the incident in his next issue, using the rubric, "Why Has the 'Herald' Returned to
Life?" as a text for a rousing editorial on "honesty in politics," a subject of which he already
knew something. The political district to which Carlow belonged was governed by a limited number
of gentlemen whose wealth was ever on the increase; and "honesty in politics" was a startling
conception to the minds of the passive and resigned voters, who discussed the editorial on
the street corners and in the stores. The next week there was another editorial, personal and
local in its application, and thereby it became evident that the new proprietor of the "Herald"
was a theorist who believed, in general, that a politician's honor should not be merely of
that middling healthy species known as "honor amongst politicians"; and, in particular, that
Rodney McCune should not receive the nomination of his party for Congress. Now, Mr. McCune
was the undoubted dictator of the district, and his followers laughed at the stranger's fantastic
onset.

But the editor was not content with the word of print; he hired a horse and rode about the
country, and (to his own surprise) he proved to be an adaptable young man who enjoyed exercise
with a pitchfork to the farmer's profit while the farmer talked. He talked little himself,
but after listening an hour or so, he would drop a word from the saddle as he left; and then,
by some surprising wizardry, the farmer, thinking over the interview, decided there was some
sense in what that young fellow said, and grew curious to see what the young fellow had further
to say in the "Herald."

Politics is the one subject that goes to the vitals of every rural American; and a Hoosier
will talk politics after he is dead.

Everybody read the campaign editorials, and found them interesting, although there was no one
who did not perceive the utter absurdity of a young stranger's dropping into Carlow and involving
himself in a party fight against the boss of the district. It was entirely a party fight; for,
by grace of the last gerrymander, the nomination carried with it the certainty of election.
A week before the convention there came a provincial earthquake; the news passed from man to
man in awe-struck whispers--McCune had withdrawn his name, making the hollowest of excuses
to his cohorts. Nothing was known of the real reason for his disordered retreat, beyond the
fact that he had been in Plattville on the morning before his withdrawal and had issued from
a visit to the "Herald" office in a state of palsy. Mr. Parker, the Rouen printer, had been
present at the close of the interview; but he held his peace at the command of his employer.
He had been called into the sanctum, and had found McCune, white and shaking, leaning on the desk.

"Parker," said the editor, exhibiting a bundle of papers he held in his hand, "I want you to
witness a verbal contract between Mr. McCune and myself. These papers are an affidavit and
copies of some records of a street-car company which obtained a charter while Mr McCune was
in the State legislature. They were sent to me by a man I do not know, an anonymous friend
of Mr. McCune's; in fact, a friend he seems to have lost. On consideration of our not printing
these papers, Mr. McCune agrees to retire from politics for good. You understand, if he ever
lifts his head again, politically, We publish them, and the courts will do the rest. Now, in
case anything should happen to me----"

"Something will happen to you, all right," broke out McCune. "You can bank on that, you black----"

"Come," the editor interrupted, not unpleasantly "why should there be anything personal, in
all this? I don't recognize you as my private enemy--not at all; and I think you are getting
off rather easily; aren't you? You stay out of politics, and everything will be comfortable.
You ought never to have been in it, you see. It's a mistake not to keep square, because in
the long run somebody is sure to give you away--like the fellow who sent me these. You promise
to hold to a strictly private life?"

"You're a traitor to the party," groaned the other, "but you only wait----"

The editor smiled sadly. "Wait nothing. Don't threaten, man. Go home to your wife. I'll give
you three to one she'll be glad you are out of it."

"I'll give you three to one," said McCune, "that the White Caps will get you if you stay in
Carlow. You want to look out for yourself, I tell you, my smart boy!"

"Good-day, Mr. McCune," was the answer. "Let me have your note of withdrawal before you leave
town this afternoon." The young man paused a moment, then extended his hand, as he said: "Shake
hands, won't you? I--I haven't meant to be too hard on you. I hope things will seem easier
and gayer to you before long; and if--if anything should turn up that I can do for you in a
private way, I'll be very glad, you know. Good-by."

The sound of the "Herald's" victory went over the State. The paper came out regularly. The
townsfolk bought it and the farmers drove in for it. Old subscribers came back. Old advertisers
renewed. The "Herald" began to sell in Amo, and Gaines County people subscribed. Carlow folk
held up their heads when journalism was mentioned. Presently the "Herald" announced a news
connection with Rouen, and with that, and the aid of "patent insides," began an era of three
issues a week, appearing on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. The Plattville Brass Band serenaded
the editor.

During the second month of the new regime of the "Herald," the working force of the paper received
an addition. One night the editor found some barroom loafers tormenting a patriarchal old man
who had a magnificent head and a grand white beard. He had been thrown out of a saloon, and
he was drunk with the drunkenness of three weeks steady pouring. He propped himself against
a wall and reproved his tormentors in Latin. "I'm walking your way, Mr. Fisbee," remarked the
journalist, hooking his arm into the old man's. "Suppose we leave our friends here and go home?"

Mr. Fisbee was the one inhabitant of the town who had an unknown past; no one knew more about
him than that he had been connected with a university somewhere, and had travelled in unheard-of
countries before he came to Plattville. A glamour of romance was thrown about him by the gossips,
to whom he ever proved a fund of delightful speculation. There was a dark, portentous secret
in his life, it was agreed; an opinion not too well confirmed by the old man's appearance.
His fine eyes had a pathetic habit of wandering to the horizon in a questioning fashion that
had a queer sort of hopelessness in it, as if his quest were one for the Holy Grail, perhaps;
and his expression was mild, vague, and sad. He had a look of race and blood; and yet, at the
first glance, one saw that he was lost in dreams, and one guessed that the dreams would never
be of great practicability in their application. Some such impression of Fisbee was probably
what caused the editor of the "Herald" to nickname him (in his own mind) "The White Knight,"
and to conceive a strong, if whimsical, fancy for him.

Old Fisbee had come (from nobody knew where) to Plattville to teach, and had been principal
of the High School for ten years, instructing his pupils after a peculiar fashion of his own,
neglecting the ordinary courses of High School instruction to lecture on archaeology to the
dumfounded scholars; growing year by year more forgetful and absent, lost in his few books
and his own reflections, until, though undeniably a scholar, he had been discharged for incompetency.
He was old; he had no money and no way to make money; he could find nothing to do. The blow
had seemed to daze him for a time; then he began to drop in at the hotel bar, where Wilkerson,
the professional drunkard, favored him with his society. The old man understood; he knew it
was the beginning of the end. He sold his books in order to continue his credit at the Palace
bar, and once or twice, unable to proceed to his own dwelling, spent the night in a lumber
yard, piloted thither by the hardier veteran, Wilkerson.

The morning after the editor took him home, Fisbee appeared at the "Herald" office in a new
hat and a decent suit of black. He had received his salary in advance, his books had been repurchased,
and he had become the reportorial staff of the "Carlow County Herald"; also, he was to write
various treatises for the paper. For the first few evenings, when he started home from the
office, his chief walked with him, chatting heartily, until they had passed the Palace bar.
But Fisbee's redemption was complete.

The old man had a daughter. When she came to Plattville, he told her what the editor of the
"Herald" had done for him.

The journalist kept steadily at his work; and, as time went on, the bitterness his predecessor's
swindle had left him passed away. But his loneliness and a sense of defeat grew and deepened.
When the vistas of the world had opened to his first youth, he had not thought to spend his
life in such a place as Plattville; but he found himself doing it, and it was no great happiness
to him that the congressional representative of the district, the gentleman whom the "Herald's"
opposition to McCune had sent to Washington, came to depend on his influence for renomination;
nor did the realization that the editor of the "Carlow County Herald" had come to be McCune's
successor as political dictator produce a perceptibly enlivening effect on the young man. The
years drifted very slowly, and to him it seemed they went by while he stood far aside and could
not even see them move. He did not consider the life he led an exciting one; but the other
citizens of Carlow did when he undertook a war against the "White Caps." The natives were much
more afraid of the "White Caps" than he was; they knew more about them and understood them
better than he did.

CHAPTER II. THE STRANGE LADY

IT was June. From the patent inner columns of the "Carlow County Herald" might be gleaned the
information (enlivened by cuts of duchesses) that the London season had reached a high point
of gaiety; and that, although the weather had grown inauspiciously warm, there was sufficient
gossip for the thoughtful. To the rapt mind of Miss Selina Tibbs came a delicious moment of
comparison: precisely the same conditions prevailed in Plattville.

Not unduly might Miss Selina lay this flattering unction to her soul, and well might the "Herald"
declare that "Carlow events were crowding thick and fast." The congressional representative
of the district was to deliver a lecture at the court-house; a circus was approaching the county-seat,
and its glories would be exhibited "rain or shine"; the court had cleared up the docket by
sitting to unseemly hours of the night, even until ten o'clock--one farmer witness had fallen
asleep while deposing that he "had knowed this man Hender some eighteen year"--and, as excitements
come indeed when they do come, and it seldom rains but it pours, the identical afternoon of
the lecture a strange lady descended from the Rouen Accommodation and was greeted on the platform
by the wealthiest citizen of the county. Judge Briscoe, and his daughter, Minnie, and (what
stirred wonder to an itch almost beyond endurance) Mr. Fisbee! and they then drove through
town on the way to the Briscoe mansion, all four, apparently, in a fluster of pleasure and
exhilaration, the strange lady engaged in earnest conversation with Mr. Fisbee on the back seat.

Judd Bennett had had the best stare at her, but, as he immediately fell into a dreamy and absent
state, little satisfaction could be got from him, merely an exasperating statement that the
stranger seemed to have a kind of new look to her. However, by means of Miss Mildy Upton, a
domestic of the Briscoe household, the community was given something a little more definite.
The lady's name was Sherwood; she lived in Rouen; and she had known Miss Briscoe at the eastern
school the latter had attended (to the feverish agitation of Plattville) three years before;
but Mildy confessed her inadequacy in the matter of Mr. Fisbee. He had driven up in the buckboard
with the others and evidently expected to stay for supper Mr. Tibbs, the postmaster (it was
to the postoffice that Miss Upton brought her information) suggested, as a possible explanation,
that the lady was so learned that the Briscoes had invited Fisbee on the ground of his being
the only person in Plattville they esteemed wise enough to converse with her; but Miss Tibbs
wrecked her brother's theory by mentioning the name of Fisbee's chief.

"You see, Solomon," she sagaciously observed, "if that were true, they would have invited him,
instead of Mr. Fisbee, and I wish they had. He isn't troubled with malaria, and yet the longer
he lives here the sallower-looking and sadder-looking he gets. I think the company of a lovely
stranger might be of great cheer to his heart, and it will be interesting to witness the meeting
between them. It may be," added the poetess, "that they have already met, on his travels before
he settled here. It may be that they are old friends--or even more."

"Then what," returned her brother, "what is he doin' settin' up in his office all afternoon
with ink on his forehead, while Fisbee goes out ridin' with her and stays for supper afterwerds?"

Although the problem of Fisbee's attendance remained a mere maze of hopeless speculation, Mildy
had been present at the opening of Miss Sherwood's trunk, and here was matter for the keen
consideration of the ladies, at least. Thoughtful conversations in regard to hats and linings
took place across fences and on corners of the Square that afternoon; and many gentlemen wondered
(in wise silence) why their spouses were absent-minded and brooded during the evening meal.

At half-past seven, the Hon. Kedge Halloway of Amo delivered himself of his lecture; "The Past
and Present. What we may Glean from Them, and Their Influence on the Future." At seven the
court-room was crowded, and Miss Tibbs, seated on the platform (reserved for prominent citizens),
viewed the expectant throng with rapture. It is possible that she would have confessed to witnessing
a sea of faces, but it is more probable that she viewed the expectant throng. The thermometer
stood at eighty-seven degrees and there was a rustle of incessantly moving palm-leaf fans as,
row by row, their yellow sides twinkled in the light of eight oil lamps. The stouter ladies
wielded their fans with vigor. There were some very pretty faces in Mr. Halloway's audience,
but it is a peculiarity of Plattville that most of those females who do not incline to stoutness
incline far in the opposite direction, and the lean ladies naturally suffered less from the
temperature than their sisters. The shorn lamb is cared for, but often there seems the intention
to impart a moral in the refusal of Providence to temper warm weather to the full-bodied.

Old Tom Martin expressed a strong consciousness of such intention when he observed to the shocked
Miss Selina, as Mr. Bill Snoddy, the stoutest citizen of the county, waddled abnormally up
the aisle: "The Almighty must be gittin" a heap of fun out of Bill Snoddy to-night."

"Oh, Mr. Martin!" exclaimed Miss Tibbs, fluttering at his irreverence.

"Why, you would yourself. Miss Seliny," returned old Tom. Mr. Martin always spoke in one key,
never altering the pitch of his high, dry, unctuous drawl, though, when his purpose was more
than ordinarily humorous, his voice assumed a shade of melancholy. Now and then he meditatively
passed his fingers through his gray beard, which followed the line of his jaw, leaving his
upper lip and most of his chin smooth-shaven. "Did you ever reason out why folks laugh so much
at fat people?" he continued. "No, ma'am. Neither'd anybody else."

"Why is it, Mr. Martin?" asked Miss Selina.

"It's like the Creator's sayin', 'Let there be light.' He says, 'Let ladies be lovely--'" (Miss
Tibbs bowed)--"and 'Let men-folks be honest--sometimes;' and, 'Let fat people be held up to
ridicule till they fall off.' You can't tell why it is; it was jest ordained that-a-way."

The room was so crowded that the juvenile portion of the assemblage was ensconced in the windows.
Strange to say, the youth of Plattville were not present under protest, as their fellows of
a metropolis would have been, lectures being well understood by the young of great cities to
have instructive tendencies. The boys came to-night because they insisted upon coming. It was
an event. Some of them had made sacrifices to come, enduring even the agony (next to hair-cutting
in suffering) of having their ears washed. Conscious of parental eyes, they fronted the public
with boyhood's professional expressionlessness, though they communicated with each other aside
in a cipher-language of their own, and each group was a hot-bed of furtive gossip and sarcastic
comment. Seated in the windows, they kept out what small breath of air might otherwise have
stolen in to comfort the audience.

Their elders sat patiently dripping with perspiration, most of the gentlemen undergoing the
unusual garniture of stiffly-starched collars, those who had not cultivated chin beards to
obviate such arduous necessities of pomp and state, hardly bearing up under the added anxiety
of cravats. However, they sat outwardly meek under the yoke; nearly all of them seeking a quiet
solace of tobacco--not that they smoked; Heaven and the gallantry of Carlow County forbid--nor
were there anywhere visible tokens of the comforting ministrations of nicotine to violate the
eye of etiquette. It is an art of Plattville.

Suddenly there was a hum and a stir and a buzz of whispering in the room. Two gray old men
and two pretty young women passed up the aisle to the platform. One old man was stalwart and
ruddy, with a cordial eye and a handsome, smooth-shaven, big face. The other was bent and trembled
slightly; his face was very white; he had a fine high brow, deeply lined, the brow of a scholar,
and a grandly flowing white beard that covered his chest, the beard of a patriarch. One of
the young women was tall and had the rosy cheeks and pleasant eyes of her father, who preceded
her. The other was the strange lady.

A universal perturbation followed her progress up the aisle, if she had known it. She was small
and fair, very daintily and beautifully made; a pretty Marquise whose head Greuze should have
painted. Mrs. Columbus Landis, wife of the proprietor of the Palace Hotel, conferring with
a lady in the next seat, applied an over-burdened adjective: "It ain't so much she's han'some,
though she is, that--but don't you notice she's got a kind of smart look to her? Her bein'
so teeny, kind of makes it more so, somehow, too." What stunned the gossips of the windows
to awed admiration, however, was the unconcerned and stoical fashion in which she wore a long
bodkin straight through her head. It seemed a large sacrifice merely to make sure one's hat
remained in place.

The party took seats a little to the left and rear of the lecturer's table, and faced the audience.
The strange lady chatted gaily with the other three, apparently as unconscious of the multitude
of eyes fixed upon her as the gazers were innocent of rude intent. There were pretty young
women in Plattville; Minnie Briscoe was the prettiest, and, as the local glass of fashion reflected,
"the stylishest"; but this girl was different, somehow, in a way the critics were puzzled to
discover--different, from the sparkle of her eyes and the crown of her trim sailor hat, to
the edge of her snowy duck skirt.

Judd Bennett sighed a sigh that was heard in every corner of the room. As everybody immediately
turned to look at him, he got up and went out.

It had long been a jocose fiction of Mr. Martin, who was a widower of thirty years' standing,
that he and the gifted authoress by his side were in a state of courtship. Now he bent his
rugged head toward her to whisper: "I never thought to see the day you'd have a rival in my
affections. Miss Seliny, but yonder looks like it. I reckon I'll have to go up to Ben Tinkle's
and buy that fancy vest he's had in stock this last twelve year or more. Will you take me back
when she's left the city again; Miss Seliny?" he drawled. "I expect, maybe, Miss Sherwood is
one of these here summer girls. I've heard of 'em but I never see one before. You better take
warning and watch me--Fisbee won't have no clear field from now on."

The stranger leaned across to speak to Miss Briscoe and her sleeve touched the left shoulder
of the old man with the patriarchal white beard. A moment later he put his right hand to that
shoulder and gently moved it up and down with a caressing motion over the shabby black broadcloth
her garment had touched.

"Look at that old Fisbee!" exclaimed Mr. Martin, affecting indignation. "Never be 'n half as
spruced up and wide awake in all his life. He's prob'ly got her to listen to him on the decorations
of Nineveh--it's my belief he was there when it was destroyed. Well, if I can't cut him out
we'll get our respected young friend of the 'Herald' to do it."

"Sh!" returned Miss Tibbs. "Here he is."

The seats upon the platform were all occupied, except the two foremost ones in the centre (one
on each side of a little table with a lamp, a pitcher of ice-water, and a glass) reserved for
the lecturer and the gentleman who was to introduce him. Steps were audible in the hall, and
every one turned to watch the door, where the distinguished pair now made their appearance
in a hush of expectation over which the beating of the fans alone prevailed. The Hon. Kedge
Halloway was one of the gleaners of the flesh-pots, himself, and he marched into the room unostentatiously
mopping his shining expanse of brow with a figured handkerchief. He was a person of solemn
appearance; a fat gold watch-chain which curved across his ponderous front, adding mysteriously
to his gravity. At his side strolled a very tall, thin, rather stooping--though broad-shouldered--rather
shabby young man with a sallow, melancholy face and deep-set eyes that looked tired. When they
were seated, the orator looked over his audience slowly and with an incomparable calm; then,
as is always done, he and the melancholy young man exchanged whispers for a few moments. After
this there was a pause, at the end of which the latter rose and announced that it was his pleasure
and his privilege to introduce, that evening, a gentleman who needed no introduction to that
assemblage. What citizen of Carlow needed an introduction, asked the speaker, to the orator
they had applauded in the campaigns of the last twenty years, the statesman author of the Halloway
Bill, the most honored citizen of the neighboring and flourishing county and city of Amo? And,
the speaker would say, that if there were one thing the citizens of Carlow could be held to
envy the citizens of Amo, it was the Honorable Kedge Halloway, the thinker, to whose widely-known
paper they were about to have the pleasure and improvement of listening.

The introduction was so vehemently applauded that, had there been present a person connected
with the theatrical profession, he might have been nervous for fear the introducer had prepared
no encore. "Kedge is too smart to take it all to himself," commented Mr. Martin. "He knows
it's half account of the man that said it."

He was not mistaken. Mr. Halloway had learned a certain perceptiveness on the stump. Resting
one hand upon his unfolded notes upon the table, he turned toward the melancholy young man
(who had subsided into the small of his back in his chair) and, after clearing his throat,
observed with sudden vehemence that he must thank his gifted friend for his flattering remarks,
but that when he said that Carlow envied Amo a Halloway, it must be replied that Amo grudged
no glory to her sister county of Carlow, but, if Amo could find envy in her heart it would
be because Carlow possessed a paper so sterling, so upright, so brilliant, so enterprising
as the "Carlow County Herald," and a journalist so talented, so gifted, so energetic, so fearless,
as its editor.

The gentleman referred to showed very faint appreciation of these ringing compliments. There
was a lamp on the table beside him, against which, to the view of Miss Sherwood of Rouen, his
face was silhouetted, and very rarely had it been her lot to see a man look less enthusiastic
under public and favorable comment of himself. She wondered if he, also, remembered the Muggleton
cricket match and the subsequent dinner oratory.

The lecture proceeded. The orator winged away to soary heights with gestures so vigorous as
to cause admiration for his pluck in making use of them on such a night; the perspiration streamed
down his face, his neck grew purple, and he dared the very face of apoplexy, binding his auditors
with a double spell. It is true that long before the peroration the windows were empty and
the boys were eating stolen, unripe fruit in the orchards of the listeners. The thieves were
sure of an alibi.

The Hon. Mr. Halloway reached a logical conclusion which convinced even the combative and unwilling
that the present depends largely upon the past, while the future will be determined, for the
most part, by the conditions of the present. "The future," he cried, leaning forward with an
expression of solemn warning, "The future is in our own hands, ladies and gentlemen of the
city of Plattville. Is it not so? We will find it so. Turn it over in your minds." He leaned
backward and folded his hands benevolently on his stomach and said in a searching whisper;
"Ponder it." He waited for them to ponder it, and little Mr. Swanter, the druggist and bookseller,
who prided himself on his politeness and who was seated directly in front, scratched his head
and knit his brows to show that he was pondering it. The stillness was intense; the fans ceased
to beat; Mr. Snoddy could be heard breathing dangerously. Mr. Swanter was considering the advisability
of drawing a pencil from his pocket and figuring on it upon his cuff, when suddenly, with the
energy of a whirlwind, the lecturer threw out his arms to their fullest extent and roared:
"It is a fact! It is carven on stone in the gloomy caverns of TIME. It is writ in FIRE on the
imperishable walls of Fate!"

After the outburst, his voice sank with startling rapidity to a tone of honeyed confidence,
and he wagged an inviting forefinger at Mr. Snoddy, who opened his mouth. "Shall we take an
example? Not from the marvellous, my friends; let us seek an illustration from the ordinary.
Is that not better? One familiar to the humblest of us. One we can all comprehend. One from
our every-day life. One which will interest even the young. Yes. The common house-fly. On a
window-sill we place a bit of fly-paper, and contiguous to it, a flower upon which the happy
insect likes to feed and rest. The little fly approaches. See, he hovers between the two. One
is a fatal trap, an ambuscade, and the other a safe harbor and an innocuous haven. But mystery
allures him. He poises, undecided. That is the present. That, my friends, is the Present! What
will he do? WHAT will he do? What will he DO? Memories of the past are whispering to him: 'Choose
the flower. Light on the posy.' Here we clearly see the influence of the past upon the present.
But, to employ a figure of speech, the fly-paper beckons to the insect toothsomely, and, thinks
he; 'Shall I give it a try? Shall I? Shall I give it a try?' The future is in his own hands
to make or unmake. The past, the voice of Providence, has counselled him: 'Leave it alone,
leave it alone, little fly. Go away from there.' Does he heed the warning? Does he heed it,
ladies and gentlemen? Does he? Ah, no! He springs into the air, decides between the two attractions,
one of them, so deadly to his interests and--drops upon the fly-paper to perish miserably!
The future is in his hands no longer. We must lie upon the bed that we have made, nor can Providence
change its unalterable decrees."

After the tragedy, the orator took a swallow of water, mopped his brow with the figured handkerchief
and announced that a new point herewith presented itself for consideration. The audience sank
back with a gasp of release from the strain of attention. Minnie Briscoe, leaning back, breathless
like the others, became conscious that a tremor agitated her visitor. Miss Sherwood had bent
her head behind the shelter of the judge's broad shoulders; was shaking slightly and had covered
her face with her hands.

"What is it, Helen?" whispered Miss Briscoe, anxiously. "What is it? Is something the matter?"

"Nothing. "Mutiny, is it? I'll show you what mutiny means. I'll have you all shot like dogs, and
the authorities will be only too thankful.

Take the girl."

The crowd was silent. One convoy soldier pulled away the girl, who was screaming desperately,
while another manacled the prisoner, who now submissively held out his hand.

"Take her to the women," shouted the officer, arranging his sword belt.

The little girl, whose face had grown quite red, was trying to disengage her arms from under the
shawl, and screamed unceasingly. Mary Pavlovna stepped out from among
the crowd and came up to the officer.

"Will you allow me to carry the little girl?" she said.

"Who are you?" asked the officer.

"A political prisoner."

Mary Pavlovna's handsome face, with the beautiful prominent eyes (he had noticed her before when the
prisoners were given into his charge), evidently produced an effect on the officer. He looked
at her in silence as if considering, then said: "I don't care; carry
her if you like.

It is easy for you to show pity; if he ran away who would have to
answer?"

"How could he run away with the child in his arms?" said Mary Pavlovna.

"I

have no time to talk with you. Take her if you like."

"Shall I give her?" asked the soldier.

"Yes, give her."

"Come to me," said Mary Pavlovna, trying to coax the child to come to her.

But the child in the soldier's arms stretched herself towards her
father and continued to scream, and would not go to Mary Pavlovna.

"Wait a bit, Mary Pavlovna," said Maslova, getting a rusk out of her
bag; "she will come to me."

The little girl knew Maslova, and when she saw her face and the rusk she let her take her. All
was quiet.

The gates were opened, and the gang stepped out, the convoy counted
the prisoners over again, the bags were packed and tied on to the
carts, the weak seated on the top.

Maslova with the child in her arms took her place among the women
next to Theodosia.

Simonson, who had all the time been watching what was going on, stepped
with large, determined strides up to the officer, who, having given
his orders, was just getting into a trap, and said, "You have behaved
badly."

"Get to your place; it is no business of yours."

"It is my business to tell you that you have behaved badly and I have said it," said Simonson,
looking intently into the officer's face from under his bushy eyebrows.

"Ready?

March!" the officer called out, paying no heed to Simonson, and, taking hold of the driver's
shoulder, he got into the trap.

The gang started and spread out as it stepped on to the muddy high
road with ditches on each side, which passed through a dense forest.

CHAPTER III.

MARY PAVLOVNA.

In spite of the hard conditions in which they were placed, life among
the political prisoners seemed very good to Katusha after the depraved,
luxurious and effeminate life she had led in town for the last six
years, and after two months' imprisonment with criminal prisoners.

The fifteen to twenty miles they did per day, with one day's rest
after two days' marching, strengthened her physically, and the fellowship
with her new companions opened out to her a life full of interests
such as she had never dreamed of.

People so wonderful (as she expressed it) as those whom she was now
going with she had not only never met but could not even have imagined.

"There

now, and I cried when I was sentenced," she said. "Why, I must thank God for it all the days of
my life. I have learned to know what I never should have found out else."

The motives she understood easily and without effort that guided these people, and, being of
the people, fully sympathised with them.

She understood that these persons were for the people and against
the upper classes, and though themselves belonging to the upper classes
had sacrificed their privileges, their liberty and their lives for
the people.

This especially made her value and admire them.

She was charmed with all the new companions, but particularly with
Mary Pavlovna, and she was not only charmed with her, but loved her
with a peculiar, respectful and rapturous love.

She was struck by the fact that this beautiful girl, the daughter of a rich general, who could
speak three languages, gave away all that her rich brother sent her, and lived like the simplest
working girl, and dressed not only simply, but poorly, paying no heed to her appearance. This
trait and a complete absence of coquetry was particularly surprising
and therefore attractive to Maslova.

Maslova could see that Mary Pavlovna knew, and was even pleased to know, that she was handsome,
and yet the effect her appearance had on men was not at all pleasing to her; she was even afraid
of it, and felt an absolute disgust to all love affairs. Her men companions knew it, and if
they felt attracted by her never permitted themselves to show it to her, but treated her as
they would a man; but with strangers, who often molested her, the great physical strength on
which she prided herself stood her in good stead.

"It happened once," she said to Katusha, "that a man followed me in the street and would not
leave me on any account. At last I gave him such a shaking that he was frightened and ran away."

She became a revolutionary, as she said, because she felt a dislike to the life of the well-to-do
from childhood up, and loved the life of the common people, and she was always being scolded
for spending her time in the servants' hall, in the kitchen or the stables instead of the drawing-room.

"And
I found it amusing to be with cooks and the coachmen, and dull with
our gentlemen and ladies," she said.

"Then when I came to understand things I saw that our life was altogether wrong; I had no
mother and I did not care for my father, and so when I was nineteen I left home, and went with
a girl friend to work as a factory hand."

After she left the factory she lived in the country, then returned to town and lived in a lodging,
where they had a secret printing press. There she was arrested and sentenced to hard labour. Mary
Pavlovna said nothing about it herself, but Katusha heard from others that Mary Pavlovna was
sentenced because, when the lodging was searched by the police and one of the revolutionists
fired a shot in the dark, she pleaded guilty.

As soon as she had learned to know Mary Pavlovna, Katusha noticed
that, whatever the conditions she found herself in, Mary Pavlovna
never thought of herself, but was always anxious to serve, to help
some one, in matters small or great.

One of her present companions, Novodvoroff, said of her that she devoted herself to philanthropic
amusements. And this was true. The interest of her whole life lay in the search for opportunities
of serving others. This kind of amusement had become the habit, the business of her life. And
she did it all so naturally that those who knew her no longer valued but simply expected it
of her.

When Maslova first came among them, Mary Pavlovna felt repulsed and disgusted. Katusha noticed
this, but she also noticed that, having made an effort to overcome these feelings, Mary Pavlovna
became particularly tender and kind to her.

The tenderness and kindness of so uncommon a being touched Maslova so much that she gave her
whole heart, and unconsciously accepting her views, could not help imitating her in everything.

This
devoted love of Katusha touched Mary Pavlovna in her turn, and she learned to love Katusha.

These women were also united by the repulsion they both felt to sexual love. The one loathed
that kind of love, having experienced all its horrors, the other, never having experienced it,
looked on it as something incomprehensible and at the same time as something repugnant and offensive
to human dignity.

CHAPTER IV.

SIMONSON.

Mary Pavlovna's influence was one that Maslova submitted to because she loved Mary Pavlovna.
Simonson influenced her because he loved her.

Everybody lives and acts partly according to his own, partly according to other people's, ideas. This
is what constitutes one of the great differences among men. To some, thinking is a kind of mental
game; they treat their reason as if it were a fly-wheel without a connecting strap, and are
guided in their actions by other people's ideas, by custom or laws; while others look upon
their own ideas as the chief motive power of all their actions, and always listen to the dictates
of their own reason and submit to it, accepting other people's opinions
only on rare occasions and after weighing them critically.

Simonson was a man of the latter sort; he settled and verified everything according to his
own reason and acted on the decisions he arrived at. When a schoolboy he made up his mind that his father's
income, made as a paymaster in government office was dishonestly gained, and he told his father
that it ought to be given to the people. When his father, instead of listening to him, gave
him a scolding, he left his father's house and would not make use of his father's means. Having
come to the conclusion that all the existing misery was a result of the people's ignorance,
he joined the socialists, who carried on propaganda among the people,
as soon as he left the university and got a place as a village schoolmaster.

He taught and explained to his pupils and to the peasants what he considered to be just, and
openly blamed what he thought unjust.

He was arrested and tried.

During his trial he determined to tell his judges that his was a
just cause, for which he ought not to be tried or punished.

When the judges paid no heed to his words, but went on with the trial,
he decided not to answer them and kept resolutely silent when they
questioned him.

He was exiled to the Government of Archangel. There he formulated a religious teaching which
was founded on the theory that everything in the world was alive, that nothing is lifeless, and
that all the objects we consider to be without life or inorganic are only parts of an enormous
organic body which we cannot compass. A man's task is to sustain the life of that huge organism
and all its animate parts.

Therefore he was against war, capital punishment and every kind of
killing, not only of human beings, but also of animals.

Concerning marriage, too, he had a peculiar idea of his own; he thought that increase was
a lower function of man, the highest function being to serve the already existing lives. He found
a confirmation of his theory in the fact that there were phacocytes in the blood. Celibates,
according to his opinion, were the same as phacocytes, their function being to help the weak
and the sickly particles of the organism.

From the moment he came to this conclusion he began to consider himself
as well as Mary Pavlovna as phacocytes, and to live accordingly, though
as a youth he had been addicted to vice.

His love for Katusha did not infringe this conception, because he loved her platonically, and
such love he considered could not hinder his activity as a phacocytes, but acted, on the contrary,
as an inspiration.

Not only moral, but also most practical questions he decided in his own way. He applied a theory
of his own to all practical business, had rules relating to the number of hours for rest and
for work, to the kind of food to eat, the way to dress, to heat and
light up the rooms.

With all this Simonson was very shy and modest; and yet when he had once made up his mind nothing
could make him waver. And this man had a decided influence on Maslova through his love for her.
With a woman's instinct Maslova very soon found out that he loved her. And the fact that she
could awaken love in a man of that kind raised her in her own estimation. It was Nekhludoff's magnanimity
and what had been in the past that made him offer to marry her, but Simonson loved her such
as she was now, loved her simply because of the love he bore her. And she felt that Simonson considered
her to be an exceptional woman, having peculiarly high moral qualities. She did not quite know
what the qualities he attributed to her were, but in order to be on the safe side and that
he should not be disappointed in her, she tried with all her might to awaken in herself all
the highest qualities she could conceive, and she tried to be as good as possible. This had
begun while they were still in prison, when on a common visiting
day she had noticed his kindly dark blue eyes gazing fixedly at her
from under his projecting brow.

Even then she had noticed that this was a peculiar man, and that he was looking at her in
a peculiar manner, and had also noticed the striking combination of sternness--the unruly hair
and the frowning forehead gave him this appearance--with the child-like
kindness and innocence of his look. She saw him again in Tomsk, where
she joined the political prisoners. Though they had not uttered a
word, their looks told plainly that they had understood one another.
Even after that they had had no serious conversation with each other,
but Maslova felt that when he spoke in her presence his words were
addressed to her, and that he spoke for her sake, trying to express
himself as plainly as he could; but it was when he started walking
with the criminal prisoners that they grew specially near to one another.

CHAPTER
V.

THE POLITICAL PRISONERS.

Until they left Perm Nekhludoff only
twice managed to see Katusha, once in Nijni, before the prisoners
were embarked on a barge surrounded with a wire netting, and again
in Perm in the prison office. At both these interviews he found her
reserved and unkind. She answered his questions as to whether she
was in want of anything, and whether she was comfortable, evasively
and bashfully, and, as he thought, with the same feeling of hostile
reproach which she had shown several times before. Her depressed state
of mind, which was only the result of the molestations from the men
that she was undergoing at the time, tormented Nekhludoff. He feared
lest, influenced by the hard and degrading circumstances in which
she was placed on the journey, she should again get into that state
of despair and discord with her own self which formerly made her irritable
with him, and which had caused her to drink and smoke excessively
to gain oblivion. But he was unable to help her in any way during
this part of the journey, as it was impossible for him to be with
her. It was only when she joined the political prisoners that he saw
how unfounded his fears were, and at each interview he noticed that
inner change he so strongly desired to see in her becoming more and
more marked. The first time they met in Tomsk she was again just as
she had been when leaving Moscow. She did not frown or become confused
when she saw him, but met him joyfully and simply, thanking him for
what he had done for her, especially for bringing her among the people
with whom she now was.

After two months' marching with the gang,
the change that had taken place within her became noticeable in her
appearance. She grew sunburned and thinner, and seemed older; wrinkles
appeared on her temples and round her mouth. The first
four strokes were given with mechanical regularity, the pride of the custodian who operated
the bell being to produce the effect of a clock-work bell such as he had once heard in the
court-house at Rouen; but the fifth and sixth strokes were halting achievements, as, after
four o'clock, he often lost count on the strain of the effort for precise imitation. There
was a pause after the sixth, then a dubious and reluctant stroke--seven--a longer pause, followed
by a final ring with desperate decision--eight! Harkless looked at his watch; it was twenty
minutes of six.

As he crossed the court-house yard to the Palace Hotel, he stopped to exchange a word with
the bell-ringer, who, seated on the steps, was mopping his brow with an air of hard-earned
satisfaction.

"Good-evening, Schofields'," he said. "You came in strong on the last stroke, to-night."

"What we need here," responded the bell-ringer, "is more public-spirited men. I ain't kickin'
on you, Mr. Harkless, no sir; but we want more men like they got in Rouen; we want men that'll
git Main Street paved with block or asphalt; men that'll put in factories, men that'll act
and not set round like that ole fool Martin and laugh and polly-woggle and make fun of public
sperrit, day in and out. I reckon I do my best for the city."

"Oh, nobody minds Tom Martin," answered Harkless. "It's only half the time he means anything
by what he says."

"That's jest what I hate about him," returned the bell-ringer in a tone of high complaint;
"you can't never tell which half it is. Look at him now!" Over in front of the hotel Martin
was standing, talking to the row of coatless loungers who sat with their chairs tilted back
against the props of the wooden awning that projected over the sidewalk. Their faces were turned
toward the court-house, and even those lost in meditative whittling had looked up to laugh.
Martin, his hands in the pockets of his alpaca coat, his rusty silk hat tilted forward till
the wide brim rested almost on the bridge of his nose, was addressing them in his one-keyed
voice, the melancholy whine of which, though not the words, penetrated to the court-house steps.

The bell-ringer, whose name was Henry Schofield, but who was known as Schofield's Henry (popularly
abbreviated to Schofields') was moved to indignation. "Look at him," he cried. "Look at him!
Everlastingly goin' on about my bell! Let him talk, jest let him talk." The supper gong boomed
inside the hotel and Harkless bade the bell-ringer good-night. As he moved away the latter
called after him: "He don't disturb nobody. Let him talk. Who pays any 'tention to him I'd
like to know?" There was a burst of laughter from the whittlers. Schofields' sat in patient
silence for a full minute, as one who knew that no official is too lofty to escape the anathemas
of envy. Then he sprang to his feet and shook his fist at Martin, who was disappearing within
the door of the hotel. "Go to Halifax!" he shouted.

The dining-room of the Palace Hotel was a large, airy apartment, rustling with artistically
perforated and slashed pink paper that hung everywhere, at this season of the year, to lend
festal effect as well as to palliate the scourge of flies. There were six or seven large tables,
all vacant except that at which Columbus Landis, the landlord, sat with his guests, while his
wife and children ate in the kitchen by their own preference. Transient trade was light in
Plattville; nobody ever came there, except occasional commercial travellers who got out of
town the instant it was possible, and who said awful things if, by the exigencies of the railway
time-table, they were left over night.

Behind the host's chair stood a red-haired girl in a blue cotton gown; and in her hand she
languidly waved a long instrument made of clustered strips of green and white and yellow tissue
paper fastened to a wooden wand; with this she amiably amused the flies except at such times
as the conversation proved too interesting, when she was apt to rest it on the shoulder of
one of the guests. This happened each time the editor of the "Herald" joined in the talk. As
the men seated themselves they all nodded to her and said, "G'd evening, Cynthy." Harkless
always called her Charmion; no one knew why. When he came in she moved around the table to
a chair directly opposite him, and held that station throughout the meal, with her eyes fixed
on his face. Mr. Martin noted this manoeuvre--it occurred regularly twice a day--with a stealthy
smile at the girl, and her light skin flushed while her lip curled shrewishly at the old gentleman.
"Oh, all right, Cynthy," he whispered to her, and chuckled aloud at her angry toss of the head.

"Schofields' seemed to be kind of put out with me this evening," he remarked, addressing himself
to the company. "He's the most ungratefullest cuss I ever come up with. I was only oratin'
on how proud the city ought to be of him. He fairly keeps Plattville's sportin' spirit on the
gog; 'die out, wasn't for him. There's be'n more money laid on him whether he'll strike over
and above the hour, or under and below, or whether he'll strike fifteen minutes before time,
or twenty after, than--well, sir, we'd all forgit the language if it wasn't for Schofields'
bell to keep us talkin'; that's my claim. Dull days, think of the talk he furnishes all over
town. Think what he's done to promote conversation. Now, for instance, Anna Belle Bardlock's
got a beau, they say"--here old Tom tilted back in his chair and turned an innocent eye upon
a youth across the table, young William Todd, who was blushing over his griddle-cakes--"and
I hear he's a good deal scared of Anna Belle and not just what you might call brash with her.
They say every Sunday night he'll go up to Bardlocks' and call on Anna Belle from half-past
six till nine, and when he's got into his chair he sets and looks at the floor and the crayon
portraits till about seven; then he opens his tremblin' lips and says, 'Reckon Schofields'
must be on his way to the court-house by this time.' And about an hour later, when Schofields'
hits four or five, he'll speak up again, 'Say, I reckon he means eight.' 'Long towards nine
o'clock, they say he skews around in his chair and says, 'Wonder if he'll strike before time
or after,' and Anna Belle answers out loud, 'I hope after,' for politeness; but in her soul
she says, 'I pray before'; and then Schofields' hits her up for eighteen or twenty, and Anna
Belle's company reaches for his hat. Three Sundays ago he turned around before he went out
and said, 'Do you like apple-butter?' but never waited to find out. It's the same programme
every Sunday evening, and Jim Bardlock says Anna Belle's so worn out you wouldn't hardly know
her for the blithe creature she was last year--the excitement's be'n too much for her!"

Poor William Todd bent his fiery face over the table and suffered the general snicker in helpless
silence. Then there was quiet for a space, broken only by the click of knives against the heavy
china and the indolent rustle of Cynthia's fly-brush.

"Town so still," observed the landlord, finally, with a complacent glance at the dessert course
of prunes to which his guests were helping themselves from a central reservoir, "Town so still,
hardly seems like show-day's come round again. Yet there's be'n some shore signs lately: when
my shavers come honeyin' up with, 'Say, pa, ain't they no urrands I can go for ye, pa? I like
to run 'em for you, pa,'--'relse, 'Oh, pa, ain't they no water I can haul, or nothin', pa?'--'relse,
as little Rosina T. says, this morning, 'Pa, I always pray fer you pa,' and pa this and pa
that-you can rely either Christmas or show-day's mighty close."

William Todd, taking occasion to prove himself recovered from confusion, remarked casually
that there was another token of the near approach of the circus, as ole Wilkerson was drunk again.

"There's a man!" exclaimed Mr. Martin with enthusiasm. "There's the feller for my money! He
does his duty as a citizen more discriminatin'ly on public occasions than any man I ever see.
There's Wilkerson's celebration when there's a funeral; look at the difference between it and
on Fourth of July. Why, sir, it's as melancholy as a hearse-plume, and sympathy ain't the word
for it when he looks at the remains, no sir; preacher nor undertaker, either, ain't half as
blue and respectful. Then take his circus spree. He come into the store this afternoon, head
up, marchin' like a grenadier and shootin' his hand out before his face and drawin' it back
again, and hollering out, 'Ta, ta, ta-ra-ta, ta, ta-ta-ra'--why, the dumbest man ever lived
could see in a minute show's 'comin' to-morrow and Wilkerson's playin' the trombone. Then he'd
snort and goggle like an elephant. Got the biggest sense of appropriateness of any man in the
county, Wilkerson has. Folks don't half appreciate him."

As each boarder finished his meal he raided the glass of wooden toothpicks and went away with
no standing on the order of his going; but Martin waited for Harkless, who, not having attended
to business so concisely as the others, was the last to leave the table, and they stood for
a moment under the awning outside, lighting their cigars.

"Call on the judge, to-night?" asked Martin.

"No," said Harkless. "Why?"

"Didn't you see the lady with Minnie and the judge at the lecture?"

"I caught a glimpse of her. That's what Bowlder meant, then."

"I don't know what Bowlder meant, but I guess you better go out there, young man. She might
not stay here long."

CHAPTER IV. THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER

The Briscoe buckboard rattled along the elastic country-road, the roans setting a sharp pace
as they turned eastward on the pike toward home and supper.

"They'll make the eight miles in three-quarters of an hour," said the judge, proudly. He pointed
ahead with his whip. "Just beyond that bend we pass through Six-Cross-Roads."

Miss Sherwood leaned forward eagerly. "Can we see 'Mr. Wimby's' house from here?"

"No, it's on the other side, nearer town; we pass it later. It's the only respectable-looking
house in this township." They reached the turn of the road, and the judge touched up his colts
to a sharper gait. "No need of dallying," he observed quietly. "It always makes me a little
sick just to see the place. I'd hate to have a break-down here."

They came in sight of a squalid settlement, built raggedly about a blacksmith's shop and a
saloon. Half-a-dozen shanties clustered near the forge, a few roofs scattered through the shiftlessly
cultivated fields, four or five barns propped by fence-rails, some sheds with gaping apertures
through which the light glanced from side to side, a squad of thin, "razor-back" hogs--now
and then worried by gaunt hounds--and some abused-looking hens, groping about disconsolately
in the mire, a broken-topped buggy with a twisted wheel settling into the mud of the middle
of the road (there was always abundant mud, here, in the dryest summer), a lowering face sneering
from a broken window--Six-Cross-Roads was forbidding and forlorn enough by day. The thought
of what might issue from it by night was unpleasant, and the legends of the Cross-Roads, together
with an unshapen threat, easily fancied in the atmosphere of the place, made Miss Sherwood
shiver as though a cold draught had crossed her.

"It is so sinister!" she exclaimed. "And so unspeakably mean! This is where they live, the
people who hate him, is it? The 'White-Caps'?"

"They are just a lot of rowdies," replied Briscoe. "You have your rough corners in big cities,
and I expect there are mighty few parts of any country that don't have their tough neighborhoods,
only Six-Cross-Roads happens to be worse than most. They choose to call themselves 'White-Caps,'
but I guess it's just a name they like to give themselves. Usually White-Caps are a vigilance
committee going after rascalities the law doesn't reach, or won't reach, but these fellows
are not that kind. They got together to wipe out their grudges--and sometimes they didn't need
any grudge and let loose their deviltries just for pure orneriness; setting haystacks afire
and such like; or, where a farmer had offended them, they would put on their silly toggery
and take him out at midnight and whip him and plunder his house and chase the horses and cattle
into his corn, maybe. They say the women went with them on their raids."

"And he was the first to try to stop them?"

"Well, you see our folks are pretty long-suffering," Briscoe replied, apologetically. "We'd
sort of got used to the meanness of the Cross-Roads. It took a stranger to stir things up--and
he did. He sent eight of 'em to the penitentiary, some for twenty years."

As they passed the saloon a man stepped into the doorway and looked at them. He was coatless
and clad in garments worn to the color of dust; his bare head was curiously malformed, higher
on one side than on the other, and though the buckboard passed rapidly, and at a distance,
this singular lopsidedness was plainly visible to the occupants, lending an ugly significance
to his meagre, yellow face. He was tall, lean, hard, powerfully built. He eyed the strangers
with affected languor, and then, when they had gone by, broke into sudden, loud laughter.

"That was Bob Skillett, the worst of the lot," said the judge. "Harkless sent his son and one
brother to prison, and it nearly broke his heart that he couldn't swear to Bob."

When they were beyond the village and in the open road again. Miss Sherwood took a deep breath.
"I think I breathe more freely," she said. "That was a hideous laugh he sent after us. I had
heard of places like this before--and I don't think I care to see many of them. As I understand
it, Six-Cross-Roads is entirely vicious, isn't it; and bears the same relation to the country
that the slums do to a city?'"

"That's about it. They make their own whiskey. I presume; and they have their own fights amongst
themselves, but they settle 'em themselves, too, and keep their own counsel and hush it up.
Lige Willetts, Minnie's friend--I guess she's told you about Lige?--well, Lige Willetts will
go anywhere when he's following a covey, though mostly the boys leave this part of the country
alone when they're hunting; but Lige got into a thicket back of the forge one morning, and
he came on a crowd of buzzards quarrelling over a heap on the ground, and he got out in a hurry.
He said he was sure it was a dog; but he ran almost all the way to Plattville."

"Father!" exclaimed his daughter, leaning from the back seat. "Don't tell such stories to Helen;
she'll think we're horrible, and you'll frighten her, too."

"Well, it isn't exactly a lady's story," said the judge. He glanced at his guest's face and
chuckled. "I guess we won't frighten her much," he went on. "Young lady, I don't believe you'd
be afraid of many things, would you? You don't look like it. Besides, the Cross-Roads isn't
Plattville, and the White-Caps have been too scared to do anything much, except try to get
even with the 'Herald,' for the last two years; ever since it went for them. They're laying
for Harkless partly for revenge and partly because they daren't do anything until he's out
of the way."

The girl gave a low cry with a sharp intake of breath. "Ah! One grows tired of this everlasting
American patience! Why don't the Plattville people do something before they----"

"It's just as I say," Briscoe answered; "our folks are sort of used to them. I expect we do
about all we can; the boys look after him nights, and the main trouble is that we can't make
him understand he ought to be more afraid of them. If he'd lived here all his life he would
be. You know there's an old-time feud between the Cross-Roads and our folks; goes way back
into pioneer history and mighty few know anything of it. Old William Platt and the forefathers
of the Bardlocks and Tibbses and Briscoes and Schofields moved up here from North Carolina
a good deal just to get away from some bad neighbors, mostly Skilletts and Johnsons--one of
the Skilletts had killed old William Platt's two sons. But the Skilletts and Johnsons followed
all the way to Indiana to join in making the new settlement, and they shot Platt at his cabin
door one night, right where the court-house stands to-day. Then the other settlers drove them
out for good, and they went seven miles west and set up a still. A band of Indians, on the
way to join the Shawnee Prophet at Tippecanoe, came down on the Cross-Roads, and the Cross-Roaders
bought them off with bad whiskey and sent them over to Plattville. Nearly all the Plattville
men were away, fighting under Harrison, and when they came back there were only a few half-crazy
women and children left. They'd hid in the woods.

"The men stopped just long enough to hear how it was, and started for the Cross-Roads; but
the Cross-Roads people caught them in an ambush and not many of our folks got back.

"We really never did get even with them, though all the early settlers lived and died still
expecting to see the day when Plattville would go over and pay off the score. It's the same
now as it was then, good stock with us, bad stock over here; and all the country riff-raff
in creation come and live with 'em when other places get too hot to hold them. Only one or
two of us old folks know what the original trouble was about; but you ask a Plattville man,
to-day, what he thinks of the Cross-Roads and he'll be mighty apt to say, 'I guess we'll all
have to go over there some time and wipe those hoodlums out.' It's been coming to that a long
time. The work the 'Herald' did has come nearer bringing us even with Six-Cross-Roads than
anything else ever has. Queer, too--a man that's only lived in Plattville a few years to be
settling such an old score for us. They'll do their best to get him, and if they do there'll
be trouble of an illegal nature. I think our people would go over there again, but I expect
there wouldn't be any ambush this time; and the pioneers, might rest easier in--" He broke
off suddenly and nodded to a little old man in a buckboard, who was turning off from the road
into a farm lane which led up to a trim cottage with a honeysuckle vine by the door. "That's
Mrs. Wimby's husband," said the judge in an undertone.

Miss Sherwood observed that "Mrs. Wimby's husband" was remarkable for the exceeding plaintiveness
of his expression. He was a weazened, blank, pale-eyed little man, with a thin, white mist
of neck whisker; his coat was so large for him that the sleeves were rolled up from his wrists
with several turns, and, as he climbed painfully to the ground to open the gate of the lane,
it needed no perspicuous eye to perceive that his trousers had been made for a much larger
man, for, as his uncertain foot left the step of his vehicle, one baggy leg of the garment
fell down over his foot, completely concealing his boot and hanging some inches beneath. A
faintly vexed expression crossed his face as he endeavored to arrange the disorder, but he
looked up and returned Briscoe's bow, sadly, with an air of explaining that he was accustomed
to trouble, and that the trousers had behaved no worse than he expected.

No more inoffensive or harmless figure than this feeble little old man could be imagined; yet
his was the distinction of having received a terrible visit from his neighbors of the Cross-Roads.
Mrs. Wimby was a widow, who owned a comfortable farm, and she had refused every offer of the
neighboring ill-eligible bachelors to share it. However, a vagabonding tinker won her heart,
and after their marriage she continued to be known as "Mrs. Wimby"; for so complete was the
bridegroom's insignificance that it extended to his name, which proved quite unrememberable,
and he was usually called "Widder-Woman Wimby's Husband," or, more simply, "Mr. Wimby." The
bride supplied the needs of his wardrobe with the garments of her former husband, and, alleging
this proceeding as the cause of their anger, the Cross-Roads raiders, clad as "White-Caps,"
broke into the farmhouse one night, looted it, tore the old man from his bed, and compelling
his wife, who was tenderly devoted to him, to watch, they lashed him with sapling shoots till
he was near to death. A little yellow cur, that had followed his master on his wanderings,
was found licking the old man's wounds, and they deluged the dog with kerosene and then threw
the poor animal upon a bonfire they had made, and danced around it in heartiest enjoyment.

The man recovered, but that was no palliation of the offense to the mind of a hot-eyed young
man from the East, who was besieging the county authorities for redress and writing brimstone
and saltpetre for his paper. The powers of the county proving either lackadaisical or timorous,
he appealed to those of the State, and he went every night to sleep at a farmhouse, the owner
of which had received a warning from the "White-Caps." And one night it befell that he was
rewarded, for the raiders attempted an entrance. He and the farmer and the former's sons beat
off the marauders and did a satisfactory amount of damage in return. Two of the "White-Caps"
they captured and bound, and others they recognized. Then the State authorities hearkened to
the voice of the "Herald" and its owner; there were arrests, and in the course of time there
was a trial. Every prisoner proved an alibi, could have proved a dozen; but the editor of the
"Herald," after virtually conducting the prosecution, went upon the stand and swore to man
after man. Eight men went to the penitentiary on his evidence, five of them for twenty years.
The Plattville Brass Band serenaded the editor of the "Herald" again.

There were no more raids, and the Six-Cross-Roads men who were left kept to their hovels, appalled
and shaken, but, as time went by and left them unmolested, they recovered a measure of their
hardiness and began to think on what they should do to the man who had brought misfortune and
terror upon them. For a long time he had been publishing their threatening letters and warnings
in a column which he headed: "Humor of the Day."

"Harkless don't understand the Cross-Roads," Briscoe said to Miss Sherwood as they left the
Wimby farm behind; "and then he's like most of us; hardly any of us realizes that harm's ever
going to come to us. Harkless was anxious enough about other people, but----"

The young lady interrupted him, touching his arm. "Look!" she said, "Didn't you see a child,
a little girl, ahead of us on the road?"

"I noticed one a minute ago, but she's not there now," answered Briscoe.

"There was a child walking along the road just ahead, but she turned and saw us coming, and
she disappeared in the most curious way; she seemed to melt into the weeds at the roadside,
across from the elder-bush yonder."

The judge pulled in the horses by the elder-bush. "No child here, now," he said, "but you're
right; there certainly was one, just before you spoke." The young corn was low in the fields,
and there was no hiding-place in sight.

"I'm very superstitious; I am sure it was an imp," Miss Sherwood said. "An imp or a very large
chameleon; she was exactly the color of the road."

"A Cross-Roads imp," said the judge, lifting the reins, "and in that case we might as well
give up. I never set up to be a match for those people, and the children are as mean as their
fathers, and smarter."

When the buckboard had rattled on a hundred yards or so, a little figure clad in a tattered
cotton gown rose up from the weeds, not ten feet from where the judge had drawn rein, and continued
its march down the road toward Plattville, capering in the dust and pursuing the buckboard
with malignant gestures till the clatter of the horses was out of hearing, the vehicle out
of sight.

Something over two hours later, as Mr. Martin was putting things to rights in his domain, the
Dry-Goods Emporium, previous to his departure for the evening's gossip and checkers at the
drug-store, he stumbled over something soft, lying on the floor behind a counter. The thing
rose, and would have evaded him, but he put out his hands and pinioned it and dragged it to
the show-window where the light of the fading day defined his capture. The capture shrieked
and squirmed and fought earnestly. Grasped by the shoulder he held a lean, fierce-eyed, undersized
girl of fourteen, clad in one ragged cotton garment, unless the coat of dust she wore over
all may be esteemed another. Her cheeks were sallow, and her brow was already shrewdly lined,
and her eyes were as hypocritical as they were savage. She was very thin and little, but old
Tom's brown face grew a shade nearer white when the light fell upon her.

"You're no Plattville girl," he said sharply.

"You lie!" cried the child. "You lie! I am! You leave me go, will you? I'm lookin' fer pap
and you're a liar!"

"You crawled in here to sleep, after your seven-mile walk, didn't you?" Martin went on.

"You're a liar," she screamed again.

"Look here," said Martin, slowly, "you go back to Six-Cross-Roads and tell your folks that
if anything happens to a hair of Mr. Harkless's head every shanty in your town will burn, and
your grandfather and your father and your uncles and your brothers and your cousins and your
second-cousins and your third-cousins will never have the good luck to see the penitentiary.
Reckon you can remember that message? But before I let you go to carry it, I guess you might
as well hand out the paper they sent you over here with."

His prisoner fell into a paroxysm of rage, and struck at him.

"I'll git pap to kill ye," she shrieked. "I don' know nothin' 'bout yer Six-Cross-Roads, ner
no papers, ner yer dam Mister Harkels neither, ner you, ye razor-backed ole devil! Pap'll kill
ye; leave me go--leave me go!--Pap'll kill ye; I'll git him to kill ye!" Suddenly her struggles
ceased; her eyes closed; her tense little muscles relaxed and she drooped toward the floor;
the old man shifted his grip to support her, and in an instant she twisted out of his hands
and sprang out of reach, her eyes shining with triumph and venom.

"Ya-hay, Mister Razor-back!" she shrilled. "How's that fer hi? Pap'll kill ye, Sunday. You'll
be screechin' in hell in a week, an' we 'ull set up an' drink our apple-jack an' laff!" Martin
pursued her lumberingly, but she was agile as a monkey, and ran dodging up and down the counters
and mocked him, singing "Gran' mammy Tipsy-Toe," till at last she tired of the game and darted
out of the door, flinging back a hoarse laugh at him as she went. He followed; but when he
reached the street she was a mere shadow flitting under the courthouse trees. He looked after
her forebodingly, then turned his eyes toward the Palace Hotel. The editor of the "Herald"
was seated under the awning, with his chair tilted back against a post, gazing dreamily at
the murky red afterglow in the west.

"What's the use of tryin' to bother him with it?" old Tom asked himself. "He'd only laugh."
He noted that young William Todd sat near the editor, whittling absently. Martin chuckled.
"William's turn to-night," he muttered. "Well, the boys take mighty good care of him." He locked
the doors of the Emporium, tried them, and dropped the keys in his pocket.

As he crossed the Square to the drug-store, where his cronies awaited him, he turned again
to look at the figure of the musing journalist. "I hope he'll go out to the judge's," he said,
and shook his head, sadly. "I don't reckon Plattville's any too spry for that young man. Five
years he's be'n here. Well, it's a good thing for us folks, but I guess it ain't exactly high-life
for him." He kicked a stick out of his way impatiently. "Now, where'd that imp run to?" he
grumbled.

The imp was lying under the court-house steps. When the sound of Martin's footsteps had passed
away, she crept cautiously from her hiding-place and stole through the ungroomed grass to the
fence opposite the hotel. Here she stretched herself flat in the weeds and took from underneath
the tangled masses of her hair, where it was tied with a string, a rolled-up, crumpled slip
of greasy paper. With this in her fingers, she lay peering under the fence, her fierce eyes
fixed unwinkingly on Harkless and the youth sitting near him.

The street ran flat and gray in the slowly gathering dusk, straight to the western horizon
where the sunset embers were strewn in long, dark-red streaks; the maple trees were clean-cut
silhouettes against the pale rose and pearl tints of the sky above, and a tenderness seemed
to tremble in the air. Harkless often vowed to himself he would watch no more sunsets in Plattville;
he realized that their loveliness lent a too unhappy tone to the imaginings and introspections
upon which he was thrown by the loneliness of the environment, and he considered that he had
too much time in which to think about himself. For five years his introspections had monotonously
hurled one word at him: "Failure; Failure! Failure!" He thought the sunsets were making him
morbid. Could he have shared them, that would have been different.

His long, melancholy face grew longer and more melancholy in the twilight, while William Todd
patiently whittled near by. Plattville had often discussed the editor's habit of silence, and
Mr. Martin had suggested that possibly the reason Mr. Harkless was such a quiet man was that
there was nobody for him to talk to. His hearers did not agree, for the population of Carlow
County was a thing of pride, being greater than that of several bordering counties. They did
agree, however, that Harkless's quiet was not unkind, whatever its cause, and that when it
was broken it was usually broken to conspicuous effect. Perhaps it was because he wrote so
much that he hated to talk.

A bent figure came slowly down the street, and William hailed it cheerfully: "Evening, Mr. Fisbee."

"A good evening, Mr. Todd," answered the old man, pausing. "Ah, Mr. Harkless, I was looking
for you." He had not seemed to be looking for anything beyond the boundaries of his own dreams,
but he approached Harkless, tugging nervously at some papers in his pocket. "I have completed
my notes for our Saturday edition. It was quite easy; there is much doing."

"Thank you, Mr. Fisbee," said Harkless, as he took the manuscript. "Have you finished your
paper on the earlier Christian symbolism? I hope the 'Herald' may have the honor of printing
it." This was the form they used.

"I shall be the recipient of honor, sir," returned Fisbee. "Your kind offer will speed my work;
but I fear, Mr. Harkless, I very much fear, that your kindness alone prompts it, for, deeply
as I desire it, I cannot truthfully say that my essays appear to increase our circulation."
He made an odd, troubled gesture as he went on: "They do not seem to read them here, Mr. Harkless,
although Mr. Martin assures me that he carefully peruses my article on Chaldean decoration
whenever he rearranges his exhibition windows, and I bear in mind the clipping from a Rouen
paper you showed me, commenting generously upon the scholarship of the 'Herald.' But for fifteen
years I have tried to improve the art feeling in Plattville, and I may say that I have worked
in the face of no small discouragement. In fact," (there was a slight quaver in Fisbee's voice),
"I cannot remember that I ever received the slightest word or token of encouragement till you
came, Mr. Harkless. Since then I have labored with refreshed energy; still, I cannot claim
that our architecture shows a change for the better, and I fear the engravings upon the walls
of our people exhibit no great progress in selection. And--I--I wish also to say, Mr. Harkless,
if you find it necessary to make some alterations in the form of my reportorial items for Saturday's
issue, I shall perfectly understand, remembering your explanation that journalism demands it.
Good-evening, Mr. Harkless. Good-evening, Mr. Todd." He plodded on a few paces, then turned,
irresolutely.

"What is it, Fisbee?" asked Harkless.

Fisbee stood for a moment, as though about to speak, then he smiled faintly, shook his head,
and went his way. Harkless stared after him, surprised. It suddenly struck him, with a feeling
of irritation, that if Fisbee had spoken it would have been to advise him to call at Judge
Briscoe's. He laughed impatiently at the notion, and, drawing his pencil and a pad from his
pocket, proceeded to injure his eyes in the waning twilight by the editorial perusal of the
items his staff had just left in his hands. When published, the manuscript came under a flaring
heading, bequeathed by Harkless's predecessor in the chair of the "Herald," and the alteration
of which he felt Plattville would refuse to sanction: "Happenings of Our City." Below, was
printed in smaller type: "Improvements in the World of Business," and, beneath that, came the
rubric: "Also, the Cradle, the Altar, and the Tomb."

The first of Fisbee's items was thus recorded: "It may be noted that the new sign-board of
Mr. H. Miller has been put in place. We cannot but regret that Mr. Miller did not instruct
the painter to confine himself to a simpler method of lettering."

"Ah, Fisbee," murmured the editor, reproachfully, "that new sign-board is almost the only improvement
in the World of Business Plattville has seen this year. I wonder how many times we have used
it from the first, 'It is rumored in business circles that Herve Miller contemplates'--to the
exciting, 'Under Way,' and, 'Finishing Touches.' My poor White Knight, are five years of training
wasted on you? Sometimes you make me fear it. Here is Plattville panting for our story of the
hanging of the sign, and you throw away the climax like that!" He began to write rapidly, bending
low over the pad in the half darkness. His narrative was an amplification of the interesting
information (already possessed by every inhabitant) that Herve Miller had put up a new sign.
After a paragraph of handsome description, "Herve is always enterprising," wrote the editor.
"This is a move in the right direction. Herve, keep it up."

He glanced over the other items meditatively, making alterations here and there. The last two
Fisbee had written as follows:

"There is noticeable in the new (and somewhat incongruous) portico erected by Solomon Tibbs
at the residence of Mr. Henry Tibbs Willetts, an attempt at rococo decoration which cannot
fail to sadden the passer-by."

"Miss Sherwood of Rouen, whom Miss Briscoe knew at the Misses Jennings' finishing-school in
New York, is a guest of Judge Briscoe's household."

Fisbee's items were written in ink; and there was a blank space beneath the last. At the bottom
of the page something had been scribbled in pencil. Harkless tried vainly to decipher it, but
the twilight had fallen too deep, and the writing was too faint, so he struck a match and held
it close to the paper. The action betokened only a languid interest, but when he caught sight
of the first of the four subscribed lines he sat up straight in his chair with an ejaculation.

He put the paper in his pocket, and set off rapidly down the village street.

At his departure William Todd looked up quickly; then he got upon his feet and quietly followed
the editor. In the dusk a tattered little figure rose up from the weeds across the way, and
stole noiselessly after William. He was in his shirt-sleeves, his waistcoat unbuttoned and
loose. On the nearest corner Mr. Todd encountered a fellow-townsman, who had been pacing up
and down in front of a cottage, crooning to a protestive baby held in his arms. He had paused
in his vigil to stare after Harkless.

"Whereas he bound for, William?" inquired the man with the baby.

"Briscoes'," answered William, pursuing his way.

"I reckoned he would be," commented the other, turning to his wife, who sat on the doorstep,
"I reckoned so when I see that lady at the lecture last night."

The woman rose to her feet. "Hi, Bill Todd!" she said. "What you got onto the back of your
vest?" William paused, put his hand behind him and encountered a paper pinned to the dangling
strap of his waistcoat. The woman ran to him and unpinned the paper. It bore a writing. They
took it to where the yellow lamp-light shone through the open door, and read:

           "der Sir
              "FoLer harkls aL yo ples an gaRd him yoR
 best venagesn is closteR, harkls not Got 3 das to liv
                                  "We come in Wite."

"What ye think, William?" asked the man with the baby, anxiously. But the woman gave the youth
a sharp push with her hand. "They never dast to do it!" she cried. "Never in the world! You
hurry, Bill Todd. Don't you leave him out of your sight one second."

CHAPTER V. AT THE PASTURE BARS: ELDER-BUSHES MAY HAVE STINGS

The street upon which the Palace Hotel fronted formed the south side of the Square and ran
west to the edge of the town, where it turned to the south for a quarter of a mile or more,
then bent to the west again. Some distance from this second turn, there stood, fronting close
on the road, a large brick house, the most pretentious mansion in Carlow County. And yet it
was a homelike place, with its red-brick walls embowered in masses of cool Virginia creeper,
and a comfortable veranda crossing the broad front, while half a hundred stalwart sentinels
of elm and beech and poplar stood guard around it. The front walk was bordered by geraniums
and hollyhocks; and honeysuckle climbed the pillars of the porch. Behind the house there was
a shady little orchard; and, back of the orchard, an old-fashioned, very fragrant rose-garden,
divided by a long grape arbor, extended to the shallow waters of a wandering creek; and on
the bank a rustic seat was placed, beneath the sycamores.

From the first bend of the road, where it left the town and became (after some indecision)
a country highway--called the pike--rather than a proud city boulevard, a pathway led through
the fields to end at some pasture bars opposite the brick house.

John Harkless was leaning on the pasture bars. The stars were wan, and the full moon shone
over the fields. Meadows and woodlands lay quiet under the old, sweet marvel of a June night.
In the wide monotony of the flat lands, there sometimes comes a feeling that the whole earth
is stretched out before one. To-night it seemed to lie so, in the pathos of silent beauty,
all passive and still; yet breathing an antique message, sad, mysterious, reassuring. But there
had come a divine melody adrift on the air. Through the open windows it floated. Indoors some
one struck a peal of silver chords, like a harp touched by a lover, and a woman's voice was
lifted. John Harkless leaned on the pasture bars and listened with upraised head and parted lips.

"To thy chamber window roving, love hath led my feet."

The Lord sent manna to the children of Israel in the wilderness. Harkless had been five years
in Plattville, and a woman's voice singing Schubert's serenade came to him at last as he stood
by the pasture bars of Jones's field and listened and rested his dazzled eyes on the big, white
face of the moon.

How long had it been since he had heard a song, or any discourse of music other than that furnished
by the Plattville Band--not that he had not taste for a brass band! But music that he loved
always gave him an ache of delight and the twinge of reminiscences of old, gay days gone forever.
To-night his memory leaped to the last day of a June gone seven years; to a morning when the
little estuary waves twinkled in the bright sun about the boat in which he sat, the trim launch
that brought a cheery party ashore from their schooner to the Casino landing at Winter Harbor,
far up on the Maine coast.

It was the happiest of those last irresponsible days before he struck into his work in the
world and became a failure. To-night he saw the picture as plainly as if it were yesterday;
no reminiscence had risen so keenly before his eyes for years: pretty Mrs. Van Skuyt sitting
beside him--pretty Mrs. Van Skuyt and her roses! What had become of her? He saw the crowd of
friends waiting on the pier for their arrival, and the dozen or so emblazoned classmates (it
was in the time of brilliant flannels) who suddenly sent up a volley of college cheers in his
honor--how plainly the dear, old, young faces rose up before him to-night, the men from whose
lives he had slipped! Dearest and jolliest of the faces was that of Tom Meredith, clubmate,
classmate, his closest friend, the thin, red-headed third baseman; he could see Tom's mouth
opened at least a yard, it seemed, such was his frantic vociferousness. Again and again the
cheers rang out, "Harkless! Harkless!" on the end of them. In those days everybody (particularly
his classmates) thought he would be minister to England in a few years, and the orchestra on
the Casino porch was playing "The Conquering Hero," in his honor, and at the behest of Tom
Meredith, he knew.

There were other pretty ladies besides Mrs. Van Skuyt in the launch-load from the yacht, but,
as they touched the pier, pretty girls, or pretty women, or jovial gentlemen, all were overlooked
in the wild scramble the college men made for their hero. They haled him forth, set him on
high, bore him on their shoulders, shouting "Skal to the Viking!" and carried him up the wooded
bluff to the Casino. He heard Mrs. Van Skuyt say, "Oh, we're used to it; we've put in at several
other places where he had friends!" He struggled manfully to be set down, but his triumphal
procession swept on. He heard bystanders telling each other, "It's that young Harkless, 'the
Great Harkless,' they're all so mad about"; and while it pleased him a little to hear such
things, they always made him laugh a great deal. He had never understood his popularity: he
had been chief editor of the university daily, and he had done a little in athletics, and the
rest of his distinction lay in college offices his mates had heaped upon him without his being
able to comprehend why they did it. And yet, somehow, and in spite of himself, they had convinced
him that the world was his oyster; that it would open for him at a touch. He could not help
seeing how the Freshmen looked at him, how the Sophomores jumped off the narrow campus walks
to let him pass; he could not help knowing that he was the great man of his time, so that "The
Great Harkless" came to be one of the traditions of the university. He remembered the wild
progress they made for him up the slope that morning at Winter Harbor, how the people baked
on, and laughed, and clapped their hands. But at the veranda edge he had noticed a little form
disappearing around a corner of the building; a young girl running away as fast as she could.

"See there!" he said, as the tribe set him down, "You have frightened the populace." And Tom
Meredith stopped shouting long enough to answer, "It's my little cousin, overcome with emotion.
She's been counting the hours till you came--been hearing of you from me and others for a good
while; and hasn't been able to talk or think of anything else. She's only fifteen, and the
crucial moment is too much for her--the Great Harkless has arrived, and she has fled."

He remembered other incidents of his greatness, of the glory that now struck him as rarely
comical; he hoped he hadn't taken it too seriously then, in the flush of his youth. Maybe,
after all, he had been a, big-headed boy, but he must have bottled up his conceit tightly enough,
or the other boys would have detected it and abhorred him. He was inclined to believe that
he had not been very much set up by the pomp they made for him. At all events, that day at
Winter Harbor had been beautiful, full of the laughter of friends and music; for there was
a musicale at the Casino in the afternoon.

But the present hour grew on him as he leaned on the pasture bars, and suddenly his memories
sped; and the voice that was singing Schubert's serenade across the way touched him with the
urgent, personal appeal that a present beauty always had for him. It was a soprano; and without
tremolo, yet came to his ear with a certain tremulous sweetness; it was soft and slender, but
the listener knew it could be lifted with fullness and power if the singer would. It spoke
only of the song, yet the listener thought of the singer. Under the moon thoughts run into
dreams, and he dreamed that the owner of the voice, she who quoted "The Walrus and the Carpenter"
on Fisbee's notes, was one to laugh with you and weep with you; yet her laughter would be tempered
with sorrow, and her tears with laughter.

When the song was ended, he struck the rail he leaned upon a sharp blow with his open hand.
There swept over him a feeling that he had stood precisely where he stood now, on such a night,
a thousand years ago, had heard that voice and that song, had listened and been moved by the
song, and the night, just as he was moved now.

He had long known himself for a sentimentalist; he had almost given up trying to cure himself.
And he knew himself for a born lover; he had always been in love with some one. In his earlier
youth his affections had been so constantly inconstant that he finally came to settle with
his self-respect by recognizing in himself a fine constancy that worshipped one woman always--it
was only the shifting image of her that changed! Somewhere (he dreamed, whimsically indulgent
of the fancy; yet mocking himself for it) there was a girl whom he had never seen, who waited
till he should come. She was Everything. Until he found her, he could not help adoring others
who possessed little pieces and suggestions of her--her brilliancy, her courage, her short
upper lip, "like a curled roseleaf," or her dear voice, or her pure profile. He had no recollection
of any lady who had quite her eyes.

He had never passed a lovely stranger on the street, in the old days, without a thrill of delight
and warmth. If he never saw her again, and the vision only lasted the time it takes a lady
to cross the sidewalk from a shop door to a carriage, he was always a little in love with her,
because she bore about her, somewhere, as did every pretty girl he ever saw, a suggestion of
the far-away divinity. One does not pass lovely strangers in the streets of Plattville. Miss
Briscoe was pretty, but not at all in the way that Harkless dreamed. For five years the lover
in him that had loved so often had been starved of all but dreams. Only at twilight and dusk
in the summer, when, strolling, he caught sight of a woman's skirt, far up the village street--half-outlined
in the darkness under the cathedral arch of meeting branches--this romancer of petticoats could
sigh a true lover's sigh, and, if he kept enough distance between, fly a yearning fancy that
his lady wandered there.

Ever since his university days the image of her had been growing more and more distinct. He
had completely settled his mind as to her appearance and her voice. She was tall, almost too
tall, he was sure of that; and out of his consciousness there had grown a sweet and vivacious
young face that he knew was hers. Her hair was light-brown with gold lustres (he reveled in
the gold lustres, on the proper theory that when your fancy is painting a picture you may as
well go in for the whole thing and make it sumptuous), and her eyes were gray. They were very
earnest, and yet they sparkled and laughed to him companionably; and sometimes he had smiled
back upon her. The Undine danced before him through the lonely years, on fair nights in his
walks, and came to sit by his fire on winter evenings when he stared alone at the embers.

And to-night, here in Plattville, he heard a voice he had waited for long, one that his fickle
memory told him he had never heard before. But, listening, he knew better--he had heard it
long ago, though when and how, he did not know, as rich and true, and ineffably tender as now.
He threw a sop to his common sense. "Miss Sherwood is a little thing" (the image was so surely
tall) "with a bumpy forehead and spectacles," he said to himself, "or else a provincial young
lady with big eyes to pose at you." Then he felt the ridiculousness of looking after his common
sense on a moonlight night in June; also, he knew that he lied.

The song had ceased, but the musician lingered, and the keys were touched to plaintive harmonies
new to him. He had come to Plattville before "Cavalleria Rusticana" was sung at Rome, and now,
entranced, he heard the "Intermezzo" for the first time. Listening to this, he feared to move
lest he should wake from a summer-night's dream.

A ragged little shadow flitted down the path behind him, and from a solitary apple-tree, standing
like a lonely ghost in the middle of the field, came the woo of a screech owl--twice. It was
answered--twice--from a clump of elder-bushes that grew in a fence-corner fifty yards west
of the pasture bars. Then the barrel of a squirrel rifle issued, lifted out of the white elder-blossoms,
and lay along the fence. The music in the house across the way ceased, and Harkless saw two
white dresses come out through the long parlor windows to the veranda.

"It will be cooler out here," came the voice of the singer clearly through the quiet. "What
a night!"

John vaulted the bars and started to cross the road. They saw him from the veranda, and Miss
Briscoe called to him in welcome. As his tall figure stood out plainly in the bright light
against the white dust, a streak of fire leaped from the elder-blossoms and there rang out
the sharp report of a rifle. There were two screams from the veranda. One white figure ran
into the house. The other, a little one with a gauzy wrap streaming behind, came flying out
into the moonlight--straight to Harkless. There was a second report; the rifle-shot was answered
by a revolver. William Todd had risen up, apparently from nowhere, and, kneeling by the pasture
bars, fired at the flash of the rifle.

"Jump fer the shadder, Mr. Harkless," he shouted; "he's in them elders," and then: "Fer God's
sake, comeback!"

Empty-handed as he was, the editor dashed for the treacherous elder-bush as fast as his long
legs could carry him; but, before he had taken six strides, a hand clutched his sleeve, and
a girl's voice quavered from close behind him:

"Don't run like that, Mr. Harkless; I can't keep up!" He wheeled about, and confronted a vision,
a dainty little figure about five feet high, a flushed and lovely face, hair and draperies
disarranged and flying. He stamped his foot with rage. "Get back in the house!" he cried.

"You mustn't go," she panted. "It's the only way to stop you."

"Go back to the house!" he shouted, savagely.

"Will you come?"

"Fer God's sake," cried William Todd, "come back! Keep out of the road." He was emptying his
revolver at the clump of elder, the uproar of his firing blasting the night. Some one screamed
from the house:

"Helen! Helen!"

John seized the girl's wrists roughly; her gray eyes flashed into his defiantly. "Will you
go?" he roared.

"No!"

He dropped her wrists, caught her up in his arms as if she had been a kitten, and leaped into
the shadow of the trees that leaned over the road from the yard. The rifle rang out again,
and the little ball whistled venomously overhead. Harkless ran along the fence and turned in
at the gate.

A loose strand of the girl's hair blew across his cheek, and in the moon her head shone with
gold. She had light-brown hair and gray eyes and a short upper lip like a curled rose-leaf.
He set her down on the veranda steps. Both of them laughed wildly.

"But you came with me!" she gasped triumphantly.

"I always thought you were tall," he answered; and there was afterward a time when he had to
agree that this was a somewhat vague reply.

CHAPTER VI. JUNE

Judge Briscoe smiled grimly and leaned on his shot-gun in the moonlight by the veranda. He
and William Todd had been trampling down the elder-bushes, and returning to the house, found
Minnie alone on the porch. "Safe?" he said to his daughter, who turned an anxious face upon
him. "They'll be safe enough now, and in our garden."

"Maybe I oughtn't to have let them go," she returned, nervously.

"Pooh! They're all right; that scalawag's half-way to Six-Cross-Roads by this time, isn't he,
William?"

"He tuck up the fence like a scared rabbit," Mr. Todd responded, looking into his hat to avoid
meeting the eyes of the lady. "I didn't have no call to toller, and he knowed how to run, I
reckon. Time Mr. Harkless come out the yard again, he was near out o' sight, and we see him
take across the road to the wedge-woods, near half-a-mile up. Somebody else with him then--looked
like a kid. Must 'a' cut acrost the field to join him. They're fur enough towards home by this."

"Did Miss Helen shake hands with you four or five times?" asked Briscoe, chuckling. 

For pulling a lemon or guava--for laughing in the presence of a convict
policeman--for having a pipe--for wearing a belt or button not issued
by government--for mustering in dirty trousers on Sunday, although
to wash them the owner would have to go naked all the Saturday afternoon--for
having half or a quarter of a pipeful of tobacco--for offences the
most trivial, and sometimes on false charges--the most inoffensive
and best behaved men of Cascade and Longridge were often to be found
filling up the cells which might otherwise have been set apart for
the custody of some of the grosser criminals who were tried at the
assizes.... The convicts selected as constables were like a ruthless
band of predatory assailants, seizing their fellow-prisoners under
any and every pretence, in order to have 'cases for the police-office!'
A first-class officer overheard the following speech uttered by a
convict policeman:--'I have no case for court this morning--what will
Mr. ---- say to me?

But a case I must have--and a case I will have--and here goes!' This policeman proceeded with
another into the bush, and in an hour returned bringing in two men on a capital charge. On the
evidence of their captors alone these two men were committed to gaol, tried at the assizes, and
sentenced to death.

By whom were the police compelled to such activity? By Mr. Price. His opinion, publicly expressed,
was, that a policeman could not be doing his duty unless he had 'cases for court.'"--Ibid, pp.
88, 89.

* * * * *

"A short analysis of the abstract would quickly strip the favored '25' of some rays of their
infamous glory, and do more to expose the blunders, follies, and
ferocious inhumanities of convict discipline than volumes of concocted
reports and oracular despatches.

From his position, Dr. Hampton must know that under the name of discipline,
deeds have been done sufficiently atrocious to glut the soul of a
Caligula.

He knows that the perjuries and punishments about tobacco were sins that cried to heaven for
abolition. He knows that in every seven cases out of ten the convicts at a penal station are
more sinned against than sinning.

Nothing is required to prove this but a critical inspection of their 'police sheets.' In the
court-house at Hobart Town, a youth, E---- G----, aged 19, was on his trial for a capital offence.
The crown prosecutor referred to the prisoner's bad character as exhibited by the unusual number of
offences on his police sheet. The judge asked to see the parchment. While looking at it, G----
said, 'Your honor, the whole of them wouldn't make one ---- good one!' For a few moments the
judge continued to examine the record, and then flung it on the floor of the court-house with
an expression of disgust at the childish nature of the 'trifling offences' set down as serious
crimes."--Review of Dr. Hampton's First Report on Norfolk Island:
By Rev. T. Rogers. p. 21.]

[Footnote 252: Despatches, 30th September
and 7th November, 1846.]

SECTION XXIV.

But Van Diemen's Land was the chief sphere of the probation system. The colonists, at first,
were not indisposed towards the experiment: the promise of an unlimited expenditure and a boundless
supply of labor reconciled them to its gigantic proportions. It assumed the air of philanthropy:
Sir John Franklin, when he announced the first outline of the scheme, referred to the redemption
of the negro slave, and said--"that England was about to incur a large expenditure in the
attempt to emancipate her erring children from the infinitely more degrading slavery of crime."[253]
This picture was fully borne out by Sir James Graham, who observed, in reference to the probationer--"New
scenes will open to his view, where skilled labor is in great demand; where the earnings of industry
rapidly accumulate. The prisoner should be made to know that he enters on a new career. The
classification of the convicts in the colony (of Van Diemen's Land), as set forth in Lord Stanley's
despatch, should be made intelligible to him. He should be told that he will be sent to Van Diemen's
Land: there, if he behave well, at once to receive a ticket-of-leave, which is equivalent to
freedom, with the certainty of abundant maintenance, the fruits of
industry."[254]

In describing the probation system it is not necessary
to do more than state its general aspects and acknowledged results.

The publications in the colonies and the official documents substantially concur, and with minute
controversy history has no concern. To view the subject with the prejudices of a party would
be treason to those important interests affected by the question. Crime will still be committed--and
its treatment, the great problem of the age, is the business of all men.

The comptroller-general, Captain Forster, who obtained his appointment by the influence of Captain
Montagu, entered on his office when Sir Eardley Wilmot arrived (1843), and re-modelled the
practical measures of Dr. Milligan, who for a time, under the auspices
of Sir John Franklin, had possessed the chief command.

Captain Forster was too well acquainted with discipline to entertain the smallest expectation
of ultimate success.

Among his friends he expressed his distrust without reserve: but
believing the home government irrevocably pledged, he concluded that
penal philosophy was not his affair; and, not without reason, that
he was better qualified than a stranger to mitigate the natural tendencies
of the system.

He had not been consulted in its structure: he did not hold himself
responsible for its errors or results.

During four years, ending in 1844, more than 15,000 prisoners arrived: in 1847, there were, in all,
30,000.

Free emigration was stopped. In 1842, 2,446 emigrants landed; in 1843, 26; in 1844, only 1.[255]
The greater number of transports under short sentences became almost
immediately eligible for hire, who were at first preferred by the
farmers to free men.

The free laborers rapidly retreated to the other colonies.

Gangs of probationers were formed throughout the country. Their locations were chiefly selected
with reference rather to their easy accommodation than their useful
employment.

A few large gangs were established beyond the settled country, but the greater part were lodged
in the old buildings erected for the use of road parties, and ill-adapted for either moral or
industrial operations.

Van Diemen's Land was supposed by the crown to be peculiarly fitted
for the experiment: an area nearly equal to Ireland, occupied by little
more than 50,000 inhabitants, appeared to offer ample room for the
stations.

It was not considered that the free population was condensed chiefly within a line of country
between the Derwent and Tamar, or on the borders of those rivers; and that however a temporary
location might be chosen, the settled districts must ultimately absorb
the pass and ticket holders.

Most were within a few hours, nearly all within a day's journey of the free population. The
ample supply of food; a system of moral training, which devoted considerable time to books
and pencils; a decided discouragement of strictness in discipline
and severity in punishment, removed the temptation to rebel.

The chief grievance of the prisoners was the prohibition of smoking, often indeed evaded by the connivance
and assistance of the overseers; yet, while at some stations indolence and plenty prevailed,
at others, remote from the public eye, misery and vice existed to an extent too awful for
more than mere reference. At the coal mines the men were robbed of their provisions by their fellow-prisoners;
new clothing was not issued until they were in tatters; hundreds were without shirts, scores
without shoes, and some only wrapped round with rugs (1843).

These evils were certainly not lasting; but they have been by no
means unfrequent at stations remote from the capital, and from the
notice of the press.

The colony did not afford a sufficient corps of able and conscientious
superintendents: many were military and naval officers, qualified
to control, but utterly unable to instruct.

The quiet movement of the vast system was earnestly desired by the local government: its effects
would, of course, be inferred from the absence of punishments; and
it was understood by the lower officers, that the shorter their black
lists, the more agreeable their periodical reports.

It was stated by the comptroller that they were engaged to carry
out the system, not to condemn it; and disaffection ended in dismissal.[256]

The
rapid increase of numbers disconcerted the comptroller.

The new arrivals were sent to crowd the stations of their predecessors: order, and even decency,
were impracticable. The accommodation of the officers was often miserable: too distant for proper
inspection.

As the men removed from Norfolk Island were added to the gangs, their
tendencies became more alarming and apparent: they were of the worst
possible description, and defied all remedy.[257] No artifices of
language will enable the moralist to describe them.

The mean pay of the officers, their uncertain tenure of office, and the nature of their duties,
would only attract candidates for employment as a temporary expedient. The control of considerable
bodies of men, under favorable circumstances, demands both vigilance and firmness. The prisoners
perceive, almost at a glance, the character of their superiors: their history and habits are the theme
of constant inquiry and discussion. An equal temper and unwearied attention are required in this arduous
occupation. But the persons engaged were often wholly disqualified by their past pursuits and personal
character, to inspire either awe or respect. The practical oversight was often committed to
the least responsible.

The religious instructors selected by the government, though chiefly
of the episcopal or catholic professions, were of miscellaneous origin.

The clergy of all persuasions were formerly admitted to the road parties; their discourses were welcome,
for they gave an interval from toil: some performed service on the sabbath at their own charge.
The new instructors were strictly official: some, indeed, highly
educated men, of long standing in their respective churches; others
were the off-shoots of various sects, without education or personal
dignity.

Of their qualifications, several high officers have spoken with contempt.[258] These opinions
were, however, partly the indirect result of disputes, in which the instructors were very generally
involved. Several were known to convey accounts of evils within the stockades, which it was
the desire of the department both to conceal and to suppress: notwithstanding, many were deficient
in zeal and ability. Their labors were strictly formal, and were soon considered hopeless.
Several exceptions must be understood; but to select them would be invidious. The exclusive
occupation of clergymen as teachers of convicts, is generally unfavorable
to their usefulness: the recognised pastor of a congregation brings
to the prison the reputation and sanctity of his character among the
free; the instructor of a gang is soon considered but as the agent
of penal government.

The basis of Lord Stanley's system was an imaginary demand for labor
in Van Diemen's Land.

The home government was so confident in this resource, that placards
were suspended on the English prisons, holding forth the prospect
of high wages as the final stage of transportation.

The execution of public works in the colonies, except at an equivalent
price, was strictly prohibited.

By improving the settled parts of the colony, the crown might have increased its attraction
to capitalists, and by diverting an excess of laborers excited the
competition of masters.

The governor was desirous of allaying colonial irritation by some substantial boon: the orders
of Lord Stanley were, however, rigid. The comptroller-general was forbidden to adopt any detailed
regulation at variance with the scheme prescribed by the crown, or to alter or depart from
its provisions, without express authority.[259]

The demands of the settlers for laborers soon fell far short of the supply. The written contracts
for the passholders in the first stages of service bound the master to pay over a portion of their
wages to the crown: this course was troublesome.

Thus few, except in the last stage of their service, were able to obtain employment at all; and
the graduated scale of payment fell to the ground.

The accumulation at the hiring depôts, sometimes to the number of 4,000, who could obtain no
engagement, induced the governor to urge their useful employment
in public works.

He stated that neither private individuals nor the colonial treasury could afford to employ them in improvements
of prospective utility, and recommended that a fixed moderate payment
should be accepted, in return for the service they might perform.

The reply of his lordship was decided:--"If," he observed, "the free inhabitants cannot purchase
the labor we have to sell, at a price which it is worth our while
to accept, it remains for us to consider whether other advantageous
employment cannot be found."

"The necessaries of life may be produced to such an extent, as to render the convicts independent of
the free colonists, who are not entitled to claim any compensation for the inconvenience with
which their presence may be attended." His lordship proposed that new lands should be surveyed,
cultivated, and sold for the advantage of the imperial treasury;
and thus the government might assert "its independence of the settlers,"
and teach them to "appreciate correctly the value of convict labor."[260]

The
defiant tone of this despatch, and its contemptuous reference to the
settlers, determined the question of transportation.[261] The partizans
of abolition could assail the system at its foundation.

Thenceforth the interests of the colonists, moral and material, were
obviously one.

The crown was to compete in the market with the farmer and the landowner;
and the labor market to be overruled by official contrivance, for
the benefit of the imperial treasury.

          The colonial newspapers were filled
             with notices of robberies, and
            the complaints of employers. A
             rapid emigration took place: free laborers and mechanics sold their
properties, acquired by years of toil, often for a trifling sum; and
the immigrants, brought to the colony at great public and private
cost, almost universally passed over to the adjacent communities.

The comptroller-general attempted to carry out the supplementary plan
ordered by Lord Stanley.

Agricultural establishments were formed; but this only provided for the probationers. The passholders
were entitled to enter the service of the settlers.

To detain them twenty miles from the nearest farm-house, was to extend indefinitely the first stage
of punishment; but when drafted to the settled districts, they could
not be employed,[262] except for the benefit of the colony, and against
this resource the decision of Lord Stanley was imperative.[263]

The
hiring depôts were placed in settled districts or chief towns.

The stage of rigid discipline being past, the convicts were not required to labour with diligence,
or suffer much restraint. They were now deemed fit for society, and it was merely the fault of
their numbers that many were unemployed. They were permitted to roam about in search of casual employment--to
spread themselves over the country. They were allowed to expend the money they acquired in
temporary service, and while any remained they were unwilling to accept an engagement. Thus
they were fed and clothed, and lightly worked: they were free from care, their time was running
out, and they were objects rather of envy than commiseration

.
 When the two young people got up from their bench, the two men rose
hastily, and then sauntered slowly toward them. When they met, Harkless shook each of them
cordially by the hand, without seeming to know it.

"We were coming to look for you," explained the judge. "William was afraid to go home alone;
thought some one might take him for Mr. Harkless and shoot him before he got into town. Can
you come out with young Willetts in the morning, Harkless," he went on, "and go with the ladies
to see the parade? And Minnie wants you to stay to dinner and go to the show with them in the
afternoon."

Harkless seized his hand and shook it fervently, and then laughed heartily, as he accepted
the invitation.

At the gate, Miss Sherwood extended her hand to him and said politely, and with some flavor
of mockery: "Good-night, Mr. Harkless. I do not leave to-morrow. I am very glad to have met you."

"We are going to keep her all summer if we can," said Minnie, weaving her arm about her friend's
waist. "You'll come in the morning?"

"Good-night, Miss Sherwood," he returned, hilariously. "It has been such a pleasure to meet
you. Thank you so much for saving my life. It was very good of you indeed. Yes, in the morning.
Good-night--good-night." He shook hands with them all again, including Mr. Todd, who was going
with him.

He laughed most of the way home, and Mr. Todd walked at his side in amazement. The Herald Building
was a decrepit frame structure on Main Street; it had once been a small warehouse and was now
sadly in need of paint. Closely adjoining it, in a large, blank-looking yard, stood a low brick
cottage, over which the second story of the warehouse leaned in an effect of tipsy affection
that had reminded Harkless, when he first saw it, of an old Sunday-school book wood-cut of
an inebriated parent under convoy of a devoted child. The title to these two buildings and
the blank yard had been included in the purchase of the "Herald"; and the cottage was Harkless's
home.

There was a light burning upstairs in the "Herald" office. From the street a broad, tumble-down
stairway ran up on the outside of the building to the second floor, and at the stairway railing
John turned and shook his companion warmly by the hand.

"Good-night, William," he said. "It was plucky of you to join in that muss, to-night. I shan't
forget it."

"I jest happened to come along," replied the other, drowsily; then, with a portentous yawn,
he asked: "Ain't ye goin' to bed?"

"No; Parker wouldn't allow it."

"Well," observed William, with another yawn, which bade fair to expose the veritable soul of
him, "I d'know how ye stand it. It's closte on eleven o'clock. Good-night." At that it suddenly
struck him that he was twenty-nine years of age; that he had laughed a great deal that evening;
that he had laughed and laughed over things not in the least humorous, like an excited schoolboy
making his first formal call; that he had shaken hands with Miss Briscoe when he left her,
as if he should never see her again; that he had taken Miss Sherwood's hand twice in one very
temporary parting; that he had shaken the judge's hand five times, and William's four!

"Idiot!" he cried. "What has happened to me?" Then he shook his fist at the moon and went in
to work--he thought.

CHAPTER VII. MORNING: "SOME IN RAGS AND SOME IN TAGS AND SOME IN VELVET GOWNS"

The bright sun of circus-day shone into Harkless's window, and he awoke to find himself smiling.
For a little while he lay content, drowsily wondering why he smiled, only knowing that there
was something new. It was thus, as a boy, he had wakened on his birthday mornings, or on Christmas,
or on the Fourth of July, drifting happily out of pleasant dreams into the consciousness of
long-awaited delights that had come true, yet lying only half-awake in a cheerful borderland,
leaving happiness undefined.

The morning breeze was fluttering at his window blind; a honeysuckle vine tapped lightly on
the pane. Birds were trilling, warbling, whistling. From the street came the rumbling of wagons,
merry cries of greeting, and the barking of dogs. What was it made him feel so young and strong
and light-hearted? The breeze brought him the smell of June roses, fresh and sweet with dew,
and then he knew why he had come smiling from his dreams. He would go a holiday-making. With
that he leaped out of bed, and shouted loudly: "Zen! Hello, Xenophon!"

In answer, an ancient, very black darky put his head in at the door, his
warped and wrinkled visage showing under his grizzled hair like charred
paper in a fall of pine ashes. He said: "Good-mawn', suh. Yessuh. Hit's
done pump' full. Good-mawn', suh." What can the matter be?
        Oh dear! What can the matter be?
        Oh dear! What can the matter be?
             Johnnie's so long at the Fair!"

At the sound of this complaint, delivered in a manly voice, the listener's jaw dropped, and
his mouth opened and stayed open. "Him!" he muttered, faintly. "Singin'!"

    "Well, the old Triangle knew the music of our tread;
     How the peaceful Seminole would tremble in his bed!"

sang the editor. "I dunno huccome it," exclaimed the old man, "an' dat ain' hyer ner dar; but,
bless Gawd! de young man' happy!" A thought struck him suddenly, and he scratched his head.
"Maybe he goin' away," he said, querulously. "What become o' ole Zen?" The splashing ceased,
but not the voice, which struck into a noble marching chorus. "Oh, my Lawd," said the colored
man, "I pray you listen at dat!"

           "Soldiers marching up the street,
             They keep the time;
             They look sublime!
            Hear them play Die Wacht am Rhein!
             They call them Schneider's Band.
               Tra la la la, la!"

The length of Main Street and all the Square resounded with the rattle of vehicles of every
kind. Since earliest dawn they had been pouring into the village, a long procession on every
country road. There were great red and blue farm wagons, drawn by splendid Clydesdales; the
elders of the family on the front seat and on boards laid from side to side in front, or on
chairs placed close behind, while, in the deep beds back of these, children tumbled in the
straw, or peeped over the sides, rosy-cheeked and laughing, eyes alight with blissful anticipations.
There were more pretentious two-seated cut-unders and stout buckboards, loaded down with merrymakers,
four on a seat meant for two; there were rattle-trap phaetons and comfortable carry-alls drawn
by steady spans; and, now and then, mule teams bringing happy negroes, ready to squander all
on the first Georgia watermelons and cider. Every vehicle contained heaping baskets of good
things to eat (the previous night had been a woeful Bartholomew for Carlow chickens) and underneath,
where the dogs paced faithfully, swung buckets and fodder for the horses, while colts innumerable
trotted dose to the maternal flanks, viewing the world with their big, new eyes in frisky surprise.

Here and there the trim side-bar buggy of some prosperous farmer's son, escorting his sweetheart,
flashed along the road, the young mare stepping out in pride of blood to pass the line of wagons,
the youth who held the reins, resplendent in Sunday best and even better, his scorched brown
face glowing with a fine belief in the superiority of both his steed and his lady; the latter
beaming out upon life and rejoicing in the light-blue ribbons on her hat, the light-blue ribbon
around her waist, the light-blue, silk half-mittens on her hands, and the beautiful red coral
necklace about her neck and the red coral buttons that fastened her gown in the back.

The air was full of exhilaration; everybody was laughing and shouting and calling greetings;
for Carlow County was turning out, and from far and near the country people came; nay, from
over the county line, clouds of dust rising from every thoroughfare and highway, and sweeping
into town to herald their coming.

Dibb Zane, the "sprinkling contractor," had been at work with the town water-cart since the
morning stars were bright, but he might as well have watered the streets with his tears, which,
indeed, when the farmers began to come in, bringing their cyclones of dust, he drew nigh unto,
after a spell of profanity as futile as his cart.

           "Tief wie das Meer soll deine Liebe sein,"

hummed the editor in the cottage. His song had taken on a reflective tone as that of one who
cons a problem, or musically ponders which card to play. He was kneeling before an old trunk
in his bedchamber. From one compartment he took a neatly folded pair of duck trousers and a
light-gray tweed coat; from another, a straw hat with a ribbon of bright colors. They had lain
in the trunk a long time undisturbed; and he examined them musingly. He shook the coat and
brushed it; then he laid the garments upon his bed, and proceeded to shave himself carefully,
after which he donned the white trousers, the gray coat, and, rummaging in the trunk again,
found a gay pink cravat, which he fastened about his tall collar (also a resurrection from
the trunk) with a pearl pin. After that he had a long, solemn time arranging his hair with
a pair of brushes. When at last he was suited, and his dressing completed, he sallied forth
to breakfast.

Xenophon stared after him as he went out of the gate whistling heartily. The old darky lifted
his hands, palms outward.

"Lan' name, who dat!" he exclaimed aloud. "Who dat in dem pan-jingeries? He jine' de circus?"
His hands fell upon his knees, and he got to his feet pneumatically, shaking his head with
foreboding. "Honey, honey, hit' baid luck, baid luck sing 'fo' breakfus. Trouble 'fo' de day
be done. Trouble, honey, gre't trouble. Baid luck, baid luck!"

Along the Square the passing of the editor in his cool equipment evoked some gasps of astonishment;
and Mr. Tibbs and his sister rushed from the postoffice to stare after him.

"He looks just beautiful, Solomon," said Miss Tibbs.

"But what's the name for them kind of clothes?" inquired her brother. "'Seems to me there's
a special way of callin' 'em. 'Seems as if I see a picture of 'em, somewheres. Wasn't it on
the cover of that there long-tennis box we bought and put in the window, and the country people
thought it was a seining outfit?"

"It was a game, the catalogue said," observed Miss Selina. "Wasn't it?"

"It was a mighty pore investment," the postmaster answered.

As Harkless approached the hotel, a decrepit old man, in a vast straw hat and a linen duster
much too large for him, came haltingly forward to meet him. He was Widow-Woman Wimby's husband.
And, as did every one else, he spoke of his wife by the name of her former martial companion.

"Be'n a-lookin' fer you, Mr. Harkless," he said in a shaking spindle of a voice, as plaintive
as his pale little eyes. "Mother Wimby, she sent some roses to ye. Cynthy's fixin' 'em on yer
table. I'm well as ever I am; but her, she's too complaining to come in fer show-day. This
morning, early, we see some the Cross-Roads folks pass the place towards town, an' she sent
me in to tell ye. Oh, I knowed ye'd laugh. Says she, 'He's too much of a man to be skeered,'
says she, 'these here tall, big men always 'low nothin' on earth kin hurt 'em,' says she, 'but
you tell him to be keerful,' says she; an' I see Bill Skillett an' his brother on the Square
lessun a half-an-hour ago, 'th my own eyes. I won't keep ye from yer breakfast.--Eph Watts
is in there, eatin'. He's come back; but I guess I don't need to warn ye agin' him. He seems
peaceable enough. It's the other folks you got to look out fer."

He limped away. The editor waved his hand to him from the door, but the old fellow shook his
head, and made a warning, friendly gesture with his arm.

Harkless usually ate his breakfast alone, as he was the latest riser in Plattville. (There
were days in the winter when he did not reach the hotel until eight o'clock.) This morning
he found a bunch of white roses, still wet with dew and so fragrant that the whole room was
fresh and sweet with their odor, prettily arranged in a bowl on the table, and, at his plate,
the largest of all with a pin through the stem. He looked up, smilingly, and nodded at the
red-haired girl. "Thank you, Charmion," he said. "That's very pretty."

She turned even redder than she always was, and answered nothing, vigorously darting her brush
at an imaginary fly on the cloth. After several minutes she said abruptly, "You're welcome."

There was a silence, finally broken by a long, gasping sigh. Astonished, he looked at the girl.
Her eyes were set unfathomably upon his pink tie; the wand had dropped from her nerveless hand,
and she stood rapt and immovable. She started violently from her trance. "Ain't you goin' to
finish your coffee?" she asked, plying her instrument again, and, bending over him slightly,
whispered: "Say, Eph Watts is over there behind you."

At a table in a far corner of the room a large gentleman in a brown frock coat was quietly
eating his breakfast and reading the "Herald." He was of an ornate presence, though entirely
neat. A sumptuous expanse of linen exhibited itself between the lapels of his low-cut waistcoat,
and an inch of bediamonded breastpin glittered there, like an ice-ledge on a snowy mountain
side. He had a steady, blue eye and a dissipated, iron-gray mustache. This personage was Mr.
Ephraim Watts, who, following a calling more fashionable in the eighteenth century than in
the latter decades of the nineteenth, had shaken the dust of Carlow from his feet some three
years previously, at the strong request of the authorities. The "Herald" had been particularly
insistent upon his deportation, and, in the local phrase, Harkless had "run him out of town."
Perhaps it was because the "Herald's" opposition (as the editor explained at the time) had
been merely moral and impersonal, and the editor had always confessed to a liking for the unprofessional
qualities of Mr. Watts, that there was but slight embarrassment when the two gentlemen met
to-day. His breakfast finished, Harkless went over to the other and extended his hand. Cynthia
held her breath and clutched the back of a chair. However, Mr. Watts made no motion toward
his well-known hip pocket. Instead, he rose, flushed slightly, and accepted the hand offered him.

"I'm glad to see you, Mr. Watts," said the journalist, cordially. "Also, if you are running
with the circus and calculate on doing business here to-day, I'll have to see that you are
fired out of town before noon. How are you? You're looking extremely well."

"Mr. Harkless," answered Watts, "I cherish no hard feelings, and I never said but what you
done exactly right when I left, three years ago. No, sir; I'm not here in a professional way
at all, and I don't want to be molested. I've connected myself with an oil company, and I'm
down here to look over the ground. It beats poker and fan-tan hollow, though there ain't as
many chances in favor of the dealer, and in oil it's the farmer that gets the rake-off. I've
come back, but in an enterprising spirit this time, to open up a new field and shed light and
money in Carlow. They told me never to show my face here again, but if you say I stay, I guess
I stay. I always was sure there was oil in the county, and I want to prove it for everybody's
benefit. Is it all right?"

"My dear fellow," laughed the young man, shaking the gambler's hand again, "it is all right.
I have always been sorry I had to act against you. Everything is all right! Stay and bore to
Corea if you like. Did ever you see such glorious weather?"

"I'll let you in on some shares," Watts called after him as he turned away. He nodded in reply
and was leaving the room when Cynthia detained him by a flourish of the fly-brush. "Say," she
said,--she always called him "Say"--"You've forgot your flower."

He came back, and thanked her. "Will you pin it on for me, Charmion?"

"I don't know what call you got to speak to me out of my name," she responded, looking at the
floor moodily.

"Why?" he asked, surprised.

"I don't see why you want to make fun of me."

"I beg your pardon, Cynthia," he said gravely. "I didn't mean to do that. I haven't been considerate.
I didn't think you'd be displeased. I'm very sorry. Won't you pin it on my coat?"

Her face was lifted in grateful pleasure, and she began to pin the rose to his lapel. Her hands
were large and red and trembled. She dropped the flower, and, saying huskily, "I don't know
as I could do it right," seized violently upon a pile of dishes and hurried from the room.

Harkless rescued the rose, pinned it on his coat himself, and, observing internally, for the
hundredth time, that the red-haired waitress was the queerest creature in the village, set
forth gaily upon his holiday.

When he reached the brick house on the pike he discovered a gentleman sunk in an easy and contemplative
attitude in a big chair behind the veranda railing. At the click of the gate the lounger rose
and disclosed the stalwart figure and brown, smiling, handsome face of Mr. Lige Willetts, an
habitual devotee of Minnie Briscoe, and the most eligible bachelor of Carlow. "The ladies will
be down right off," he said, greeting the editor's finery with a perceptible agitation and
the editor himself with a friendly shake of the hand. "Mildy says to wait out here."

But immediately there was a faint rustling within the house: the swish of draperies on the
stairs, a delicious whispering when light feet descend, tapping, to hearts that beat an answer,
the telegraphic message, "We come! We come! We are near! We are near!" Lige Willetts stared
at Harkless. He had never thought the latter good-looking until he saw him step to the door
to take Miss Sherwood's hand and say in a strange, low, tense voice, "Good-morning," as if
he were announcing, at the least: "Every one in the world except us two, died last night. It
is a solemn thing, but I am very happy."

They walked, Minnie and Mr. Willetts a little distance in front of the others. Harkless could
not have told, afterward, whether they rode, or walked, or floated on an air-ship to the court-house.
All he knew distinctly was that a divinity in a pink shirt waist, and a hat that was woven
of gauzy cloud by mocking fairies to make him stoop hideously to see under it, dwelt for the
time on earth and was at his side, dazzling him in the morning sunshine. Last night the moon
had lent her a silvery glamour; she had something of the ethereal whiteness of night-dews in
that watery light, a nymph to laugh from a sparkling fountain, at the moon or, as he thought,
remembering her courtesy for his pretty speech, perhaps a little lady of King Louis's court,
wandering down the years from Fontainebleau and appearing to clumsy mortals sometimes, of a
June night when the moon was in their heads.

But to-day she was of the clearest color, a pretty girl, whose gray eyes twinkled to his in
gay companionship. He marked how the sunshine was spun into the fair shadows of her hair and
seemed itself to catch a lustre, rather than to impart it, and the light of the June day drifted
through the gauzy hat, touching her face with a delicate and tender flush that came and went
like the vibrating pink of early dawn. She had the divinest straight nose, tip-tilted the faintest,
most alluring trifle, and a dimple cleft her chin, "the deadliest maelstrom in the world!"
He thrilled through and through. He had been only vaguely conscious of the dimple in the night.
It was not until he saw her by daylight that he really knew it was there.

The village hummed with life before them. They walked through shimmering airs, sweeter to breathe
than nectar is to drink. She caught a butterfly, basking on a jimson weed, and, before she
let it go, held it out to him in her hand. It was a white butterfly. He asked which was the
butterfly.

"Bravo!" she said, tossing the captive craft above their heads and watching the small sails
catch the breeze; "And so you can make little flatteries in the morning, too. It is another
courtesy you should be having from me, if it weren't for the dustiness of it. Wait till we
come to the board walk."

She had some big, pink roses at her waist. "In the meantime," he answered, indicating these,
"I know very well a lad that would be blithe to accept a pretty token of any lady's high esteem."

"But you have one, already, a very beautiful one." She gave him a genial up-and-down glance
from head to foot, half quizzical, but so quick he almost missed it. And then he was glad he
had found the straw hat with the youthful ribbon, and all his other festal vestures. "And a
very becoming flower a white rose is," she continued, "though I am a bold girl to be blarneying
with a young gentleman I met no longer ago than last night."

"But why shouldn't you blarney with a gentleman, when you began by saving his life?"

"Or, rather, when the gentleman had the politeness to gallop about the county with me tucked
under his arm?" She stood still and laughed softly, but consummately, and her eyes closed tight
with the mirth of it. She had taken one of the roses from her waist, and, as she stood, holding
it by the long stem, its petals lightly pressed her lips.

"You may have it--in exchange," she said. He bent down to her, and she began to fasten the
pink rose in place of the white one on his coat. She did not ask him, directly or indirectly,
who had put the white one there for him, because she knew by the way it was pinned that he
had done it himself. "Who is it that ev'ry morning brings me these lovely flow'rs?" she burlesqued,
as he bent over her.

"'Mr. Wimby,'" he returned. "I will point him out to you. You must see him, and, also, Mr.
Bodeffer, the oldest inhabitant--and crossest."

"Will you present them to me?"

"No; they might talk to you and take some of my time with you away from me." Her eyes sparkled
into his for the merest fraction of a second, and she laughed half mockingly. Then she dropped
his lapel and they proceeded. She did not put the white rose in her belt, but carried it.

The Square was heaving with a jostling, goodnatured, happy, and constantly increasing crowd
that overflowed on Main Street in both directions; and the good nature of this crowd was augmented
in the ratio that its size increased. The streets were a confusion of many colors, and eager
faces filled every window opening on Main Street or the Square. Since nine o'clock all those
of the courthouse had been occupied, and here most of the damsels congregated to enjoy the
spectacle of the parade, and their swains attended, gallantly posting themselves at coignes
of less vantage behind the ladies. Some of the faces that peeped from the dark, old court-house
windows were pretty, and some of them were not pretty; but nearly all of them were rosy-cheeked,
and all were pleasant to see because of the good cheer they showed. Some of the gallants affected
the airy and easy, entertaining the company with badinage and repartee; some were openly bashful.
Now and then one of the latter, after long deliberation, constructed a laborious compliment
for his inamorata, and, after advancing and propounding half of it, again retired into himself,
smit with a blissful palsy. Nearly all of them conversed in tones that might have indicated
that they were separated from each other by an acre lot or two.

Here and there, along the sidewalk below, a father worked his way through the throng, a licorice-bedaubed
cherub on one arm, his coat (borne with long enough) on the other; followed by a mother with
the other children hanging to her skirts and tagging exasperatingly behind, holding red and
blue toy balloons and delectable batons of spiral-striped peppermint in tightly closed, sadly
sticky fingers.

A thousand cries rent the air; the strolling mountebanks and gypsying booth-merchants; the
peanut vendors; the boys with palm-leaf fans for sale; the candy sellers; the popcorn peddlers;
the Italian with the toy balloons that float like a cluster of colored bubbles above the heads
of the crowd, and the balloons that wail like a baby; the red-lemonade man, shouting in the
shrill voice that reaches everywhere and endures forever: "Lemo! Lemo! Ice-cole lemo! Five
cents, a nickel, a half-a-dime, the twentiethpotofadollah! Lemo! Ice-cole lemo!"--all the vociferating
harbingers of the circus crying their wares. Timid youth, in shoes covered with dust through
which the morning polish but dimly shone, and unalterably hooked by the arm to blushing maidens,
bought recklessly of peanuts, of candy, of popcorn, of all known sweetmeats, perchance; and
forced their way to the lemonade stands; and there, all shyly, silently sipped the crimson-stained
ambrosia. Everywhere the hawkers dinned, and everywhere was heard the plaintive squawk of the
toy balloon.

But over all rose the nasal cadence of the Cheap John, reeking oratory from his big wagon on
the corner: "Walk up, walk up, walk up, ladies and gents! Here we are! Here we are! Make hay
while we gather the moss. Walk up, one and all. Here I put this solid gold ring, sumptuous
and golden, eighteen carats, eighteen golden carats of the priceless mother of metals, toiled
fer on the wild Pacific slope, eighteen garnteed, I put this golden ring, rich and golden,
in the package with the hangkacheef, the elegant and blue-ruled note-paper, self-writing pens,
pencil and penholder. Who takes the lot? Who takes it, ladies and gents?"

His tongue curled about his words; he seemed to love them. "Fer a quat-of-a-dollah! Don't turn
away, young man--you feller in the green necktie, there. We all see the young lady on your
arm is a-langrishing fer the golden ring and the package. Faint heart never won fair wummin'.
There you are, sir, and you'll never regret it. Go--and be happy! Now, who's the next man to
git solid with his girl fer a quat-of-a-dollah? Life is a mysterus and unviolable shadder,
my friends; who kin read its orgeries? To-day we are here--but to-morrow we may be in jail.
Only a quat-of-a-dollah! We are Seventh-Day Adventists, ladies and gents, a-givin' away our
belongings in the awful face of Michael, fer a quat-of-a-dollah. The same price fer each-an-devery
individual, lady and gent, man, wummin, wife and child, and happiness to one and all fer a
quat-of-a-dollah!"

Down the middle of the street, kept open between the waiting crowd, ran barefoot boys, many
of whom had not slept at home, but had kept vigil in the night mists for the coming of the
show, and, having seen the muffled pageant arrive, swathed, and with no pomp and panoply, had
returned to town, rioting through jewelled cobwebs in the morning fields, happy in the pride
of knowledge of what went on behind the scenes. To-night, or to-morrow, the runaways would
face a woodshed reckoning with outraged ancestry; but now they caracoled in the dust with no
thought of the grim deeds to be done upon them.

In the court-house yard, and so sinning in the very eye of the law, two swarthy, shifty-looking
gentlemen were operating (with some greasy walnut shells and a pea) what the fanciful or unsophisticated
might have been pleased to call a game of chance; and the most intent spectator of the group
around them was Mr. James Bardlock, the Town Marshal. He was simply and unofficially and earnestly
interested. Thus the eye of Justice may not be said to have winked upon the nefariousness now
under its vision; it gazed with strong curiosity, an itch to dabble, and (it must be admitted)
a growing hope of profit. The game was so direct and the player so sure. Several countrymen
had won small sums, and one, a charmingly rustic stranger, with a peculiar accent (he said
that him and his goil should now have a smoot' old time off his winninks--though the lady was
not manifested), had won twenty-five dollars with no trouble at all. The two operators seemed
depressed, declaring the luck against them and the Plattville people too brilliant at the game.

It was wonderful how the young couples worked their way arm-in-arm through the thickest crowds,
never separating. Even at the lemonade stands they drank holding the glasses in their outer
hands--such are the sacrifices demanded by etiquette. But, observing the gracious outpouring
of fortune upon the rustic with the rare accent, a youth in a green tie disengaged his arm--for
the first time in two hours--from that of a girl upon whose finger there shone a ring, sumptuous
and golden, and, conducting her to a corner of the yard, bade her remain there until he returned.
He had to speak to Hartly Bowlder, he explained.

Then he plunged, red-faced and excited, into the circle about the shell manipulators, and offered,
to lay a wager.

"Hol' on there, Hen Fentriss," thickly objected a flushed young man beside him, "iss my turn."

"I'm first. Hartley," returned the other. "You can hold yer bosses a minute, I reckon."

"Plenty fer each and all, chents," interrupted one of the shell-men. "Place yer spondulicks
on de little ball. Wich is de next lucky one to win our money? Chent bets four sixty-five he
seen de little ball go under de middle shell. Up she comes! Dis time we wins; Plattville can't
win every time. Who's de next chent?"

Fentriss edged slowly out of the circle, abashed, and with rapidly whitening cheeks. He paused
for a moment, outside, slowly realizing that all his money had gone in one wild, blind whirl--the
money he had earned so hard and saved so hard, to make a holiday for his sweetheart and himself.
He stole one glance around the building to where a patient figure waited for him. Then he fled
down a side alley and soon was out upon the country road, tramping soddenly homeward through
the dust, his chin sunk in his breast and his hands clenched tight at his sides. Now and then
he stopped and bitterly hurled a stone at a piping bird on a fence, or gay Bob White in the
fields. At noon the patient figure was still waiting in the corner of the court-house yard,
meekly twisting the golden ring upon her finger.

But the flushed young man who had spoken thickly to her deserter drew an envied roll of bankbills
from his pocket and began to bet with tipsy caution, while the circle about the gamblers watched
with fervid interest, especially Mr. Bardlock, Town Marshal.

From far up Main Street came the cry "She's a-comin'! She's a-comin'!" and, this announcement
of the parade proving only one of a dozen false alarms, a thousand discussions took place over
old-fashioned silver timepieces as to when "she" was really due. Schofields' Henry was much
appealed to as an arbiter in these discussions, from a sense of his having a good deal to do
with time in a general sort of way; and thus Schofields' came to be reminded that it was getting
on toward ten o'clock, whereas, in the excitement of festival, he had not yet struck nine.
This, rushing forthwith to do, he did; and, in the elation of the moment, seven or eight besides.
Miss Helen Sherwood was looking down on the mass of shifting color from a second-story window--whither
many an eye was upturned in wonder--and she had the pleasure of seeing Schofields' emerge on
the steps beneath her, when the bells had done, and heard the cheers (led by Mr. Martin) with
which the laughing crowd greeted his appearance after the performance of his feat.

She turned beamingly to Harkless. "What a family it is!" she laughed. "Just one big, jolly
family. I didn't know people could be like this until I came to Plattville."

"That is the word for it," he answered, resting his hand on the casement beside her. "I used
to think it was desolate, but that was long ago." He leaned from the window to look down. In
his dark cheek was a glow Carlow folk had never seen there; and somehow he seemed less thin
and tired; indeed, he did not seem tired at all, by far the contrary; and he carried himself
upright (when he was not stooping to see under the hat), though not as if he thought about
it. "I believe they are the best people I know," he went on. "Perhaps it is because they have
been so kind to me; but they are kind to each other, too; kind, good people----"

"I know," she said, nodding--a flower on the gauzy hat set to vibrating in a tantalizing way.
"I know. There are fat women who rock and rock on piazzas by the sea, and they speak of country
people as the 'lower classes.' How happy this big family is in not knowing it is the lower
classes!" "We haven't read Nordau down here," said John. "Old Tom Martin's favorite work is
'The Descent of Man.' Miss Tibbs admires Tupper, and 'Beulah,' and some of us possess the works
of E. P. Roe--and why not?"

"Yes; what of it," she returned, "since you escape Nordau? I think the conversation we hear
from the other windows is as amusing and quite as loud as most of that I hear in Rouen during
the winter; and Rouen, you know, is just like any other big place nowadays, though I suppose
there are Philadelphians, for instance, who would be slow to believe a statement like that."

"Oh, but they are not all of Philadelphia----" He left the sentence, smilingly.

"And yet somebody said, 'The further West I travel the more convinced I am the Wise Men came
from the East.'"

"Yes," he answered. "'From' is the important word in that."

"It was a girl from Southeast Cottonbridge, Massachusetts," said Helen, "who heard I was from
Indiana and asked me if I didn't hate to live so far away from things." There was a pause,
while she leaned out of the window with her face aside from him. Then she remarked carelessly,
"I met her at Winter Harbor."

"Do you go to Winter Harbor?" he asked.

"We have gone there every summer until this one, for years. Have you friends who go there?"

"I had--once. There was a classmate of mine from Rouen----"

"What was his name? Perhaps I know him." She stole a glance at him. His face had fallen into
sad lines, and he looked like the man who had come up the aisle with the Hon. Kedge Halloway.
A few moments before he had seemed another person entirely.

"He's forgotten me, I dare say. I haven't seen him for seven years; and that's a long time,
you know. Besides, he's 'out in the world,' where remembering is harder. Here in Plattville
we don't forget."

"Were you ever at Winter Harbor?"

"I was--once. I spent a very happy day there long ago, when you must have been a little girl.
Were you there in--"

"Listen!" she cried. "The procession is coming. Look at the crowd!" The parade had seized a
psychological moment.

There was a fanfare of trumpets in the east. Lines of people rushed for the street, and, as
one looked down on the straw hats and sunbonnets and many kinds of finer head apparel, tossing
forward, they seemed like surf sweeping up the long beaches.

She was coming at last. The boys whooped in the middle of the street; some tossed their arms
to heaven, others expressed their emotion by somersaults; those most deeply moved walked on
their hands. In the distance one saw, over the heads of the multitude, tossing banners and
the moving crests of triumphal cars, where "cohorts were shining in purple and gold." She was
coming. After all the false alarms and disappointments, she was coming!

There was another flourish of music. Immediately all the band gave sound, and then, with blare
of brass and the crash of drums, the glory of the parade burst upon Plattville. Glory in the
utmost! The resistless impetus of the march-time music; the flare of royal banners, of pennons
on the breeze; the smiling of beautiful Court Ladies and great, silken Nobles; the swaying
of howdahs on camel and elephant, and the awesome shaking of the earth beneath the elephant's
feet, and the gleam of his small but devastating eye (every one declared he looked the alarmed
Mr. Snoddy full in the face as he passed, and Mr. Snoddy felt not at all reassured when Tom
Martin severely hinted that it was with the threatening glance of a rival); then the badinage
of the clown, creaking along in his donkey cart; the terrific recklessness of the spangled
hero who was drawn by in a cage with two striped tigers; the spirit of the prancing steeds
that drew the rumbling chariots, and the grace of the helmeted charioteers; the splendor of
the cars and the magnificence of the paintings with which they were adorned; the ecstasy of
all this glittering, shining, gorgeous pageantry needed even more than walking on your hands
to express.

Last of all came the tooting calliope, followed by swarms of boys as it executed, "Wait till
the clouds roll by, Jennie" with infinite dash and gusto.

When it was gone, Miss Sherwood's intent gaze relaxed--she had been looking on as eagerly as
any child,--and she turned to speak to Harkless and discovered that he was no longer in the
room; instead, she found Minnie and Mr. Willetts, whom he had summoned from another window.

"He was called away," explained Lige. "He thought he'd be back before the parade was over,
and said you were enjoying it so much he didn't want to speak to you."

"Called away?" she said, inquiringly.

Minnie laughed. "Oh, everybody sends for Mr. Harkless."

"It was a farmer, name of Bowlder," added Mr. Willetts. "His son Hartley's drinking again,
and there ain't any one but Harkless can do anything with him. You let him tackle a sick man
to nurse, or a tipsy one to handle, and I tell you," Mr. Willetts went on with enthusiasm,
"he is at home. It beats me,--and lots of people don't think college does a man any good! Why,
the way he cured old Fis----"

"See!" cried Minnie, loudly, pointing out of the window. "Look down there. Something's happened."

There was a swirl in the crowd below. Men were running around a corner of the court-house,
and the women and children were harking after. They went so fast, and there were so many of
them, that immediately that whole portion of the yard became a pushing, tugging, pulling, squirming
jam of people.

"It's on the other side," said Lige. "We can see from the hall window. Come quick, before these
other folks fill it up."

They followed him across the building, and looked down on an agitated swarm of faces. Five
men were standing on the entrance steps to the door below, and the crowd was thickly massed
beyond, leaving a little semicircle clear about the steps. Those behind struggled to get closer,
and leaped in the air to catch a glimpse of what was going on. Harkless stood alone on the
top step, his hand resting on the shoulder of the pale and contrite and sobered Hartley. In
the clear space, Jim Bardlock was standing with sheepishly hanging head, and between him and
Harkless were the two gamblers of the walnut shells. The journalist held in his hand the implements
of their profession.

"Give it all up," he was saying in his steady voice. "You've taken eighty-six dollars from
this boy. Hand it over."

The men began to edge closer to the crowd, giving little, swift, desperate, searching looks
from left to right, and right to left, moving nervously about, like weasels in a trap. "Close
up there tight," said Harkless, sharply. "Don't let them out."

"W'y can't we git no square treatment here?" one of the gamblers whined; but his eyes, blazing
with rage, belied the plaintive passivity of his tone. "We been running no skin. Wy d'ye say
we gotter give up our own money? You gotter prove it was a skin. We risked our money fair."

"Prove it! Come up here, Eph Watts. Friends," the editor turned to the crowd, smiling, "friends,
here's a man we ran out of town once, because he knew too much about things of this sort. He's
come back to us again and he's here to stay. He'll give us an object-lesson on the shell game."

"It's pretty simple," remarked Mr. Watts. "The best way is to pick up the ball with your second
finger and the back part of your thumb as you pretend to lay the shell down over it: this way."
He illustrated, and showed several methods of manipulation, with professional sang-froid; and
as he made plain the easy swindle by which many had been duped that morning, there arose an
angry and threatening murmur.

"You all see," said Harkless, raising his voice a little, "what a simple cheat it is--and old
as Pharaoh. Yet a lot of you stood around and lost your own money, and stared like idiots,
and let Hartley Bowlder lose eighty-odd dollars on a shell racket, and not one of you lifted
a hand. How hard did you work for what these two cheap crooks took from you? Ah!" he cried,
"it is because you were greedy that they robbed you so easily. You know it's true. It's when
you want to get something for nothing that the 'confidence men' steal the money you sweat for
and make the farmer a laughing stock. And you, Jim Bardlock, Town Marshal!--you, who confess
that you 'went in the game sixty cents' worth, yourself--" His eyes were lit with wrath as
he raised his accusing hand and levelled it at the unhappy municipal.

The Town Marshal smiled uneasily and deprecatingly about him, and, meeting only angry glances,
hearing only words of condemnation, he passed his hand unsteadily over his fat mustache, shifted
from one leg to the other and back again, looked up, looked down, and then, an amiable and
pleasure-loving man, beholding nothing but accusation and anger in heaven and earth, and wishing
nothing more than to sink into the waters under the earth, but having no way of reaching them,
finding his troubles quite unbearable, and unable to meet the manifold eye of man, he sought
relief after the unsagacious fashion of a larger bird than he. His burly form underwent a series
of convulsions not unlike sobs, and he shut his eyes tightly and held them so, presenting a
picture of misery unequalled in the memory of any spectator. Harkless's outstretched hand began
to shake. "You!" he tried to continue--"you, a man elected to----"

There came from the crowd the sound of a sad, high-keyed voice, drawling: "That's a nice vest
Jim's got on, but it ain't hardly the feathers fitten for an ostrich, is it?"

The editor's gravity gave way; he broke into a ringing laugh and turned again to the shell-men.
"Give up the boy's money. Hurry."

"Step down here and git it," said the one who had spoken.

There was a turbulent motion in the crowd, and a cry arose, "Run 'em out! Ride 'em on a rail!
Tar and feathers! Run 'em out o' town!"

"I wouldn't dilly-dally long if I were you," said Harkless, and his advice seemed good to the
shell-men. A roll of bills, which he counted and turned over to the elder Bowlder, was sullenly
placed in his hand. The fellow who had not yet spoken clutched the journalist's sleeve with
his dirty hand.

"We hain't done wit' youse," he said, hoarsely. "Don't belief it, not fer a minute, see?"

The Town Marshal opened his eyes briskly, and placing a hand on each of the gamblers, said:
"I hereby do arrest your said persons, and declare you my prisoners." The cry rose again, louder:
"Run 'em out! String 'em up! Hang them! Hang them!" and a forward rush was made.

"This way, Jim. Be quick," said Harkless, quietly, bending down and jerking one of the gamblers
half-way up the steps. "Get through the hall to the other side and then run them to the lock-up.
No one will stop you that way. Watts and I will hold this door." Bardlock hustled his prisoners
through the doorway, and the crowd pushed up the steps, while Harkless struggled to keep the
vestibule clear until Watts got the double doors closed. "Stand back, here!" he cried; "it's
all over. Don't be foolish. The law is good enough for us. Stand back, will you!"

He was laughing a little, shoving them back with open hand and elbow, when a small, compact
group of men suddenly dashed up the steps together, and a heavy stick swung out over their
heads. A straw hat with a gay ribbon sailed through the air. The journalist's long arms went
out swiftly from his body in several directions, the hands not open, but clenched and hard.
The next instant he and Mr. Watts stood alone on the steps, and a man with a bleeding, blaspheming
mouth dropped his stick and tried to lose himself in the crowd. Mr. Watts was returning something
he had not used to his hip-pocket.

"Prophets of Israel!" exclaimed William Todd, ruefully, "it wasn't Eph Watts's pistol. Did
you see Mr. Harkless? I was up on them steps when he begun. I don't believe he needs as much
takin' care of as we think."

"Wasn't it one of them Cross-Roads devils that knocked his hat off?" asked Judd Bennett. "I
thought I see Bob Skillett run up with a club."

Harkless threw open the doors behind him; the hall was empty. "You may come in now," he said.
"This isn't my court-house."

CHAPTER VIII. GLAD AFTERNOON: THE GIRL BY THE BLUE TENT-POLE

They walked slowly back along the pike toward the brick house. The white-ruffed fennel reached
up its dusty yellow heads to touch her skirts as she passed, and then drooped, satisfied, against
the purple iron-weed at the roadside. In the noonday silence no cricket chirped nor locust
raised its lorn monotone; the tree shadows mottled the road with blue, and the level fields
seemed to pant out a dazzling breath, the transparent "heat-waves" that danced above the low
corn and green wheat.

He was stooping very much as they walked; he wanted to be told that he could look at her for
a thousand years. Her face was rarely and exquisitely modelled, but, perhaps, just now the
salient characteristic of her beauty (for the salient characteristic seemed to be a different
thing at different times) was the coloring, a delicate glow under the white skin, that bewitched
him in its seeming a reflection of the rich benediction of the noonday sun that blazed overhead.

Once he had thought the way to the Briscoe homestead rather a long walk; but now the distance
sped malignantly; and strolled they never so slow, it was less than a "young bird's flutter
from a wood." With her acquiescence he rolled a cigarette, and she began to hum lightly the
air of a song, a song of an ineffably gentle, slow movement.

That, and a reference of the morning, and, perhaps, the smell of his tobacco mingling with
the fragrance of her roses, awoke again the keen reminiscence of the previous night within
him. Clearly outlined before him rose the high, green slopes and cool cliff-walls of the coast
of Maine, while his old self lazily watched the sharp little waves through half-closed lids,
the pale smoke of his cigarette blowing out under the rail of a waxen deck where he lay cushioned.
And again a woman pelted his face with handfuls of rose-petals and cried: "Up lad and at 'em!
Yonder is Winter Harbor." Again he sat in the oak-raftered Casino, breathless with pleasure,
and heard a young girl sing the "Angel's Serenade," a young girl who looked so bravely unconscious
of the big, hushed crowd that listened, looked so pure and bright and gentle and good, that
he had spoken of her as "Sir Galahad's little sister." He recollected he had been much taken
with this child; but he had not thought of her from that time to this, he supposed; had almost
forgotten her. ... And the voice....

He stopped short and struck his palms together. "You are Tom Meredith's little cousin!"

"The Great Harkless!" she answered, and stretched out her hand to him.

"I remember you!"

"Isn't it time?"

"Ah, but I never forgot you," he cried. "I thought I had. I didn't know who it was I was remembering.
I thought it was fancy, and it was memory. I never forgot your voice, singing--and I remembered
your face too; though I thought I didn't." He drew a deep breath. "That was why----"

"Tom Meredith has not forgotten you," she said, as he paused.

"Would you mind shaking hands once more?" he asked. She gave him her hand again. "With all
my heart. Why?"

"I'm making a record at it. Thank you."

"They called me 'Sir Galahad's little sister' all one summer because the Great John Harkless
called me that. You danced with me in the evening."

"Did I?"

"Ah," she said, shaking her head, "you were too busy being in love with Mrs. Van Skuyt to remember
a waltz with only me! I was allowed to meet you as a reward for singing my very best, and you--you
bowed with the indulgence of a grandfather, and asked me to dance."

"Like a grandfather? How young I was then! How time changes us!"

"I'm afraid my conversation did not make a great impression upon you," she continued.

"But it did. I am remembering very fast. If you will wait a moment, I will tell you some of
the things you said."

The girl laughed merrily. Whenever she laughed he realized that it was becoming terribly difficult
not to tell her how adorable she was. "I wouldn't risk it, if I were you," she warned him,
"because I didn't speak to you at all. I shut my lips tight and trembled all over every bit
of the time I was dancing with you. I did not sleep that night, because I was so unhappy, wondering
what the Great Harkless would think of me. I knew he thought me unutterably stupid because
I couldn't talk to him. I wanted to send him word that I knew I had bored him. I couldn't bear
for him not to know that I knew I had. But he was not thinking of me in any way. He had gone
to sea again in a big boat, the ungrateful pirate, cruising with Mrs. Van Skuyt."

"How time does change us!" said John. "You are wrong, though; I did think of you; I have al----"

"Yes," she interrupted, tossing her head in airy travesty of the stage coquette, "you think
so--I mean you say so--now. Away with you and your blarneying!"

And so they went through the warm noontide, and little he cared for the heat that wilted the
fat mullein leaves and made the barefoot boy, who passed by, skip gingerly through the burning
dust with anguished mouth and watery eye. Little he knew of the locust that suddenly whirred
his mills of shrillness in the maple-tree, and sounded so hot, hot, hot; or those others that
railed at the country quiet from the dim shade around the brick house; or even the rain-crow
that sat on the fence and swore to them in the face of a sunny sky that they should see rain
ere the day were done.

Little the young man recked of what he ate at Judge Briscoe's good noon dinner: chicken wing
and young roas'n'-ear; hot rolls as light as the fluff of a summer cloudlet; and honey and
milk; and apple-butter flavored like spices of Arabia; and fragrant, flaky cherry-pie; and
cool, rich, yellow cream. Lige Willetts was a lover, yet he said he asked no better than to
Just go on eating that cherry-pie till a sweet death overtook him; but railroad sandwiches
and restaurant chops might have been set before Harkless for all the difference it would have
made to him.

At no other time is a man's feeling of companionship with a woman so strong as when he sits
at table with her-not at a "decorated" and becatered and bewaitered table, but at a homely,
appetizing, wholesome home table like old Judge Briscoe's. The very essence of the thing is
domesticity, and the implication is utter confidence and liking. There are few greater dangers
for a bachelor. An insinuating imp perches on his shoulder, and, softly tickling the bachelor's
ear with the feathers of an arrow-shaft, whispers: "Pretty nice, isn't it, eh? Rather pleasant
to have that girl sitting there, don't you think? Enjoy having her notice your butter-plate
was empty? Think it exhilarating to hand her those rolls? Looks nice, doesn't she? Says 'Thank
you' rather prettily? Makes your lonely breakfast seem mighty dull, doesn't it? How would you
like to have her pour your coffee for you to-morrow, my boy? How would it seem to have such
pleasant company all the rest of your life? Pretty cheerful, eh?"

When Miss Sherwood passed the editor the apple-butter, the casual, matter-of-course way she
did it entranced him in a strange, exquisite wonderment. He did not set the dish down when
she put it in his hand, but held it straight out before him, just looking at it, until Mr.
Willetts had a dangerous choking fit, for which Minnie was very proud of Lige; no one could
have suspected that it was the veil of laughter. When Helen told John he really must squeeze
a lemon into his iced tea, he felt that his one need in life was to catch her up in his arms
and run away with her, not anywhere in particular, but just run and run and run away.

After dinner they went out to the veranda and the gentlemen smoked. The judge set his chair
down on the ground, tilted back in it with his feet on the steps, and blew a wavery domed city
up in the air. He called it solid comfort. He liked to sit out from under the porch roof, he
said; he wanted to see more of the sky. The others moved their chairs down to join him in the
celestial vision. There had blown across the heaven a feathery, thin cloud or two, but save
for these, there was nothing but glorious and tender, brilliant blue. It seemed so clear and
close one marvelled the little church spire in the distance did not pierce it; yet, at the
same time, the eye ascended miles and miles into warm, shimmering ether. Far away two buzzards
swung slowly at anchor, half-way to the sun.

           "'O bright, translucent, cerulean hue,
             Let my wide wings drift on in you,'"

said Harkless, pointing them out to Helen.

"You seem to get a good deal of fun out of this kind of weather," observed Lige, as he wiped
his brow and shifted his chair out of the sun.

"I expect you don't get such skies as this up in Rouen," said the judge, looking at the girl
from between half-closed eyelids.

"It's the same Indiana sky, I think," she answered.

"I guess maybe in the city you don't see as much of it, or think as much about it. Yes, they're
the Indiana skies," the old man went on.

                Skies as blue
        As the eyes of children when they smile at you.'

"There aren't any others anywhere that ever seemed much like them to me. They've been company
for me all my life. I don't think there are any others half as beautiful, and I know there
aren't any as sociable. They were always so." He sighed gently, and Miss Sherwood fancied his
wife must have found the Indiana skies as lovely as he had, in the days of long ago. "Seems
to me they are the softest and bluest and kindest in the world."

"I think they are," said Helen, "and they are more beautiful than the 'Italian skies,' though
I doubt if many of us Hoosiers realize it; and--certainly no one else does."

The old man leaned over and patted her hand. Harkless gasped. "'Us Hoosiers!'" chuckled the
judge. "You're a great Hoosier, young lady! How much of your life have you spent in the State?
'Us Hoosiers!'"

"But I'm going to be a good one," she answered, gaily, "and if I'm good enough, when I grow
up maybe I'll be a great one."

The buckboard had been brought around, and the four young people climbed in, Harkless driving.
Before they started, the judge, standing on the horse-block in front of the gate, leaned over
and patted Miss Sherwood's hand again. Harkless gathered up the reins.

"You'll make a great Hoosier, all right," said the old man, beaming upon the girl. "You needn't
worry about that, I guess, my dear."

When he said "my dear," Harkless spoke to the horses.

"Wait," said the judge, still holding the girl's hand. "You'll make a great Hoosier, some day;
don't fret. You're already a very beautiful one." Then he bent his white head and kissed her,
gallantly. John said: "Good afternoon, judge"; the whip cracked like a pistol-shot, and the
buckboard dashed off in a cloud of dust.

"Every once in a while, Harkless," the old fellow called after them, "you must remember to
look at the team."

The enormous white tent was filled with a hazy yellow light, the warm, dusty, mellow light
that thrills the rejoicing heart because it is found nowhere in the world except in the tents
of a circus--the canvas-filtered sunshine and sawdust atmosphere of show day. Through the entrance
the crowd poured steadily, coming from the absorptions of the wild-animal tent to feast upon
greater wonders; passing around the sawdust ellipse that contained two soul-cloying rings,
to find seats whence they might behold the splendors so soon to be unfolded. Every one who
was not buying the eternal lemonade was eating something; and the faces of children shone with
gourmand rapture; indeed, very often the eyes of them were all you saw, half-closed in palate-gloating
over a huge apple, or a bulky oblong of popcorn, partly unwrapped from its blue tissue-paper
cover; or else it might be a luscious pink crescent of watermelon, that left its ravisher stained
and dripping to the brow.

Here, as in the morning, the hawkers raised their cries in unintermittent shrillness, offering
to the musically inclined the Happy Evenings Song-book, alleged to contain those treasures,
all the latest songs of the day, or presented for the consideration of the humorous the Lawrence
Lapearl Joke-book, setting forth in full the art of comical entertainment and repartee. (Schofields'
Henry bought two of these--no doubt on the principle that two were twice as instructive as
one--intending to bury himself in study and do battle with Tom Martin on his own ground.)

Here swayed the myriad palm-leaf fans; here paraded blushing youth and rosy maiden, more relentlessly
arm-in-arm than ever; here crept the octogenarian, Mr. Bodeffer, shaking on cane and the shoulder
of posterity; here waddled Mr. Snoddy, who had hurried through the animal tent for fear of
meeting the elephant; here marched sturdy yeomen and stout wives; here came William Todd and
his Anna Belle, the good William hushed with the embarrassments of love, but looking out warily
with the white of his eye for Mr. Martin, and determined not to sit within a hundred yards
of him; here rolled in the orbit of habit the bacchanal, Mr. Wilkerson, who politely answered
in kind all the uncouth roarings and guttural ejaculations of jungle and fen that came from
the animal tent; in brief, here came with lightest hearts the population of Carlow and part of Amo.

Helen had found a true word: it was a big family. Jim Bardlock, broadly smiling and rejuvenated,
shorn of depression, paused in front of the "reserve" seats, with Mrs. Bardlock on his arm,
and called loudly to a gentleman on a tier about the level of Jim's head: "How are ye? I reckon
we were a little too smart fer 'em, this morning, huh?" Five or six hundred people--every one
within hearing--fumed to look at Jim; but the gentleman addressed was engaged in conversation
with a lady and did not notice.

"Hi! Hi, there! Say! Mr. Harkless!" bellowed Jim, informally. The people turned to look at
Harkless. His attention was arrested and his cheek grew red.

"What is it?" he asked, a little confused and a good deal annoyed.

"I don't hear what ye say," shouted Jim, putting his hand to his ear.

"What is it?" repeated the young man. "I'll kill that fellow to-night," he added to Lige Willetts.
"Some one ought to have done it long ago."

"What?"

"I say, WHAT IS IT?"

"I only wanted to say me and you certainly did fool these here Hoosiers this morning, huh?
Hustled them two fellers through the court-house, and nobody never thought to slip round to
the other door and head us off. Ha, ha! We were jest a leetle too many fer 'em, huh?"

From an upper tier of seats the rusty length of Mr. Martin erected itself joint by joint, like
an extension ladder, and he peered down over the gaping faces at the Town Marshal. "Excuse
me," he said sadly to those behind him, but his dry voice penetrated everywhere, "I got up
to hear Jim say 'We' again."

Mr. Bardlock joined in the laugh against himself, and proceeded with his wife to some seats,
forty or fifty feet distant. When he had settled himself comfortably, he shouted over cheerfully
to the unhappy editor: "Them shell-men got it in fer you, Mr. Harkless."

"Ain't that fool shet up yit?" snarled the aged Mr. Bodeffer, indignantly. He was sitting near
the young couple, and the expression of his sympathy was distinctly audible to them and many
others. "Got no more regards than a brazing calf-disturbin' a feller with his sweetheart!"

"The both of 'em says they're goin' to do fer you," bleated Mr. Bardlock. "Swear they'll git
their evens with ye."

Mr. Martin rose again. "Don't git scared and leave town, Mr. Harkless," he called out; "Jim'll
protect you."

Vastly to the young man's relief the band began to play, and the equestrians and equestriennes
capered out from the dressing-tent for the "Grand Entrance," and the performance commenced.
Through the long summer afternoon it went on: wonders of horsemanship and horsewomanship; hair-raising
exploits on wires, tight and slack; giddy tricks on the high trapeze; feats of leaping and
tumbling in the rings; while the tireless musicians blatted inspiringly through it all, only
pausing long enough to allow that uproarious jester, the clown, to ask the ring-master what
he would do if a young lady came up and kissed him on the street, and to exploit his hilarities
during the short intervals of rest for the athletes.

When it was over, John and Helen found themselves in the midst of a densely packed crowd, and
separated from Miss Briscoe and Lige. People were pushing and shoving, and he saw her face
grow pale. He realized with a pang of sympathy how helpless he would feel if he were as small
as she, and at his utmost height could only see big, suffocating backs and huge shoulders pressing
down from above. He was keeping them from crowding heavily upon her with all his strength,
and a royal feeling of protectiveness came over him. She was so little. And yet, without the
remotest hint of hardness, she gave him such a distinct impression of poise and equilibrium,
she seemed so able to meet anything that might come, to understand it--even to laugh at it--so
Americanly capable and sure of the event, that in spite of her pale cheek he could not feel
quite so protective as he wished to feel.

He managed to get her to one of the tent-poles, and placed her with her back to it. Then he
set one of his own hands against it over her head, braced himself and stood, keeping a little
space about her, ruggedly letting the crowd surge against him as it would; no one should touch
her in rough carelessness.

"Thank you. It was rather trying in there," she said, and looked up into his eyes with a divine
gratitude.

"Please don't do that," he answered in a low voice.

"Do what?"

"Look like that."

She not only looked like that, but more so. "Young man, young man," she said, "I fear you're
wishful of turning a girl's head."

The throng was thick around them, garrulous and noisy, but they two were more richly alone
together, to his appreciation, than if they stood on some far satellite of Mars. He was not
to forget that moment, and he kept the picture of her, as she leaned against the big blue tent-pole,
there, in his heart: the clear gray eyes lifted to his, the delicate face with the color stealing
back to her cheeks, and the brave little figure that had run so straight to him out of the
night shadows. There was something about her, and in the moment, that suddenly touched him
with a saddening sweetness too keen to be borne; the forget-me-not finger of the flying hour
that could not come again was laid on his soul, and he felt the tears start from his heart
on their journey to his eyes. He knew that he should always remember that moment. She knew
it, too. She put her hand to her cheek and turned away from him a little tremulously. Both
were silent.

They had been together since early morning. Plattville was proud of him. Many a friendly glance
from the folk who jostled about them favored his suit and wished both of them well, and many
lips, opening to speak to Harkless in passing, closed when their owners (more tactful than
Mr. Bardlock) looked a second time.

Old Tom Martin, still perched alone On his high seat, saw them standing by the tent-pole, and
watched them from under his rusty hat brim. "I reckon it's be'n three or four thousand years
since I was young," he sighed to himself; then, pushing his hat still further down over his
eyes: "I don't believe I'd ort to rightly look on at that." He sighed again as he rose, and
gently spoke the name of his dead wife: "Marjie,--it's be'n lonesome, sometimes. I reckon you're
mighty tired waitin' for me, ever since sixty-four--yet maybe not; Ulysses S. Grant's over
on your side now, and perhaps you've got acquainted with him; you always thought a good deal
more of him than you did of me."

"Do you see that tall old man up there?" said Helen, nodding her head toward Martin. "I think
I should like to know him. I'm sure I like him."

"That is old Tom Martin."

"I know."

"I was sorry and ashamed about all that conspicuousness and shouting. It must have been very
unpleasant for you; it must have been so, for a stranger. Please try to forgive me for letting
you in for it."

"But I liked it. It was 'all in the family,' and it was so jolly and good-natured, and that
dear old man was so bright. Do you know," she said softly, "I don't think I'm such a stranger--I--I
think I love all these people a great deal--in spite of having known them only two days."

At that a wild exhilaration possessed him. He wanted to shake hands with everybody in the tent,
to tell them all that he loved them with his whole heart, but, what was vastly more important,
she loved them a great deal--in spite of having known them only two days!

He made the horses prance on the homeward drive, and once, when she told him that she had read
a good many of his political columns in the "Herald," he ran them into a fence. After this
it occurred to him that they were nearing their destination and had come at a perversely sharp
gait; so he held the roans down to a snail's pace (if it be true that a snail's natural gait
is not a trot) for the rest of the way, while they talked of Tom Meredith and books and music,
and discovered that they differed widely about Ibsen.

They found Mr. Fisbee in the yard, talking to Judge Briscoe. As they drove up, and before the
horses had quite stopped, Helen leaped to the ground and ran to the old scholar with both her
hands outstretched to him. He looked timidly at her, and took the hands she gave him; then
he produced from his pocket a yellow telegraph envelope, watching her anxiously as she received
it. However, she seemed to attach no particular importance to it, and, instead of opening it,
leaned toward him, still holding one of his hands.

"These awful old men!" Harkless groaned inwardly as he handed the horses over to the judge.
"I dare say he'll kiss her, too." But, when the editor and Mr. Willetts had gone, it was Helen
who kissed Fisbee.

"They're coming out to spend the evening, aren't they?" asked Briscoe, nodding to the young
men as they set off down the road.

"Lige has to come whether he wants to or not," Minnie laughed, rather consciously; "It's his
turn to-night to look after Mr. Harkless."

"I guess he won't mind coming," said the judge.

"Well," returned his daughter, glancing at Helen, who stood apart, reading the telegram to
Fisbee, "I know if he follows Mr. Harkless he'll get here pretty soon after supper--as soon
as the moon comes up, anyway."

The editor of the "Herald" was late to his supper that evening. It was dusk when he reached
the hotel, and, for the first time in history, a gentleman sat down to meat in that house of
entertainment in evening dress. There was no one in the diningroom when he went in; the other
boarders had finished, and it was Cynthia's "evening out," but the landlord came and attended
to his guests' wants himself, and chatted with him while he ate.

"There's a picture of Henry Clay," remarked Landis, in obvious relevancy to his companion's
attire, "there's a picture of Henry Clay somewheres about the house in a swallow-tail coat.
Governor Ray spoke here in one in early times, Bodeffer says, except it was higher built up
'n yourn about the collar, and had brass buttons, I think. Ole man Wimby was here to-night,"
the landlord continued, changing the subject. "He waited around fer ye a good while. He's be'n
mighty wrought up sence the trouble this morning, an' wanted to see ye bad. I don't know 'f
you seen it, but that feller 't knocked your hat off was mighty near tore to pieces in the
crowd before he got away. 'Seems some the boys re-cog-nized him as one the Cross-Roads Skillets,
and sicked the dogs on him, and he had a pretty mean time of it. Wimby says the Cross-Roads
folks'll be worse 'n ever, and, says he, 'Tell him to stick close to town,' says he. 'They'll
do anything to git him now,' says he, 'and resk anything.' I told him you wouldn't take no
stock in it, but, see here, don't you put nothin' too mean fer them folks. I tell you, Mr.
Harkless, plenty of us are scared fer ye."

The good fellow was so earnest that when the editor's meal was finished and he would have departed,
Landis detained him almost by force until the arrival of Mr. Willetts, who, the landlord knew,
was his allotted escort' for the evening. When Lige came (wearing a new tie, a pink one he
had hastened to buy as soon as his engagements had allowed him the opportunity), Mr. Landis
hissed a savage word of reproach for his tardiness in his ear, and whisperingly bade him not
let the other out of reach that night, to which Willetts replied with a nod implying his trustworthiness;
and the young men set off in the darkness.

Harkless wondered if his costume were not an injustice to his companion, but he did not regret
it; he would wear his best court suit, his laces and velvets, for deference to that lady. It
was a painful thing to remember his dusty rustiness of the night before, the awful Carlow cut
of his coat, and his formless black cravat; the same felt hat he wore again to-night, perforce,
but it was brushed--brushed almost to holes in spots, and somehow he had added a touch of shape
to it. His dress-coat was an antique; fashions had changed, no doubt; he did not know; possibly
she would recognize its vintage--but it was a dress-coat.

Lige walked along talking; Harkless answering "Yes" and "No" at random. The woodland-spiced
air was like champagne to him; the road under foot so elastic and springy that he felt like
a thoroughbred before a race; he wanted to lift his foot knee-high at every step, he had so
much energy to spare. In the midst of a speech of Lige's about the look of the wheat he suddenly
gave out a sigh so deep, so heartfelt, so vibrant, so profound, that Willetts turned with astonishment;
but when his eye reached his companion's face, Harkless was smiling. The editor extended his hand.

"Shake hands, Lige," he cried.

The moon peeped over the shoulder of an eastern wood, and the young men suddenly descried their
long shadows stretching in front of them. Harkless turned to look at the silhouetted town,
the tree-tops and roofs and the Methodist church spire, silvered at the edges.

"Do you see that town, Willetts?" he asked, laying his fingers on his companion's sleeve. "That's
the best town in the United States!"

"I always kind of thought you didn't much like it," said the other, puzzled. "Seemed to me
you always sort of wished you hadn't settled here."

A little further on they passed Mr. Fisbee. He was walking into the village with his head thrown
back, a strange thing for him. They gave him a friendly greeting and passed on.

"Well, it beats me!" observed Lige, when the old man was out of hearing. "He's be'n there to
supper again. He was there all day yesterday, and with 'em at the lecture, and at the deepo
day before and he looks like another man, and dressed up--for him--to beat thunder----What
do you expect makes him so thick out there all of a sudden?"

"I hadn't thought about it. The judge and he have been friends a good while, haven't they?"

"Yes, three or four years; but not like this. It beats me! He's all upset over Miss Sherwood,
I think. Old enough to be her grandfather, too, the old----"

His companion stopped him, dropping a hand on his shoulder.

"Listen!"

They were at the corner of the Briscoe picket fence, and a sound lilted through the stillness--a
touch on the keys that Harkless knew. "Listen," he whispered.

It was the "Moonlight Sonata" that Helen was playing. "It's a pretty piece," observed Lige
after a time. John could have choked him, but he answered: "Yes, it is seraphic."

"Who made it up?" pursued Mr. Willetts.

"Beethoven."

"Foreigner, I expect. Yet in some way or another makes me think of fishing down on the Wabash
bend in Vigo, and camping out nights like this; it's a mighty pretty country around there--especially
at night."

The sonata was finished, and then she sang--sang the "Angel's Serenade." As the soft soprano
lifted and fell in the modulations of that song there was in its timbre, apart from the pure,
amber music of it, a questing, seeking pathos, and Willetts felt the hand on his shoulder tighten
and then relax; and, as the song ended, he saw that his companion's eyes were shining and moist.

CHAPTER IX. NIGHT: IT IS BAD LUCK TO SING BEFORE BREAKFAST

There was a lace of faint mists along the creek and beyond, when John and Helen reached their
bench (of course they went back there), and broken roundelays were croaking from a bayou up
the stream, where rakish frogs held carnival in resentment of the lonesomeness. The air was
still and close. Hundreds of fire-flies coquetted with the darkness amongst the trees across
the water, glinting from unexpected spots, shading their little lanterns for a second to glow
again from other shadows. The sky was a wonderful olive green; a lazy cloud drifted in it and
lapped itself athwart the moon.

"The dead painters design the skies for us each day and night, I think," Helen said, as she
dropped a little scarf from her shoulders and leaned back on the bench. "It must be the only
way to keep them happy and busy 'up there.' They let them take turns, and those not on duty,
probably float around and criticise."

"They've given a good man his turn to-night," said John; "some quiet colorist, a poetic, friendly
soul, no Turner--though I think I've seen a Turner sunset or two in Plattville."

"It was a sculptor's sunset this evening. Did you see it?--great massy clouds piled heap on
heap, almost with violence. I'm sure it was Michelangelo. The judge didn't think it meant Michelangelo;
he thought it meant rain."

"Michelangelo gets a chance rather often, doesn't he, considering the number of art people
there must be over there? I believe I've seen a good many sunsets of his, and a few dawns,
too; the dawns not for a long time--I used to see them more frequently toward the close of
senior year, when we sat up all night talking, knowing we'd lose one another soon, and trying
to hold on as long as we could."

She turned to him with a little frown. "Why have you never let Tom Meredith know you were living
so near him, less than a hundred miles, when he has always liked and admired you above all
the rest of mankind? I know that he has tried time and again to hear of you, but the other
men wrote that they knew nothing--that it was thought you had gone abroad. I had heard of you,
and so must he have seen your name in the Rouen papers--about the 'White-Caps,' and in politics--but
he would never dream of connecting the Plattville Mr. Harkless with his Mr. Harkless, though
I did, just a little, and rather vaguely. I knew, of course, when you came into the lecture.
But why haven't you written to my cousin?"

"Rouen seems a long way from here," he answered quietly. "I've only been there once--half a
day on business. Except that, I've never been further away than Amo or Gainesville, for a convention
or to make a speech, since I came here."

"Wicked!" she exclaimed, "To shut yourself up like this! I said it was fine to drop out of
the world; but why have you cut off your old friends from you? Why haven't you had a relapse,
now and then, and come over to hear Ysaye play and Melba sing, or to see Mansfield or Henry
Irving, when we have had them? And do you think you've been quite fair to Tom? What right had
you to assume that he had forgotten you?"

"Oh, I didn't exactly mean forgotten," he said, pulling a blade of grass to and fro between
his fingers, staring at it absently. "It's only that I have dropped out of the world, you know.
I kept track of every one, saw most of my friends, or corresponded, now and then, for a year
or so after I left college; but people don't miss you much after a while. They rather expected
me to do a lot of things, in a way, you know, and I wasn't doing them. I was glad to get away.
I always had an itch for newspaper work, and I went on a New York paper. Maybe it was the wrong
paper; at least, I wasn't fit for it. There was something in the side of life I saw, too, not
only on the paper, that made me heart-sick; and then the rush and fight and scramble to be
first, to beat the other man. Probably I am too squeamish. I saw classmates and college friends
diving into it, bound to come out ahead, dear old, honest, frank fellows, who had been so happy-go-lucky
and kind and gay, growing too busy to meet and be good to any man who couldn't be good to them,
asking (more delicately) the eternal question, 'What does it get me?' You might think I bad-met
with unkindness; but it was not so; it was the other way more than I deserved. But the cruel
competition, the thousands fighting for places, the multitude scrambling for each ginger-bread
baton, the cold faces on the streets--perhaps it's all right and good; of course it has to
be--but I wanted to get out of it, though I didn't want to come here. That was chance. A new
man bought the paper I was working for, and its policy changed. Many of the same men still
wrote for it, facing cheerfully about and advocating a tricky theory, vehement champions of
a set of personal schemers and waxy images."

He spoke with feeling; but now, as though a trifle ashamed of too much seriousness, and justifiably
afraid of talking like one of his own editorials, he took a lighter tone. "I had been taken
on the paper through a friend and not through merit, and by the same undeserved, kindly influence,
after a month or so I was set to writing short political editorials, and was at it nearly two
years. When the paper changed hands the new proprietor indicated that he would be willing to
have me stay and write the other way. I refused; and it became somewhat plain to me that I
was beginning to be a failure.

"A cousin of mine, the only relative I had, died in Chicago, and I went to his funeral. I happened
to hear of the Carlow 'Herald' through an agent there, the most eloquent gentleman I ever met.
I was younger, and even more thoughtless than now, and I had a little money and I handed it
over for the 'Herald.' I wanted to run a paper myself, and to build up a power! And then, though
I only lived here the first few years of my life and all the rest of it had been spent in the
East, I was born in Indiana, and, in a way, the thought of coming back to a life-work in my
native State appealed to me. I always had a dim sort of feeling that the people out in these
parts knew more--had more sense and were less artificial, I mean--and were kinder, and tried
less to be somebody else, than almost any other people anywhere. And I believe it's so. It's
dull, here in Carlow, of course--that is, it used to be. The agent explained that I could make
the paper a daily at once, with an enormous circulation in the country. I was very, very young.
Then I came here and saw what I had got. Possibly it is because I am sensitive that I never
let Tom know. They expected me to amount to something; but I don't believe his welcome would
be less hearty to a failure--he is a good heart."

"Failure!" she cried, and clapped her hands and laughed.

"I'm really not very tragic about it, though I must seem consumed with self-pity," he returned,
smiling. "It is only that I have dropped out of the world while Tom is still in it."

"Dropped out of the world!'" she echoed, impatiently. "Can't you see you've dropped into it?
That you----"

"Last night I was honored by your praise of my graceful mode of quitting it!"

"And so you wish me to be consistent!" she retorted scornfully. TARAS'S STORY.

The carriage in which Nekhludoff had taken his place was half filled
with people.

There were in it servants, working men, factory hands, butchers, Jews, shopmen, workmen's wives,
a soldier, two ladies, a young one and an old one with bracelets on her arm, and a severe-looking
gentleman with a cockade on his black cap. All these people were sitting quietly; the bustle
of taking their places was long over; some sat cracking and eating
sunflower seeds, some smoking, some talking.

Taras sat, looking very happy, opposite the door, keeping a place for Nekhludoff, and carrying
on an animated conversation with a man in a cloth coat who sat opposite to him, and who was,
as Nekhludoff afterwards found out, a gardener going to a new situation. Before reaching the place
where Taras sat Nekhludoff stopped between the seats near a reverend-looking old man with a white
beard and nankeen coat, who was talking with a young woman in peasant dress. A little girl of about
seven, dressed in a new peasant costume, sat, her little legs dangling above the floor, by the
side of the woman, and kept cracking seeds.

The old man turned round, and, seeing Nekhludoff, he moved the lappets of his coat off the varnished
seat next to him, and said, in a friendly manner:

"Please, here's a seat."

Nekhludoff thanked him, and took the seat.

As soon as he was seated the woman continued the interrupted conversation.

She was returning to her village, and related how her husband, whom
she had been visiting, had received her in town.

"I was there during the carnival, and now, by the Lord's help, I've been again," she said. "Then,
God willing, at Christmas I'll go again."

"That's right," said the old man, with a look at Nekhludoff, "it's
the best way to go and see him, else a young man can easily go to
the bad, living in a town."

"Oh, no, sir, mine is not such a man. No nonsense of any kind about him; his life is as good as
a young maiden's. The money he earns he sends home all to a copeck. And, as to our girl here,
he was so glad to see her, there are no words for it," said the woman,
and smiled.

The little girl, who sat cracking her seeds and spitting out the shells, listened to her mother's
words, and, as if to confirm them, looked up with calm, intelligent eyes into Nekhludoff's
and the old man's faces.

"Well, if he's good, that's better still," said the old man.

"And none of that sort of thing?" he added, with a look at a couple,
evidently factory hands, who sat at the other side of the carriage.

The husband, with his head thrown back, was pouring vodka down his throat out of a bottle, and
the wife sat holding a bag, out of which they had taken the bottle, and watched him intently.

"No,
mine neither drinks nor smokes," said the woman who was conversing with the old man, glad
of the opportunity of praising her husband once more. "No, sir, the earth does not hold many
such." And, turning to Nekhludoff, she added, "That's the sort of
man he is."

"What could be better," said the old man, looking at the factory worker, who had had his drink
and had passed the bottle to his wife. The wife laughed, shook her head, and also raised the
bottle to her lips.

Noticing Nekhludoff's and the old man's look directed towards them,
the factory worker addressed the former.

"What is it, sir?

That we are drinking?

Ah, no one sees how we work, but every one sees how we drink. I have earned it, and I am drinking
and treating my wife, and no one else."

"Yes, yes," said Nekhludoff, not knowing what to say.

"True, sir. My wife is a steady woman. I am satisfied with my wife, because she can feel for
me. Is it right what I'm saying, Mavra?"

"There you are, take it, I don't want any more," said the wife, returning the bottle to him.
"And what are you jawing for like that?" she added.

"There now! She's good--that good; and suddenly she'll begin squeaking like a wheel that's
not greased. Mavra, is it right what I'm saying?"

Mavra laughed and moved her hand with a tipsy gesture.

"Oh, my, he's at it again."

"There now, she's that good--that good; but let her get her tail over the reins, and you can't
think what she'll be up to. . . . Is it right what I'm saying? You must excuse me, sir, I've had a
drop! What's to be done?" said the factory worker, and, preparing to go to sleep, put his head
in his wife's lap.

Nekhludoff sat a while with the old man, who told him all about himself. The old man was a stove
builder, who had been working for 53 years, and had built so many stoves that he had lost count,
and now he wanted to rest, but had no time. He had been to town and found employment for the
young ones, and was now going to the country to see the people at
home.

After hearing the old man's story, Nekhludoff went to the place that Taras was keeping for him.

"It's
all right, sir; sit down; we'll put the bag here," said the gardener, who sat opposite Taras,
in a friendly tone, looking up into Nekhludoff's face.

"Rather a tight fit, but no matter since we are friends," said Taras, smiling, and lifting the
bag, which weighed more than five stone, as if it were a feather, he carried it across to
the window.

"Plenty of room; besides, we might stand up a bit; and even under
the seat it's as comfortable as you could wish.

What's the good of humbugging?" he said, beaming with friendliness
and kindness.

Taras spoke of himself as being unable to utter a word when quite
sober; but drink, he said, helped him to find the right words, and
then he could express everything.

And in reality, when he was sober Taras kept silent; but when he
had been drinking, which happened rarely and only on special occasions,
he became very pleasantly talkative.

Then he spoke a great deal, spoke well and very simply and truthfully, and especially with great
kindliness, which shone in his gentle, blue eyes and in the friendly smile that never left his
lips. He was in such a state to-day. Nekhludoff's approach interrupted the conversation; but when
he had put the bag in its place, Taras sat down again, and with his
strong hands folded in his lap, and looking straight into the gardener's
face, continued his story.

He was telling his new acquaintance about his wife and giving every
detail: what she was being sent to Siberia for, and why he was now
following her.

Nekhludoff had never heard a detailed account of this affair, and so he listened with interest.
When he came up, the story had reached the point when the attempt
to poison was already an accomplished fact, and the family had discovered
that it was Theodosia's doing.

"It's about my troubles that I'm talking," said Taras, addressing Nekhludoff with cordial friendliness.
"I have chanced to come across such a hearty man, and we've got into
conversation, and I'm telling him all."

"I see," said Nekhludoff.

"Well, then in this way, my friend, the business became known. Mother, she takes that cake.
'I'm going,' says she, 'to the police officer.' My father is a just old man. 'Wait, wife,'
says he, 'the little woman is a mere child, and did not herself know what she was doing. We
must have pity. She may come to her senses.' But, dear me, mother would not hear of it. 'While
we keep her here,' she says, 'she may destroy us all like cockroaches.'
Well, friend, so she goes off for the police officer.

He bounces in upon us at once. Calls for witnesses."

"Well, and you?" asked the gardener.

"Well, I, you see, friend, roll about with the pain in my stomach, and vomit. All my inside is turned
inside out; I can't even speak.

Well, so father he goes and harnesses the mare, and puts Theodosia into the cart, and is off
to the police-station, and then to the magistrate's. And she, you
know, just as she had done from the first, so also there, confesses
all to the magistrate--where she got the arsenic, and how she kneaded
the cake.

'Why did you do it?' says he.

'Why,' says she, 'because he's hateful to me. I prefer Siberia to a life with him.' That's me,"
and Taras smiled.

"Well, so she confessed all.

Then, naturally--the prison, and father returns alone. And harvest time just coming, and mother
the only woman at home, and she no longer strong. So we think what
we are to do.

Could we not bail her out? So father went to see an official. No go. Then another. I think
he went to five of them, and we thought of giving it up.

Then we happened to come across a clerk--such an artful one as you don't often find. 'You
give me five roubles, and I'll get her out,' says he. He agreed to do it for three. Well, and
what do you think, friend? I went and pawned the linen she herself had woven, and gave him the
money. As soon as he had written that paper," drawled out Taras, just as if he were speaking
of a shot being fired, "we succeeded at once. I went to fetch her myself. Well, friend, so I
got to town, put up the mare, took the paper, and went to the prison. 'What do you want?' 'This
is what I want,' say I, 'you've got my wife here in prison.' 'And have you got a paper?' I gave
him the paper. He gave it a look. 'Wait,' says he. So I sat down on a bench. It was already
past noon by the sun. An official comes out. 'You are Vargoushoff?' 'I am.' 'Well, you may
take her.' The gates opened, and they led her out in her own clothes quite all right. 'Well,
come along. Have you come on foot?' 'No, I have the horse here.' So I went and paid the ostler,
and harnessed, put in all the hay that was left, and covered it with sacking for her to sit on.
She got in and wrapped her shawl round her, and off we drove. She says nothing and I say nothing.
Just as we were coming up to the house she says, 'And how's mother; is she alive?' 'Yes, she's
alive.' 'And father; is he alive? 'Yes, he is.' 'Forgive me, Taras,'
she says, 'for my folly.

I did not myself know what I was doing.' So I say, 'Words won't mend matters. I have forgiven
you long ago,' and I said no more.

We got home, and she just fell at mother's feet. Mother says, 'The Lord will forgive you.' And
father said, 'How d'you do?' and 'What's past is past. Live as best you can. Now,' says he,
'is not the time for all that; there's the harvest to be gathered
in down at Skorodino,' he says.

'Down on the manured acre, by the Lord's help, the ground has borne such rye that the sickle
can't tackle it.

It's all interwoven and heavy, and has sunk beneath its weight; that must be reaped. You and
Taras had better go and see to it to-morrow.' Well, friend, from
that moment she took to the work and worked so that every one wondered.

At that time we rented three desiatins, and by God's help we had a
wonderful crop both of oats and rye.

I mow and she binds the sheaves, and sometimes we both of us reap. I am good at work and not
afraid of it, but she's better still at whatever she takes up.

She's a smart woman, young, and full of life; and as to work, friend,
she'd grown that eager that I had to stop her.

We get home, our fingers swollen, our arms aching, and she, instead of resting, rushes off to
the barn to make binders for the sheaves for next day. Such a change!"

"Well, and to you? Was she kinder, now?" asked the gardener.

"That's beyond question. She clings to me as if we were one soul. Whatever I think she understands.
Even mother, angry as she was, could not help saying: 'It's as if
our Theodosia had been transformed; she's quite a different woman
now!' We were once going to cart the sheaves with two carts.

She and I were in the first, and I say, 'How could you think of doing that, Theodosia?' and she
says, 'How could I think of it? just so, I did not wish to live with
you.

I thought I'd rather die than live with you!' I say, 'And now?' and
she says, 'Now you're in my heart!'"

Taras stopped, and smiled joyfully, shook his head as if surprised. "Hardly had we got the harvest
home when I went to soak the hemp, and when I got home there was a summons, she must go to be tried,
and we had forgotten all about the matter that she was to be tried for."

"It can only be the evil one," said the gardener. "Could any man of himself think of destroying
a living soul? We had a fellow once--" and the gardener was about to commence his tale when
the train began to stop.

"It seems we are coming to a station," he said. "I'll go and have a drink."

The conversation stopped, and Nekhludoff followed the gardener out of the carriage onto the wet
platform of the station.

CHAPTER XLII.

LE VRAI GRAND MONDE.

Before Nekhludoff got out he had noticed in the station yard several elegant equipages, some with
three, some with four, well-fed horses, with tinkling bells on their harness. When he stepped
out on the wet, dark-coloured boards of the platform, he saw a group of people in front of
the first-class carriage, among whom were conspicuous a stout lady with costly feathers on her
hat, and a waterproof, and a tall, thin-legged young man in a cycling suit. The young man had
by his side an enormous, well-fed dog, with a valuable collar. Behind them stood footmen, holding
wraps and umbrellas, and a coachman, who had also come to meet the
train.

On the whole of the group, from the fat lady down to the coachman who stood holding up his long
coat, there lay the stamp of wealth and quiet self-assurance. A curious and servile crowd
rapidly gathered round this group--the station-master, in his red cap, a gendarme, a thin young
lady in a Russian costume, with beads round her neck, who made a point of seeing the trains
come in all through the summer, a telegraph clerk, and passengers, men and women.

In the young man with the dog Nekhludoff recognised young Korchagin, a gymnasium student. The
fat lady was the Princess's sister, to whose estate the Korchagins
were now moving.

The guard, with his gold cord and shiny top-boots, opened the carriage door and stood holding it
as a sign of deference, while Philip and a porter with a white apron carefully carried out the
long-faced Princess in her folding chair. The sisters greeted each other, and French sentences
began flying about. Would the Princess go in a closed or an open carriage? At last the procession
started towards the exit, the lady's maid, with her curly fringe, parasol and leather case in
the rear.

Nekhludoff not wishing to meet them and to have to take leave over
again, stopped before he got to the door, waiting for the procession
to pass.

The Princess, her son, Missy, the doctor, and the maid went out first,
the old Prince and his sister-in-law remained behind.

Nekhludoff was too far to catch anything but a few disconnected French sentences of their conversation
One of the sentences uttered by the Prince, as it often happens, for some unaccountable reason
remained in his memory with all its intonations and the sound of
the voice.

"Oh, il est du vrai grand monde, du vrai grand monde," said the Prince
in his loud, self-assured tone as he went out of the station with
his sister-in-law, accompanied by the respectful guards and porters.

At this moment from behind the corner of the station suddenly appeared
a crowd of workmen in bark shoes, wearing sheepskin coats and carrying
bags on their backs.

The workmen went up to the nearest carriage with soft yet determined steps, and were about
to get in, but were at once driven away by a guard.

Without stopping, the workmen passed on, hurrying and jostling one
another, to the next carriage and began getting in, catching their
bags against the corners and door of the carriage, but another guard
caught sight of them from the door of the station, and shouted at
them severely.

The workmen, who had already got in, hurried out again and went on,
with the same soft and firm steps, still further towards Nekhludoff's
carriage.

A guard was again going to stop them, but Nekhludoff said there was plenty of room inside, and
that they had better get in. They obeyed and got in, followed by Nekhludoff.

The workmen were about to take their seats, when the gentleman with the cockade and the two ladies,
looking at this attempt to settle in their carriage as a personal
insult to themselves, indignantly protested and wanted to turn them
out.

The workmen--there were 20 of them, old men and quite young ones,
all of them wearied, sunburnt, with haggard faces--began at once to
move on through the carriage, catching the seats, the walls, and the
doors with their bags.

They evidently felt they had offended in some way, and seemed ready to go on indefinitely wherever
they were ordered to go.

"Where are you pushing to, you fiends? Sit down here," shouted another guard they met.

"Voila encore des nouvelles," exclaimed the younger of the two ladies, quite convinced that she
would attract Nekhludoff's notice by her good French.

The other lady with the bracelets kept sniffing and making faces, and remarked something about
how pleasant it was to sit with smelly peasants.

The workmen, who felt the joy and calm experienced by people who have
escaped some kind of danger, threw off their heavy bags with a movement
of their shoulders and stowed them away under the seats.

The gardener had left his own seat to talk with Taras, and now went back, so that there were
two unoccupied seats opposite and one next to Taras.

Three of the workmen took these seats, but when Nekhludoff came up
to them, in his gentleman's clothing, they got so confused that they
rose to go away, but Nekhludoff asked them to stay, and himself sat
down on the arm of the seat, by the passage down the middle of the
carriage.

One of the workmen, a man of about 50, exchanged a surprised and even frightened look with a young
man. That Nekhludoff, instead of scolding and driving them away, as was natural to a gentleman,
should give up his seat to them, astonished and perplexed them. They even feared that this might
have some evil result for them.

However, they soon noticed that there was no underlying plot when they heard Nekhludoff talking
quite simply with Taras, and they grew quiet and told one of the lads to sit down on his bag
and give his seat to Nekhludoff. At first the elderly workman who sat opposite Nekhludoff shrank
and drew back his legs for fear of touching the gentleman, but after
a while he grew quite friendly, and in talking to him and Taras even
slapped Nekhludoff on the knee when he wanted to draw special attention
to what he was saying.

He told them all about his position and his work in the peat bogs, whence he was now returning
home. He had been working there for two and a half months, and was bringing home his wages, which
only came to 10 roubles, since part had been paid beforehand when he was hired. They worked,
as he explained, up to their knees in water from sunrise to sunset, with two hours' interval
for dinner.

"Those who are not used to it find it hard, of course," he said; "but when one's hardened it doesn't
matter, if only the food is right. At first the food was bad. Later the people complained, and
they got good food, and it was easy to work."

Then he told them how, during 28 years he went out to work, and sent all his earnings home.
First to his father, then to his eldest brother, and now to his nephew, who was at the head of
the household.

On himself he spent only two or three roubles of the 50 or 60 he earned a year, just for luxuries--tobacco
and matches.

"I'm a sinner, when tired I even drink a little vodka sometimes," he added, with a guilty smile.

Then
he told them how the women did the work at home, and how the contractor
had treated them to half a pail of vodka before they started to-day,
how one of them had died, and another was returning home ill. The
sick workman he was talking about was in a corner of the same carriage.

He was a young lad, with a pale, sallow face and bluish lips. He was evidently tormented by intermittent
fever. Nekhludoff went up to him, but the lad looked up with such
a severe and suffering expression that Nekhludoff did not care to
bother him with questions, but advised the elder man to give him quinine,
and wrote down the name of the medicine. He wished to give him some
money, but the old workman said he would pay for it himself.

"Well,
much as I have travelled, I have never met such a gentleman before.
Instead of punching your head, he actually gives up his place to you,"
said the old man to Taras. "It seems there are all sorts of gentlefolk,
too."

"Yes, this is quite a new and different world," thought Nekhludoff,
looking at these spare, sinewy, limbs, coarse, home-made garments,
and sunburnt, kindly, though weary-looking faces, and feeling himself
surrounded on all sides with new people and the serious interests,
joys, and sufferings of a life of labour.

"Here is le vrai grand
monde," thought Nekhludoff, remembering the words of Prince Korchagin
and all that idle, luxurious world to which the Korchagins belonged,
with their petty, mean interests. And he felt the joy of a traveller
on discovering a new, unknown, and beautiful world.

END OF BOOK II.

BOOK
III.

CHAPTER I.

MASLOVA MAKES NEW FRIENDS.

The gang of prisoners
to which Maslova belonged had walked about three thousand three hundred
miles. She and the other prisoners condemned for criminal offences
had travelled by rail and by steamboats as far as the town of Perm.
It was only here that Nekhludoff succeeded in obtaining a permission
for her to continue the journey with the political prisoners, as Vera
Doukhova, who was among the latter, advised him to do. The journey
up to Perm had been very trying to Maslova both morally and physically.
Physically, because of the overcrowding, the dirt, and the disgusting
vermin, which gave her no peace; morally, because of the equally disgusting
men. The men, like the vermin, though they changed at each halting-place,
were everywhere alike importunate; they swarmed round her, giving
her no rest. Among the women prisoners and the men prisoners, the
jailers and the convoy soldiers, the habit of a kind of cynical debauch
was so firmly established that unless a female prisoner was willing
to utilise her position as a woman she had to be constantly on the
watch. To be continually in a state of fear and strife was very trying.
And Maslova was specially exposed to attacks, her appearance being
attractive and her past known to every one. The decided resistance
with which she now met the importunity of all the men seemed offensive
to them, and awakened another feeling, that of ill-will towards her.
But her position was made a little easier by her intimacy with Theodosia,
and Theodosia's husband, who, having heard of the molestations his
wife was subject to, had in Nijni been arrested at his own desire
in order to be able to protect her, and was now travelling with the
gang as a prisoner. Maslova's position became much more bearable when
she was allowed to join the political prisoners, who were provided
with better accomodations, better food, and were treated less rudely,
but besides all this Maslova's condition was much improved because
among the political prisoners she was no longer molested by the men,
and could live without being reminded of that past which she was so
anxious to forget. But the chief advantage of the change lay in the
fact that she made the acquaintance of several persons who exercised
a decided and most beneficial influence on her character. It isn't your fault, dear. They wouldn't come on a night like this."

But Helen drew away and went to the window, flattening her arm against the pane, her forehead
pressed against her arm. She had let him go; she had let him go alone. She had forgotten the
danger that always beset him. She had been so crazy, she had seen nothing, thought of nothing.
She had let him go into that, and into the storm, alone. Who knew better than she how cruel
they were? She had seen the fire leap from the white blossom and heard the ball whistle, the
ball they had meant for his heart, that good, great heart. She had run to him the night before--why
had she let him go into the unknown and the storm to-night? But how could she have stopped
him? How could she have kept him, after what he had said? She peered into the night through
distorting tears.

The wind had gone down a little, but only a little, and the electrical flashes danced all around
the horizon in magnificent display, sometimes far away, sometimes dazingly near, the darkness
trebly deep between the intervals when the long sweep of flat lands lay in dazzling clearness,
clean-cut in the washed air to the finest detail of stricken field and heaving woodland. A
staggering flame clove earth and sky; sheets of light came following it, and a frightful uproar
shook the house and rattled the casements, but over the crash of thunder Minnie heard her friend's
loud scream and saw her spring back from the window with both hands, palm outward, pressed
to her face. She leaped to her and threw her arms about her.

"What is it?"

"Look!" Helen dragged her to the window. "At the next flash--the fence beyond the meadow----"

"What was it? What was it like?" The lightning flashed incessantly. Helen tried to point; her
hand only jerked from side to side.

"Look!" she cried.

"I see nothing but the lightning," Minnie answered, breathlessly.

"Oh, the fence! The fence--and in the field!"

"Helen! What was it like?"

"Ah-ah!" she panted, "a long line of white--horrible white----"

"What like?" Minnie turned from the window and caught the other's wrist in a fluttering clasp.

"Minnie, Minnie! Like long white gowns and cowls crossing the fence." Helen released her wrist,
and put both hands on Minnie's cheeks, forcing her around to face the pane. "You must look--you
must look," she cried.

"They wouldn't do it, they wouldn't--it isn't!" Minnie cried. "They couldn't come in the storm.
They wouldn't do it in the pouring rain!"

"Yes! Such things would mind the rain!" She burst into hysterical laughter, and Minnie, almost
as unnerved, caught her about the waist. "They would mind the rain. They would fear a storm!
Ha, ha, ha! Yes--yes! And I let him go--I let him go!"

Pressing close together, shuddering, clasping each other's waists, the two girls peered out
at the flickering landscape.

"Look!"

Up from the distant fence that bordered the northern side of Jones's field, a pale, pelted,
flapping thing reared itself, poised, and seemed, just as the blackness came again, to drop
to the ground.

"Did you see?"

But Minnie had thrown herself into a chair with a laugh of wild relief. "My darling girl!"
she cried. "Not a line of white things--just one--Mr. Jones's old scarecrow! And we saw it
blown down!"

"No, no, no! I saw the others; they were in the field beyond. I saw them! When I looked the
first time they were nearly all on the fence. This time we saw the last man crossing. Ah! I
let him go alone!"

Minnie sprang up and enfolded her. "No; you dear, imagining child, you're upset and nervous--that's
all the matter in the world. Don't worry; don't, child, it's all right. Mr. Harkless is home
and safe in bed long ago. I know that old scarecrow on the fence like a book; you're so unstrung
you fancied the rest. He's all right; don't you bother, dear."

The big, motherly girl took her companion in her arms and rocked her back and forth soothingly,
and petted and reassured her, and then cried a little with her, as a good-hearted girl always
will with a friend. Then she left her for the night with many a cheering word and tender caress.
"Get to sleep, dear," she called through the door when she had closed it behind her. "You must,
if you have to go in the morning--it just breaks my heart. I don't know how we'll bear it without
you. Father will miss you almost as much as I will. Good-night. Don't bother about that old
white scarecrow. That's all it was. Good-night, dear, good-night."

"Good-night, dear," answered a plaintive little voice. Helen's hot cheek pressed the pillow
and tossed from side to side. By and by she turned the pillow over; it had grown wet. The wind
blew about the eaves and blew itself out; she hardly heard it. Sleep would not come. She got
up and laved her burning eyes. Then she sat by the window. The storm's strength was spent at
last; the rain grew lighter and lighter, until there was but the sound of running water and
the drip, drip on the tin roof of the porch. Only the thunder rumbling in the distance marked
the storm's course; the chariots of the gods rolling further and further away, till they finally
ceased to be heard altogether. The clouds parted majestically, and then, between great curtains
of mist, the day-star was seen shining in the east.

The night was hushed, and the peace that falls before dawn was upon the wet, flat lands. Somewhere
in the sodden grass a swamped cricket chirped. From an outlying flange of the village a dog's
howl rose mournfully; was answered by another, far away, and by another and another. The sonorous
chorus rose above the village, died away, and quiet fell again.

Helen sat by the window, no comfort touching her heart. Tears coursed her cheeks no longer,
but her eyes were wide and staring, and her lips parted, for the hush was broken by the far
clamor of the court-house bell ringing in the night. It rang, and rang, and rang, and rang.
She could not breathe. She threw open the window. The bell stopped. All was quiet once more.
The east was growing gray.

Suddenly out of the stillness there came the sound of a horse galloping over a wet road. He
was coming like mad. Some one for a doctor? No; the horse-hoofs grew louder, coming out from
the town, coming this way, coming faster and faster, coming here. There was a splashing and
trampling in front of the house and a sharp "Whoa!" In the dim gray of first dawn she made
out a man on a foam-flecked horse. He drew up at the gate.

A window to the right of hers went screeching up. She heard the judge clear his throat before
he spoke.

"What is it? That's you, isn't it, Wiley? What is it?" He took a good deal of time and coughed
between the sentences. His voice was more than ordinarily quiet, and it sounded husky. "What
is it, Wiley?"

"Judge, what time did Mr. Harkless leave here last night and which way did he go?"

There was a silence. The judge turned away from the window. Minnie was standing just outside
his door. "It must have been about half-past nine, wasn't it, father?" she called in a shaking
voice. "And, you know, Helen thought he went west."

"Wiley!" The old man leaned from the sill again.

"Yes!" answered the man on horseback.

"Wiley, he left about half-past nine--just before the storm. They think he went west."

"Much obliged. Willetts is so upset he isn't sure of anything."

"Wiley!" The old man's voice shook; Minnie began to cry aloud. The horseman wheeled about and
turned his animal's head toward town. "Wiley!"

"Yes."

"Wiley, they haven't--you don't think they've got him?"

"By God, judge," said the man on horseback, "I'm afraid they have!"

CHAPTER X. THE COURT-HOUSE BELL

The court-house bell ringing in the night! No hesitating stroke of Schofields' Henry, no uncertain
touch, was on the rope. A loud, wild, hurried clamor pealing out to wake the country-side,
a rapid clang! clang! clang! that struck clear in to the spine.

The court-house bell had tolled for the death of Morton, of Garfield, of Hendricks; had rung
joy-peals of peace after the war and after political campaigns; but it had rung as it was ringing
now only three times; once when Hibbard's mill burned, once when Webb Landis killed Sep Bardlock
and intrenched himself in the lumber-yard and would not be taken till he was shot through and
through, and once when the Rouen accommodation was wrecked within twenty yards of the station.

Why was the bell ringing now? Men and women, startled into wide wakefulness, groped to windows--no
red mist hung over town or country. What was it? The bell rang on. Its loud alarm beat increasingly
into men's hearts and quickened their throbbing to the rapid measure of its own. Vague forms
loomed in the gloaming. A horse, wildly ridden, splashed through the town. There were shouts;
voices called hoarsely. Lamps began to gleam in the windows. Half-clad people emerged from
their houses, men slapping their braces on their shoulders as they ran out of doors. Questions
were shouted into the dimness.

Then the news went over the town.

It was cried from yard to yard, from group to group, from gate to gate, and reached the furthermost
confines. Runners shouted it as they sped by; boys panted it, breathless; women with loosened
hair stumbled into darkling chambers and faltered it out to new-wakened sleepers; pale girls
clutching wraps at their throats whispered it across fences; the sick, tossing on their hard
beds, heard it. The bell clamored it far and near; it spread over the country-side; it flew
over the wires to distant cities. The White-Caps had got Mr. Harkless!

Lige Willetts had lost track of him out near Briscoes', it was said, and had come in at midnight
seeking him. He had found Parker, the "Herald" foreman, and Ross Schofield, the typesetter,
and Bud Tipworthy, the devil, at work in the printing-room, but no sign of Harkless, there
or in the cottage. Together these had sought for him and had roused others, who had inquired
at every house where he might have gone for shelter, and they had heard nothing. They had watched
for his coming during the slackening of the storm and he had not come, and there was nowhere
he could have gone. He was missing; only one thing could have happened.

They had roused up Warren Smith, the prosecutor, the missing editor's most intimate friend
in Carlow, and Homer, the sheriff, and Jared Wiley, the deputy. William Todd had rung the alarm.
The first thing to do was to find him. After that there would be trouble--if not before. It
looked as if there would be trouble before. The men tramping up to the muddy Square in their
shirt-sleeves were bulgy about the right hips; and when Homer Tibbs joined Lum Landis at the
hotel corner, and Landis saw that Homer was carrying a shot-gun, Landis went back for his.
A hastily sworn posse galloped out Main Street. Women and children ran into neighbors' yards
and began to cry. Day was coming; and, as the light grew, men swore and savagely kicked at
the palings of fences that they passed.

In the foreglow of dawn they gathered in the Square and listened to Warren Smith, who made
a speech from the court-house fence and warned them to go slow. They answered him with angry
shouts and hootings, but he made his big voice heard, and bade them do nothing rash; no facts
were known, he said; it was far from certain that harm had been done, and no one knew that
the Six-Cross-Roads people had done it--even if something had happened to Mr. Harkless. He
declared that he spoke in Harkless's name. Nothing could distress him so much as for them to
defy the law, to take it out of the proper hands. Justice would be done.

"Yes it will!" shouted a man below him, brandishing the butt of a raw-hide whip above his head.
"And while you jaw on about it here, he may be tied up like a dog in the woods, shot full of
holes by the men you never lifted a finger to hender, because you want their votes when you
run for circuit judge. What are we doin' here? What's the good of listening to you?"

There was a yell at this, and those who heard the speaker would probably have started for the
Cross-Roads without further parley, had not a rumor sprung up, which passed so rapidly from
man to man that within five minutes it was being turbulently discussed in every portion of
the crowd. The news came that the two shell-gamblers had wrenched a bar out of a window under
cover of the storm, had broken jail, and were at large. Their threats of the day before were
remembered now, with convincing vividness. They had sworn repeatedly to Bardlock and to the
sheriff, and in the hearing of others, that they would "do" for the man who took their money
from them and had them arrested. The prosecuting attorney, quickly perceiving the value of
this complication in holding back the mob that was already forming, called Homer from the crowd
and made him get up on the fence and confess that his prisoners had escaped--at what time he
did not know, probably toward the beginning of the storm, when it was noisiest.

"You see," cried the attorney, "there is nothing as yet of which we can accuse the Cross-Roads.
If our friend has been hurt, it is much more likely that these crooks did it. They escaped
in time to do it, and we all know they were laying for him. You want to be mighty careful,
fellow-citizens. Homer is already in telegraphic communication with every town around here,
and we'll have those men before night. All you've got to do is to control yourselves a little
and go home quietly." He could see that his words (except those in reference to returning home--no
one was going home) made an impression. There rose a babble of shouting and argument and swearing
that grew continually louder, and the faces the lawyer looked down on were creased with perplexity,
and shadowed with an anger that settled darker and darker.

Mr. Ephraim Watts, in spite of all confusion, clad as carefully as upon the preceding day,
deliberately climbed the fence and stood by the lawyer and made a single steady gesture with
his hand. He was listened to at once, as his respect for the law was less notorious than his
irreverence for it, and he had been known in Carlow as a customarily reckless man. They wanted
illegal and desperate advice, and quieted down to hear it. He spoke in his professionally calm
voice.

"Gentlemen, it seems to me that Mr. Smith and Mr. Ribshaw" (nodding to the man with the rawhide
whip) "are both right. What good are we doing here? What we want to know is what's happened
to Mr. Harkless. It looks just now like the shell-men might have done it. Let's find out what
they done. Scatter and hunt for him. 'Soon as anything is known for certain, Hibbard's mill
whistle will blow three times. Keep on looking till it does. Then" he finished, with a barely
perceptible scornful smile at the attorney, "then we can decide on what had ought to be done."

Six-Cross-Roads lay dark and steaming in the sun that morning. The forge was silent, the saloon
locked up, the roadway deserted, even by the pigs. The broken old buggy stood rotting in the
mud without a single lean, little old man or woman--such were the children of the Cross-Roads--to
play about it. The fields were empty, and the rag-stuffed windows blank, under the baleful
glance of the horsemen who galloped by at intervals, muttering curses, not always confining
themselves to muttering them. Once, when the deputy sheriff rode through alone, a tattered
black hound, more wolf than dog, half-emerged, growling, from beneath one of the tumble-down
barns, and was jerked back into the darkness by his tail, with a snarl fiercer than his own,
while a gun-barrel shone for a second as it swung for a stroke on the brute's head. The hound
did not yelp or whine when the blow fell. He shut his eyes twice, and slunk sullenly back to
his place.

The shanties might have received a volley or two from some of the mounted bands, exasperated
by futile searching, had not the escape of Homer's prisoners made the guilt of the Cross-Roads
appear doubtful in the minds of many. As the morning waned, the advocates of the theory that
the gamblers had made away with Harkless grew in number. There came a telegram from the Rouen
chief of police that he had a clew to their whereabouts; he thought they had succeeded in reaching
Rouen, and it began to be generally believed that they had escaped by the one-o'clock freight,
which had stopped to take on some empty cars at a side-track a mile northwest of the town,
across the fields from the Briscoe house. Toward noon a party went out to examine the railroad
embankment.

Men began to come back into the village for breakfast by twos and threes, though many kept
on searching the woods, not feeling the need of food, or caring if they did. Every grove and
clump of underbrush, every thicket, was ransacked; the waters of the creek, shallow for the
most part, but swollen overnight, were dragged at every pool. Nothing was found; there was
not a sign.

The bar of the hotel was thronged all morning as the returning citizens rapidly made their
way thither, and those who had breakfasted and were going out again paused for internal, as
well as external, reinforcement. The landlord, himself returned from a long hunt, set up his
whiskey with a lavish hand.

"He was the best man we had, boys," said Landis, as he poured the little glasses full. "We'd
ort of sent him to the legislative halls of Washington long ago. He'd of done us honor there;
but we never thought of doin' anything fer him; jest set 'round and let him build up the town
and give him empty thankyes. Drink hearty, gentlemen," he finished, gloomily, "I don't grudge
no liquor to-day--except to Lige Willetts."

"He was a good man," said young William Todd, whose nose was red, not from the whiskey. "I've
about give up."

Schofields' Henry drew his sleeve across his eyes. "He was the only man in this whole city
that didn't jab and nag at me when I done my best," he exclaimed, with an increasing break
in his utterance. "Many a good word I've had from him when nobody in town done nothin' but
laugh an' rile an' badger me about my--my bell." And Schofields' Henry began to cry openly.

"He was a great hand with the chuldern," said one man. "Always have something to say to 'em
to make 'em laugh when he went by. 'Talk more to them 'n he would to grown folks. Yes, sir."

"They knowed him all right," added another. "I reckon all of us did, little and big."

"It's goin' to seem mighty empty around here," said Ross Schofield. "What's goin' to become
o' the 'Herald' and the party in this district? Where's the man to run either of 'em now. Like
as not," he concluded desperately, "the election'll go against us in the fall."

Dibb Zane choked over his four fingers. "We might's well bust up this dab-dusted ole town ef
he's gone."

"I don't know what's come over that Cynthy Tipworthy," said the landlord. "She's waited table
on him last two year, and her brother Bud works at the 'Herald' office. She didn't say a word--only
looked and looked and looked--like a crazy woman; then her and Bud went off together to hunt
in the woods. They just tuck hold of each other's hands like----"

"That ain't nothin'," Homer Tibbs broke in. "You'd ort to've saw old Miz Hathaway, that widder
woman next door to us, when she heard it. He had helped her to git her pension; and she tuck
on worse 'n' anything I ever hear--lot worse 'n' when Hathaway died."

"I reckon there ain't many crazier than them two Bowlders, father and son," said the postmaster,
wiping the drops from his beard as he set his glass on the bar. "They rid into town like a
couple of wild Indians, the old man beatin' that gray mare o' theirn till she was one big welt,
and he ain't natcherly no cruel man, either. I reckon Lige Willetts better keep out of Hartley's
way."

"I keep out of no man's way," cried a voice behind him. Turning, they saw Lige standing on
the threshold of the door that led to the street. In his hand he held the bridle of the horse
he had ridden across the sidewalk, and that now stood panting, with lowered head, half through
the doorway, beside his master. Lige was hatless, splashed with mud from head to foot; his
jaw was set, his teeth ground together; his eyes burned under red lids, and his hair lay tossed
and damp on his brow. "I keep out of no man's way," he repeated, hoarsely.

"I heard you, Mr. Tibbs, but I've got too much to do, while you loaf and gas and drink over
Lum Landis's bar--I've got other business than keeping out of Hartley Bowlder's way. I'm looking
for John Harkless. He was the best man we had in this ornery hole, and he was too good for
us, and so we've maybe let him get killed, and maybe I'm to blame. But I'm going to find him,
and if he's hurt--damn me! I'm going to have a hand on the rope that lifts the men that did
it, if I have to go to Rouen to put it there! After that I'll answer for my fault, not before!"

He threw himself on his horse and was gone. Soon the room was emptied, as the patrons of the
bar returned to the search, and only Mr. Wilkerson and the landlord remained, the bar being
the professional office, so to speak, of both.

Wilkerson had a chair in a corner, where he sat chanting a funeral march in a sepulchral murmur,
allowing a parenthetical hic to punctuate the dirge in place of the drum. Whenever a batch
of newcomers entered, he rose to drink with them; and, at such times, after pouring off his
liquor with a rich melancholy, shedding tears after every swallow, he would make an exploring
tour of the room on his way back to his corner, stopping to look under each chair inquiringly
and ejaculate: "Why, where kin he be!" Then, shaking his head, he would observe sadly: "Fine
young man, he was, too; fine young man. Pore fellow! I reckon we hain't a-goin' to git him."

At eleven o'clock. Judge Briscoe dropped wearily from his horse at his own gate, and said to
a wan girl who came running down the walk to meet him: "There is nothing, yet. I sent the telegram
to your mother--to Mrs. Sherwood."

Helen turned away without answering. Her face was very white and looked pinched about the mouth.
She went back to where old Fisbee sat on the porch, his white head held between his two hands;
he was rocking himself to and fro. She touched him gently, but he did not look up. She spoke
to him.

"There isn't anything--yet. He sent the telegram to mamma. I shall stay with you, now, no matter
what you say." She sat beside him and put her head down on his shoulder, and though for a moment
he appeared not to notice it, when Minnie came out on the porch, hearing her father at the
door, the old scholar had put his arm about the girl and was stroking her fair hair softly.

Briscoe glanced at them, and raised a warning finger to his daughter, and they went tiptoeing
into the house, where the judge dropped heavily upon a sofa with an asthmatic sigh; he was
worn and tired. Minnie stood before him with a look of pale inquiry, and he shook his head.

"No use to tell them; but I can't see any hope," he answered her, biting nervously at the end
of a cigar. "I expect you better bring me some coffee in here; I couldn't take another step
to save me. I'm too old to tear around the country horseback before breakfast, like I have to-day."

"Did you send her telegram?" Minnie asked, as he drank the coffee she brought him. She had
interpreted "coffee" liberally, and, with the assistance of Mildy Upton (whose subdued nose
was frankly red and who shed tears on the raspberries), had prepared an appetizing table at
his elbow.

"Yes," responded the judge, "and I'm glad she sent it. I talked the other way yesterday, what
little I said--it isn't any of our business--but I don't think any too much of those people,
somehow. She thinks she belongs with Fisbee, and I guess she's right. That young fellow must
have got along with her pretty well, and I'm afraid when she gives up she'll be pretty bad
over it; but I guess we all will. It's terribly sudden, somehow, though it's only what everybody
half expected would come; only we thought it would come from over yonder." He nodded toward
the west. "But she's got to stay here with us. Boarding at Sol Tibbs's with that old man won't
do; and she's no girl to live in two rooms. You fix it up with her--you make her stay."

"She must," answered his daughter as she knelt beside him and patted his coat and handed him
several things to eat at the same time. "Mr. Fisbee will help me persuade her, now that she's
bound to stay in spite of him and the Sherwoods, too. I think she is perfectly grand to do
it. I've always thought she was grand--ever since she took me under her wing at school when
I was terribly 'country' and frightened; but she was so sweet and kind she made me forget.
She was the pet of the school, too, always doing things for the other girls, for everybody;
looking out for people simply heads and heads bigger than herself, and so recklessly generous
and so funny about it; and always thoughtful and--and--pleasant----"

Minnie was speaking sadly, mechanically; but suddenly she broke off with a quick sob, sprang
up and went to the window; then, turning, cried out:

"I don't believe it! He knew how to take care of himself too well. He'd have got away from them."

Her father shook his head. "Then why hasn't he turned up? He'd have gone home after the storm
if something bad wasn't the matter."

"But nothing--nothing that bad could have happened. They haven't found--any--anything."

"But why hasn't he come back, child?"

"Well, he's lying hurt somewhere, that's all."

"Then why haven't they found him?"

"I don't care!" she cried, and choked with the words and tossed her dishevelled hair from her
temples; "it isn't true. Helen won't believe it--why should I? It's only a few hours since
he was right here in our yard, talking to us all. I won't believe it till they've searched
every stick and stone of Six-Cross-Roads and found him."

"It wasn't the Cross-Roads," said the old gentleman, pushing the table away and relaxing his
limbs on the sofa. "They probably didn't have anything to do with it. We thought they had at
first, but everybody's about come to believe it was those two devils that he had arrested yesterday."

"Not the Cross-Roads!" echoed Minnie, and she began to tremble violently. "Haven't they been
out there yet?"

"What use? They are out of it, and they can thank God they are!"

"They are not!" she cried excitedly. "They did it. It was the White-Caps. We saw them, Helen
and I."

The judge got upon his feet with an oath. He had not sworn for years until that morning. "What's
this?" he said sharply.

"I ought to have told you before, but we were so frightened, and--and you went off in such
a rush after Mr. Wiley was here. I never dreamed everybody wouldn't know it was the Cross-Roads;
that they would think of any one else. And I looked for the scarecrow as soon as it was light
and it was 'way off from where we saw them, and wasn't blown down at all, and Helen saw them
in the field besides--saw all of them----"

He interrupted her. "What do you mean? Try to tell me about it quietly, child." He laid his
hand on her shoulder.

She told him breathlessly (while he grew more and more visibly perturbed and uneasy, biting
his cigar to pieces and groaning at intervals) what she and Helen had seen in the storm. When
she finished he took a few quick turns about the room with his hands thrust deep in his coat
pockets, and then, charging her to repeat the story to no one, left the house, and, forgetting
his fatigue, rapidly crossed the fields to the point where the bizarre figures of the night
had shown themselves to the two girls at the window.

The soft ground had been trampled by many feet. The boot-prints pointed to the northeast. He
traced them backward to the southwest through the field, and saw where they had come from near
the road, going northeast. Then, returning, he climbed the fence and followed them northward
through the next field. From there, the next, beyond the road that was a continuation of Main
Street, stretched to the railroad embankment. The track, raggedly defined in trampled loam
and muddy furrow, bent in a direction which indicated that its terminus might be the switch
where the empty cars had stood last night, waiting for the one-o'clock freight. Though the
fields had been trampled down in many places by the searching parties, he felt sure of the
direction taken by the Cross-Roads men, and he perceived that the searchers had mistaken the
tracks he followed for those of earlier parties in the hunt. On the embankment he saw a number
of men, walking west and examining the ground on each side, and a long line of people following
them out from town. He stopped. He held the fate of Six-Cross-Roads in his hand and he knew it.

He knew that if he spoke, his evidence would damn the Cross-Roads, and that it meant that more
than the White-Caps would be hurt, for the Cross-Roads would fight. If he had believed that
the dissemination of his knowledge could have helped Harkless, he would have called to the
men near him at once; but he had no hope that the young man was alive. They would not have
dragged him out to their shanties wounded, or as a prisoner; such a proceeding would have courted
detection, and, also, they were not that kind; they had been "looking for him" a long time,
and their one idea was to kill him.

And Harkless, for all his gentleness, was the sort of man, Briscoe believed, who would have
to be killed before he could be touched. Of one thing the old gentleman was sure; the editor
had not been tied up and whipped while yet alive. In spite of his easy manners and geniality,
there was a dignity in him that would have made him kill and be killed before the dirty fingers
of a Cross-Roads "White-Cap" could have been laid upon him in chastisement. A great many good
Americans of Carlow who knew him well always Mistered him as they would have Mistered only
an untitled Morton or Hendricks who might have lived amongst them. He was the only man the
old darky, Uncle Xenophon, had ever addressed as "Marse" since he came to Plattville, thirty
years ago.

Briscoe considered it probable that a few people were wearing bandages, in the closed shanties
over to the west to-day. A thought of the number they had brought against one man; a picture
of the unequal struggle, of the young fellow he had liked so well, unarmed and fighting hopelessly
in a trap, and a sense of the cruelty of it, made the hot anger surge up in his breast, and
he started on again. Then he stopped once more. Though long retired from faithful service on
the bench, he had been all his life a serious exponent of the law, and what he went to tell
meant lawlessness that no one could hope to check. He knew the temper of the people; their
long suffering was at an end, and they would go over at last and wipe out the Cross-Roads.
It depended on him. If the mob could be held off over to-day, if men's minds could cool over
night, the law could strike and the innocent and the hotheaded be spared from suffering. He
would wait; he would lay his information before the sheriff; and Horner would go quietly with
a strong posse, for he would need a strong one. He began to retrace his steps.

The men on the embankment were walking slowly, bending far over, their eyes fixed on the ground.
Suddenly one of them stood erect and tossed his arms in the air and shouted loudly. Other men
ran to him, and another far down the track repeated the shout and the gesture to another far
in his rear; this man took it up, and shouted and waved to a fourth man, and so they passed
the signal back to town. There came, almost immediately three long, loud whistles from a mill
near the station, and the embankment grew black with people pouring out from town, while the
searchers came running from the fields and woods and underbrush on both sides of the railway.

Briscoe paused for the last time; then he began to walk slowly toward the embankment.

The track lay level and straight, not dimming in the middle distances, the rails converging
to points, both northwest and southeast, in the clean-washed air, like examples of perspective
in a child's drawing-book. About seventy miles to the west and north lay Rouen; and, in the
same direction, nearly six miles from where the signal was given, the track was crossed by
a road leading directly south to Six-Cross-Roads.

The embankment had been newly ballasted with sand. What had been discovered was a broad brown
stain on the south slope near the top. There were smaller stains above and below; none beyond
it to left or right; and there were deep boot-prints in the sand. Men were examining the place
excitedly, talking and gesticulating. It was Lige Willetts who had found it. His horse was
tethered to a fence near by, at the end of a lane through a cornfield. Jared Wiley, the deputy,
was talking to a group near the stain, explaining.

"You see them two must have knowed about the one-o'clock freight, and that it was to stop here
to take on the empty lumber cars. I don't know how they knowed it, but they did. It was this
way: when they dropped from the window, they beat through the storm, straight for this side-track.
At the same time Mr. Harkless leaves Briscoes' goin' west. It begins to rain. He cuts across
to the railroad to have a sure footing, and strikin' for the deepo for shelter--near place
as any except Briscoes' where he'd said good-night already and prob'ly don't wish to go back,
'fear of givin' trouble or keepin' 'em up--anybody can understand that. He comes along, and
gets to where we are precisely at the time they do, them comin' from town, him strikin' for
it. They run right into each other. That's what happened. They re-cog-nized him and raised
up on him and let him have it. What they done it with, I don't know; we took everything in
that line off of 'em; prob'ly used railroad iron; and what they done with him afterwards we
don't know; but we will by night. They'll sweat it out of 'em up at Rouen when they get 'em."

"I reckon maybe some of us might help," remarked Mr. Watts, reflectively.

Jim Bardlock swore a violent oath. "That's the talk!" he shouted. "Ef I ain't the first man
of this crowd to set my foot in Roowun, an' first to beat in that jail door, an' take 'em out
an' hang 'em by the neck till they're dead, dead, dead, I'm not Town Marshal of Plattville,
County of Carlow, State of Indiana, and the Lord have mercy on our souls!"

Tom Martin looked at the brown stain and quickly turned away; then he went back slowly to the
village. On the way he passed Warren Smith.

"Is it so?" asked the lawyer.

Martin answered with a dry throat. He looked out dimly over the sunlit fields, and swallowed
once or twice. "Yes, it's so. There's a good deal of it there. Little more than a boy he was."
The old fellow passed his seamy hand over his eyes without concealment. "Peter ain't very bright,
sometimes, it seems to me," he added, brokenly; "overlook Bodeffer and Fisbee and me and all
of us old husks, and--and--" he gulped suddenly, then finished--"and act the fool and take
a boy that's the best we had. I wish the Almighty would take Peter off the gate; he ain't fit
fer it."

When the attorney reached the spot where the crowd was thickest, way was made for him. The
old colored man, Xenophon, approached at the same time, leaning on a hickory stick and bent
very far over, one hand resting on his hip as if to ease a rusty joint. The negro's age was
an incentive to fable; from his appearance he might have known the prophets, and he wore that
hoary look of unearthly wisdom many decades of superstitious experience sometimes give to members
of his race. His face, so tortured with wrinkles that it might have been made of innumerable
black threads woven together, was a living mask of the mystery of his blood. Harkless had once
said that Uncle Xenophon had visited heaven before Swedenborg and hell before Dante. To-day,
as he slowly limped over the ties, his eyes were bright and dry under the solemn lids, and,
though his heavy nostrils were unusually distended in the effort for regular breathing, the
deeply puckered lips beneath them were set firmly.

He stopped and looked at the faces before him. When he spoke his voice was gentle, and though
the tremulousness of age harped on the vocal strings, it was rigidly controlled. "Kin some
kine gelmun," he asked, "please t'be so good ez t' show de ole main whuh de W'ite-Caips is
done shoot Marse Hawkliss?"

"Here was where it happened, Uncle Zen," answered Wiley, leaning him forward. "Here is the stain."

Xenophon bent over the spot on the sand, making little odd noises in his throat. Then he painfully
resumed his former position. "Dass his blood," he said, in the same gentle, quavering tone.
"Dass my bes' frien' whut lay on de groun' whuh yo staind, gelmun."

There was a pause, and no one spoke.

"Dass whuh day laid 'im an' dass whuh he lie," the old negro continued. "Dey shot 'im in de
fiels. Dey ain' shot 'im hear-yondeh dey drugged 'im, but dis whuh he lie." He bent over again,
then knelt, groaningly, and placed his hand on the stain, one would have said, as a man might
place his hand over a heart to see if it still beat. He was motionless, with the air of hearkening.

"Marse, honey, is you gone?" He raised his voice as if calling, "Is you gone, suh?--Marse?"

He looked up at the circle about him, and, still kneeling, not taking his hand from the sand,
seeming to wait for a sign, to listen for a voice, he said: "Whafo' you gelmun think de good
Lawd summon Marse Hawkliss? Kaze he de mos' fittes'? You know dat man he ketch me in de cole
night, wintuh 'to' lais', stealin' 'is wood. You know whut he done t'de ole thief? Tek an'
bull' up big fiah een ole Zen' shainty; say, 'He'p yo'se'f an' welcome. Reckon you hongry,
too, ain' you, Xenophon?' Tek an' feed me. Tek an' tek keer o' me ev' since. Ah pump de baith
full in de mawin'; mek 'is bed; pull de weeds out'n of de front walk--dass all. He tek me in.
When Ah aisk 'im ain' he fraid keep ole thief he say, jesso: 'Dass all my fault, Xenophon;
ought look you up long 'go; ought know long 'go you be cole dese baid nights. Reckon Ahm de
thievenest one us two, Xenophon, keepin' all dis wood stock' up when you got none,' he say,
jesso. Tek me in; say he lahk a thief. Pay me sala'y. Feed me. Dass de main whut de Caips gone
shot lais' night." He raised his head sharply, and the mystery in his gloomy eyes intensified
as they opened wide and stared at the sky, unseeingly.

"Ise bawn wid a cawl!" he exclaimed, loudly. His twisted frame was braced to an extreme tension.
"Ise bawn wid a cawl! De blood anssuh!"

"It wasn't the Cross-Roads, Uncle Xenophon," said Warren Smith, laying his hand on the old
man's shoulder.

Xenophon rose to his feet. He stretched a long, bony arm straight to the west, where the Cross-Roads
lay; stood rigid and silent, like a seer; then spoke:

"De men whut shot Marse Hawkliss lies yondeh, hidin' f'um de light o' day. An' him"--he swerved
his whole rigid body till the arm pointed northwest--"he lies yondeh. You won't find him heah.
Dey fought 'im een de fiel's an' dey druggen 'im heah. Dis whim dey lay 'im down. Ise bawn
wid a cawl!"

There were exclamations from the listeners, for Xenophon spoke as one having authority. Suddenly
he turned and pointed his outstretched hand full at Judge Briscoe.

"An' dass de main," he cried, "dass de main kin tell you Ah speak de trufe."

Before he was answered, Eph Watts looked at Briscoe keenly and then turned to Lige Willetts
and whispered: "Get on your horse, ride in, and ring the court-house bell like the devil. Do
as I say!"

Tears stood in the judge's eyes. "It is so," he said, solemnly. "He speaks the truth. I didn't
mean to tell it to-day, but somehow--" He paused. "The hounds!" he cried. "They deserve it!
My daughter saw them crossing the fields in the night--saw them climb the fence, hoods, gowns,
and all, a big crowd of them. She and the lady who is visiting us saw them, saw them plainly.
The lady saw them several times, clear as day, by the flashes of lightning--the scoundrels
were coming this way. They must have been dragging him with them then. He couldn't have had
a show for his life amongst them. Do what you like--maybe they've got him at the Cross-Roads.
If there's a chance of it--dead or alive--bring him back!"

A voice rang out above the clamor that followed the judge's speech.

"'Bring him back!' God could, maybe, but He won't. Who's travelling my way? I go west!" Hartley
Bowlder had ridden his sorrel up the embankment, and the horse stood between the rails. There
was an angry roar from the crowd; the prosecutor pleaded and threatened unheeded; and as for
the deputy sheriff, he declared his intention of taking with him all who wished to go as his
posse. Eph Watts succeeded in making himself heard above the tumult.

"The Square!" he shouted. "Start from the Square. We want everybody, and we'll need them. We
want every one in Carlow to be implicated in this posse."

"They will be!" shouted a farmer. "Don't you worry about that."

"We want to get into some sort of shape," cried Eph.

"Shape, hell!" said Hartley Bowlder.

There was a hiss and clang and rattle behind him, and a steam whistle shrieked. The crowd divided,
and Hartley's sorrel jumped just in time as the westbound accommodation rushed through on its
way to Rouen. From the rear platform leaned the sheriff, Horner, waving his hands frantically
as he flew by, but no one understood--or cared--what he said, or, in the general excitement,
even wondered why he was leaving the scene of his duty at such a time. When the train had dwindled
to a dot and disappeared, and the noise of its rush grew faint, the court-house bell was heard
ringing, and the mob was piling pell-mell into the village to form on the Square. The judge
stood alone on the embankment.

"That settles it," he said aloud, gloomily, watching the last figures. He took off his hat
and pushed back the thick, white hair from his forehead. "Nothing to do but wait. Might as
well go home for that. Blast it!" he exclaimed, impatiently. "I don't want to go there. It's
too hard on the little girl. If she hadn't come till next week she'd never have known John
Harkless."

CHAPTER XI. JOHN BROWN'S BODY

All morning horsemen had been galloping through Six-Cross-Roads, sometimes singly, oftener
in company. At one-o'clock the last posse passed through on its return to the county-seat,
and after that there was a long, complete silence, while the miry corners were undisturbed
by a single hoof-beat. No unkempt colt nickered from his musty stall; the sparse young corn
that was used to rasp and chuckle greenly stood rigid in the fields. Up the Plattville pike
despairingly cackled one old hen, with her wabbling sailor run, smit with a superstitious horror
of nothing, in the stillness; she hid herself in the shadow underneath a rickety barn, and
her shrieking ceased.

Only on the Wimby farm were there signs of life. The old lady who had sent Harkless roses sat
by the window all morning and wiped her eyes, watching the horsemen ride by; sometimes they
would hail her and tell her there was nothing yet. About two-o'clock, her husband rattled up
in a buckboard, and got out the late, and more authentic, Mr. Wimby's shot-gun, which he carefully
cleaned and oiled, in spite of its hammerless and quite useless condition, sitting, meanwhile,
by the window opposite his wife, and often looking up from his work to shake his weak fist
at his neighbors' domiciles and creak decrepit curses and denunciations.

But the Cross-Roads was ready. It knew what was coming now. Frightened, desperate, sullen,
it was ready.

The afternoon wore on, and lengthening shadows fell upon a peaceful--one would have said, a
sleeping--country. The sun-dried pike, already dusty, stretched its serene length between green
borders flecked with purple and yellow and white weedflowers; and the tree shadows were not
shade, but warm blue and lavender glows in the general pervasion of still, bright light, the
sky curving its deep, unburnished, penetrable blue over all, with no single drift of fleece
upon it to be reflected in the creek that wound along past willow and sycamore. A woodpecker's
telegraphy broke the quiet like a volley of pistol shots.

But far eastward on the pike there slowly developed a soft, white haze. It grew denser and
larger. Gradually it rolled nearer. Dimly behind it could be discerned a darker, moving nucleus
that extended far back upon the road. A heavy tremor began to stir the air--faint manifold
sounds, a waxing, increasing, multitudinous rumor.

The pike ascended a long, slight slope leading west up to the Cross-Roads. From a thicket of
iron-weed at the foot of this slope was thrust the hard, lean visage of an undersized girl
of fourteen. Her fierce eyes examined the approaching cloud of dust intently. A redness rose
under the burnt yellow skin and colored the wizened cheeks.

They were coming.

She stepped quickly out of the tangle, and darted up the road, running with the speed of a
fleet little terrier, not opening her lips, not calling out, but holding her two thin hands
high above her head. That was all. But Birnam wood was come to Dunsinane at last, and the messenger
sped. Out of the weeds in the corners of the snake fence, in the upper part of the rise, silently
lifted the heads of men whose sallowness became a sickish white as the child flew by.

The mob was carefully organized. They had taken their time and had prepared everything deliberately,
knowing that nothing could stop them. No one had any thought of concealment; it was all as
open as the light of day, all done in the broad sunshine. Nothing had been determined as to
what was to be done at the Cross-Roads more definite than that the place was to be wiped out.
That was comprehensive enough; the details were quite certain to occur. They were all on foot,
marching in fairly regular ranks. In front walked Mr. Watts, the man Harkless had abhorred
in a public spirit and befriended in private--to-day he was a hero and a leader, marching to
avenge his professional oppressor and personal brother. Cool, unruffled, and, to outward vision,
unarmed, marching the miles in his brown frock coat and generous linen, his carefully creased
trousers neatly turned up out of the dust, he led the way. On one side of him were the two
Bowlders, on the other was Lige Willetts, Mr. Watts preserving peace between the two young
men with perfect tact and sang-froid.

They kept good order and a similitude of quiet for so many, except far to the rear, where old
Wilkerson was bringing up the tail of the procession, dragging a wretched yellow dog by a slip-noose
fastened around the poor cur's protesting neck, the knot carefully arranged under his right
ear. In spite of every command and protest, Wilkerson had marched the whole way uproariously
singing, "John Brown's Body."

The sun was in the west when they came in sight of the Cross-Roads, and the cabins on the low
slope stood out angularly against the radiance beyond. As they beheld the hated settlement,
the heretofore orderly ranks showed a disposition to depart from the steady advance and rush
the shanties. Willetts, the Bowlders, Parker, Ross, Schofield, and fifty others did, in fact,
break away and set a sharp pace up the slope.

Watts tried to call them back. "What's the use your gettin' killed?" he shouted.

"Why not?" answered Lige, who, like the others, was increasing his speed when old "Wimby" rose
up suddenly from the roadside ahead of them, and motioned them frantically to go back. "They're
laid out along the fence, waitin' fer ye," he warned them. "Git out the road. Come by the fields.
Per the Lord's sake, spread!" Then, as suddenly as he had appeared, he dropped down into the
weeds again. Lige and those with him paused, and the whole body came to a halt while the leaders
consulted. There was a sound of metallic clicking and a thin rattle of steel. From far to the
rear came the voice of old Wilkerson:

   "John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
    John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground--"

A few near him, as they stood waiting, began to take up the burden of the song, singing in
slow time like a dirge; then those further away took it up; it spread, reached the leaders;
they, too, began to sing, taking off their hats as they joined in; and soon the whole concourse,
solemn, earnest, and uncovered, was singing--a thunderous requiem for John Harkless.

The sun was swinging lower and the edges of the world were embroidered with gold while that
deep volume of sound shook the air, the song of a stern, savage, just cause--sung, perhaps,
as some of the ancestors of these men sang with Hampden before the bristling walls of a hostile
city. It had iron and steel in it. The men lying on their guns in the ambuscade along the fence
heard the dirge rise and grow to its mighty fulness, and they shivered. One of them, posted
nearest the advance, had his rifle carefully levelled at Lige Willetts, a fair target in the
road. When he heard the singing, he turned to the man next behind him and laughed harshly:
"I reckon we'll see a big jamboree in hell to-night, huh?"

The huge murmur of the chorus expanded, and gathered in rhythmic
strength, and swelled to power, and rolled and thundered across the
plain.
               His soul goes marching on!"

A gun spat from the higher ground, and Willetts dropped where he stood, but was up again in
a second, with a red line across his forehead where the ball had grazed his temple. Then the
mob spread out like a fan, hundreds of men climbing the fence and beginning the advance through
the fields, dosing on the ambuscade from both sides. Mr. Watts, wading through the high grass
in the field north of the road, perceived the barrel of a gun shining from a bush some distance
in front of him, and, although in the same second no weapon was seen in his hand, discharged
a revolver at the bush behind the gun. Instantly ten or twelve men leaped from their hiding-places
along the fences of both fields, and, firing hurriedly and harmlessly into the scattered ranks
of the oncoming mob, broke for the shelter of the houses, where their fellows were posted.
Taken on the flanks and from the rear, there was but one thing for them to do to keep from
being hemmed in and shot or captured. (They excessively preferred being shot.) With a wild,
high, joyous yell, sounding like the bay of young hounds breaking into view of their quarry,
the Plattville men followed.

The most eastward of the debilitated edifices of Six-Cross-Roads was the saloon, which bore
the painted legends: on the west wall, "Last Chance"; on the east wall, "First Chance." Next
to this, and separated by two or three acres of weedy vacancy from the corners where the population
centred thickest, stood-if one may so predicate of a building which leaned in seven directions-the
house of Mr. Robert Skillett, the proprietor of the saloon. Both buildings were shut up as
tight as their state of repair permitted. As they were furthest to the east, they formed the
nearest shelter, and to them the Cross-Roaders bent their flight, though they stopped not here,
but disappeared behind Skillett's shanty, putting it between them and their pursuers, whose
guns were beginning to speak. The fugitives had a good start, and, being the picked runners
of the Cross-Roads, they crossed the open, weedy acres in safety and made for their homes.
Every house had become a fort, and the defenders would have to be fought and torn out one by
one. As the guns sounded, a woman in a shanty near the forge began to scream, and kept on screaming.

On came the farmers and the men of Plattville. They took the saloon at a run; battered down
the crazy doors with a fence-rail, and swarmed inside like busy insects, making the place hum
like a hive, but with the hotter industries of destruction. It was empty of life as a tomb,
but they beat and tore and battered and broke and hammered and shattered like madmen; they
reduced the tawdry interior to a mere chaos, and came pouring forth laden with trophies of
ruin. And then there was a charry smell in the air, and a slender feather of smoke floated
up from a second-story window.

At the same time Watts led an assault on the adjoining house--an assault which came to a sudden
pause, for, from cracks in the front wall, a squirrel-rifle and a shot-gun snapped and banged,
and the crowd fell back in disorder. Homer Tibbs had a hat blown away, full of buck-shot holes,
while Mr. Watts solicitously examined a small aperture in the skirts of his brown coat. The
house commanded the road, and the rush of the mob into the village was checked, but only for
the instant.

A rickety woodshed, which formed a portion of the Skillett mansion, closely joined the "Last
Chance" side of the family place of business. Scarcely had the guns of the defenders sounded,
when, with a loud shout, Lige Willetts leaped from an upper window on that side of the burning
saloon and landed on the woodshed, and, immediately climbing the roof of the house itself,
applied a fiery brand to the time-worn clapboards. Ross Schofield dropped on the shed, close
behind him, his arm lovingly enfolding a gallon jug of whiskey, which he emptied (not without
evident regret) upon the clapboards as Lige fired them. Flames burst forth almost instantly,
and the smoke, uniting with that now rolling out of every window of the saloon, went up to
heaven in a cumbrous, gray column.

As the flames began to spread, there was a rapid fusillade from the rear of the house, and
a hundred men and more, who had kept on through the fields to the north, assailed it from behind.
Their shots passed clear through the flimsy partitions, and there was a horrid screeching,
like a beast's howls, from within. The front door was thrown open, and a lean, fierce-eyed
girl, with a case-knife in her hand, ran out in the face of the mob. At sound of the shots
in the rear they had begun to advance on the house a second time, and Hartley Bowlder was the
nearest man to the girl. With awful words, and shrieking inconceivably, she made straight at
Hartley, and attacked him with the knife. She struck at him again and again, and, in her anguish
of hate and fear, was so extraordinary a spectacle that she gained for her companions the four
or five seconds they needed to escape from the house. As she hurled herself alone at the oncoming
torrent, they sped from the door unnoticed, sprang over the fence, and reached the open lots
to the west before they were seen by Willetts from the roof.

"Don't let 'em fool you!" he shouted. "Look to I your left! There they go! Don't let 'em get away."

The Cross-Readers were running across the field. They were Bob Skillett and his younger brother,
and Mr. Skillett was badly damaged: he seemed to be holding his jaw on his face with both hands.
The girl turned, and sped after them. She was over the fence almost as soon as they were, and
the three ran in single file, the girl last. She was either magnificently sacrificial and fearless,
or she cunningly calculated that the regulators would take no chances of killing a woman-child,
for she kept between their guns and her two companions, trying to cover and shield the latter
with her frail body.

"Shoot, Lige," called Watts. "If we fire from here we'll hit the girl. Shoot!"

Willetts and Ross Schofield were still standing on the roof, at the edge, out of the smoke,
and both fired at the same time. The fugitives did not turn; they kept on running, and they
had nearly reached the other side of the field, when suddenly, without any premonitory gesture,
the elder Skillett dropped flat on his face. The Cross-Roaders stood by each other that day,
for four or five men ran out of the nearest shanty into the open, lifted the prostrate figure
from the ground, and began to carry it back with them. But Mr. Skillett was alive; his curses
were heard above all other sounds. Lige and Schofield fired again, and one of the rescuers
staggered. Nevertheless, as the two men slid down from the roof, the burdened Cross-Readers
were seen to break into a run; and at that, with another yell, fiercer, wilder, more joyous
than the first, the Plattville men followed.

The yell rang loudly in the ears of old Wilkerson, who had remained back in the road, and at
the same instant he heard another shout behind him. Mr. Wilkerson had not shared in the attack,
but, greatly preoccupied with his own histrionic affairs, was proceeding up the pike alone--except
for the unhappy yellow mongrel, still dragged along by the slip-noose--and alternating, as
was his natural wont, from one fence to the other; crouching behind every bush to fire an imaginary
rifle at his dog, and then springing out, with triumphant bellowings, to fall prone upon the
terrified animal. It was after one of these victories that a shout of warning was raised behind
him, and Mr. Wilkerson, by grace of the god Bacchus, rolling out of the way in time to save
his life, saw a horse dash by him--a big, black horse whose polished flanks were dripping with
lather. Warren Smith was the rider. He was waving a slip of yellow paper high in the air.

He rode up the slope, and drew rein beyond the burning buildings, just ahead of those foremost
in the pursuit. He threw his horse across the road to oppose their progress, rose in his stirrups,
and waved the paper over his head. "Stop!" he roared, "Give me one minute. Stop!" He had a
grand voice; and he was known in many parts of the State for the great bass roar with which
he startled his juries. To be heard at a distance most men lift the pitch of their voices;
Smith lowered his an octave or two, and the result was like an earthquake playing an organ
in a catacomb.

"Stop!" he thundered. "Stop!"

In answer, one of the flying Cross-Roaders turned and sent a bullet whistling close to him.
The lawyer paused long enough to bow deeply in satirical response; then, flourishing the paper,
he roared again: "Stop! A mistake! I have news! Stop, I say! Homer has got them!"

To make himself heard over that tempestuous advance was a feat; for him, moreover, whose counsels
had so lately been derided, to interest the pursuers at such a moment enough to make them listen--to
find the word--was a greater; and by the word, and by gestures at once vehemently imperious
and imploring, to stop them was still greater; but he did it. He had come at just the moment
before the moment that would have been too late. They all heard him. They all knew, too, he
was not trying to save the Cross-Roads as a matter of duty, because he had given that up before
the mob left Plattville. Indeed, it was a question if, at the last, he had not tacitly approved;
and no one feared indictments for the day's work. It would do no harm to listen to what he
had to say. The work could wait; it would "keep" for five minutes. They began to gather around
him, excited, flushed, perspiring, and smelling of smoke. Hartley Bowlder, won by Lige's desperation
and intrepidity, was helping the latter tie up his head; no one else was hurt.

"What is it?" they clamored impatiently. "Speak quick!" There was another harmless shot from
a fugitive, and then the Cross-Roaders, divining that the diversion was in their favor, secured
themselves in their decrepit fastnesses and held their fire. Meanwhile, the flames crackled
cheerfully in Plattville ears. No matter what the prosecutor had to say, at least the Skillett
saloon and homestead were gone, and Bob Skillett and one other would be sick enough to be good
for a while.

"Listen," cried Warren Smith, and, rising in his stirrups again, read the missive in his hand,
a Western Union telegraph form. "Warren Smith, Plattville," was the direction. "Found both
shell-men. Police familiar with both, and both wanted here. One arrested at noon in a second-hand
clothes store, wearing Harkless's hat, also trying dispose torn full-dress coat known to have
been worn by Harkless last night. Stains on lining believed blood. Second man found later at
freight-yards in empty lumber car left Plattville 1 P.M., badly hurt, shot, and bruised. Supposed
Harkless made hard fight. Hurt man taken to hospital unconscious. Will die. Hope able question
him first and discover whereabouts body. Other man refuses talk so far. Check any movement
Cross-Roads. This clears Skillett, etc. Come over on 9.15."

The telegram was signed by Homer and by Barrett, the superintendent of police at Rouen.

"It's all a mistake, boys," the lawyer said, as he handed the paper to Watts and Parker for
inspection. "The ladies at the judge's were mistaken, that's all, and this proves it. It's
easy enough to understand: they were frightened by the storm, and, watching a fence a quarter-mile
away by flashes of lightning, any one would have been confused, and imagined all the horrors
on earth. I don't deny but what I believed it for a while, and I don't deny but the Cross-Roads
is pretty tough, but you've done a good deal here already, to-day, and we're saved in time
from a mistake that would have turned out mighty bad. This settles it. Homer got a wire from
Rouen to come over there, soon as they got track of the first man; that was when we saw him
on the Rouen accommodation."

A slightly cracked voice, yet a huskily tuneful one, was lifted quaveringly on the air from
the roadside, where an old man and a yellow dog sat in the dust together, the latter reprieved
at the last moment, his surprised head rakishly garnished with a hasty wreath of dog-fennel
daisies.

   "John Brown's body lies a-mouldering in the ground,
            While we go marching on!"

Three-quarters of an hour later, the inhabitants of the Cross-Roads, saved, they knew not how;
guilty; knowing nothing of the fantastic pendulum of opinion, which, swung by the events of
the day, had marked the fatal moment of guilt, now on others, now on them, who deserved it--these
natives and refugees, conscious of atrocity, dumfounded by a miracle, thinking the world gone
mad, hovered together in a dark, ragged mass at the crossing corners, while the skeleton of
the rotting buggy in the slough rose behind them against the face of the west. They peered
with stupified eyes through the smoky twilight.

CHAPTER XII. JERRY THE TELLER At midnight a small brougham stopped at the gates of the city
hospital in Rouen. A short distance ahead, the lamps of a cab, drawn up at the curbing, made
two dull orange sparks under the electric light swinging over the street. A cigarette described
a brief parabola as it was tossed from the brougham, and a short young man jumped out and entered
the gates, then paused and spoke to the driver of the cab.

"Did you bring Mr. Barrett here?"

"Yes, sir," answered the driver; "him and two other gentlemen."

Lighting another cigarette, from which he drew but two inspirations before he threw it away,
the young man proceeded quickly up the walk. As he ascended the short flight of steps which
led to the main doors, he panted a little, in a way which suggested that (although his white
waistcoat outlined an ellipse still respectable) a crescendo of portliness was playing diminuendo
with his youth. And, though his walk was brisk, it was not lively. The expression of his very
red face indicated that his briskness was spurred by anxiety, and a fattish groan he emitted
on the top step added the impression that his comfortable body protested against the mental
spur. In the hall he removed his narrow-brimmed straw hat and presented a rotund and amiable
head, from the top of which his auburn hair seemed to retire with a sense of defeat; it fell
back, however, not in confusion, but in perfect order, and the sparse pink mist left upon his
crown gave, by a supreme effort, an effect of arrangement, so that an imaginative observer
would have declared that there was a part down the middle. The gentleman's plump face bore
a grave and troubled expression, and gravity and trouble were patent in all the lines of his
figure and in every gesture; in the way he turned his head; in the uneasy shifting of his hat
from one hand to the other and in his fanning himself with it in a nervous fashion; and in
his small, blue eyes, which did not twinkle behind his rimless glasses and looked unused to
not twinkling. His gravity clothed him like an ill-fitting coat; or, possibly, he might have
reminded the imaginative observer, just now conjured up, of a music-box set to turning its
cylinder backwards.

He spoke to an attendant, and was directed to an office, which he entered without delay. There
were five men in the room, three of them engaged in conversation near the door; another, a
young surgeon, was writing at a desk; the fifth drowsily nodding on a sofa. The newcomer bowed
as he entered.

"Mr. Barrett?" he said inquiringly.

One of the men near the door turned about. "Yes, sir," he answered, with a stem disfavor of
the applicant; a disfavor possibly a perquisite of his office. "What's wanted?"

"I think I have met you," returned the other. "My name is Meredith."

Mr. Barrett probably did not locate the meeting, but the name proved an open sesame to his
geniality, for he melted at once, and saying: "Of course, of course, Mr. Meredith; did you
want a talk with me?" clasped the young man's hand confidentially in his, and, with an appearance
of assuring him that whatever the atrocity which had occurred in the Meredith household it
should be discreetly handled and hushed up, indicated a disposition to conduct him toward a
more appropriate apartment for the rehearsal of scandal. The young man accepted the hand-clasp
with some resignation, but rejected the suggestion of privacy.

"A telegram from Plattville reached me half an hour ago," he said. "I should have had it sooner,
but I have been in the country all day."

The two men who had been talking with the superintendent turned quickly, and stared at the
speaker. He went on: "Mr. Harkless was an old--and--" He broke off, with a sudden, sharp choking,
and for a moment was unable to control an emotion that seemed, for some reason, as surprising
and unbefitting, in a person of his rubicund presence, as was his gravity. An astonished tear
glittered in the corner of his eye. The grief of the gayer sorts of stout people appears, sometimes,
to dumfound even themselves. The young man took off his glasses and wiped them slowly. "--An
old and very dear friend of mine." He replaced the glasses insecurely upon his nose. "I telephoned
to your headquarters, and they said you had come here."

"Yes, sir; yes, sir," the superintendent of police responded, cheerfully. "These two gentlemen
are from Plattville; Mr. Smith just got in. They mighty near had big trouble down there to-day,
but I guess we'll settle things for 'em up here. Let me make you acquainted with my friend,
Mr. Smith, and my friend, Mr. Homer. Gentlemen, my friend, Mr. Meredith, one of our well-known
citizens."

"You hear it from the police, gentlemen," added Mr. Meredith, perking up a little. "I know
Dr. Gay." He nodded to the surgeon.

"I suppose you have heard some of the circumstances--those that we've given out," said Barrett.

"I read the account in the evening paper. I had heard of Harkless, of Carlow, before; but it
never occurred to me that it was my friend--I had heard he was abroad--until I got this telegram
from a relative of mine who happened to be down there."

"Well," said the superintendent, "your friend made a mighty good fight before he gave up. The
Teller, that's the man we've got out here, he's so hacked up and shot and battered his mother
wouldn't know him, if she wanted to; at least, that's what Gay, here, says. We haven't seen
him, because the doctors have been at him ever since he was found, and they expect to do some
more tonight, when we've had our interview with him, if he lives long enough. One of my sergeants
found him in, the freight-yards about four-o'clock and sent him here in the ambulance; knew
it was Teller, because he was stowed away in one of the empty cars that came from Plattville
last night, and Slattery--that's his running mate, the one we caught with the coat and hat--gave
in that they beat their way on that freight. I guess Slattery let this one do most of the fighting;
he ain't scratched; but Mr. Harkless certainly made it hot for the Teller."

"My relative believes that Mr. Harkless is still alive," said Meredith.

Mr. Barrett permitted himself an indulgent smile. He had the air of having long ago discovered
everything which anybody might wish to know, and of knowing a great deal which he held in reserve
because it was necessary to suppress many facts for a purpose far beyond his auditor's comprehension,
though a very simple matter to himself.

"Well, hardly, I expect," he replied, easily. "No; he's hardly alive."

"Oh, don't say that," said Meredith.

"I'm afraid Mr. Barrett has to say it," broke in Warren Smith. "We're up here to see this fellow
before he dies, to try and get him to tell what disposal they made of the----"

"Ah!" Meredith shivered. "I believe I'd rather he said the other than to hear you say that."

Mr. Horner felt the need of defending a fellow-townsman, and came to the rescue, flushing painfully.
"It's mighty bad, I know," said the sheriff of Carlow, the shadows of his honest, rough face
falling in a solemn pattern; "I reckon we hate to say it as much as you hate to hear it; and
Warren really didn't get the word out. It's stuck in our throats all day; and I don't recollect
as I heard a single man say it before I left our city this morning. Our folks thought a great
deal of him, Mr. Meredith; I don't believe there's any thinks more. But it's come to that now;
you can't hardly see no chance left. We be'n sweating this other man, Slattery, but we can't
break him down. Jest tells us to go to"--the sheriff paused, evidently deterred by the thought
that swear-words were unbefitting a hospital--"to the other place, and shets his jaw up tight.
The one up here is called the Teller, as Mr. Barrett says; his name's Jerry the Teller. Well,
we told Slattery that Jerry had died and left a confession; tried to make him think there wasn't
no hope fer him, and he might as well up and tell his share; might git off easier; warned him
to look out for a mob if he didn't, maybe, and so on, but it never bothered him at all. He's
nervy, all right. Told us to go--that is, he said it again--and swore the Teller was on his
way to Chicago, swore he seen him git on the train. Wouldn't say another word tell he got a
lawyer. So, 'soon as it was any use, we come up here--they reckon he'll come to before he dies.
We'll be glad to have you go in with us," Horner said kindly. "I reckon it's all the same to
Mr. Barrett."

"He will die, will he, Gay?" Meredith asked, turning to the surgeon.

"Oh, not necessarily," the young man replied, yawning slightly behind his hand, and too long
accustomed to straightforward questions to be shocked at an evident wish for a direct reply.
"His chances are better, because they'll hang him if he gets well. They took the ball and a
good deal of shot out of his side, and there's a lot more for afterwhile, if he lasts. He's
been off the table an hour, and he's still going."

"That's in his favor, isn't it?" said Meredith. "And extraordinary, too?" If young Dr. Gay
perceived a slur in these interrogations he betrayed no exterior appreciation of it.

"Shot!" exclaimed Homer. "Shot! I knowed there'd be'n a pistol used, though where they got
it beats me--we stripped 'em--and it wasn't Mr. Harkless's; he never carried one. But a shot-gun!"

An attendant entered and spoke to the surgeon, and Gay rose wearily, touched the drowsy young
man on the shoulder, and led the way to the door. "You can come now," he said to the others;
"though I doubt its being any good to you. He's delirious."

They went down a long hall and up a narrow corridor, then stepped softly into a small, quiet ward.

There was a pungent smell of chemicals in the room; the light was low, and the dimness was
imbued with a thick, confused murmur, incoherent whisperings that came from a cot in the corner.
It was the only cot in use in the ward, and Meredith was conscious of a terror that made him
dread, to look at it, to go near it. Beside it a nurse sat silent, and upon it feebly tossed
the racked body of him whom Barrett had called Jerry the Teller.

The head was a shapeless bundle, so swathed it was with bandages and cloths, and what part
of the face was visible was discolored and pigmented with drugs. Stretched under the white
sheet the man looked immensely tall--as Horner saw with vague misgiving--and he lay in an odd,
inhuman fashion, as though he had been all broken to pieces. His attempts to move were constantly
soothed by the nurse, and he as constantly renewed such attempts; and one hand, though torn
and bandaged, was not to be restrained from a wandering, restless movement which Meredith felt
to be pathetic. He had entered the room with a flare of hate for the thug whom he had come
to see die, and who had struck down the old friend whose nearness he had never known until
it was too late. But at first sight of the broken figure he felt all animosity fall away from
him; only awe remained, and a growing, traitorous pity as he watched the long, white fingers
of the Teller "pick at the coverlet." The man was muttering rapid fragments of words, and syllables.

"Somehow I feel a sense of wrong," Meredith whispered to Gay. "I feel as if I had done the
fellow to death myself, as if it were all out of gear. I know, now, how Henry felt over the
great Guisard. My God, how tall he looks! That doesn't seem to me like a thug's hand."

The surgeon nodded. "Of course, if there's a mistake to be made, you can count on Barrett and
his sergeants to make it. I doubt if this is their man. When they found him what clothes he
wore were torn and stained; but they had been good once, especially the linen."

Barrett bent over the recumbent figure. "See here. Jerry," he said, "I want to talk to you
a little. Rouse up, will you? I want to talk to you as a friend."

The incoherent muttering continued.

"See here, Jerry!" repeated Barrett, more sharply. "Jerry! rouse up, will you? We don't want
any fooling; understand that, Jerry!" He dropped his hand on the man's shoulder and shook him
slightly. The Teller uttered a short, gasping cry.

"Let me," said Gay, and swiftly interposed. Bending over the cot, he said in a pleasant, soft
voice: "It's all right, old man; it's all right. Slattery wants to know what you did with that
man down at Plattville, when you got through with him. He can't remember, and he thinks there
was money left on him. Slattery's head was hurt--he can't remember. He'll go shares with you,
when he gets it. Slattery's going to stand by you, if he can get the money."

The Teller only tried to move his free hand to the shoulder Barrett had shaken.

"Slattery wants to know," repeated the surgeon, gently moving the hand back upon the sheet.
"He'll divvy up, when he gets it. He'll stand by you, old man."

"Would you please not mind," whispered the Teller faintly, "would you please not mind if you
took care not to brush against my shoulder again?"

The surgeon drew back with an exclamation; but the Teller's whisper gathered strength, and
they heard him murmuring oddly to himself. Meredith moved forward.

"What's that?" he asked, with a startled gesture.

"Seems to be trying to sing, or something," said Barrett, bending over to listen. The Teller
swung his arm heavily over the side of the cot, the fingers never ceasing their painful twitching,
and Gay leaned down and gently moved the cloths so that the white, scarred lips were free.
They moved steadily; they seemed to be framing the semblance of an old ballad that Meredith
knew; the whisper grew more distinct, and it became a rich but broken voice, and they heard
it singing, like the sound of some far, halting minstrelsy:

"Wave willows--murmur waters--golden sunbeams smile, Earthly music--cannot waken--lovely--Annie
Lisle."

"My God!" cried Tom Meredith.

The bandaged hand waved jauntily over the Teller's head. "Ah, men," he said, almost clearly,
and tried to lift himself on his arm, "I tell you it's a grand eleven we have this year! There
will be little left of anything that stands against them. Did you see Jim Romley ride over
his man this afternoon?"

As the voice grew clearer the sheriff stepped forward, but Tom Meredith, with a loud exclamation
of grief, threw himself on his knees beside the cot and seized the wandering fingers in his
own. "John!" he cried. "John! Is it you?"

The voice went on rapidly, not heeding him: "Ah, you needn't howl; I'd have been as much use
at right as that Sophomore. Well, laugh away, you Indians! If it hadn't been for this ankle--but
it seems to be my chest that's hurt--and side--not that it matters, you know; the Sophomore's
just as good, or better. It's only my egotism. Yes, it must be the side--and chest--and head--all
over, I believe. Not that it matters--I'll try again next year--next year I'll make it a daily,
Helen said, not that I should call you Helen--I mean Miss--Miss--Fisbee--no, Sherwood--but
I've always thought Helen was the prettiest name in the world--you'll forgive me?--And please
tell Parker there's no more copy, and won't be--I wouldn't grind out another stick to save
his immortal--yes, yes, a daily--she said-ah, I never made a good trade--no--they can't come
seven miles--but I'll finish you, Skillett, first; I know you! I know nearly all of you! Now
let's sing 'Annie Lisle.'" He lifted his hand as if to beat the time for a chorus.

"Oh, John, John!" cried Tom Meredith, and sobbed outright. "My boy--my boy--old friend----"
The cry of the classmate was like that of a mother, for it was his old idol and hero who lay
helpless and broken before him.

The brougham lamps and the apathetic sparks of the cab gleamed in front of the hospital till
daylight. Two other pairs of lamps joined them in the earliest of the small hours, these subjoined
to two deep-hooded phaetons, from each of which quickly descended a gentleman with a beard,
an air of eminence, and a small, ominous black box. The air of eminence was justified by the
haste with which Meredith had sent for them, and by their wide repute. They arrived almost
simultaneously, and hastily shook hands as they made their way to the ward down the long hall
and up the narrow corridor. They had a short conversation with Gay and a word with the nurse,
then turned the others out of the room by a practiced innuendo of manner. They stayed a long
time in the room without opening the door. Meredith paced the hall alone, sometimes stopping
to speak to Warren Smith; but the two officials of peace sat together in dumb consternation
and astonishment. The sleepy young man relaxed himself resignedly upon a bench in the hall
had returned to the dormance from which he had been roused. The big hospital was very still.
Now and then a nurse went through the hall, carrying something, and sometimes a neat young
physician passed cheerfully along, looking as if he had many patients who were well enough
to testify to his skill, but sick enough to pay for it. Outside, through the open front doors,
the crickets chirped.

Meredith went out on the steps, and breathed the cool night air. A slender taint of drugs hung
everywhere about the building, and the almost imperceptible permeation sickened him; it was
deadly, he thought, and imbued with a hideous portent of suffering. That John Harkless, of
all men, should lie stifled with ether, and bandaged and splintered, and smeared with horrible
unguents, while they stabbed and slashed and tortured him, and made an outrage and a sin of
that grand, big, dexterous body of his! Meredith shuddered. The lights in the little ward were
turned up, and they seemed to shine from a chamber of horrors, while he waited, as a brother
might have waited outside the Inquisition--if, indeed, a brother would have been allowed to
wait outside the Inquisition.

Alas, he had found John Harkless! He had "lost track" of him as men sometimes do lose track
of their best beloved, but it had always been a comfort to know that Harkless was--somewhere,
a comfort without which he could hardly have got along. Like others he had been waiting for
John to turn up--on top, of course; for people would always believe in him so, that he would
be shoved ahead, no matter how much he hung back himself--but Meredith had not expected him
to turn up in Indiana. He had heard vaguely that Harkless was abroad, and he had a general
expectation that people would hear of him over there some day, with papers like the "Times"
beseeching him to go on missions. And he found him here, in his own home, a stranger, alone
and dying, receiving what ministrations were reserved for Jerry the Teller. But it was Helen
Sherwood who had found him. He wondered how much those two had seen of each other, down there
in Plattville. If they had liked each other, and Harkless could have lived, he thought it might
have simplified some things for Helen. "Poor Helen!" he exclaimed aloud. Her telegram had a
ring, even in the barren four sentences. He wondered how much they had liked each other. Perhaps
she would wish to come at once. When those fellows came out of the room he would send her a
word by telegraph.

When they came out--ah! he did not want them to come out; he was afraid. They were an eternity--why
didn't they come? No; he hoped they would not come, just now. In a little time, in a few minutes,
even, he would not dread a few words so much; but now he couldn't quite bear to be told he
had found his friend only to lose him, the man he had always most needed, wanted, loved. Everybody
had always cared for Harkless, wherever he went. That he had always cared for everybody was
part of the reason, maybe. Meredith remembered, now, hearing a man who had spent a day in Plattville
on business speak of him: "They've got a young fellow down there who'll be Governor in a few
years. He's a sort of dictator; and runs the party all over that part of the State to suit
his own sweet will, just by sheer personality. And there isn't a man in that district who wouldn't
cheerfully lie down in the mud to let him pass over dry. It's that young Harkless, you know;
owns the 'Herald,' the paper that downed McCune and smashed those imitation 'White-Caps' in
Carlow County." Meredith had been momentarily struck by the coincidence of the name, but his
notion of Harkless was so inseparably connected with what was (to his mind) a handsome and
more spacious--certainly more illuminated--field of action, that the idea that this might be
his friend never entered his head. But thank goodness that made things all right. Only in the interval
Hella said that really I am inconceivably stupid sometimes. What on earth did I want to write
a thing like that for? When it begins, of course she will let me know directly. As a matter
of fact it has not begun yet. We have agreed now that it will be better to say "Endt," a sort
of portmanteau word of developed [entwickelt] and at last [endlich] . That will really be splendid
and Hella says that I happened upon it in a lucid interval.

"Ah, that would be too beautiful!" he said.

And then he shivered; for his name was spoken from within.

It was soon plain to him that he need not have feared a few words, for he did not in the least
understand those with which the eminent surgeons favored him; and they at once took their departure.
He did understand, however, what Horner told him. Mr. Barrett, Warren Smith, and the sleepy
young man had reentered the ward; and Horner was following, but waited for Meredith. Somehow,
the look of the sheriff's Sunday coat, wrinkling forlornly from his broad, bent shoulders,
was both touching and solemn. He said simply: "He's conscious and not out of his head. They're
gone in to take his ante-mortem statement," and they went into the room.

Harkless's eyes were bandaged. The lawyer was speaking to him, and as Horner went awkwardly
toward the cot. Warren said something indicative of the sheriff's presence, and the hand on
the sheet made a formless motion which Horner understood, for he took the pale fingers in his
own, very gently, and then set them back. Smith turned toward Meredith, but the latter made
a gesture which forbade the attorney to speak of him, and went to a corner and sat down with
his head in his hands.

The sleepy young man opened a notebook and shook a stylographic pen so that the ink might flow
freely. The lawyer, briefly and with unlegal agitation, administered an oath, to which Harkless
responded feebly, and then there was silence.

"Now, Mr. Harkless, if you please," said Barrett, insinuatingly; "if you feel like telling
us as much as you can about it?" 

***

An American scientest claims to have discovered a harmless germ likely to defeat the "flu" microbe.
It is said that some medical men have put up a purse and that the
two germs are being matched to fight a ten round contest under National
Sporting Club rules. If it were only for myself I should tell you nothing, because, if I am to leave,
I should like it better if no one were punished. But that's a bad community over there; they
are everlastingly worrying our people; they have always been a bother to us, and it's time
it was stopped for good. I don't believe very much in punishment, but you can't do a great
deal of reforming with the Cross-Roaders unless you catch them young--very young, before they're
weaned--they wean them on whiskey, I think. I realize you needn't have sworn me for me to tell
you this."

Homer and Smith had started at the mention of the Cross-Roads, but they subdued their ejaculations,
while Mr. Barrett looked as if he had known it, of course. The room was still, save for the
dim voice and the soft transcribings of the stylographic pen.

"I left Judge Briscoe's, and went west on the pike to a big tree. It rained, and I stepped
under the tree for shelter. There was a man on the other side of the fence. It was Bob Skillett.
He was carrying his gown and hood--I suppose it was that--on his arm. Then I saw two others
a little farther east, in the middle of the road; and I think they had followed me from the
Briscoes', or near there. They had their foolish regalia on, as all the rest had,--there was
plenty of lightning to see. The two in the road were simply standing there in the rain, looking
at me through the eye-holes in their hoods. I knew there were others--plenty--but I thought
they were coming from behind me--the west.

"I wanted to get home--the court-house yard was good enough for me--so I started east, toward
town. I passed the two gentlemen; and one fell down as I went by him, but the other fired a
shot as a signal, and I got his hood off his face for it--I stopped long enough--and it was
Force Johnson. I know him well. Then I ran, and they followed. A little ahead of me I saw six
or eight of them spread across the road. I knew I'd have a time getting through, so I jumped
the fence to cut across the fields, and I lit in a swarm of them--it had rained them just where
I jumped. I set my back to the fence, but one of the fellows in the road leaned over and smashed
my head in, rather--with the butt of a gun, I believe. I came out from the fence and they made
a little circle around me. No one said anything. ***

"London from above," says a Daily Mail correspondent, "is gloriously,
tenderly, wistfully beautiful."

We rather gather that it is the lid of Carmelite House that gives it just that little note of
wistfulness.

***

"How to Prepare Marble Beef" is the subject of a contemporary's "Hints
to Young Housekeepers," We had always supposed that that sort of thing
could be safely left to the butcher.

***

The demobilised members
of a Herefordshire band have all grown too big for their uniforms.
The contra-bombardon man, we understand, also complains that his instrument
is too tight round the chest.

***

"The one unselfish friend of man
is the dog," said Sir FREDERICK BANBURY, M.P. A less courageous man
would certainly have mentioned the PRESIDENT of the United States. He waited
for a good flurry of lightning, and I was slow tumbling down. Some one else fired a shot-gun,
I think--I can't be sure--about the same time, from the side. I tried to get up, but I couldn't,
and then they got together, for a consultation. The man I had hurt--I didn't recognize him--came
and looked at me. He was nursing himself all over; and groaned; and I laughed, I--at any rate,
my arm was lying stretched out on the grass, and he stamped his heel into my hand, and after
a little of that I quit feeling.

"I'm not quite clear about what happened afterwards. They went away, not far, I think. There's
an old shed, a cattle-shelter, near there, and I think the storm drove them under it to wait
for a slack. It seemed a long time. Sometimes I was conscious, sometimes I wasn't. I thought
I might be drowned, but I suppose the rain was good for me. Then I remember being in motion,
being dragged and carried a long way. They took me up a steep, short slope, and set me down
near the top. I knew that was the railroad embankment, and I thought they meant to lay me across
the track, but it didn't occur to them, I suppose--they are not familiar with melodrama--and
a long time after that I felt and heard a great banging and rattling under me and all about
me, and it came to me that they had disposed of me by hoisting me into an empty freight-car.
The odd part of it was that the car wasn't empty, for there were two men already in it, and
I knew them by what they said to me.

"They were the two shell-men who cheated Hartley Bowlder, and they weren't vindictive; they
even seemed to be trying to help me a little, though perhaps they were only stealing my clothes,
and maybe they thought for them to do anything unpleasant would be superfluous; I could see
that they thought I was done for, and that they had been hiding in the car when I was put there.
I asked them to try to call the train men for me, but they wouldn't listen, or else I couldn't
make myself understood. That's all. The rest is a blur. I haven't known anything more until
those surgeons were here. Please tell me how long ago it happened. I shall not die, I think;
there are a good many things I want to know about." He moved restlessly and the nurse soothed him.

