3. I forgot to tell you that yesterday morning I was at Mr. Harley's levee: he swore I came
in spite, to see him among a parcel of fools. My business was to desire I might let the Duke
of Ormond know how the affair stood of the First-Fruits. He promised to let him know it, and
engaged me to dine with him to-day. Every Saturday, Lord Keeper, Secretary St. John, and I
dine with him, and sometimes Lord Rivers; and they let in none else. Patrick brought me some
letters into the Park; among which one was from Walls; and t'other, yes, faith, t'other was
from our little MD, N.11. I read the rest in the Park, and MD's in a chair as I went from St.
James's to Mr. Harley; and glad enough I was, faith, to read it, and see all right. Oh, but
I won't answer it these three or four days at least, or may be sooner. An't I silly? faith,
your letters would make a dog silly, if I had a dog to be silly, but it must be a little dog.--I
stayed with Mr. Harley till past nine, where we had much discourse together after the rest
were gone; and I gave him very truly my opinion where he desired it. He complained he was not
very well, and has engaged me to dine with him again on Monday. So I came home afoot, like
a fine gentleman, to tell you all this.

4. I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St. John; and after dinner he had a note from Mr. Harley,
that he was much out of order.(8) Pray God preserve his health! everything depends upon it.
The Parliament at present cannot go a step without him, nor the Queen neither. I long to be
in Ireland; but the Ministry beg me to stay: however, when this Parliament lurry(9) is over,
I will endeavour to steal away; by which time I hope the First-Fruit business will be done.
This kingdom is certainly ruined as much as was ever any bankrupt merchant. We must have peace,
let it be a bad or a good one, though nobody dares talk of it. The nearer I look upon things,
the worse I like them. I believe the confederacy will soon break to pieces, and our factions
at home increase. The Ministry is upon a very narrow bottom, and stand like an isthmus, between
the Whigs on one side, and violent Tories on the other. They are able seamen; but the tempest
is too great, the ship too rotten, and the crew all against them. Lord Somers has been twice
in the Queen's closet, once very lately; and your Duchess of Somerset,(10) who now has the
key, is a most insinuating woman; and I believe they will endeavour to play the same game that
has been played against them.--I have told them of all this, which they know already, but they
cannot help it. They have cautioned the Queen so much against being governed, that she observes
it too much. I could talk till to-morrow upon these things, but they make me melancholy. I
could not but observe that lately, after much conversation with Mr. Harley, though he is the
most fearless man alive, and the least apt to despond, he confessed to me that uttering his
mind to me gave him ease.

5. Mr. Harley continues out of order, yet his affairs force him abroad: he is subject to a
sore throat, and was cupped last night: I sent and called two or three times. I hear he is
better this evening. I dined to-day in the City with Dr. Freind at a third body's house, where
I was to pass for somebody else; and there was a plaguy silly jest carried on, that made me
sick of it. Our weather grows fine, and I will walk like camomile. And pray walk you to your
Dean's, or your Stoyte's, or your Manley's, or your Walls'. But your new lodgings make you
so proud, you will walk less than ever. Come, let me go to bed, sirrahs.

6. Mr. Harley's going out yesterday has put him a little backwards. I called twice, and sent,
for I am in pain for him. Ford caught me, and made me dine with him on his Opera-day; so I
brought Mr. Lewis with me, and sat with him till six. I have not seen Mr. Addison these three
weeks; all our friendship is over. I go to no Coffee-house. I presented a parson of the Bishop
of Clogher's, one Richardson,(11) to the Duke of Ormond to-day: he is translating prayers and
sermons into Irish, and has a project about instructing the Irish in the Protestant religion.

7. Morning. Faith, a little would make me, I could find in my heart, if it were not for one
thing, I have a good mind, if I had not something else to do, I would answer your dear saucy
letter. O, Lord, I am going awry with writing in bed. O, faith, but I must answer it, or I
shan't have room, for it must go on Saturday; and don't think I will fill the third side, I
an't come to that yet, young women. Well then, as for your Bernage, I have said enough: I writ
to him last week.--Turn over that leaf. Now, what says MD to the world to come? I tell you,
Madam Stella, my head is a great deal better, and I hope will keep so. How came yours to be
fifteen days coming, and you had my fifteenth in seven? Answer me that, rogues. Your being
with Goody Walls is excuse enough: I find I was mistaken in the sex, 'tis a boy.(12) Yes, I
understand your cypher, and Stella guesses right, as she always does. He(13) gave me al bsadnuk
lboinlpl dfaonr ufainf btoy dpionufnad,(14) which I sent him again by Mr. Lewis, to whom I
writ a very complaining letter that was showed him; and so the matter ended. He told me he
had a quarrel with me; I said I had another with him, and we returned to our friendship, and
I should think he loves me as well as a great Minister can love a man in so short a time. Did
not I do right? I am glad at heart you have got your palsy-water;(15) pray God Almighty it
may do my dearest little Stella good! I suppose Mrs. Edgworth set out last Monday se'ennight.
Yes, I do read the Examiners, and they are written very finely, as you judge. I compute you
ought to save eight pounds by being in the others five months; and you have no more done it
than eight thousand. I am glad you are rid of that squinting, blinking Frenchman. I will give
you a bill on Parvisol for five pounds for the half-year. And must I go on at four shillings
a week, and neither eat nor drink for it? Who the Devil said Atterbury and your Dean were alike?
I never saw your Chancellor, nor his chaplain. The latter has a good deal of learning, and
is a well-wisher to be an author: your Chancellor is an excellent man. As for Patrick's bird,
he bought him for his tameness, and is grown the wildest I ever saw. His wings have been quilled
thrice, and are now up again: he will be able to fly after us to Ireland, if he be willing.--Yes,
Mrs. Stella, Dingley writes more like Presto than you; for all you superscribed the letter,
as who should say, Why should not I write like our Presto as well as Dingley? You with your
awkward SS;(17) cannot you write them thus, SS? No, but always SSS. Spiteful sluts, to affront
Presto's writing; as that when you shut your eyes you write most like Presto. I know the time
when I did not write to you half so plain as I do now; but I take pity on you both. I am very
much concerned for Mrs. Walls's eyes. Walls says nothing of it to me in his letter dated after
yours. You say, "If she recovers, she may lose her sight." I hope she is in no danger of her
life. Yes, Ford is as sober as I please: I use him to walk with me as an easy companion, always
ready for what I please, when I am weary of business and Ministers. I don't go to a Coffee-house
twice a month. I am very regular in going to sleep before eleven.--And so you say that Stella
is a pretty girl; and so she be, and methinks I see her just now as handsome as the day is
long. Do you know what? when I am writing in our language, I make up my mouth just as if I
was speaking it. I caught myself at it just now. And I suppose Dingley is so fair and so fresh
as a lass in May, and has her health, and no spleen.--In your account you sent do you reckon
as usual from the 1st of November(18) was twelvemonth? Poor Stella, will not Dingley leave
her a little daylight to write to Presto? Well, well, we'll have daylight shortly, spite of
her teeth; and zoo(19) must cly Lele and Hele, and Hele aden. Must loo mimitate Pdfr, pay?
Iss, and so la shall. And so lele's fol ee rettle. Dood-mollow.--At night. Mrs. Barton sent
this morning to invite me to dinner; and there I dined, just in that genteel manner that MD
used when they would treat some better sort of body than usual.

8. O dear MD, my heart is almost broken. You will hear the thing before this comes to you.
I writ a full account of it this night to the Archbishop of Dublin; and the Dean may tell you
the particulars from the Archbishop. I was in a sorry way to write, but thought it might be
proper to send a true account of the fact; for you will hear a thousand lying circumstances.
It is of Mr. Harley's being stabbed this afternoon, at three o'clock, at a Committee of the
Council. I was playing Lady Catharine Morris's(20) cards, where I dined, when young Arundel(21)
came in with the story. I ran away immediately to the Secretary, which was in my way: no one
was at home. I met Mrs. St. John in her chair; she had heard it imperfectly. I took a chair
to Mr. Harley, who was asleep, and they hope in no danger; but he has been out of order, and
was so when he came abroad to-day, and it may put him in a fever: I am in mortal pain for him.
That desperate French villain, Marquis de Guiscard,(22) stabbed Mr. Harley. Guiscard was taken
up by Mr. Secretary St. John's warrant for high treason, and brought before the Lords to be
examined; there he stabbed Mr. Harley. I have told all the particulars already to the Archbishop.
I have now, at nine, sent again, and they tell me he is in a fair way. Pray pardon my distraction;
I now think of all his kindness to me.--The poor creature now lies stabbed in his bed by a
desperate French Popish villain. Good-night, and God preserve you both, and pity me; I want it.

9. Morning; seven, in bed. Patrick is just come from Mr. Harley's. He slept well till four;
the surgeon sat(23) up with him: he is asleep again: he felt a pain in his wound when he waked:
they apprehend him in no danger. This account the surgeon left with the porter, to tell people
that send. Pray God preserve him. I am rising, and going to Mr. Secretary St. John. They say
Guiscard will die with the wounds Mr. St. John and the rest gave him. I shall tell you more
at night.--Night. Mr. Harley still continues on the mending hand; but he rested ill last night,
and felt pain. I was early with the Secretary this morning, and I dined with him, and he told
me several particularities of this accident, too long to relate now. Mr. Harley is still mending
this evening, but not at all out of danger; and till then I can have no peace. Good-night,
etc., and pity Presto.

10. Mr. Harley was restless last night; but he has no fever, and the hopes of his mending increase.
I had a letter from Mr. Walls, and one from Mr. Bernage. I will answer them here, not having
time to write. Mr. Walls writes about three things. Fletcher, it would seem, had carried on
a brisk traffic in creating by a stroke of the quill powerfully rich families by simply granting
them domains in return for bribes.

Captain John R. N. Evans had been in command of the royal warship Richmond. An estate was his
fervent ambition. Fletcher's mandate gave him a grant of land running forty miles one way,
and thirty another, on the west bank of the Hudson. Beginning at the south line of the present
town of New Paltry, Ulster County, it included the southern tier of the now existing towns in
that picturesque county, two-thirds of the fertile undulations of Orange County and a part of
the present town of Haverstraw. It is related of this area, that there was "but one house on
it, or rather a hut, where a poor man lives." Notwithstanding this lone, solitary subject, Evans
saw great trading and seignorial possibilities in his tract. And what did he pay for this immense
stretch of territory? A very modest bribe; common report had it that he gave Fletcher £100 for the
grant.[16]

Nicholas Bayard, of whom it is told that he was a handy go-between in arranging with the sea pirates
the price that they should pay for Fletcher's protection, was another favored personage. Bayard
was the recipient of a grant forty miles long and thirty broad on both sides of Schoharie Creek.
Col. William Smith's prize was a grant from Fletcher of an estate fifty miles in length on Nassau--now
Long Island. According to Bellomont, Smith got this land "arbitrarily and by strong hand."
Smith was in collusion with Fletcher, and moreover, was chief justice of the province, "a
place of great awe as well as authority." This judicial land wrester forced the town of Southampton
to accept the insignificant sum of £10 for the greater part of forty
miles of beach--a singularly profitable transaction for Smith, who
cleared in one year £500, the proceeds of whales taken there, as he
admitted to Bellomont.[17] Henry Beekman, the astute and smooth founder
of a rich and powerful family, was made a magnate of the first importance
by a grant from Fletcher of a tract sixteen miles in length in Dutchess
County, and also of another estate running twenty miles along the
Hudson and eight miles inland.

This estate he valued at £5,000.[18] Likewise Peter Schuyler, Godfrey Dellius and their associates
had conjointly secured by Fletcher's patent, a grant fifty miles
long in the romantic Mohawk Valley--a grant which "the Mohawk Indians
have often complained of".

Upon this estate they placed a value of £25,000.

This was a towering fortune for the period; in its actual command
of labor, necessities, comforts and luxuries it ranked as a power
of transcending importance.

These were some of the big estates created by "Colonel Fletcher's intolerable corrupt selling
away the lands of this Province," as Bellomont termed it in his communication to the Lords of
Trade of Nov. 28, 1700. Fletcher, it was set forth, profited richly by these corrupt grants.
He got in bribes, it was charged, at least £4,000.[19] But Fletcher
was not the only corrupt official.

In his interesting work on the times,[20] George W. Schuyler presents what is an undoubtedly
accurate description of how Robert Livingston, progenitor of a rich and potent family which for
generations exercised a profound influence in politics and other public affairs, contrived to
get together an estate which soon ranked as the second largest in New York state and as one of the
greatest in the colonies.
 They let nobody see him, and that is perfectly
right. The Parliament cannot go on till he is well, and are forced to adjourn their money businesses,
which none but he can help them in. Pray God preserve him.

13. Mr. Harley is better to-day, slept well all night, and we are a little out of our fears.
I send and call three or four times every day. I went into the City for a walk, and dined there
with a private man; and coming home this evening, broke my shin in the Strand over a tub of
sand left just in the way. I got home dirty enough, and went straight to bed, where I have
been cooking it with gold-beater's skin, and have been peevish enough with Patrick, who was
near an hour bringing a rag from next door. It is my right shin, where never any humour fell
when t'other used to swell; so I apprehend it less: however, I shall not stir till 'tis well,
which I reckon will be in a week. I am very careful in these sort of things; but I wish I had
Mrs. J----'s water:(2) she is out of town, and I must make a shift with alum. I will dine with
Mrs. Vanhomrigh till I am well, who lives but five doors off; and that I may venture.

14. My journals are like to be very diverting, now I cannot stir abroad, between accounts of
Mr. Harley's mending, and of my broken shin. I just walked to my neighbour Vanhomrigh at two,
and came away at six, when little Harrison the Tatler came to me, and begged me to dictate
a paper to him, which I was forced in charity to do. Mr. Harley still mends; and I hope in
a day or two to trouble you no more with him, nor with my shin. Go to bed and sleep, sirrahs,
that you may rise to-morrow and walk to Donnybrook, and lose your money with Stoyte and the
Dean; do so, dear little rogues, and drink Presto's health. O pray, don't you drink Presto's
health sometimes with your deans, and your Stoytes, and your Walls, and your Manleys, and your
everybodies, pray now? I drink MD's to myself a hundred thousand times.

15. I was this morning at Mr. Secretary St. John's for all my shin; and he has given me for
young Harrison the Tatler the prettiest employment in Europe; secretary to my Lord Raby,(3)
who is to be Ambassador Extraordinary at the Hague, where all the great affairs will be concerted;
so we shall lose the Tatlers in a fortnight. I will send Harrison to-morrow morning to thank
the Secretary. Poor Biddy Floyd(4) has got the smallpox. I called this morning to see Lady
Betty Germaine, and when she told me so, I fairly took my leave. I have the luck of it;(5)
for about ten days ago I was to see Lord Carteret;(6) and my lady was entertaining me with
telling of a young lady, a cousin, who was then ill in the house of the smallpox, and is since
dead: it was near Lady Betty's, and I fancy Biddy took the fright by it. I dined with Mr. Secretary;
and a physician came in just from Guiscard, who tells us he is dying of his wounds, and can
hardly live till to-morrow. A poor wench that Guiscard kept, sent him a bottle of sack; but
the keeper would not let him touch it, for fear it was poison. He had two quarts of old clotted
blood come out of his side to-day, and is delirious. I am sorry he is dying; for they had found
out a way to hang him. He certainly had an intention to murder the Queen.

16. I have made but little progress in this letter for so many days, thanks to Guiscard and
Mr. Harley; and it would be endless to tell you all the particulars of that odious fact. I
do not yet hear that Guiscard is dead, but they say 'tis impossible he should recover. I walked
too much yesterday for a man with a broken shin; to-day I rested, and went no farther than
Mrs. Vanhomrigh's, where I dined; and Lady Betty Butler coming in about six, I was forced in
good manners to sit with her till nine; then I came home, and Mr. Ford came in to visit my
shin, and sat with me till eleven: so I have been very idle and naughty. It vexes me to the
pluck(7) that I should lose walking this delicious day. I never see them; and I plainly told
Mr. Harley and Mr. St. John, ten days ago, before my Lord Keeper and Lord Rivers, that I had
been foolish enough to spend my credit with them in favour of Addison and Steele; but that
I would engage and promise never to say one word in their behalf, having been used so ill for
what I had already done.--So, now I am got into the way of prating again, there will be no
quiet for me.

     When Presto begins to prate,
     Give him a rap upon the pate.

O Lord, how I blot! it is time to leave off, etc.

17. I had a letter from Raymond, who cannot hear of your box; but I hope you have it before
this comes to your hands. I dined to-day with Mr. Lewis of the Secretary's office. Mr. Harley
has abundance of extravasated blood comes from his breast out of his wound, and will not be
well so soon as we expected. I had something to say, but cannot call it to mind. (What was it?)

18. I was to-day at Court to look for the Duke of Argyle, and gave him the memorial about Bernage.
The Duke goes with the first fair wind. I could not find him, but I have given the memorial
to another to give him; and, however, it shall be sent after him. Bernage has made a blunder
in offering money to his colonel without my advice; however, he is made captain-lieutenant,
only he must recruit the company, which will cost him forty pounds, and that is cheaper than
an hundred. I dined to-day with Mr. Secretary St. John, and stayed till seven, but would not
drink his champagne and burgundy, for fear of the gout. My shin mends, but is not well. I hope
it will by the time I send this letter, next Saturday.

19. I went to-day into the City, but in a coach, and sossed(9) up my leg on the seat; and as
I came home, I went to see poor Charles Barnard's(10) books, which are to be sold by auction,
and I itch to lay out nine or ten pounds for some fine editions of fine authors. But 'tis too
far, and I shall let it slip, as I usually do all such opportunities. I dined in a coffee-house
with Stratford upon chops and some of his wine. Where did MD dine? Why, poor MD dined at home
to-day, because of the Archbishop, and they could not go abroad, and had a breast of mutton
and a pint of wine. I hope Mrs. Walls mends; and pray give me an account what sort of godfather
I made, and whether I behaved myself handsomely. The Duke of Argyle is gone; and whether he
has my memorial, I know not, till I see Dr. Arbuthnot,(11) to whom I gave it. That hard name
belongs to a Scotch doctor, an acquaintance of the Duke's and me; Stella can't pronounce it.
Oh that we were at Laracor this fine day! the willows begin to peep, and the quicks to bud.
My dream is out: I was a-dreamed last night that I ate ripe cherries.--And now they begin to
catch the pikes, and will shortly the trouts (pox on these Ministers!)--and I would fain know
whether the floods were ever so high as to get over the holly bank or the river walk; if so,
then all my pikes are gone; but I hope not. Why don't you ask Parvisol these things, sirrahs?
And then my canal, and trouts, and whether the bottom be fine and clear? But harkee, ought
not Parvisol to pay in my last year's rents and arrears out of his hands? I am thinking, if
either of you have heads to take his accounts, it should be paid in to you; otherwise to Mr.
Walls. I will write an order on t'other side; and do as you will. Here's a world of business;
but I must go sleep, I'm drowsy; and so goodnight, etc.

20. This sore shin ruins me in coach-hire; no less than two shillings to-day going and coming
from the City, where I dined with one you never heard of, and passed an insipid day. I writ
this post to Bernage, with the account I told you above. I hope he will like it; 'tis his own
fault, or it would have been better. Now when the Indians complained, what happened? Did the
Government protect them? The Government, and especially the courts, were quick and generous
in affording the greatest protection and the widest latitude to Astor's company. But when the
Indians resented the robberies and injustices to which they were subjected beyond bearing, they
were murdered. They were murdered wantonly and in cold blood; and then urgent alarmist representations
would be sent to Washington that the Indians were in a rebellious state, whereupon troops would
be punitively hurried forth to put them down in slaughter. In turn, goaded by an intense spirit
of revenge, the Indians would resort to primitive force and waylay,
rob and murder the white agents and traders.[86]

From 1815 to 1831
more than 150 traders were robbed and killed by Indians.[87] Many
of these were Astor's men.

But how many Indians were killed by the whites has never been known, nor apparently was there any
solicitude as to whether the number was great or small.

What did Astor pay his men for engaging in this degrading and dangerous business? Is it not a terrifying
commentary on the lengths to which men are forced to go in quest of a livelihood, and the benumbing
effects on their sensibilities, that Astor should find a host of men ready to seduce the Indians
into a state of drunkenness, cheat and rob them, and all this only to get robbed and perhaps murdered
in turn? For ten or eleven months in the year Astor's subaltern men toiled arduously through
forest and plain, risking sickness, the dangers of the wilderness and sudden death. They did
not rob because it benefited them; it was what they were paid to
do; and it was likewise expected of them that they should look upon
the imminent chances of death as a part of their contract.

For all this what was their pay? It was the trifling sum of $130 for the ten or eleven months.
But this was not paid in money. The poor wretches who gave up their labor, and often their health
and lives, for Astor were themselves robbed, or their heirs, if they had any. Payment was nearly
always made in merchandise, which was sold at exorbitant prices. Everything that they needed
they had to buy at Astor's stores; by the time that they had bought a year's supplies they
not only had nothing coming to them, but they were often actually in debt to Astor.

But Astor--how did he fare? His profits from the fur trade of the West were truly stupendous for
that period. He, himself, might plead to the Government that the company was in a decaying state
of poverty. These pleas deceived no one. It was characteristic of his habitual deceit that he should
petition the Government for a duty on foreign furs on the ground that the company was being competed
with in the American markets by the British fur companies. At this very time Astor held a virtual
monopoly of fur trading in the United States. One need not be surprised at the grounds of such
a plea.

Throughout the whole history of the trading class, this pathetic
and absurdly false plea of poverty has incessantly been used by this
class, and used successfully, to get further concessions and privileges
from a Government which reflected, and represented, its interests.

 This way of journal is the worst in the
world for writing of news, unless one does it the last day; and so I will observe henceforward,
if there be any politics or stuff worth sending. My shin mends in spite of the scratching last
night. I dined to-day at Ned Southwell's with the Bishop of Ossory(1) and a parcel of Irish
gentlemen. Have you yet seen any of the Spectators? Just three weeks to-day since I had your
last, N.11. I am afraid I have lost one by the packet that was taken; that will vex me, considering
the pains MD take to write, especially poor pretty Stella, and her weak eyes. God bless them
and the owner, and send them well, and little me together, I hope ere long. This illness of
Mr. Harley puts everything backwards, and he is still down, and like to be so, by that extravasated
blood which comes from his breast to the wound: it was by the second blow Guiscard gave him
after the penknife was broken. I am shocked at that villainy whenever I think of it. Biddy
Floyd is past danger, but will lose all her beauty: she had them mighty thick, especially about
her nose.

25. Morning. I wish you a merry New Year; this is the first day of the year, you know, with
us, and 'tis Lady-day. I must rise and go to my Lord Keeper: it is not shaving-day to-day,
so I shall be early. I am to dine with Mr. Secretary St. John. Good-morrow, my mistresses both,
good-morrow. Stella will be peeping out of her room at Mrs. De Caudres'(2) down upon the folks
as they come from church; and there comes Mrs. Proby,(3) and that is my Lady Southwell,(4)
and there is Lady Betty Rochfort.(5) I long to hear how you are settled in your new lodgings.
I wish I were rid of my old ones, and that Mrs. Brent could contrive to put up my books in
boxes, and lodge them in some safe place, and you keep my papers of importance. But I must
rise, I tell you.--At night. So I visited and dined as I told you, and what of that?

26. This was a most delicious day; and my shin being past danger, I walked like lightning above
two hours in the Park. We have generally one fair day, and then a great deal of rain for three
or four days together. All things are at a stop in Parliament for want of Mr. Harley; they
cannot stir an inch without him in their most material affairs: and we fear, by the caprice
of Radcliffe, who will admit none but his own surgeon,(6) he has not been well looked after.
I dined at an alehouse with Mr. Lewis, but had his wine. Don't you begin to see the flowers
and blossoms of the field? How busy should I be now at Laracor! No news of your box? I hope
you have it, and are this minute drinking the chocolate, and that the smell of the Brazil tobacco
has not affected it. I would be glad to know whether you like it, because I would send you
more by people that are now every day thinking of going to Ireland; therefore pray tell me,
and tell me soon: and I will have the strong box.

27. A rainy, wretched, scurvy day from morning till night: and my neighbour Vanhomrigh invited
me to dine with them and this evening I passed at Mr. Prior's with Dr. Freind; and 'tis now
past twelve, so I must go sleep.

28. Morning. O, faith, you're an impudent saucy couple of sluttikins for presuming to write
so soon, said I to myself this morning; who knows but there may be a letter from MD at the
Coffee-house? Well, you must know, and so, I just now sent Patrick, and he brought me three
letters, but not one from MD, no indeed, for I read all the superscriptions; and not one from
MD. One I opened, it was from the Archbishop;(7) t'other I opened, it was from Staunton;(8)
the third I took, and looked at the hand. Whose hand is this? says I; yes, says I, whose hand
is this? Then there was wax between the folds; then I began to suspect; then I peeped; faith,
it was Walls's hand after all: then I opened it in a rage, and then it was little MD's hand,
dear, little, pretty, charming MD's sweet hand again. O Lord, an't here a clutter and a stir,
and a bustle? never saw the like. Faith, I believe yours lay some days at the post-office,
and that it came before my eighteenth went, but that I did not expect it, and I hardly ever
go there. Well, and so you think I'll answer this letter now; no, faith, and so I won't. I'll
make you wait, young women; but I'll inquire immediately about poor Dingley's exchequer trangum.(9)
What, is that Vedel again a soldier? was he broke? I'll put it in Ben Tooke's hand. I hope
Vedel could not sell it.--At night. Vedel, Vedel, poh, pox, I think it is Vedeau;(10) ay, Vedeau,
now I have it; let me see, do you name him in yours? Yes, Mr. John Vedeau is the brother; but
where does this brother live? I'll inquire. This was a fast-day for the public; so I dined
late with Sir Matthew Dudley, whom I have not been with a great while. He is one of those that
must lose his employment whenever the great shake comes; and I can't contribute to keep him
in, though I have dropped words in his favour to the Ministry; but he is too violent a Whig,
and friend to the Lord Treasurer,(11) to stay in. 'Tis odd to think how long they let those
people keep their places; but the reason is, they have not enough to satisfy all expecters,
and so they keep them all in hopes, that they may be good boys in the meantime; and thus the
old ones hold in still. The Comptroller(12) told me that there are eight people expect his
staff. I walked after dinner to-day round the Park. What, do I write politics to little young
women? Hold your tongue, and go to your Dean's.

29. Morning. If this be a fine day, I will walk into the City, and see Charles Barnard's library.
What care I for your letter, saucy N.12? I will say nothing to it yet: faith, I believe this
will be full before its time, and then go it must. I will always write once a fortnight; and
if it goes sooner by filling sooner, why, then there is so much clear gain. Morrow, morrow,
rogues and lasses both, I can't lie scribbling here in bed for your play; I must rise, and
so morrow again.--At night. Your friend Montgomery and his sister are here, as I am told by
Patrick. I have seen him often, but take no notice of him: he is grown very ugly and pimpled.
They tell me he is a gamester, and wins money.--How could I help it, pray? Patrick snuffed
the candle too short, and the grease ran down upon the paper.(13) It an't my fault, 'tis Patrick's
fault; pray now don't blame Presto. I walked today in the City, and dined at a private house,
and went to see the auction of poor Charles Barnard's books; they were in the middle of the
physic books, so I bought none; and they are so dear, I believe I shall buy none, and there
is an end; and go to Stoyte's, and I'll go sleep.

30. Morning. This is Good Friday, you must know; and I must rise and go to Mr. Secretary about
some business, and Mrs. Vanhomrigh desires me to breakfast with her, because she is to intercede
for Patrick, who is so often drunk and quarrelsome in the house, that I was resolved to send
him over; but he knows all the places where I send, and is so used to my ways, that it would
be inconvenient to me; but when I come to Ireland, I will discharge him.(14) Sir Thomas Mansel,(15)
one of the Lords of the Treasury, setting me down at my door to-day, saw Patrick, and swore
he was a Teague-lander.(16) I am so used to his face, I never observed it, but thought him
a pretty fellow. Sir Andrew Fountaine and I supped this fast-day with Mrs. Vanhomrigh. We were
afraid Mr. Harley's wound would turn to a fistula; but we think the danger is now past. He
rises every day, and walks about his room, and we hope he will be out in a fortnight. Prior
showed me a handsome paper of verses he has writ on Mr. Harley's accident:(17) they are not
out; I will send them to you, if he will give me a copy.

31. Morning. What shall we do to make April fools this year, now it happens on Sunday? Patrick
brings word that Mr. Harley still mends, and is up every day. I design to see him in a few
days: and he brings me word too that he has found out Vedeau's brother's shop: I shall call
there in a day or two. It seems the wife lodges next door to the brother. I doubt the scoundrel
was broke, and got a commission, or perhaps is a volunteer gentleman, and expects to get one
by his valour. Morrow, sirrahs, let me rise.--At night. I dined to-day with Sir Thomas Mansel.
We were walking in the Park, and Mr. Lewis came to us. Mansel asked where we dined. We said,
"Together." He said, we should dine with him, only his wife(18) desired him to bring nobody,
because she had only a leg of mutton. I said I would dine with him to choose; but he would
send a servant to order a plate or two: yet this man has ten thousand pounds a year in land,
and is a Lord of the Treasury, and is not covetous neither, but runs out merely by slattering(19)
and negligence. The worst dinner I ever saw at the Dean's was better: but so it is with abundance
of people here. I called at night at Mr. Harley's, who begins to walk in his room with a stick,
but is mighty weak.--See how much I have lost with that ugly grease.(20) 'Tis your fault, pray;
and I'll go to bed.

April 1. The Duke of Buckingham's house fell down last night with an earthquake, and is half
swallowed up; won't you go and see it?--An April fool, an April fool, oh ho, young women. Well,
don't be angry. I will make you an April fool no more till the next time; we had no sport here,
because it is Sunday, and Easter Sunday. I dined with the Secretary, who seemed terribly down
and melancholy, which Mr. Prior and Lewis observed as well as I: perhaps something is gone
wrong; perhaps there is nothing in it. God bless my own dearest MD, and all is well.

2. But while the workers made these products their sole share was meager wages, barely sufficient
to sustain the ordinary demands of life. Moreover, the workers of
one country were compelled to pay exorbitant prices for the goods
turned out by the workers of other countries. I am plagued with one Richardson, an Irish parson, and his project
of printing Irish Bibles, etc., to make you Christians in that country: I befriend him what
I can, on account of the Archbishop and Bishop of Clogher.--But what business have I to meddle,
etc. Do not you remember that, sirrah Stella? what was that about, when you thought I was meddling
with something that was not my business? O, faith, you are an impudent slut, I remember your
doings, I'll never forget you as long as I live. Lewis and I dined together at his lodgings.
But where's the answer to this letter of MD's? O, faith, Presto, you must think of that. Time
enough, says saucy Presto.

3. I was this morning to see Mrs. Barton: I love her better than anybody here, and see her
seldomer. Why, really now, so it often happens in the world, that where one loves a body best--pshah,
pshah, you are so silly with your moral observations. Well, but she told me a very good story. The
company had him in a clamp from which he could not well escape. The workers were housed in ugly
little pens, called cottages, built in tight rows, each having five rooms and "conveniences."
For each of these cottages $18 rent a month was charged. He took all right; said I had reason; vowed nothing ailed him
but sitting up whole nights at business, and one night at drinking; would have had me dine
with him and Mrs. Masham's brother, to make up matters; but I would not. I don't know, but
I would not. But indeed I was engaged with my old friend Rollinson;(22) you never heard of
him before.

4. I sometimes look a line or two back, and see plaguy mistakes of the pen; how do you get
over them? You are puzzled sometimes. Why, I think what I said to Mr. Secretary was right.
Mr. Harley promised to see me in a day or two, so I called this evening; but his son and others
were abroad, and he asleep, so I came away, and found out Mrs. Vedeau. She drew out a letter
from Dingley, and said she would get a friend to receive the money. I told her I would employ
Mr. Tooke in it henceforward. Her husband bought a lieutenancy of foot, and is gone to Portugal.
He sold his share of the shop to his brother, and put out the money to maintain her, all but
what bought the commission. Other shippers who applied their surplus capital to investments in
other forms of trade and ownership advanced rapidly in wealth.
CITY LAND THE SUPREME FACTOR.

Between land ownership and other forms,
however, there was a great difference. I design to engage Ben Tooke, and then receive the parchment from her.--I
gave Mr. Dopping a copy of Prior's verses on Mr. Harley; he sent them yesterday to Ireland,
so go look for them, for I won't be at the trouble to transcribe them here. They will be printed
in a day or two. Give my hearty service to Stoyte and Catherine: upon my word I love them dearly,
and desire you will tell them so: pray desire Goody Stoyte not to let Mrs. Walls and Mrs. Johnson
cheat her of her money at ombre, but assure her from me that she is a bungler. Dine with her
to-day, and tell her so, and drink my health, and good voyage, and speedy return, and so you're
a rogue.

