L. Maria Child

THE FIRST SNOWFALL ........ James Russell Lowell

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN RIVER ........ John Ruskin

THE STORY OF ESTHER

THE DARNING-NEEDLE ........ Hans Christian Andersen

THE POTATO ........ Thomas Moore

THE QUEEN OF THE UNDERWORLD

ORIGIN OF THE OPAL

IN TIME'S SWING ........ Lucy Larcom

WHY THE SEA IS SALT ........ Mary Howitt

PRONUNCIATION OF PROPER NAMES

For Classification of Selections, see General Index at end of Volume X.

ILLUSTRATIONS

KAY AND GERDA AT PLAY AMONG THE FLOWEBS ... (Color Plate) Arthur Henderson AESOP (Halftone)
..... From Painting by Velasquez THE OWL ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THE SPARROW AND THE EAGLE
..... Herbert N. Rudeen INFANT JOY ..... Lucille Enders JAPANESE GATE ..... Herbert N Rudeen
THE STONECUTTER AND HIS SILKEN COUCH ..... Herbert N. Rudeen EVERYTHING REJOICED IN A NEW GROWTH
..... Herbert N. Rudeen BLUEBEARD ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THE PASS KEY ..... Uncredited SHE
SLIPPED SILENTLY AWAY ..... Herbert N. Rudeen SISTER ANN WATCHING FROM THE TOWER ..... Herbert
N. Rudeen RUMPELSTILTZKIN ..... Herbert N. Rudeen AWAITING THE RETURN OF THE FATHER ..... Herbert
N. Rudeen JAPANESE LANTERN ..... Herbert N. Rudeen HER GREATEST PLEASURE WAS TO LOOK INTO THE
MIRROR ..... Herbert N. Rudeen YEARNING LOVE ..... Lucille Enders THE FIGURE OF A STRANGER
IN THE SUNBEAM ..... Arthur Henderson MARYGOLD WAS A GOLDEN STATUE ..... Arthur Henderson THE
CHILD'S WORLD ..... Marion Miller THE SWALLOWS AND THE STORK CAME ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THE
FAT MAN TOLD ABOUT KLUMPEY-DUMPEY ..... Herbert N. Rudeen HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN ..... (Halftone)
Uncredited PICTURE BOOKS IN WINTER ..... Iris Weddell White THE GODS WERE AMAZED ..... A. H.
Winkler HODER HURLED THE DART ..... Herbert N. Rudeen STRANGE OPAL LIGHTS FILTERED THROUGH
THE WATER ..... A. H. Winkler THOR'S HAND GRIPPED HIM ..... W. O. Reese SHUFFLE-SHOON AND AMBER-LOCKS
..... Lucille Enders HOLLYHOCKS ..... Donn P. Crane THE GOBLIN AND THE MIRROR ..... Herbert
N. Rudeen THE SNOW-FLAKE AT LAST BECAME A MAIDEN ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THEY FLEW OVER WOODS
AND LAKES ..... Herbert N Rudeen "HE IS BLOWING BUBBLES" ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THE CROW STOPPED
TO LOOK AT HER ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THE REINDEER RAN AS FAST AS IT COULD GO ..... Herbert
N. Rudeen THE SNOW QUEEN'S CASTLE ..... Herbert N. Rudeen PEGASUS AT THE FOUNTAIN ..... Herbert
N Rudeen PEGASUS DARTED DOWN ASLANT ..... Herbert N. Rudeen ST. NICHOLAS ..... Herbert N. Rudeen
IN VAIN PHAETHON PULLED AT THE REINS ..... Donn P. Crane THERE WAS A LITTLE CHIMNEY SWEEP,
AND HIS NAME WAS TOM ..... Donn P. Crane THEY CAME UP WITH A POOR IRISH WOMAN ..... Donn P.
Crane BEES AND HIVES ..... Donn P. Crane HARTHOVER PLACE ..... Donn P. Crane ALL RAN AFTER
TOM ..... Donn P. Crane TOM LOOKED DOWN THE CLIFF ..... Donn P. Crane THE OLD DAME LOOKED AT
TOM ..... Donn P. Crane TOM LOOKED INTO THE CLEAR WATER ..... Donn P. Crane SIR JOHN SEARCHING
FOR TOM ..... Donn P. Crane TOM WAS NOW A WATER BABY ..... Donn P. Crane "OH, YOU BEAUTIFUL
CREATURE!" SAID TOM ..... Donn P. Crane TOM ESCAPED THE OTTER ..... Donn P. Crane THE SALMON,
KING OF ALL THE FISH ..... Donn P. Crane TOM ON THE BUOY ..... Donn P. Crane PORPOISES .....
Donn P. Crane A LOBSTER ..... Donn P. Crane ELLIE AND THE PROFESSOR ..... Donn P. Crane MRS.
BEDONEBYASYOUDID ..... Donn P. Crane SHE TOOK TOM IN HER ARMS ..... Donn P. Crane TOM FOUND
THE CABINET ..... Donn P. Crane THE LAST OF THE GAIRFOWL ..... Donn P. Crane AND BEHOLD, IT
WAS ELLIE ..... Donn P. Crane HOLGER DANSKE ..... Arthur Henderson THE FIGUREHEAD ..... Arthur
Henderson "MY DEAR GOOD HUSBAND" ..... Herbert N. Rudeen THE FAIRIES OF CALDON-LOW ..... Iris
Weddell White WHO STOLE THE BIRD'S NEST? ..... Herbert N. Rudeen "FATHER, WHO MAKES IT SNOW?"
..... Iris Weddell White "HELLO! I'M WET, LET ME IN" ..... Donn P. Crane "SORRY TO INCOMMODE
YOU" ..... Donn P. Crane "PRAY SIR, WERE YOU MY MUG?" ..... Donn P. Crane "THOU HAST HAD THY
SHARE OF LIFE" ..... Donn P. Crane HE CAST THE FLASK INTO THE STREAM ..... Donn P. Crane THE
DWARF SHOOK THE DROPS INTO THE FLASK ..... Donn P. Crane MORDECAI IN THE KING'S GATE .....
Arthur Henderson HE PUT ON SACKCLOTH AND ASHES ..... Arthur Henderson THEN HAMAN WAS AFRAID
..... Arthur Henderson PLUTO SEIZED PROSERPINA ..... Arthur Henderson IN TIME'S SWING .....
Herbert N. Rudeen SO THE BARGAIN WAS MADE ..... Mildred Lyon

AESOP

Many centuries ago, more than six hundred years before Christ was born, there lived in Greece
a man by the name of Aesop. We do not know very much about him, and no one can tell exactly
what he wrote, or even that he ever wrote anything.

We know he was a slave and much wiser than his masters, but whether he was a fine, shapely
man or a hunchback and a cripple we cannot be sure, for different people have written very
differently about him.

No matter what he was or how he lived, many, many stories are still told about him, and the
greater part of the fables we all like to read are said to have been written or told by him,
and everybody still calls them Aesop's fables.

Some of the stories told about him are curious indeed. Here are a few of them.

In those days men were sold as slaves in the market, as cattle are sold now. One day Aesop
and two other men were put up at auction. Xanthus, a wealthy man, wanted a slave, and he said
to the men: "What can you do?"

The two men bragged large about the things they could do, for both wanted a rich master like
Xanthus.

"But what can you do?" said Xanthus, turning to Aesop.

"The others can do so much and so well," said Aesop, "that there's nothing left for me to do."

"Will you be honest and faithful if I buy you?"

"I shall be that whether you buy me or not."

"Will you promise not to run away?"

"Did you ever hear," answered Aesop, "of a bird in a cage that promised to stay in it?"

Xanthus was so much pleased with the answers that he bought Aesop.

Some time afterward, Xanthus, wishing to give a dinner to some of his friends, ordered Aesop
to furnish the finest feast that money could buy.

The first course Aesop supplied was of tongues cooked in many ways, and the second of tongues
and the third and the fourth. Then Xanthus called sharply to Aesop:

"Did I not tell you, sirrah, to provide the choicest dainties that money could procure?"

"And what excels the tongue?" replied Aesop. "It is the great channel of learning and philosophy.
By this noble organ everything wise and good is accomplished."

The company applauded Aesop's wit, and good humor was restored.

"Well," said Xanthus to the guests, "pray do me the favor of dining with me again to-morrow.
And if this is your best," continued he turning to Aesop, "pray, to-morrow let us have some
of the worst meat you can find."

The next day, when dinner-time came, the guests were assembled. Great was their astonishment
and great the anger of Xanthus at finding that again nothing but tongue was put upon the table.

"How, sir," said Xanthus, "should tongues be the best of meat one day, and the worst another?"

"What," replied Aesop, "can be worse than the tongue? What wickedness is there under the sun
that it has not a part in? Treasons, violence, injustice, and fraud are debated and resolved
upon by the tongue. It is the ruin of empires, of cities, and of private friendships."

* * * * *

At another time Xanthus very foolishly bet with a scholar that he could drink the sea dry.
Alarmed, he consulted Aesop.

"To perform your wager," said Aesop, "you know is impossible, but I will show you how to evade it."

They accordingly met the scholar, and went with him and a great number of people to the seashore,
where Aesop had provided a table with several large glasses upon it, and men who stood around
with ladles with which to fill the glasses.

Xanthus, instructed by Aesop, gravely took his seat at the table. The beholders looked on with
astonishment, thinking that he must surely have lost his senses.

"My agreement," said he, turning to the scholar, "is to drink up the sea. I said nothing of
the rivers and streams that are everywhere flowing into it. Stop up these, and I will proceed
to fulfill my engagement."

* * * * *

It is said that at one time when Xanthus started out on a long journey, he ordered his servants
to get all his things together and put them up into bundles so that they could carry them.

When everything had been neatly tied up, Aesop went to his master and begged for the lightest
bundle. Wishing to please his favorite slave, the master told Aesop to choose for himself the
one he preferred to carry. Looking them all over, he picked up the basket of bread and started
off with it on the journey. The other servants laughed at his foolishness, for that basket
was the heaviest of all.

When dinner-time came, Aesop was very tired, for he had had a difficult time to carry his load
for the last few hours. When they had rested, however, they took bread from the basket, each
taking an equal share. Half the bread was eaten at this one meal, and when supper-time came
the rest of it disappeared.

For the whole remainder of the journey, which ran far into the night and was over rough roads,
up and down hills, Aesop had nothing to carry, while the loads of the other servants grew heavier
and heavier with every step.

 The people of the neighborhood in which Aesop was a slave one day
observed him attentively looking over some poultry in a pen that was
near the roadside; and those idlers, who spent more time in prying into
other people's affairs than in adjusting their own, asked why he
bestowed his attention on those animals.

"I am surprised," replied Aesop, "to see how mankind imitate this foolish animal."

"In what?" asked the neighbors.

"Why, in crowing so well and scratching so poorly," rejoined Aesop.

Fables, you know, are short stories, usually about animals and things, which are made to talk
like human beings. Fables are so bright and interesting in themselves that both children and
grown-ups like to read them. Children see first the story, and bye and bye, after they have
thought more about it and have grown older, they see how much wisdom there is in the fables.

For an example, there is the fable of the crab and its mother. They were strolling along the
sand together when the mother said, "Child, you are not walking gracefully. You should walk
straight forward, without twisting from side to side."

"Pray, mother," said the young one, "if you will set the example, I will follow it."

Perhaps children will think the little crab was not very respectful, but the lesson is plain
that it is always easier to give good advice than it is to follow it.

There is another, which teaches us to be self-reliant and resourceful. A crow, whose throat
was parched and dry with thirst, saw a pitcher in the distance. In great joy he flew to it,
but found that it held only a little water, and even that was too near the bottom to be reached,
for all his stooping and straining.

Next he tried to overturn the pitcher, thinking that he would at least be able to catch some
of the water as it trickled out. But this he was not strong enough to do. In the end he found
some pebbles lying near, and by dropping them one by one into the pitcher, he managed at last
to raise the water up to the very brim, and thus was able to quench his thirst.

THE FALCON AND THE PARTRIDGE

                       From The Arabian Nights

Once upon a time a Falcon stooped from its flight and seized a Partridge; but the latter freed
himself from the seizer, and entering his nest, hid himself there. The Falcon followed apace
and called out to him, saying:

"O imbecile, I saw you hungry in the field and took pity on you; so I picked up for you some
grain and took hold of you that you might eat; but you fled from me, and I know not the cause
of your flight, except it were to put upon me a slight. Come out, then, and take the grain
I have brought you to eat, and much good may it do you, and with your health agree."

When the Partridge heard these words he believed, and came out to the Falcon, who thereupon
struck his talons into him and seized him.

Cried the Partridge, "Is this that which you told me you had brought me from the field, and
whereof you told me to eat, saying, 'Much good may it do you, and with your health agree?'
Thou hast lied to me, and may God cause what you eat of my flesh to be a killing poison in
your maw!"

When the Falcon had eaten the Partridge his feathers fell off, his strength failed, and he
died on the spot. Know that he who digs for his brother a pit, himself soon falls into it.

MINERVA AND THE OWL

"My most solemn and wise bird," said Minerva one day to her Owl, "I have hitherto admired you
for your profound silence; but I have now a mind to have you show your ability in discourse,
for silence is only admirable in one who can, when he pleases, triumph by his eloquence and
charm with graceful conversation."

The Owl replied by solemn grimaces, and made dumb signs. Minerva bade him lay aside that affectation
and begin; but he only shook his wise head and remained silent. Thereupon Minerva commanded
him to speak immediately, on pain of her displeasure.

The Owl, seeing no remedy, drew up close to Minerva, and whispered very softly in her ear this
sage remark: "Since the world is grown so depraved, they ought to be esteemed most wise who
have eyes to see and wit to hold their tongues."

THE SPARROW AND THE EAGLE

From The Arabian Nights

Once a Sparrow, flitting over a flock of sheep, saw a great Eagle swoop down upon a newly weaned
lamb and carry it up in his claws and fly away. Thereupon the Sparrow clapped his wings and
said, "I will do even as this Eagle did."

So he waxed proud in his own conceit, and, mimicking one greater than he, flew down forthright
and lighted on the back of a fat ram with a thick fleece, that was matted by his lying till
it was like woolen felt. As soon as the Sparrow pounced upon the sheep's back he flopped his
wings to fly away, but his feet became tangled in the wool, and, however hard he tried, he
could not set himself free.

While all this was passing, the shepherd was looking on, having seen what happened first with
the Eagle and afterward with the Sparrow. So in a great rage he came up to the wee birdie and
seized him. He plucked out his wing feathers and carried him to his children.

"What is this?" asked one of them.

"This," he answered, "is he that aped a greater than himself and came to grief."

The Old Man and Death

A poor and toil-worn peasant, bent with years and groaning beneath the weight of a heavy fagot
of firewood which he carried, sought, weary and sore-footed, to gain his distant cottage. Unable
to bear the weight of his burden longer, he let it fall by the roadside, and lamented his hard
fate.

"What pleasure have I known since I first drew breath in this sad world? From dawn to dusk
it has been hard work and little pay! At home is an empty cupboard, a discontented wife, and
lazy and disobedient children! O Death! O Death! come and free me from my troubles!"

At once the ghostly King of Terrors stood before him and asked, "What do you want with me?"

"Noth-nothing," stammered the frightened peasant, "except for you to help me put again upon
my shoulders the bundle of fagots I have let fall!"

INFANT JOY

By William Blake

"I have no name;
  I am but two days old."
"What shall I call thee?"
  "I happy am;
Joy is my name."
Sweet joy befall thee!

Pretty Joy!
Sweet Joy, but two days old.
Sweet Joy I call thee:
  Thou dost smile:
  I sing the while,
"Sweet joy befall thee!"

THE BABY

By George Macdonald

Where did you come from, baby dear? Out of the everywhere into the here.

Where did you get your eyes so blue? Out of the sky as I came through.

What makes the light in them sparkle and spin? Some of the starry spikes left in.

Where did you get that little tear? I found it waiting when I got here.

What makes your forehead so smooth and high? A soft hand stroked it as I went by.

What makes your cheek like a warm white rose? Something better than any one knows.

Whence that three-cornered smile of bliss? Three angels gave me at once a kiss.

Where did you get that pearly ear? God spoke, and it came out to hear.

Where did you get those arms and hands? Love made itself into hooks and bands.

Feet, whence did you come, you darling things? From the same box as the cherub's wings.

How did they all just come to be you? God thought about me, and so I grew.

But how did you come to us, you dear? God thought of YOU, and so I am here.

THE DISCONTENTED STONECUTTER

Adapted from the Japanese

Once upon a time there was a man who worked from early morning till late at night cutting building
stones out of the solid rock. His pay was small and hardly enough to keep his wife and children
from starving. So the poor stonecutter grew discontented and sighed and moaned bitterly over
his hard lot.

One day when his work seemed harder than usual and his troubles more than he could bear he
cried out in despair:

"Oh, I wish I could be rich and lie at ease on a soft couch with a curtain of red silk!"

Just then a beautiful fairy floated down from heaven, and softly said, "Thy wish is granted
thee." So the poor stonecutter found himself rich and powerful and resting easily on his silken
couch with its red curtain. As he gazed out, however, he saw the king of the country ride by
with many horsemen before and behind him, and with a great golden sunshade held over his head.
It irritated the rich man to have no parasol over his head and to see another more powerful
than himself, and in his discontentment he exclaimed, "Would that I were a king such as that one."

Once again his good fairy appeared, waved his wand, and said, "It shall be as thou desirest."
Immediately the man was king, and before him and behind him rode his men-at-arms, and over
his head was a golden sunshade. But elsewhere the sun shone fiercely down and dried up the
vegetation with its terrible heat. It was reflected into the face of the king so that even
the golden sunshade did not keep him from suffering. Once more he sighed discontentedly, "If
I could only be the sun!"

Almost before he spoke he found himself to be the sun, and he began joyously to send his fiery
rays above, below and everywhere roundabout him. He scorched the grass of the earth, and burned
the faces of its rulers and felt his power unlimited until a little cloud placed itself between
him and the earth and threw back his scorching rays. It still angered him to find something
more powerful than himself, and he wished aloud that he might be the cloud.

Again his wish was granted, and he found himself floating where he wished through the sky.
He ran between the sun and the earth and sheltered the latter so that the grass grew green,
the trees leaved out again, and everything rejoiced in a new growth. Then he sent great floods
of rain upon the earth, filled the rivers till they overflowed, swept homes and herds into
the sea, and destroyed the works of man in every direction. But try as he would he could not
move one great rock that stood right across his way. Though he sent waters that roared around
its base and pushed hard against it, yet it remained immovable. Such a failure angered the
man-cloud, and again he cried out, "Would that I were a rock, so strong and immovable is it."

This time, also, his guardian angel interfered, and he found himself a rock that withstood
the sun, the wind and the waters. But then, one day, there came along a rude stonecutter, who
with chisel and heavy hammer began to cut the great rock into small, regular building stones.
"What does this mean?" cried the rock. "Has this man power to cut me in pieces? Surely I am
weaker than he! Would I were a stonecutter!"

"As thou wishest, so shall it be," said his guardian angel, and immediately he was again a
stonecutter, working hard as before and for small wages, but happy and contented with his lot.

DISCREET HANS

By Wilhelm and Jakob Grimm

Hans's mother asked, "Whither are you going, Hans?"

"To Grethel's," replied he.

"Behave well, Hans."

"I will take care; good-bye, mother."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Hans came to Grethel. "Good day," said he.

"Good day," replied Grethel. "What treasure do you bring today?"

"I bring nothing. Have you anything to give?"

Grethel presented Hans with a needle.

"Good-bye," said he.

"Good-bye, Hans."

Hans took the needle, stuck it in a load of hay, and walked home behind the wagon.

"Good evening, mother."

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's."

"And what have you given her?"

"Nothing; she has given me something."

"What has Grethel given you?"

"A needle," said Hans.

"And where have you put it?"

"In the load of hay."

"Then you have behaved stupidly, Hans; you should put needles on your coat sleeve."

"To behave better, do nothing at all," thought Hans.

"Whither are you going, Hans?"

"To Grethel's, mother." What treasure do you bring?"

"I bring nothing. Have you anything to give?"

Grethel gave Hans a knife.

"Good-bye, Grethel."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Hans took the knife, put it in his sleeve and went home.

"Good evening, mother."

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's."

"And what did you take to her?"

"I took nothing; she has given something to me."

"And what did she give you?"

"A knife," said Hans.

"And where have you put it?"

"In my sleeve."

"Then you have behaved foolishly again, Hans; you should put knives in your pocket."

"Good-bye, Grethel."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Hans took the goat, tied its legs and put it in his pocket. Just as he reached home it was
suffocated.

"Good evening, mother."

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's."

"And what did you take to her?"

"I took nothing; she gave to me."

"And what did Grethel give you?"

"A goat."

"Where did you put it, Hans?"

"In my pocket."

"There you acted stupidly, Hans; you should have tied the goat with a rope."

"I have nothing. Have you anything to give?"

Grethel gave Hans a piece of bacon.

"Good-bye, Grethel."

"Good-bye, Hans."

Hans took the bacon, tied it with a rope, and swung it to and fro, so that the dogs came and
ate it up. When he reached home he held the rope in his hand, but there was nothing on it.

"Good evening, mother," said he.

"Good evening, Hans. Where have you been?"

"To Grethel's, mother."

"What did you take her?"

"I took nothing; she gave to me."

"And what did Grethel give you?"

"A piece of bacon," said Hans.

"And where have you put it?"

"I tied it with a rope, swung it about, and the dogs came and ate it up."

"There you acted stupidly, Hans; you should have carried the bacon on your head." "Good-bye,"
said Hans. "Good-bye," said Grethel.

Hans took the calf, set it on his head, and the calf scratched his face.

"A calf," said Hans.

"And what did you do with it?"

"I set it on my head and it kicked my face."

"Then you acted stupidly, Hans; you should have led the calf home and put it in the stall."

Hans tied a rope round Grethel, led her home, put her in the stall and made the rope fast;
then he went to his mother.

"She gave nothing; she came with me."

"And where have you left her, then?"

"I tied her with a rope, put her in the stall, and threw her some grass."

"Then you have acted stupidly, Hans; you should have looked at her with friendly eyes."

"To behave better, do nothing," thought Hans; and then he went into the stall, and made sheep's
eyes at Grethel.

And after that Grethel became Hans's wife.

The Brothers Grimm, Jakob and Wilhelm, were very learned German scholars who lived during the
first half of the nineteenth century. They were both professors at the University of Gottingen,
and published many important works, among them a famous dictionary. In their own country it
is, of course, these learned works which have given them much of their fame, but in other countries
they are chiefly known for their Fairy Tales.

Most of these they did not themselves write; they simply collected and rewrote. They would
hear of some old woman who was famous for telling stories remembered from childhood, and they
would present themselves at her cottage to bribe or wheedle her into telling them her tales.
Perhaps the promise that her words should appear in print would be enough to induce her to
talk; perhaps hours would be wasted in trying to make her grow talkative, without success.
At any rate, the Grimm brothers finally collected enough of these stories to make a big, fat book.

THE POPPYLAND EXPRESS

St. Louis Star Sayings

The first train leaves at 6 p. m.
  For the land where the poppy blows.
The mother is the engineer,
  And the passenger laughs and crows.

The palace car is the mother's arms;
  The whistle a low, sweet strain.
The passenger winks and nods and blinks
  And goes to sleep on the train.

At 8 p. m. the next train starts
  For the poppyland afar.
The summons clear falls on the ear,
  "All aboard for the sleeping car!"

But "What is the fare to poppyland?
  I hope it is not too dear."
The fare is this--a hug and a kiss,
  And it's paid to the engineer.

So I ask of Him who children took
  On His knee in kindness great:
"Take charge, I pray, of the trains each day
  That leave at six and eight.

"Keep watch of the passengers," thus I pray,
  "For to me they are very dear;
And special ward, O gracious Lord,
  O'er the gentle engineer."

BLUEBEARD

Once upon a time there lived a great lord who had many beautiful homes and who was fairly rolling
in wealth. He had town houses and castles in the country, all filled with rich furniture and
costly vessels of gold and silver. In spite of all his riches, however, nobody liked the man,
because of his ugly and frightful appearance. Perhaps people could have endured his face if
it had not been for a great blue beard that frightened the women and children until they fled
at his very approach.

Now, it so happened that there was living near one of his castles a fine lady of good breeding
who had two beautiful daughters. Bluebeard, for such was the name by which he was known through
all the country, saw the two daughters and determined to have one of them for his wife. So
he proposed to the mother for one, but left it to her to decide which of the daughters she
would give him.

Neither of the daughters was willing to marry him, for neither could make up her mind to live
all her life with such a hideous blue beard, however rich the owner might be. Moreover, they
had heard, and the report was true, that the man had been married several times before, and
no one knew what had become of his wives.

In order to become better acquainted with the women, Bluebeard invited them and their mother
to visit him at one of his castles in the country. They accepted the invitation, and for nine
delightful days they hunted and fished over his vast estates, and for nine wonderful evenings
they feasted and danced in his magnificent rooms.

Everything went so much to their liking, and Bluebeard himself was so gracious, that the younger
girl began to think that after all his beard was not so very blue; and so, soon after their
return to town, the mother announced that the younger daughter was ready to marry him. In a
few days the ceremony was performed, and Bluebeard took his wife to one of his castles, where
they spent a happy month.

At the end of that time Bluebeard told his wife that he was obliged to make a long journey
and would be away from home about six weeks. He added that he hoped his wife would enjoy herself,
and that he wished her to send for her friends if she wanted them, and to spend his money as
freely as she liked in their entertainment.

"Here," he said, "are the keys of my two great storerooms, where you will find everything you
need for the house; here are the keys of the sideboards, where you will find all the gold and
silver plate for the table; here are the keys of my money chests, where you will find gold
and silver in abundance  and many caskets containing beautiful jewels which you have not yet
seen; and here is a pass key which will open all the rooms in the castle excepting one.

"But here is a little key which fits the lock in the door of the little room at the end of
the long gallery on the first floor. This little room you must not enter. Open everything else,
go everywhere you like, treat everything as though it was your own; but I strictly forbid you
to enter the little room. If you even so much as put the key in the lock you may expect to
suffer direfully from my anger."

The young wife promised faithfully to observe her husband's wishes to the letter, and he, pleased
with the readiness with which she consented to obey him, kissed her fondly, sprang into his
carriage and departed on his journey.

No sooner had Bluebeard left than the friends of his wife began to arrive. Many of them did
not wait for an invitation, but came as soon as they heard that her husband had gone with his
terrible blue beard. Then was there great merrymaking all over the house, and it was overrun
from top to bottom with the excited guests, for all were consumed with the desire to see the
treasures the castle contained. These were truly wonderful. Rich tapestries hanging on the
walls, great mirrors that reflected the whole image of a person from head to foot, wonderful
pictures in frames of pure gold, gold and silver vessels of graceful shape and elegant design,
cabinets filled with curiosities, lights gleaming with crystals, caskets filled with sparkling
diamonds and other precious stones without number, all served to charm and delight the guests
so that they had little time to think about their hostess.

The wife, however, soon wearied of the splendor of her home, for she kept continually thinking
about the little room at the end of the long gallery on the first floor. The more she thought
about it the more curious she became, and finally, forgetting her good manners, she left her
guests, slipped silently away from them, and in her excitement nearly fell the whole length
of the secret stairway that led to the long gallery. Her courage did not fail her till she
reached the door of the little room. Then she remembered how false she was to her trust, and
hesitated. Her conscience, however, was soon silenced by her curiosity, and with a beating
heart and trembling hand she pushed the little key into the lock, and the door flew open.

The shutters of the window in the little room were closed, and at first she could see nothing;
but as her eyes became accustomed to the dim light she saw that clotted blood covered the floor,
and that hanging from the walls by their long hair were the bloody heads of Bluebeard's other
wives, while on the floor lay their dead bodies.

When the young wife realized at what she was looking, the key fell from her shaking hand, her
heart stopped beating, and she almost fell to the floor in horror and amazement. Recovering
herself after a while, she stooped and picked up the key, locked the door and hurried back
to her chamber. In vain she tried to compose herself and meet her guests again. She was too
frightened to control herself, and when she looked at the little key of that awful little room
at the end of the long gallery on the first floor, she saw that it was stained with blood.
She wiped the key and wiped it, but the blood would not come off. She washed it, and scrubbed
it with sand and freestone and brick dust, but the blood would not come off; or, if she did
succeed in cleaning one side and turned the key over, there was blood on the other side, for
it was a magic key which a fairy friend of Bluebeard's had given him.

That night the wife was terrified to hear Bluebeard returning, though she tried to welcome
him with every show of delight and affection. He explained his sudden change of plans by saying
that he had met a friend on the road who told him that it was unnecessary for him to make the
long journey, as the business he was intending to transact had been all done.

It was a very unhappy night she passed, but Bluebeard said nothing to disturb her until morning,
and then he presently asked her for his keys. She gave them to him, but her hand trembled like
an old woman's. Bluebeard took the keys and looked them over carelessly.

"I see the key of the little room at the end of the long gallery on the first floor is not
with the others. Where is it?"

"It must have fallen off in the drawer where I kept the keys," she said.

"Please get it for me at once," said Bluebeard, "as I wish to go to the room."

The wife, as white as a sheet, and almost too faint to walk, went back to her chamber and returned,
saying she could not find the key.

"But I must have it," said Bluebeard; "go again and look more carefully for it. Certainly you
cannot have lost it."

So back to the chamber went the terrified woman, and, seeing no hope of escape, she carried
the key down to her waiting husband.

Bluebeard took the key, and looking at it closely, said to his wife, "Why is this blood spot
on the key?"

"I do not know," said the wife, faintly.

"You do not know!" said Bluebeard. "Well, I know. You wanted to go to the little room. Very
well; I shall see that you get there and take your place with the other ladies."

In despair the young woman flung herself at his feet and begged for mercy, repenting bitterly
of her curiosity. Bluebeard turned a deaf ear to all her entreaties and was not moved in the
least by her piteous beauty.

"Hear me, madam. You must die at, once," he said.

"But give me a little time to make my peace with God," she said. "I must have time to say my
prayers."

"I will give you a quarter of an hour," answered Bluebeard, "but not a minute more."

He turned away, and she sent for her sister, who came quickly at her summons.

"Sister Ann," she said excitedly, "go up to the top of the tower and see if my brothers are
coming. They promised to come and see me to-day. If they are on the road make signs to them
to hurry as fast as they can. I am in awful despair."

Without waiting for an explanation the sister went to the top of the tower and began her watch.

She was scarcely seated when her sister called up, "Sister Annie, do you see any one coming?"

Annie answered, "I see nothing but the sun on the golden dust and the grass which grows green."

In the meantime, Bluebeard, who had armed himself with a sharp, curved scimitar, stood at the
foot of the stairs waiting for his wife to come down.

"Annie, sister Annie, do you see any one coming down the road?" cried the wife again.

"No, I see nothing but the golden dust."

Then Bluebeard called out, "Come down quickly now, or I will come up to you."

"One minute more," replied his wife; and then she called softly, "Annie, sister Annie, do you
see any one coming?"

"I think I see a cloud of dust a little to the left."

"Do you think it is my brothers?" said the wife.

"Alas, no, dear sister, it is only a shepherd boy with his sheep."

"Will you come down now, madam, or shall I fetch you?" Bluebeard bawled out.

"I am coming,--indeed I will come in just a minute."

Then she called out for the last time, "Annie, sister Annie, do you see any one coming?"

"I see," replied her sister, "two horsemen coming, but they are still a great way off."

"Thank God," cried the wife, "it is my brothers. Urge them to make haste." Annie replied, "I
am beckoning to them. They have seen my signals. They are galloping towards us."

Now Bluebeard called out so loudly for his wife to come down that his voice shook the whole
house. His lady, not daring to keep him waiting any longer, hurried down the stairs, her hair
streaming about her shoulders and her face bathed in tears. She threw herself on the floor
at his feet and begged for mercy.

"There is no use in your pleading," said Bluebeard; "you must certainly die."

Then, seizing her by the hair with his left hand, he raised his scimitar, preparing to strike
off her head. The poor woman turned her eyes upon him and begged for a single moment to collect
her thoughts. "No," he said; "not a moment more. Commend yourself to God."

He raised his arm to strike. Just at that moment there was a loud knocking at the gate, and
Bluebeard stopped short in his bloody work. Two officers in uniform sprang into the castle
and ran upon Bluebeard with drawn swords. The cruel man, seeing they were his wife's brothers,
tried to escape, but they followed and overtook him before he had gone twenty steps. Though
he begged for mercy they listened not to a single word, but thrust him through and through
with their swords.

The poor wife, who was almost as dead as her lord, could hardly rise to greet her brothers,
but when she learned of Bluebeard's death she quickly recovered and embraced them heartily.

Bluebeard, it was found, had no heirs, and so all his riches came into the possession of his
wife. She was filled with thankfulness at her rescue, and in repentance for her curiosity she
gave her sister a generous portion of her money, and established her brothers in high positions
in the army.

As for herself, she afterwards married a worthy gentleman and lived happily to a hale old age.
The beautiful town and country houses were constantly filled with guests, who, after they had
convinced themselves that the cruel master was actually dead, made the rooms ring with their
joyous laughter and talking.

LULLABY

Come hither, little restless one, 'Tis time to shut your eyes; The sun behind the hills has
gone, The stars are in the skies.

See, one by one they show their light-- How clear and bright they look! Just like the fireflies
in the night, That shine beside the brook.

You do not hear the robins sing-- They're snug within their nest; And sheltered by their mother's
wing, The little chickens rest.

The dog, he will not frolic now, But to his kennel creeps; The turkeys climb upon the bough,
And e'en the kitten sleeps.

The very violets in their bed Fold up their eyelids blue, And you, my flower, must droop your
head And close your eyelids, too.

Then join your little hands and pray To God, who made the light, To keep you holy all the day
And guard you through the night.

RUMPELSTILTZKIN

By Jakob and Wilhelm Grimm

There was once upon a time a poor miller who had a beautiful daughter. It happened one day
that he had an audience with the King, and in order to appear important he told the King that
he had a daughter who could spin straw into gold.

"Now that's a talent worth having," said the King to the miller; "if your daughter is as clever
as you say, bring her to my palace tomorrow, and I'll test her."

