On arriving in the vicinity of Kroonstadt, the most risky part of the journey was over, and
then a wonderfully novel scene unfolded itself as we crawled over a rise from the desolate,
barren country we had been traversing, and a tented city lay in front of us. Anyway, such was
its appearance at a first glance, for white tents stretched far away east and west, and appeared
to swamp into insignificance the unpretentious houses, and even a fairly imposing church-spire
which lay in the background. I had never seen anything like this vast army depôt, and examined
everything with the greatest attention and interest. Huge mountains of forage covered by tarpaulin
sheets were the first things to catch my eye; then piles upon piles of wooden cases were pointed
out as "rations"--that mysterious term which implies so much and may mean so little; again,
there was a hillock of wicker-covered bottles with handles which puzzled me, and which were
explained as "cordials" of some kind. Powerful traction-engines, at rest and in motion, next
came into sight, and weird objects that looked like life-boats mounted on trucks, but which
proved to be pontoons--strange articles to perceive at a railway-station. Then we passed a
vast concourse of red-cross tents of every description, proclaiming a hospital. As far as outward
appearances went, it looked most beautifully arranged in symmetrically laid-out streets, while
many of the marquees had their sides thrown back, and showed the patients within, either in
bed or sitting about and enjoying the breeze and the rays of a sun never too hot at that time
of year. "How happy and comfortable they look!" was my remark as we left them behind. Someone
who knew Kroonstadt said: "Yes, they are all right; but the Scotch Hospital is the one to see
if you are staying long enough--spring-beds, writing-tables, and every luxury." I was sorry
time admitted of no visit to this establishment or to the magnificent Yeomanry Hospital at
Deelfontein, farther south, to which I shall have occasion to allude in a later chapter. This
last establishment was, even at that early stage of the war, a household word among the soldiers
at the front, a dearly longed-for Mecca amongst the sick and wounded.

Our train had come to an abrupt standstill, and, on looking out, the line appeared so hopelessly
blocked that the only way of reaching the station and lunch appeared to be on foot. We walked,
therefore, upwards of half a mile, undergoing many perils from shunting engines, trains undecided
whether to go on or to go back, and general confusion. It certainly did not look as if our
train could be extricated for hours, but it proved there was method in this apparent muddle,
and we suffered no delay worth speaking of. The station was densely packed with Staff officers
and soldiers. Presently someone elbowed a way through the crowd to make way for the General,
just arrived from Bloemfontein. A momentary interest was roused as an elderly, soldierly gentleman,
with white hair and a slight figure, passed out of sight into one of the officials' rooms,
and then we joined the throng trying to get food in the overtaxed refreshment-room. We had
some interesting conversation with the officer in command of the station, and learnt how the
Kroonstadt garrison were even then living in the midst of daily alarms from De Wet or his followers;
added to these excitements, there was a colossal amount of work to be got through in the way
of supplying Pretoria with food, by a line liable to be interrupted, and in coping with the
task of receiving and unloading remounts, which were arriving from the South in large numbers.
I saw some of these poor animals packed nine in a truck, marvellously quiet, and unmindful
of strange sights and sounds, and of being hurled against each other when the locomotive jerked
on or came to a stop. They were in good condition, but their eyes were sad and their tails
were woefully rubbed. After seeing Kroonstadt Railway-station, I realized that the work of
a Staff officer on the lines of communication was no sinecure.

Marvellous to relate, in the early afternoon we found our train in the station, and, climbing
into our carriage once more, we proceeded on our road without delay, congratulating ourselves
on our good fortune in not being held up at Kroonstadt, as had been the fate of many travellers
going south. Immediately south of Kroonstadt we crossed the Vaal River, with its fine high-level
bridge reduced to atoms by dynamite. This had given the engineers another opportunity to display
their skill by a clever deviation of a couple of miles in length, winding down almost to the
water-level, and then serenely effecting the crossing by a little wooden bridge, from which
its ruined predecessor was visible about a quarter of a mile up the stream. Darkness and approaching
night then hid the landscape. That evening we were told we need have no fears, for we were
practically out of the dangerous zone. We dined comfortably in our compartment, and I heard
many more reminiscences of the advance from two travelling companions who had taken part in
it. Suddenly in the next compartment a party of Canadian officers commenced singing part-songs
with real musical talent. We relapsed into silence as we heard the "Swanee River" sung more
effectively than I have ever heard it before or since, and it reminded me that we, too, were
going home. Presently we found ourselves joining in the chorus of that most touching melody,
"Going back to Dixie," greatly to the delight of our sociable and talented neighbours. Daylight
next morning brought us to Bloemfontein and civilization, and what impressed me most was the
fact of daily newspapers being sold at a bookstall, which sight I had not seen for many months.
On arriving at Cape Town, I was most hospitably entertained at Groot Schuurr by Colonel Frank
Rhodes, in the absence of his brother. This mansion had been a convalescent home for many officers
ever since the war began. There I passed a busy ten days in seeing heaps of friends, and I
had several interviews with Sir Alfred Milner, to whom events of the siege and relief of Mafeking
were of specially deep interest. I gave him as a memento a small Mauser bullet mounted as a
scarf-pin, and before leaving for England I received from him the following letter:

     "GOVERNMENT HOUSE,
     "CAPE TOWN,
     "November 7, 1900.

     "DEAR LADY SARAH,

"How very kind of you to think of giving me that interesting relic of Mafeking! It will indeed
revive memories of anxiety, as well as of the intensest feeling of relief and thankfulness
that I have ever experienced.

"Hoping we shall meet again when 'distress and strain are over,'

     "I am,
     "Yours very sincerely,
     "ALFRED MILNER."

Much of my time was also occupied in corresponding with Mafeking about the distribution of
the fund which was being energetically collected in London by my sister, Lady Georgiana Curzon.
Many weeks before we were relieved I had written to Lady Georgiana, then hard at work with
the organization of the Yeomanry Hospital, suggesting to her to start a relief fund for the
inhabitants of Mafeking. It had all along seemed to me that these latter deserved some substantial
recognition and compensation beyond what they could expect from the Government, for damage
done to their homes and their shops, and for the utter stagnation of the trade in the town
during the siege. The nurses, the nuns and their convent, were also worthy objects for charity.
This latter residence, but lately built, and including a nicely decorated chapel with many
sacred images, had been, as I have said, practically destroyed; and the Sisters had borne their
part most nobly, in nursing the sick and wounded, while many were suffering in health from
the privations they had undergone. In response to my appeal, Lady Georgiana inserted the following
letter in the Times just before the news of the Relief reached England:

     "20, CURZON STREET, W.,
     "May 11.

     "SIR,

    "I venture to address an appeal to the people of the United
    Kingdom, through the columns of your paper, on behalf of the
    inhabitants of Mafeking. Nothing but absolute knowledge of
    their sufferings prompts me to thus inaugurate another fund,
    and one which must come in addition to the numerous
    subscriptions already started in connection with the South
    African War. I admit the generous philanthropy of our country
    has been evinced to a degree that is almost inconceivable, and
    I hesitate even now in making this fresh appeal, but can only
    plead as an excuse the heartrending accounts of the sufferings
    of Mafeking that I have received from my sister, Lady Sarah
    Wilson.

    "The last mail from South Africa brought me a letter from her,
    dated March 3. In it she implores me to take active measures to
    bring before the generous British public the destitute
    condition of the nuns, refugees, and civilians generally, in
    Mafeking. She writes with authority, having witnessed their
    sufferings herself, and, indeed, having shared equally with
    them the anxieties and privations of this prolonged siege. Her
    letter describes the absolute ruin of all the small
    tradespeople, whose homes are in many cases demolished. The
    compensation they will receive for damaged goods will be
    totally inadequate to cover their loss. Years must pass ere
    their trade can be restored to the proportions of a livelihood.
    Meanwhile starvation in the immediate future lies before them.
    The unfortunate Sisters in the convent have for weeks hardly
    had a roof over their heads, the Boer shells having more or
    less destroyed their home. In consequence, their belongings
    left intact by shot or shell have been ruined by rain. The
    destruction of their small and humble properties, in addition
    to their discomfort, has added to their misery; and yet no
    complaining word has passed their lips, but they have
    throughout cheerfully and willingly assisted the hospital
    nurses in their duties, always having smiles and encouraging
    words for the sick and wounded.

    "Sitting at home in our comfortable houses, it is hard to
    realize the actual sufferings of these besieged inhabitants of
    Mafeking. My letter tells me that for months they have not
    slept in their beds, and although no opposition to the Boer
    forces in the first instance would have saved their town, their
    properties, and in many cases their lives, yet they one and all
    bravely and nobly 'buckled to,' and stood by that gallant
    commander, Baden-Powell. Loyalty was their cry, and freedom and
    justice their household gods. Have not their courage and
    endurance thrilled the whole world? I feel I need not ask
    forgiveness for issuing yet this one more appeal. It comes
    last, but is it least? A handful of soldiers, nearly all
    colonials, under a man who must now rank as a great and tried
    commander, have for six months repelled the Boer attacks. Could
    this small force have for one moment been a match for the
    well-equipped besiegers if the inhabitants had not fought for
    and with the garrison? Some worked and fought in actual
    trenches; others demonstrated by patient endurance their cool
    and courageous determination never to give in. Would it not be
    a graceful recognition of their courage if, on that glorious
    day, which we hope may not be far distant, when the relief of
    Mafeking is flashed across thousands of miles to the 'heart of
    the Empire,' we could cable back our congratulations on their
    freedom, and inform Mafeking that a large sum of money is ready
    to be placed by this country for the relief of distress amongst
    the Sisters, refugees, and suffering civilians of the town?

    "I feel I shall not ask in vain, but that our congratulations
    to Mafeking will take most material form by generous admirers
    in the United Kingdom.

    "Subscriptions will be received by Messrs. Hoare and Co.,
    bankers, Fleet Street, E.C.

     "I remain,
     "Your obedient servant,
     "GEORGIANA CURZON."

The fund had reached unhoped-for proportions. In our most optimistic moments we did not expect
to collect more than two or three thousand pounds, but subscriptions had poured in from the
very commencement, and the grand amount of £29,267 was finally the total contributed. This
sum was ably administered by Colonel Vyvyan of the Buffs, who had been Base-Commandant of Mafeking
during the siege. He was assisted by a committee, and the principal items allocated by these
gentlemen were as follows:

                                                £
     Widows and orphans                       6,536
     Refugees                                 4,630
     Town relief                              3,741
     Seaside fund                             2,900
     Churches, convent, schools, etc.         2,900
     Wounded men                              2,245
     Small tradesmen                          1,765
     Hospital staff, nuns, etc.               1,115
     Colonel Plumer's Rhodesian column, etc.  1,000

Lady Georgiana Curzon's eloquent appeal proved to be the salvation of many a family in Mafeking.

The popularity of the fund was enormously helped by the interest of the then Prince and Princess
of Wales, now our King and Queen, in the town and in the assistance of the same. This interest
was evinced by the following letters, given to me later by my sister:

     "TREASURER'S HOUSE,
     "YORK
     "June 20, 1900.

     MY DEAR LADY GEORGIE.

    "The Princess and I thank you very much for sending your
    sister's letters for us to read. They are most interesting, and
    admirably written. She has certainly gone through experiences
    which ought to last her a lifetime! If the papers are correct
    in stating that you start on Saturday for Madeira to meet her,
    let me wish you bon voyage.

     "Ever yours very sincerely,
     "(Signed) ALBERT EDWARD."

The Princess of Wales had already written as follows:

     "MY DEAR GEORGIE,

    "I saw in yesterday's Times your touching appeal for poor,
    unfortunate, forsaken Mafeking, in which I have taken the
    liveliest interest during all these months of patient and brave
    endurance. I have therefore great pleasure in enclosing £100
    for the benefit of the poor nuns and other inhabitants. I hope
    very soon, however, they will be relieved, and I trust poor
    sister Sarah will be none the worse for all she has gone
    through during her forced captivity. Many thanks for sending me
    that beautifully drawn-up report of your Yeomanry Hospital. How
    well you have explained everything! Hoping to meet soon,

     "Yours affectionately,
     "(Signed) ALEXANDRA."[41]

Some fourteen months after my return home a Gazette appeared with the awards gained during
the early part of the war, and great was my delight to find I had been selected for the coveted
distinction of the Royal Red Cross. The King had previously nominated Lady Georgiana Curzon
and myself to be Ladies of Grace of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, which entitles its
members to wear a very effective enamel locket on a black bow; but, next to the Red Cross,
the medal which I prize most highly is the same which the soldiers received for service in
South Africa, with the well-known blue and orange striped ribbon. This medal was given to the
professional nurses who were in South Africa, but I think I was, with one other exception,
the only amateur to receive it, and very unworthy I felt myself when I went to St. James's
Palace with all the gallant and skilful sisterhood of army nurses to share with them the great
honour of receiving the same from His Majesty in person.

FOOTNOTES:

[40] Small kettles.

[41] I am allowed to reproduce the foregoing letters by the gracious permission of Their Majesties
the King and Queen.

On the pages of history is recorded in golden letters the name and deeds of Florence Nightingale,
who, as the pioneer of scientific hospital nursing, did so much to mitigate the horrors of
war. Her example was nobly followed half a century later by two other English ladies, who,
although they had not to encounter the desperate odds connected with ignorance and old-fashioned
ideas which Miss Nightingale successfully combated, did marvellous service by displaying what
private enterprise can do in a national emergency--an emergency with which, in its suddenness,
gravity, and scope, no Government could have hoped to deal successfully. I must go back to
the winter of 1899 to call their great work to mind. War had already been waging some weeks
in South Africa when the Government's proclamation was issued calling for volunteers from the
yeomanry for active service at the front, and the lightning response that came to this appeal
from all quarters and from all grades was the silver lining shining brightly through the black
clouds that hovered over the British Empire during that dread winter. Thus the loyalty of the
men of Britain was proven, and among the women who yearned to be up and doing were Lady Georgiana
Curzon and Lady Chesham. Not theirs was the sentiment that "men must work and women must weep";
to them it seemed but right that they should take their share of the nation's burden, and,
as they could not fight, they could, and did, work.

Filled with pity for all who were so gallantly fighting at the seat of war, it was the yeomen--called
suddenly from peaceful pursuits to serve their country in her day of distress--who claimed
their deepest sympathies, and, with the object of establishing a hospital for this force at
the front, Lady Georgiana Curzon and Lady Chesham, on December 29, 1899, appealed to the British
public for subscriptions. The result far exceeded their expectations, and every post brought
generous donations in cash and in kind. Even the children contributed eagerly to the Yeomen's
Fund, and one poor woman gave a shilling towards the cost of providing a bed in the hospital,
"in case her son might have to lie on it." The Queen--then Princess of Wales--allowed herself
to be nominated President; the present Princess of Wales and the Duchess of Connaught gave
their names as Vice-Presidents of the Imperial Yeomanry Hospitals. The working committee was
composed of the following: Adeline, Duchess of Bedford, the Duchess of Marlborough, the Countesses
of Essex and Dudley, the Ladies Chesham and Tweedmouth, Mesdames S. Neumann, A.G. Lucas, Blencowe
Cookson, Julius Wernher (now Lady Wernher), and Madame von Andre. Amongst the gentlemen who
gave valuable assistance, the most prominent were: Viscount Curzon, M.P. (now Lord Howe), Hon.
Secretary; Mr. Ludwig Neumann, Hon. Treasurer; General Eaton (now Lord Cheylesmore); and Mr.
Oliver Williams.

Lady Georgiana Curzon was a born leader, and it was but natural that the capable ladies aforementioned
appointed her as their chairman. Passionately devoted to sport though she was, she willingly
forsook her beloved hunting-field, leaving a stable full of hunters idle at Melton Mowbray,
for the committee-room and the writing-table. The scheme was one fraught with difficulties
great and numerous, and not the least amongst them was the "red tape" that had to be cut; but
Lady Georgiana Curzon took up the good cause with enthusiasm and ability, and she and her colleagues
worked to such purpose that, on March 17, 1900, a base hospital containing over 500 beds (which
number was subsequently increased to 1,000), fully equipped, left our shores. So useful did
these institutions prove themselves, that as time went on, and the evils of war spread to other
parts of South Africa, the committee were asked to inaugurate other hospitals, and, the funds
at their disposal allowing of acquiescence, they established branches at Mackenzie's Farm,
Maitland Camp, Eastwood, Elandsfontein, and Pretoria, besides a small convalescent home for
officers at Johannesburg. Thus in a few months a field-hospital and bearer company (the first
ever formed by civilians), several base hospitals, and a convalescent home, were organized
by the Imperial Yeomanry Hospitals Committee, who frequently met, with Lady Georgiana Curzon
presiding, to discuss ways and means of satisfactorily working those establishments so many
thousands of miles away.

The Hospital Commissioners who visited Deelfontein in November, 1900, said it was one of the
best-managed hospitals in Africa. A similar opinion was expressed by Colonel A.G. Lucas, M.V.O.,
when he visited it in the autumn, and this gentleman also reported most favourably on the section
at Mackenzie's Farm. Through Colonel Kilkelly, Lord Kitchener sent a message to the committee
early in 1901, expressing his admiration of the Pretoria Hospital. In this branch Lady Roberts
showed much interest, and, with her customary kindness, rendered it every assistance in her
power. At a time when military hospitals were being weighed in the balance, and in some instances
found wanting, the praise bestowed on the Yeomanry Institutions was worthy of note. From first
to last the various staffs numbered over 1,400 persons, and more than 20,000 patients were
treated in the Yeomanry Hospitals whilst they were under the management of Lady Georgiana Curzon
and her committee. Although sick and wounded from every force under the British flag in South
Africa were taken in, and many Boers as well, a sufficient number of beds was always available
for the immediate admittance of patients from the force for which the hospitals were originally
created. The subscriptions received for this great national work totalled over £145,300, in
addition to a subsidy of £3,000 from the Government for prolonging the maintenance of the field-hospital
and bearer company from January 1 to March 31, 1901. The interest on deposits alone amounted
to over £1,635, and when, with the cessation of hostilities, there was, happily, no further
need for these institutions, the buildings, etc., were sold for £24,051. The balance which
the committee ultimately had in hand from this splendid total of over £174,000 was devoted
to the maintenance of a school which had since been established at Perivale Alperton, for the
benefit of the daughters of yeomen who were killed or disabled during the war.

