Our general direction was westward, over such routes as could be found, provided they did not
embarrass the march of the infantry. The roads, from the winter's frosts and rains, were in
a frightful state, and when it was sought to avoid a spot which the head of the column had
proved almost bottomless, the bogs and quicksands of the adjoining fields demonstrated that
to make a detour was to go from bad to worse.  In the face of these discouragements we floundered
on, however, crossing on the way a series of small streams swollen to their banks.  Crook and
Devin reached the county-seat of Dinwiddie about 5 o'clock in the evening, having encountered
only a small picket, that at once gave way to our advance.  Merritt left Custer at Malon's
crossing of Rowanty Creek to care for the trains containing our subsistence and the reserve
ammunition, these being stuck in the mire at, intervals all the way back to the Jerusalem plank-road;
and to make any headway at all with the trains, Custer's men often had to unload the wagons
and lift them out of the boggy places.

Crook and Devin camped near Dinwiddie Court House in such manner as to cover the Vaughn, Flatfoot,
Boydton, and Five Forks roads; for, as these all intersected at Dinwiddie, they offered a chance
for the enemy's approach toward the rear of the Fifth Corps, as Warren extended to the left
across the Boydton road.  Any of these routes leading to the south or west might also be the
one on which, in conformity with one part of my instructions, I was expected to get out toward
the Danville and Southside railroads, and the Five Forks road would lead directly to General
Lee's right flank, in case opportunity was found to comply with the other part.  The place
was, therefore, of great strategic value, and getting it without cost repaid us for floundering
through the mud.

Dinwiddie Court House, though a most important point in the campaign, was far from attractive
in feature, being made up of a half-dozen unsightly houses, a ramshackle tavern propped up
on two sides with pine poles, and the weatherbeaten building that gave official name to the
cross-roads.  We had no tents--there were none in the command--so I took possession of the
tavern for shelter for myself and staff, and just as we had finished looking over its primitive
interior a rain storm set in.

The wagon containing my mess equipment was back somewhere on the road, hopelessly stuck in
the mud, and hence we had nothing to eat except some coffee which two young women living at
the tavern kindly made for us; a small quantity of the berry being furnished from the haversacks
of my escort.  By the time we got the coffee, rain was falling in sheets, and the evening bade
fair to be a most dismal one; but songs and choruses set up by some of my staff--the two young
women playing accompaniments on a battered piano--relieved the situation and enlivened us a
little.  However, the dreary night brought me one great comfort; for General Grant, who that
day had moved out to Gravelly Run, sent me instructions to abandon all idea of the contemplated
raid, and directed me to act in concert with the infantry under his immediate command, to turn,
if possible, the right flank of Lee's army.  The despatch made my mind easy with respect to
the objectionable feature of my original instructions, and of course relieved me also from
the anxiety growing out of the letter received at Hancock Station the night of the 28th; so,
notwithstanding the suspicions excited by some of my staff concerning the Virginia feather-bed
that had been assigned me, I turned in at a late hour and slept most soundly.

The night of the 29th the left of General Grant's infantry--Warren's corps--rested on the Boydton
road, not far from its intersection with the Quaker road.  Humphreys's corps was next to Warren;
then came Ord, next Wright, and then Parke, with his right resting on the Appomattox.  The
moving of Warren and Humphreys to the left during the day was early discovered by General Lee.
He met it by extending the right of his infantry on the White Oak road, while drawing in the
cavalry of W. H. F. Lee and Rosser along the south bank of Stony Creek to cover a crossroads
called Five Forks, to anticipate me there; for assuming that my command was moving in conjunction
with the infantry, with the ultimate purpose of striking the Southside railroad, Lee made no
effort to hold Dinwiddie, which he might have done with his cavalry, and in this he made a
fatal mistake.  The cavalry of Fitz. Lee was ordered at this same time from Sunderland depot
to Five Forks, and its chief placed in command of all the mounted troops of General Lee's army.

At daylight on the 30th I proceeded to make dispositions under the new conditions imposed by
my modified instructions, and directed Merritt to push Devin out as far as the White Oak road
to make a reconnoissance to Five Forks, Crook being instructed to send Davies's brigade to
support Devin.  Crook was to hold, with Gregg's brigade, the Stony Creek crossing of the Boydton
plank road, retaining Smith's near Dinwiddie, for use in any direction required.  On the 29th
W. H. F. Lee conformed the march of his cavalry with that of ours, but my holding Stony Creek
in this way forced him to make a detour west of Chamberlin's Run, in order to get in communication
with his friends at Five Forks.

The rain that had been falling all night gave no sign of stopping, but kept pouring down all
day long, and the swamps and quicksands mired the horses, whether they marched in the roads
or across the adjacent fields.  Undismayed, nevertheless, each column set out for its appointed
duty, but shortly after the troops began to move I received from General Grant this despatch,
which put a new phase on matters:

"HEADQUARTERS ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES, "GRAVELLY RUN, March 30, 1865.

"MAJOR-GENERAL SHERIDAN:

"The heavy rain of to-day will make it impossible for us to do much until it dries up a little,
or we get roads around our rear repaired. You may, therefore, leave what cavalry you deem necessary
to protect the left, and hold such positions as you deem necessary for that purpose, and send
the remainder back to Humphrey's Station where they can get hay and grain.  Fifty wagons loaded
with forage will be sent to you in the morning.  Send an officer back to direct the wagons
back to where you want them.  Report to me the cavalry you will leave back, and the position
you will occupy.  Could not your cavalry go back by the way of Stony Creek depot and destroy
or capture the store of supplies there?

"U. S. GRANT, Lieut.-General."

When I had read and pondered this, I determined to ride over to General Grant's headquarters
on Gravelly Run, and get a clear idea of what it was proposed to do, for it seemed to me that
a suspension of operations would be a serious mistake.  Mounting a powerful gray pacing horse
called Breckenridge (from its capture from one of Breckenridge's staff-officers at Missionary
Ridge), and that I knew would carry me through the mud, I set out accompanied by my Assistant
Adjutant-General, Colonel Frederick C.  Newhall, and an escort of about ten or fifteen men.
At first we rode north up the Boydton plank-road, and coming upon our infantry pickets from
a direction where the enemy was expected to appear, they began to fire upon us, but seeing
from our actions that we were friends, they ceased, and permitted us to pass the outposts.
We then struggled on in a northeasterly direction across-country, till we struck the Vaughn
road.  This carried us to army headquarters, which were established south of Gravelly Run in
an old cornfield.  I rode to within a few yards of the front of General Grant's tent, my horse
plunging at every step almost to his knees in the mud, and dismounted near a camp-fire, apparently
a general one, for all the staff-officers were standing around it on boards and rails placed
here and there to keep them from sinking into the mire.

Going directly to General Grant's tent, I found him and Rawlins talking over the question of
suspending operations till the weather should improve.  No orders about the matter had been
issued yet, except the despatch to me, and Rawlins, being strongly opposed to the proposition,
was frankly expostulating with General Grant, who, after greeting me, remarked, in his quiet
way: "Well, Rawlins, I think you had better take command."  Seeing that there was a difference
up between Rawlins and his chief, I made the excuse of being wet and cold, and went outside
to the fire.  Here General Ingalls met me and took me to his tent, where I was much more comfortable
than when standing outside, and where a few minutes later we were joined by General Grant.
Ingalls then retired, and General Grant began talking of our fearful plight, resulting from
the rains and mud, and saying that because of this it seemed necessary to suspend operations.
I at once begged him not to do so, telling him that my cavalry was already on the move in spite
of the difficulties, and that although a suspension of operations would not be fatal, yet it
would give rise to the very charge of disaster to which he had referred at City Point, and,
moreover, that we would surely be ridiculed, just as General Burnside's army was after the
mud march of 1863.  His better judgment was against suspending operations, but the proposition
had been suggested by all sorts of complaints as to the impossibility of moving the trains
and the like, so it needed little argument to convince him, and without further discussion
he said, in that manner which with him meant a firmness of purpose that could not be changed
by further complainings, "We will go on."  I then told him that I believed I could break in
the enemy's right if he would let me have the Sixth Corps; but saying that the condition of
the roads would prevent the movement of infantry, he replied that I would have to seize Five
Forks with the cavalry alone.

On my way back to Dinwiddie I stopped at the headquarters of General Warren, but the General
being asleep, I went to the tent of one of his staff-officers.  Colonel William T. Gentry,
an old personal friend with whom I had served in Oregon.  In a few minutes Warren came in and
we had a short conversation, he speaking rather despondently of the outlook, being influenced
no doubt by the depressing weather.

From Warren's headquarters I returned, by the Boydton road to Dinwiddie Court House, fording
Gravelly Run with ease.  When I got as far as the Dabney road I sent Colonel Newhall out on
it toward Five Forks, with orders for Merritt to develop the enemy's position and strength,
and then rode on to Dinwiddie to endeavor to get all my other troops up.  Merritt was halted
at the intersection of the Five Forks and Gravelly Church roads when Newhall delivered the
orders, and in compliance moving out Gibbs's brigade promptly, sharp skirmishing was brought
on, Gibbs driving the Confederates to Five Forks, where he found them behind a line of breastworks
running along the White Oak road.  The reconnoissance demonstrating the intention of the enemy
to hold this point, Gibbs was withdrawn.

