     "Instruments of percussion were few, and not indigenous to
     the Romans: such as were used came from the East, and were
     chiefly used in the worship of Eastern deities at Rome. When
     the worship of Bacchus was prohibited, they passed away with
     that licentious rite. The most complicated instrument of
     the ancient world appeared in Rome during the first century
     of our era. It was an organ, not, as in the scriptural
     days, a mere syrinx, or Pan's pipes, but an undoubted organ,
     somewhat similar in effect to our modern instrument.

     "The instrument is said to have been invented by Ctesbius of
     Alexandria in Egypt, who lived about 250 B.C. It did not
     appear extensively in Rome, however, until nearly three
     hundred years later. This organ has given rise to much
     fruitless discussion. In the field of musical history
     especially, 'a little' knowledge has proved 'a dangerous
     thing;' for, where slight descriptions exist of instruments
     of music, latitude is left for every writer to form his own
     theory, to fight for it, and denunciate those who differ
     from it.

     "We have seen what a battle was fought over the three little
     manuscripts of Greek music; what a host of differing
     opinions were held about the scriptural word 'Selah:' and
     now, about this hydraulic organ, each writer mounts his
     hobby-horse, and careers over the field of conjecture.
     Vitruvius has given a full description of the instrument
     from personal inspection; but as his technical terms have
     lost all significance to modern readers, and have been
     translated in various ways, and as his work contained no
     diagrams or illustrations of the various parts, it is
     useless.

     "Some writers imagine the organ to have had seven or eight
     stops,--that is, so many different kinds of tones,--which
     would place them nearly on a par with our own. Others think
     that they possessed seven or eight keys; that is, so many
     tones only. It has been a point of dispute as to what
     function the water performed in working it. Vitruvius is
     rather hazy on this point, saying only that it is
     'suspended' in the instrument. The water, when the organ was
     played, was in a state of agitation, as if boiling.

     "There are medals still in existence which were awarded to
     victors in organ contests, on which this instrument is
     represented with two boys blowing or pumping; but the
     representation is too small to clear up any doubtful
     points."

But, without devoting further space to the music that was in vogue prior to the Christian era,
I proceed to notice that our first reliable account of it, as a system, commences with the
fourth century; at which time St. Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, arranged the sacred chants that
bear his name, and which were to be sung in the cathedrals.

In the year 600 St. Gregory improved upon these chants, inventing the scale of eight notes.
His system is the basis of our modern music.

From the close of the eleventh to the commencement of the fourteenth century, minstrels, jongleurs,
or troubadours, were the principal devotees of music. They seem to have been its custodians,
so to speak; and to their guild many of the knights belonged. Some of the kings and nobles
of the time were also, in a sense, troubadours; such as, for instance, Thibault of Navarre,
and William the Ninth of Poitou.

These roving musicians, who generally united the qualities of the poet, the musical composer,
and performer, were treated with much favor by princes and all the nobility, and were everywhere
warmly welcomed for a long period. It is, however, far from pleasant to have to say that this
for a long time noble class of musicians, to whom we owe so much for the preservation unbroken
for three hundred years of the chain of musical life, as well indeed, also, as that of general
literature, spoiled perhaps by the excessive praises and indulgences accorded them, became
at last quite dissolute, and fell from their high position. All royal favors were finally withdrawn
from them, and orders for their restriction were issued from the throne.

Mr. B.W. Ball (in that faithful exponent of art, "The Boston Commonwealth") thus expressively
sings the story of the ancient troubadour, styling him--

     "THE POET OF OLD."

     Once the poet wandered,
       With his lyre in hand,--
     Wandered, singing, harping,
       On from land to land.

     Like a bird he hovered;
       And, where'er he came,
     Kindled he each bosom
       With his song to flame.

     Careless of the morrow,
       Journeyed he along;
     Opened every portal
       To the sound of song.

     Suâ sponte heart's-ease
       In his bosom grew:
     Happiness as birthright,
       Like the gods, he knew.

     All life's haps and changes
       On his chords he rung:
     Every thought, emotion,
       In him found a tongue.

     Voiced he for the lover
       Passion of his breast;
     Feigned he, death to lighten,
       Islands of the Blest.

     Up in ether throned he
       Gods, the world to sway,--
     Gods to bend and listen
       While their votaries pray.

     Soul and sense, enchanted,
       Drank his accents in:
     E'en to marble bosoms
       He his way could win.

     From her casement Beauty
       Leaned his song to hear:
     E'en the haughty conqueror
       Bent a willing ear;

     For without the poet
       And his epic lay
     Passed his vast existence,
       Whirlwind-like, away,--

     Trace nor vestige leaving
       Where his legions trod,
     Which the year effaced not
       From the vernal sod.

     Thus the poet wandered
       In a nobler time,--
     Wandered, singing, harping,
       Free of every clime.

During the fourteenth century, music was most cultivated by the people of the Netherlands,
who carried the art towards much perfection, producing several fine composers, and furnishing
the leading musical instructors for the other parts of Europe. Among some of the ablest musicians
of the Netherlands may be mentioned Dufay, Jan of Okenheim, and Josquin Desprès, the latter
being the most celebrated of contrapuntists. The Netherland musical supremacy lasted until 1563.

In the year 1400 the claims of music received the recognition of the crown in England, a charter
being granted to a regularly formed musical society.

Commencing with the invention of movable type in 1502 (which invention so vastly facilitated
the publication and spreading of the thoughts of the composer), and with the Reformation in
the sixteenth century, the noble art of music began a new, unimpeded, and brilliant career
among the civilized nations of the world. Dating from thence, the steps in the progress of
this delightful science can be plainly traced. Unvexed and unfettered by the obscurities that
attach to its antique history, we can contemplate with pleasure and profit the wonderful creations
and achievements of its devotees.

This I need not attempt here, save in the briefest form; my purpose in preparing this chapter
being only to give, as indicated in the title, a glance at the history of music.

