"Henry and I have always believed you as selfish, James Fisbee, as you are self-ingrossed and
incapable. She has told us of your 'renunciation'; of your 'forbidding' her to remain with
you; how you 'commanded,' after you had 'begged' her, to return to us, and how her conscience
told her she should stay and share your life in spite of our long care of her, but that she
yielded to your 'wishes' and our entreaty. What have you ever done for her and what have you
to offer her? She is our daughter, and needless to say we shall still take care of her, for
no one believes you capable of it, even in that miserable place, and, of course, in time she
will return to her better wisdom, her home, and her duty. I need scarcely say we have given
up the happy months we had planned to spend in Dresden. Henry and I can only stay at home to
pray that her preposterous mania will wear itself out in short order, as she will find herself
unfitted for the ridiculous task which she insists upon attempting against the earnest wishes
of us who have been more than father and mother to her. Of course, she has talked volumes of
her affection for us, and of her gratitude, which we do not want--we only want her to stay
with us. Please, please try to make her come back to us--we cannot bear it long. If you are
a man you will send her to us soon. Her excuse for not returning on the day we wired our intention
to go abroad at once (and I may as well tell you now that our intention to go was formed in
order to bring affairs to a crisis and to draw her away from your influence--we always dreaded
her visit to you and held it off for years)--her excuse was that your best friend, and, as
I understand it, your patron, had been injured in some brawl in that Christian country of yours--a
charming place to take a girl like her--and she would not leave you in your 'distress' until
more was known of the man's injuries. And now she insists--and you will know it from her by
the next mail--on returning to Plattville, forsooth, because she has been reading your newspaper,
and she says she knows you are in difficulties over it, and it is her moral obligation--as
by some wild reasoning of her own she considers herself responsible for your ruffling patron's
having been alone when he was shot--to go down and help. I suppose he made love to her, as
all the young men she meets always do, sooner or later, but I have no fear of any rustic entanglements
tor her; she has never been really interested, save in one affair. We are quite powerless--we
have done everything; but we cannot alter her determination to edit your paper for you. Naturally,
she knows nothing whatever about such work, but she says, with the air of triumphantly quelching
all such argument, that she has talked a great deal to Mr. Macauley of the 'Journal.' Mr. Macauley
is the affair I have alluded to; he is what she has meant when she has said, at different times,
that she was interested in journalism. But she is very business-like now. She has bought a
typewriter and purchased a great number of soft pencils and erasers at an art shop; I am only
surprised that she does not intend to edit your miserable paper in water-colors. She is coming
at once. For mercy's sake don't telegraph her not to; your forbiddings work the wrong way.
Our only hope is that she will find the conditions so utterly discouraging at the very start
that she will give it up and come home. If you are a man you will help to make them so. She
has promised to stay with that country girl with whom she contracted such an incomprehensible
friendship at Miss Jennings's.

"Oh, James, pray for grace to be a man once in your life and send her back to us! Be a man--try
to be a man! Remember the angel you killed! Remember all we have done for you and what a return
you have made, and be a man for the first time. Try and be a man!

                         "Your unhappy sister-in-law,

                                         "MARTHA SHERWOOD."

Mr. Fisbee read the letter with a great, rising delight which no sense of duty could down;
indeed, he perceived that his sense of duty had ceased to conflict with the one strong hope
of his life, just as he perceived that to be a man, according to Martha Sherwood, was, in part,
to assist Martha Sherwood to have her way in things; and, for the rest, to be the sort of man
she persuaded herself she would be were she not a woman. This he had never been able to be.

By some whimsy of fate, or by a failure of Karma (or, perhaps, by some triumph of Kismetic
retribution), James Fisbee was born in one of the most business-like and artless cities of
a practical and modern country, of money-getting, money-saving parents, and he was born a dreamer
of the past. He grew up a student of basilican lore, of choir-screens, of Persian frescoes,
and an ardent lounger in the somewhat musty precincts of Chaldea and Byzantium and Babylon.
Early Christian Symbolism, a dispute over the site of a Greek temple, the derivation of the
lotus column, the restoration of a Gothic buttress--these were the absorbing questions of his
youth, with now and then a lighter moment spent in analytical consideration of the extra-mural
decorations of St. Mark's. The world buzzed along after its own fashion, not disturbing him,
and his absorptions permitted only a faint consciousness of the despair of his relatives regarding
his mind. Arrived at middle-age, and a little more, he found himself alone in the world (though,
for that matter, he had always been alone and never of the world), and there was plenty of
money for him with various bankers who appeared to know about looking after it. Returning to
the town of his nativity after sundry expeditions in Syria--upon which he had been accompanied
by dusky gentlemen with pickaxes and curly, long-barrelled muskets--he met, and was married
by, a lady who was ambitious, and who saw in him (probably as a fulfilment of another Kismetic
punishment) a power of learning and a destined success. Not long after the birth of their only
child, a daughter, he was "called to fill the chair" of archaeology in a newly founded university;
one of the kind which a State and a millionaire combine to purchase ready-made. This one was
handed down off the shelf in a more or less chaotic condition, and for a period of years betrayed
considerable doubt as to its own intentions, undecided whether they were classical or technical;
and in the settlement of that doubt lay the secret of the past of the one man in Plattville
so unhappy as to possess a past. From that settlement and his own preceding action resulted
his downfall, his disgrace with his wife's relatives, the loss of his wife, the rage, surprise,
and anguish of her sister, Martha, and Martha's husband, Henry Sherwood, and the separation
from his little daughter, which was by far to him the hardest to bear. For Fisbee, in his own
way, and without consulting anybody--it never occurred to him, and he was supposed often to
forget that he had a wife and child--had informally turned over to the university all the money
which the banks had kindly taken care of, and had given it to equip an expedition which never
expedited. A new president of the institution was installed; he talked to the trustees; they
met, and elected to become modern and practical and technical; they abolished the course in
fine arts, which abolished Fisbee's connection with them, and they then employed his money
to erect a building for the mechanical engineering department. Fisbee was left with nothing.
His wife and her kinsfolk exhibited no brilliancy in holding a totally irresponsible man down
to responsibilities, and they made a tragedy of a not surprising fiasco. Mrs. Fisbee had lived
in her ambitions, and she died of heartbreak over the discovery of what manner of man she had
married. But, before she died, she wisely provided for her daughter.

Fisbee told Parker the story after his own queer fashion.

"You see, Mr. Parker," he said, as they sat together in the dust and litter of the "Herald"
office, on Sunday afternoon, "you see, I admit that my sister-in-law has always withheld her
approbation from me, and possibly her disapproval is well founded--I shall say probably. My
wife had also a considerable sum, and this she turned over to me at the time of our marriage,
though I had no wish regarding it one way or the other. When I gave my money to the university
with which I had the honor to be connected, I added to it the fund I had received from her,
as I was the recipient of a comfortable salary as a lecturer in the institution and had no
fear of not living well, and I was greatly interested in providing that the expedition should
be perfectly equipped. Expeditions of the magnitude of that which I had planned are expensive,
I should, perhaps, inform you, and this one was to carry on investigations regarding several
important points, very elaborately; and I am still convinced it would have settled conclusively
many vital questions concerning the derivation of the Babylonian column, as: whether the lotus
column may be without prejudice said to--but at the present moment I will not enter into that.
I fear I had no great experience in money matters, for the transaction had been almost entirely
verbal, and there was nothing to bind the trustees to carry out my plans for the expedition.
They were very sympathetic, but what could they do? they begged leave to inquire. Such an institution
cannot give back money once donated, and it was clearly out of character for a school of technology
and engineering to send savants to investigate the lotus column."

"I see," Mr. Parker observed, genially. He listened with the most ingratiating attention, knowing
that he had a rich sensation to set before Plattville as a dish before a king, for Fisbee's
was no confidential communication. The old man might have told a part of his history long ago,
but it had never occurred to him to talk about his affairs--things had a habit of not occurring
to Fisbee--and the efforts of the gossips to draw him out always passed over his serene and
absent head.

"It was a blow to my wife," the old man continued, sadly, "and I cannot deny that her reproaches
were as vehement as her disappointment was sincere." He hurried over this portion of his narrative
with a vaguely troubled look, but the intelligent Parker read poor Mrs. Fisbee's state of mind
between the sentences. "She never seemed to regard me in the same light again," the archaeologist
went on. "She did not conceal from me that she was surprised and that she could not look upon
me as a practical man; indeed, I may say, she appeared to regard me with marked antipathy.
She sent for her sister, and begged her to take our daughter and keep her from me, as she did
not consider me practical enough-I will substitute for her more embittered expressions--to
provide for a child and instruct it in the world's ways. My sister-in-law, who was childless,
consented to adopt the little one, on the conditions that I renounced all claim, and that the
child legally assumed her name and should be in all respects as her own daughter, and that
I consented to see her but once a year, in Rouen, at my brother-in-law's home.

"I should have refused, but I--my wife--that is--she was--very pressing--in her last hours,
and they all seemed to feel that I ought to make amends--all except the little girl herself,
I should say, for she possessed, even as an infant, an exceptional affection for her father.
I had nothing; my salary was gone, and I was discomfited by the combined actions of the trustees
and my relatives, so--I--I gave her up to them, and my wife passed away in a more cheerful
frame of mind, I think. That is about all. One of the instructors obtained the position here
for me, which I--I finally--lost, and I went to See the little girl every New Year's day. This
year she declared her intention of visiting me, but she was persuaded by friends who were conversant
with the circumstances to stay with them, where I could be with her almost as much as at my
apartment at Mr. Tibbs's. She had long since declared her intention of some day returning to
live with me, and when she came she was strenuous in insisting that the day had come." The
old man's voice broke suddenly as he observed: "She has--a very--beautiful--character, Mr. Parker."

The foreman nodded with warm confirmation. "I believe you, sir. Yes, sir; I saw her, and I
guess she looks it. You take that kind of a lady usually, and catch her in a crowd like the
one show-day, and she can't help doing the Grand Duchess, giving the tenants a treat--but not
her; she didn't seem to separate herself from 'em, some way."

"She is a fine lady," said the other simply. "I did not accept her renunciation, though I acknowledge
I forbade it with a very poignant envy. I could not be the cause of her giving up for my sake
her state of ease and luxury--for my relatives are more than well-to-do, and they made it plain
she must choose between them and me, with the design, I think, of making it more difficult
to choose me. And, also, it seemed to me, as it did to her, that she owed them nearly everything,
but she declared I had lived alone so long that she owed me everything, also. She is a--beautiful--character,
Mr. Parker."

"Well," said Parker, after a pause, "the town will be upside down over this; and folks will
be mighty glad to have it explained about your being out there so much, and at the deepo, and
all this and that. Everybody in the place has been wondering what in--that is--" he finished
in some confusion--"that is--what I started to say was that it won't be so bad as it might
be, having a lady in the office here. I don't cuss to speak of, and Ross can lay off on his
till the boss comes back. Besides, it's our only chance. If she can't make the 'Herald' hum,
we go to the wall."

The old man did not seem to hear him. "I forbade the renunciation she wished to make for my
sake," he said, gently, "but I accept it now for the sake of our stricken friend--for Mr. Harkless."

"And for the Carlow 'Herald,'" completed the foreman.

The morning following that upon which this conversation took place, the two gentlemen stood
together on the station platform, awaiting the arrival of the express from Rouen. It was a
wet gray day; the wide country lay dripping under formless wraps of thin mist, and a warm,
drizzling rain blackened the weather-beaten shingles of the station; made clear-reflecting
puddles of the unevenly worn planks of the platform, and dampened the packing-cases that never
went anywhere too thoroughly for occupation by the station-lounger, and ran in a little crystal
stream off Fisbee's brown cotton umbrella and down Mr. Parker's back. The 'bus driver, Mr.
Bennett, the proprietor of two attendant "cut-unders," and three or four other worthies whom
business, or the lack of it, called to that locality, availed themselves of the shelter of
the waiting-room, but the gentlemen of the "Herald" were too agitated to be confined, save
by the limits of the horizon. They had reached the station half an hour before train time,
and consumed the interval in pacing the platform under the cotton umbrella, addressing each
other only in monosyllables. Those in the waiting-room gossiped eagerly, and for the thousandth
time, about the late events, and the tremendous news concerning Fisbee. Judd Bennett looked
out through the rainy doorway at the latter with reverence and a fine pride of townsmanship,
declaring it to be his belief that Fisbee and Parker were waiting for her at the present moment.
It was a lady, and a bird of a lady, too, else why should Cale Parker be wearing a coat, and
be otherwise dooded and fixed up beyond any wedding? Judd and his friends were somewhat excited
over Parker.

Fisbee was clad in his best shabby black, which lent an air of state to the occasion, but Mr.
Parker--Caleb Parker, whose heart, during his five years of residence in Plattville, had been
steel-proof against all the feminine blandishments of the town, whose long, lank face had shown
beneath as long, and lanker, locks of proverbially uncombed hair, he who had for weeks conspicuously
affected a single, string-patched suspender, who never, even upon the Sabbath day, wore a collar
or blacked his shoes--what aesthetic leaven had entered his soul that he donned not a coat
alone but also a waistcoat with checks?--and, more than that, a gleaming celluloid collar?--and,
more than that, a brilliant blue tie? What had this iron youth to do with a rising excitement
at train time and brilliant blue ties?

Also, it might have been inquired if this parade of fashion had no connection with the simultaneous
action of Mr. Ross Schofield; for Ross was at this hour engaged in decorating the battered
chairs in the "Herald" editorial room with blue satin ribbon, the purchase of which at the
Dry Goods Emporium had been directed by a sudden inspiration of his superior of the composing
force. It was Ross's intention to garnish each chair with an elaborately tied bow, but, as
he was no sailor and understood only the intricacies of a hard-knot, he confined himself to
that species of ornamentation, leaving, however, very long ends of ribbon hanging down after
the manner of the pendants of rosettes.

It scarcely needs the statement that his labors were in honor of the new editor-in-chief of
the Carlow "Herald." The advent and the purposes of this personage were, as yet, known certainly
to only those of the "Herald" and to the Briscoes. It had been arranged, however, that Minnie
and her father were not to come to the station, for the journalistic crisis was immoderately
pressing; the "Herald" was to appear on the morrow, and the new editor wished to plunge directly,
and without the briefest distraction, into the paper's difficulties, now accumulated into a
veritable sea of troubles. The editor was to be delivered to the Briscoes at eventide and returned
by them again at dewy morn; and this was to be the daily programme. It had been further--and
most earnestly--stipulated that when the wounded proprietor of the ailing journal should be
informed of the addition to his forces, he was not to know, or to have the slenderest hint
of, the sex or identity of the person in charge during his absence. It was inevitable that
Plattville (already gaping to the uttermost) would buzz voluminously over it before night,
but Judge Briscoe volunteered to prevent the buzz from reaching Rouen. He undertook to interview
whatever citizens should visit Harkless, or write to him--when his illness permitted visits
and letters--and forewarn them of the incumbent's desires. To-day, the judge stayed at home
with his daughter, who trilled about the house for happiness, and, in their place, the "Herald"
deputation of two had repaired to the station to act as a reception committee.

Far away the whistle of the express was heard, muffled to sweetness in the damp, and the drivers,
whip in hand, came out upon the platform, and the loafers issued, also, to stand under the
eaves and lean their backs against the drier boards, preparing to eye the travellers with languid
raillery.

Mr. Parker, very nervous himself, felt the old man's elbow trembling against his own as the
great engine, reeking in the mist, and sending great clouds of white vapor up to the sky, rushed
by them, and came to a standstill beyond the platform.

Fisbee and the foreman made haste to the nearest vestibule, and were gazing blankly at its
barred approaches when they heard a tremulous laugh behind them and an exclamation.

"Upstairs and downstairs and in my lady's chamber! Just behind you, dear."

Turning quickly, Parker beheld a blushing and smiling little vision, a vision with light-brown
hair, a vision enveloped in a light-brown rain-cloak and with brown gloves, from which the
handles of a big brown travelling bag were let fall, as the vision disappeared under the cotton
umbrella, while the smitten Judd Bennett reeled gasping against the station.

"Dearest," the girl cried to the old man, "you were looking for me between the devil and deep
sea--the parlor-car and the smoker. I've given up cigars, and I've begun to study economy,
so I didn't come on either."

There was but this one passenger for Plattville; two enormous trunks thundered out of the baggage
car onto the truck, and it was the work of no more than a minute for Judd to hale them to the
top of the omnibus (he well wished to wear them next his heart, but their dimensions forbade
the thought), and immediately he cracked his whip and drove off furiously through the mud to
deposit his freight at the Briscoes'. Parker, Mr. Fisbee, and the new editor-in-chief set forth,
directly after, in one of the waiting cut-unders, the foreman in front with the driver, and
holding the big brown bag on his knees in much the same manner he would have held an alien,
yet respected, infant.

CHAPTER XIV. A RESCUE

The drizzle and mist blew in under the top of the cut-under as they drove rapidly into town,
and bright little drops sparkled on the fair hair above the new editor's forehead and on the
long lashes above the new editor's cheeks.

She shook these transient gems off lightly, as she paused in the doorway of the office at the
top of the rickety stairway. Mr. Schofield had just added the last touch to his decorations
and managed to slide into his coat as the party came up the stairs, and now, perspiring, proud,
embarrassed, he assumed an attitude at once deprecatory of his endeavors and pointedly expectant
of commendation for the results. (He was a modest youth and a conscious; after his first sight
of her, as she stood in the doorway, it was several days before he could lift his distressed
eyes under her glance, or, indeed, dare to avail himself of more than a hasty and fluttering
stare at her when her back was turned.) As she entered the room, he sidled along the wall and
laughed sheepishly at nothing.

Every chair in the room was ornamented with one of his blue rosettes, tied carefully (and firmly)
to the middle slat of each chair-back. There had been several yards of ribbon left over, and
there was a hard knot of glossy satin on each of the ink-stands and on the door-knobs; a blue
band, passing around the stovepipe, imparted an antique rakishness suggestive of the charioteer;
and a number of streamers, suspended from a hook in the ceiling, encouraged a supposition that
the employees of the "Herald" contemplated the intricate festivities of May Day. It needed
no genius to infer that these garnitures had not embellished the editorial chamber during Mr.
Harkless's activity, but, on the contrary, had been put in place that very morning. Mr. Fisbee
had not known of the decorations, and, as his glance fell upon them, a faint look of pain passed
over his brow; but the girl examined the room with a dancing eye, and there were both tears
and laughter in her heart.

"How beautiful!" she cried. "How beautiful!" She crossed the room and gave her hand to Ross.
"It is Mr. Schofield, isn't it? The ribbons are delightful. I didn't know Mr. Harkless's room
was so pretty."

Ross looked out of the window and laughed as he took her hand (which he shook with a long up
and down motion), but he was set at better ease by her apparent unrecognition of the fact that
the decorations were for her. "Oh, it ain't much, I reckon," he replied, and continued to look
out of the window and laugh.

She went to the desk and removed her gloves and laid her rain-coat over a chair near by. "Is
this Mr. Harkless's chair?" she asked, and, Fisbee answering that it was, she looked gravely
at it for a moment, passed her hand gently over the back of it, and then, throwing the rain-cloak
over another chair, said cheerily:

"Do you know, I think the first thing for us to do will be to dust everything very carefully."

"You remember I was confident she would know precisely where to begin?" was Fisbee's earnest
whisper in the willing ear of the long foreman. "Not an instant's indecision, was there?"

"No, siree!" replied the other; and, as he went down to the press-room to hunt for a feather-duster
which he thought might be found there, he collared Bud Tipworthy, who, not admitted to the
conclave of his superiors, was whistling on the rainy stairway. "You hustle and find that dust
brush we used to have. Bud," said Parker. And presently, as they rummaged in the nooks and
crannies about the machinery, he melted to his small assistant. "The paper is saved, Buddie--saved
by an angel in light brown. You can tell it by the look of her."

"Gee!" said Bud.

Mr. Schofield had come, blushing, to join them. "Say, Cale, did you notice the color of her eyes?"

"Yes; they're gray."

"I thought so, too, show day, and at Kedge Halloway's lecture; but, say, Cale, they're kind
of changeable. When she come in upstairs with you and Fisbee, they were jest as blue!--near
matched the color of our ribbons."

"Gee!" repeated Mr. Tipworthy.

When the editorial chamber had been made so Beat that it almost glowed--though it could never
be expected to shine as did Fisbee and Caleb Parker and Ross Schofield that morning--the editor
took her seat at the desk and looked over the few items the gentlemen had already compiled
for her perusal. Mr. Parker explained many technicalities peculiar to the Carlow "Herald,"
translated some phrases of the printing-room, and enabled her to grasp the amount of matter
needed to fill the morrow's issue.

When Parker finished, the three incompetents sat watching the little figure with the expression
of hopeful and trusting terriers. She knit her brow for a second--but she did not betray an
instant's indecision.

"I think we should have regular market reports," she announced, thoughtfully. "I am sure Mr.
Harkless would approve. Don't you think he would?" She turned to Parker.

"Market reports!" Mr. Fisbee exclaimed. "I should never have thought of market reports, nor,
do I imagine, would either of my--my associates. A woman to conceive the idea of market reports!"

The editor blushed. "Why, who would, dear, if not a woman, or a speculator, and I'm not a speculator;
and neither are you, and that's the reason you didn't think of them. So, Mr. Parker, as there
is so much pressure, and if you don't mind continuing to act as reporter as well as compositor
until after to-morrow, and if it isn't too wet--you must take an umbrella--would it be too
much bother if you went around to all the shops--stores, I mean--to all the grocers', and the
butchers', and that leather place we passed, the tannery?--and if there's one of those places
where they bring cows, would it be too much to ask you to stop there?--and at the flour-mill,
if it isn't too far?--and at the dry-goods store? And you must take a blank-book and sharpened
pencil, And will you price everything, please, and jot down how much things are?"

Orders received, the impetuous Parker was departing on the instant, when she stopped him with
a little cry: "But you haven't any umbrella!" And she forced her own, a slender wand, upon
him; it bore a cunningly wrought handle and its fabric was of glistening silk. The foreman,
unable to decline it, thanked her awkwardly, and, as she turned to speak to Fisbee, bolted
out of the door and ran down the steps without unfolding the umbrella; and as he made for Mr.
Martin's emporium, he buttoned it securely under his long "Prince Albert," determined that
not a drop of water should touch and ruin so delicate a thing. Thus he carried it, triumphantly
dry, through the course of his reportings of that day.

When he had gone the editor laid her hand on Fisbee's arm. "Dear," she said, "do you think
you would take cold if you went over to the hotel and made a note of all the arrivals for the
last week--and the departures, too? I noticed that Mr. Harkless always filled two or three--sticks,
isn't it?--with them and things about them, and somehow it 'read' very nicely. You must ask
the landlord all about them; and, if there aren't any, we can take up the same amount of space
lamenting the dull times, just as he used to. You see I've read the 'Herald' faithfully; isn't
it a good thing I always subscribed for it?" She patted Fisbee's cheek, and laughed gaily into
his mild, vague old eyes.

"It won't be this scramble to 'fill up' much longer. I have plans, gentlemen," she cried, "and
before long we will print news. And we must buy 'plate matter' instead of 'patent insides';
and I had a talk with the Associated Press people in Rouen--but that's for afterwhile. And
I went to the hospital this morning before I left. They wouldn't let me see him again, but
they told me all about him, and he's better; and I got Tom to go to the jail--he was so mystified,
he doesn't know what I wanted it for--and he saw some of those beasts, and I can do a column
of description besides an editorial about them, and I will be fierce enough to suit Carlow,
you may believe that. And I've been talking to Senator Burns--that is, listening to Senator
Burns, which is much stupider--and I think I can do an article on national politics. I'm not
very well up on local issues yet, but I--" She broke off suddenly. "There! I think we can get
out to-morrow's number without any trouble. By the time you get back from the hotel, father,
I'll have half my stuff written--'written up,' I mean. Take your big umbrella and go, dear,
and please ask at the express office if my typewriter has come."

She laughed again with sheer delight, like a child, and ran to the corner and got the cotton
umbrella and placed it in the old man's hand. As he reached the door, she called after him:
"Wait!" and went to him and knelt before him, and, with the humblest, proudest grace in the
world, turned up his trousers to keep them from the mud. Ross Schofield had never considered
Mr. Fisbee a particularly sacred sort of person, but he did from that moment. The old man made
some timid protest, at his daughter's action, But she answered; "The great ladies used to buckle
the Chevalier Bayard's spurs for him, and you're a great deal nicer than the Chev----You haven't
any rubbers! I don't believe any of you have any rubbers!" And not until both Fisbee and Mr.
Schofield had promised to purchase overshoes at once, and in the meantime not to step in any
puddles, would she let her father depart upon his errand. He crossed the Square with the strangest,
jauntiest step ever seen in Plattville. Solomon Tibbs had a warm argument with Miss Selina
as to his identity. Miss Selina maintaining that the figure under the big umbrella--only the
legs and coat-tails were visible to them--was that of a stranger, probably an Englishman.

In the "Herald" office the editor turned, smiling, to the paper's remaining vassal. "Mr. Schofield,
I heard some talk in Rouen of an oil company that had been formed to prospect for kerosene
in Carlow County. Do you know anything about it?"

Ross, surfeited with honor, terror, and possessed by a sweet distress at finding himself tete-a-tete
with the lady, looked at the wall and replied:

"Oh, it's that Eph Watts's foolishness."

"Do you know if they have begun to dig for it yet?"

"Ma'am?" said Ross.

"Have they begun the diggings yet?"

"No, ma'am; I think not. They've got a contrapshun fixed up about three mile south. I don't
reckon they've begun yet, hardly; they're gittin' the machinery in place. I heard Eph say they'd
begin to bore--dig, I mean, ma'am, I meant to say dig----" He stopped, utterly confused and
unhappy; and she understood his manly purpose, and knew him for a gentleman whom she liked.

"You mustn't be too much surprised," she said; "but in spite of my ignorance about such things,
I mean to devote a good deal of space to the oil company; it may come to be of great importance
to Carlow. We won't go into it in to-morrow's paper, beyond an item or so; but do you think
you could possibly find Mr. Watts and ask him for some information as to their progress, and
if it would be too much trouble for him to call here some time to-morrow afternoon, or the
day after? I want him to give me an interview if he will. Tell him, please, he will very greatly
oblige us."

"Oh, he'll come all right," answered her companion, quickly. "I'll take Tibbs's buggy and go
down there right off. Eph won't lose no time gittin' here!" And with this encouraging assurance
he was flying forth, when he, like the others, was detained by her solicitous care. She was
a born mother. He protested that in the buggy he would be perfectly sheltered; besides, there
wasn't another umbrella about the place; he liked to get wet, anyway; had always loved rain.
The end of it was that he went away in a sort of tremor, wearing her rain-cloak over his shoulders,
which garment, as it covered its owner completely when she wore it, hung almost to his knees.
He darted around a corner; and there, breathing deeply, tenderly removed it; then, borrowing
paper and cord at a neighboring store, wrapped it neatly, and stole back to the printing-office
on the ground floor of the "Herald" building, and left the package in charge of Bud Tipworthy,
mysteriously charging him to care for it as for his own life, and not to open it, but if the
lady so much as set one foot out of doors before his return, to hand it to her with the message:
"He borrowed another off J. Hankins."

Left alone, the lady went to the desk and stood for a time looking gravely at Harkless's chair.
She touched it gently, as she had touched it once before that morning, and then she spoke to
it as if he were sitting there, and as she would not have spoken, had he been sitting there.

"You didn't want gratitude, did you?" she whispered, with sad lips.

Soon she smiled at the blue ribbons, patted the chair gaily on the back, and, seizing upon
pencil and pad, dashed into her work with rare energy. She bent low over the desk, her pencil
moving rapidly, and, except for a momentary interruption from Mr. Tipworthy, she seemed not
to pause for breath; certainly her pencil did not. She had covered many sheets when her father
returned; and, as he came in softly, not to disturb her, she was so deeply engrossed she did
not hear him; nor did she look up when Parker entered, but pursued the formulation of her fast-flying
ideas with the same single purpose and abandon; so the two men sat and waited while their chieftainess
wrote absorbedly. At last she glanced up and made a little startled exclamation at seeing them
there, and then gave them cheery greeting. Each placed several scribbled sheets before her,
and she, having first assured herself that Fisbee had bought his overshoes, and having expressed
a fear that Mr. Parker had found her umbrella too small, as he looked damp (and indeed he was
damp), cried praises on their notes and offered the reporters great applause.

