Bucks stood motionless. "Poor little old Van Dyne! Why, my brother Sam taught at Van Dyne.
No, you would not have known him; he's dead. Never before west of the Missouri River have I
seen a Van Dyne man. You are the first." He shook his head as he sat down again. "It is crowded
out now: no money, no prestige, half-starved professors with their elbows out, the president
working like a dog all the week and preaching somewhere every Sunday to earn five dollars.
But, by Heaven, they turned out men! Did you know Bug Robinson?" he asked suddenly.

"He gave me my degree."

"Old Bug! He was Sam's closest friend, McCloud. It's good to see him getting the recognition
he deserves, isn't it? Do you know, I send him an annual every year? Yes, sir! And one year
I had the whole blooming faculty out here on a fossil expedition; but, by Heaven, McCloud,
some of them looked more like megatheriums than what they dug up did."

"I heard about that expedition."

"I never got to college. I had to hustle. I'll get out of here before I tire you. Wilcox will
be here all night, and my China boy is making some broth for you now. You'll feel better in
the morning."

Ten weeks later McCloud was sent from Medicine Bend up on the Short Line as trainmaster, and
on the Short Line he learned railroading.

"That's how I came here," said George McCloud to Farrell Kennedy a long time afterward, at
Medicine Bend. "I had shrivelled and starved three years out there in the desert. I lived with
those cattle underground till I had forgotten my own people, my own name, my own face--and
Bucks came along one day with Whispering Smith and dragged me out of my coffin. They had it
ordered, and it being a small size and 'onhandy,' as the undertaker said, I paid for it and
told him to store it for me. Well, do you think I ever could forget either of those men, Farrell?"

McCloud's fortunes thus threw him first into the operating department of the mountain lines,
but his heart was in the grades and the curves. To him the interest in the trainwork was the
work of the locomotives toiling with the heavy loads up the canyons and across the uneven plateaus
and through the deep gorges of the inner range, where the panting exhaust, choked between sheer
granite walls, roared in a mighty protest against the burden put by the steep grades on the
patient machines.

In all the group of young men then on the mountain division, obscure and unknown at the time,
but destined within so few years to be scattered far and wide as constructionists with records
made in the rebuilding operations through the Rocky Mountains, none was less likely to attract
attention than McCloud. Bucks, who, indeed, could hardly be reckoned so much of the company
as its head, was a man of commanding proportions physically. Like Glover, Bucks was a giant
in stature, and the two men, when together, could nowhere escape notice; they looked, in a
word, their part, fitted to cope with the tremendous undertakings that had fallen to their
lot. Callahan, the chess-player on the Overland lines, the man who could hold large combinations
of traffic movement constantly in his head and by intuition reach the result of a given problem
before other men could work it out, was, like Morris Blood, the master of tonnage, of middle
age. But McCloud, when he went to the mountain division, in youthfulness of features was boyish,
and when he left he was still a boy, bronzed, but young of face in spite of a lifetime's pressure
and worry crowded into three years. He himself counted this physical make-up as a disadvantage.
"It has embroiled me in no end of trouble, because I couldn't convince men I was in earnest
until I made good in some hard way," he complained once to Whispering Smith. "I never could
acquire even a successful habit of swearing, so I had to learn to fight."

When, one day in Boney Street in Medicine Bend, he threw open the door of Marion Sinclair's
shop, flung his hat sailing along the showcase with his war-cry, and called to her in the back
rooms, she thought he had merely run in to say he was in town.

"How do you do? What do you think? You're going to have an old boarder back," he cried. "I'm
coming to Medicine Bend, superintendent of the division!"

"Mr. McCloud!" Marion Sinclair clasped her hands and dropped into a chair. "Have they made
you superintendent already?"

"Well, I like that! Do you want them to wait till I'm gray-headed?"

Marion threw her hands to her own head. "Oh, don't say anything about gray hairs. My head won't
bear inspection. But I can't get over this promotion coming so soon--this whole big division!
Well, I congratulate you very sincerely----"

"Oh, but that isn't it! I suppose anybody will congratulate me. But where am I to board? Have
you a cook? You know how I went from bad to worse after you left Cold Springs. May I have my
meals here with you as I used to there?"

"Why, I suppose you can, yes, if you can stand the cooking. I have an apprentice, Mr. Dancing's
daughter, who does pretty well. She lives here with me, and is learning the business. But I
sha'n't take as much as you used to pay me, for I'm doing so much better down here."

"Let me run that end of it, will you? I shall be doing better down here myself."

They laughed as they bantered. Marion Sinclair wore gold spectacles, but they did not hide
the delightful good-nature in her eyes. On the third finger of her slender left hand she wore,
too, a gold band that explained the gray in her hair at twenty-six.

This was the wife of Murray Sinclair, whom he had brought to the mountains from her far-away
Wisconsin home. Within a year he had broken her heart so far as it lay in him to do it, but
he could not break her charm nor her spirit. She was too proud to go back, when forced to leave
him, and had set about earning her own living in the country to which she had come as a bride.
She put on spectacles, she mutilated her heavy brown hair and to escape notice and secure the
obscurity that she craved, her name, Marion, became, over the door of her millinery shop and
in her business, only "M. Sinclair."

Cold Springs, where Sinclair had first brought her when he had headquarters there as foreman
of bridges, had proved a hopeless place for the millinery business--at least, in the way that
Marion ran it. The women that had husbands had no money to buy hats with, and the women without
husbands wore gaudy headgear, and were of the kind that made Marion's heart creep when they
opened the shop door. What was worse, they were inclined to joke with her, as if there must
be a community of interest between a deserted woman and women who had deserted womanhood. To
this business Marion would not cater, and in consequence her millinery affairs sometimes approached
collapse. She could, however, cook extraordinarily well, and, with the aid of a servant-maid,
could always provide for a boarder or two--perhaps a railroad man or a mine superintendent
to whom she could serve meals, and who, like all mountain men, were more than generous in their
accounting with women. Among these standbys of hers was McCloud. McCloud had always been her
friend, and when she left Cold Springs and moved to Medicine Bend to set up her little shop
in Boney Street near Fort, she had lost him. Yet somehow, to compensate Marion for other cruel
things in the mountains, Providence seemed to raise up a new friend for her wherever she went.
In Medicine Bend she did not know a soul, but almost the first customer that walked into her
shop--and she was a customer worth while--was Dicksie Dunning of the Crawling Stone.

CHAPTER V

THE CRAWLING STONE

Where the mountain chains of North America have been flung up into a continental divide, the
country in many of its aspects is still terrible. In extent alone this mountain empire is grandiose.
The swiftest transcontinental trains approaching its boundaries at night find night falling
again before they have fairly penetrated it. Geologically severe, this region in geological
store is the richest of the continent; physically forbidding beyond all other stretches of
North America, the Barren Land alone excepted, in this region lie its gentlest valleys. Here
the desert is most grotesque, and here are pastoral retreats the most secluded. It is the home
of the Archean granite, and its basins are of a fathomless dust. Under its sagebrush wastes
the skeletons of earth's hugest mammals lie beside behemoth and the monsters of the deep. The
eternal snow, the granite peak, the sandstone butte, the lava-bed, the gray desert, the far
horizon are familiar here. With the sunniest and bluest of skies, this is the range of the
deadliest storms, and its delightful summers contrast with the dreadest cold.

Here the desert of death simulates a field of cooling snow, green hills lie black in the dazzling
light of day, limpid waters run green over arsenic stone, and sunset betricks the fantastic
rock with column and capital and dome. Clouds burst here above arid wastes, and where dew is
precious the skies are most prodigal in their downpour. If the torrent bed is dry, distrust it.

This vast mountain shed parts rivers whose waters find two oceans, and their valleys are the
natural highways up which railroads wind to the crest of the continent. To the mountain engineer
the waterway is the sphinx that holds in its silence the riddle of his success; with him lies
the problem of providing a railway across ranges which often defy the hoofs of a horse.

The construction engineer studies the course of the mountain water. The water is both his ally
and his enemy--ally because it alone has made possible his undertakings; enemy because it fights
to destroy his puny work, just as it fights to level the barriers that oppose him. Like acid
spread on copperplate, water etches the canyons in the mountain slopes and spreads wide the
valleys through the plains. Among these scarcely known ranges of the Rocky Mountain chain the
Western rivers have their beginnings. When white men crowded the Indian from the plains he
retreated to the mountains, and in their valleys made his final stand against the aggressor.
The scroll of this invasion of the mountain West by the white man has been unrolled, read,
and put away within a hundred years, and of the agencies that made possible the swiftness of
the story transportation overshadows all others. The first railroad put across those mountains
cost twenty-five thousand miles of reconnaissances and fifteen thousand miles of instrument
surveys. Since the day of that undertaking a generation of men has passed, and in the interval
the wilderness that those men penetrated has been transformed. The Indian no longer extorts
terms from his foe: he is not.

Where the tepee stood the rodman drives his stakes, and the country of the great Indian rivers,
save one, has been opened for years to the railroad. That one is the Crawling Stone. The valley
of Crawling Stone River marked for more than a decade the dead line between the Overland Route
of the white man and the last country of the Sioux. It was long after the building of the first
line before even an engineer's reconnaissance was made in the Crawling Stone country. Then,
within ten years, three surveys were made, two on the north side of the river and one on the
south side, by interests seeking a coast outlet. Three reports made in this way gave varying
estimates of the expense of putting a line up the valley, but the three coincided in this,
that the cost would be prohibitive. Engineers of reputation had in this respect agreed, but
Glover, who looked after such work for Bucks, remained unconvinced, and before McCloud was
put into the operating department on the Short Line he was asked by Glover to run a preliminary
up Crawling Stone Valley. Before the date of his report the conclusions reached by other engineers
had stood unchallenged.

The valley was not unknown to McCloud. His first year in the mountains, in which, fitted as
thoroughly as he could fit himself for his profession, he had come West and found himself unable
to get work, had been spent hunting, fishing, and wandering, often cold and often hungry, in
the upper Crawling Stone country. The valley in itself offers to a constructionist no insuperable
obstacles; the difficulty is presented in the canyon where the river bursts through the Elbow
Mountains. South of this canyon, McCloud, one day on a hunting trip, found himself with two
Indians pocketed in the rough country, and was planning how to escape passing a night away
from camp when his companions led him past a vertical wall of rock a thousand feet high, split
into a narrow defile down which they rode, as it broadened out, for miles. They emerged upon
an open country that led without a break into the valley of the Crawling Stone below the canyon.
Afterward, when he had become a railroad man, McCloud, sitting at a camp-fire with Glover and
Morris Blood, heard them discussing the coveted and impossible line up the valley. He had been
taken into the circle of constructionists and was told of the earlier reports against the line.
He thought he knew something about the Elbow Mountains, and disputed the findings, offering
in two days' ride to take the men before him to the pass called by the Indians The Box, and
to take them through it. Glover called it a find, and a big one, and though more immediate
matters in the strategy of territorial control then came before him, the preliminary was ordered
and McCloud's findings were approved. McCloud himself was soon afterward engrossed in the problems
of operating the mountain division; but the dream of his life was to build the Crawling Stone
Line with a maximum grade of eight tenths through The Box.

The prettiest stretch of Crawling Stone Valley lies within twenty miles of Medicine Bend. There
it lies widest, and has the pick of water and grass between Medicine Bend and the Mission Mountains.
Cattlemen went into the Crawling Stone country before the Indians had wholly left it. The first
house in the valley was the Stone Ranch, built by Richard Dunning, and it still stands overlooking
the town of Dunning at the junction of the Frenchman Creek with the Crawling Stone. The Frenchman
is fed by unfailing springs, and when by summer sun and wind every smaller stream in the middle
basin has been licked dry, the Frenchman runs cold and swift between its russet hills. Richard
Dunning, being on the border of the Indian country, built for his ranch-house a rambling stone
fortress. He had chosen, it afterward proved, the choice spot in the valley, and he stocked
it with cattle when yearlings could be picked up in Medicine Bend at ten dollars a head. He
got together a great body of valley land when it could be had for the asking, and became the
rich man of the Long Range.

The Dunnings were Kentuckians. Richard was a bridge engineer and builder, and under Brodie
built some of the first bridges on the mountain division, notably the great wooden bridge at
Smoky Creek. Richard brought out his nephew, Lance Dunning. He taught Lance bridge-building,
and Murray Sinclair, who began as a cowboy on the Stone Ranch, learned bridge-building from
Richard Dunning. The Dunnings both came West, though at different times, as young men and unmarried,
and, as far as Western women were concerned, might always have remained so. But a Kentucky
cousin, Betty, one of the Fairfield Dunnings, related to Richard within the sixth or eighth
degree, came to the mountains for her health. Betty's mother had brought Richard up as a boy,
and Betty, when he left Fairfield, was a baby. But Dick--as they knew him at home--and the
mother wrote back and forth, and he persuaded her to send Betty out for a trip, promising he
would send her back in a year a well woman.

Betty came with only her colored maid, old Puss Dunning, who had taken her from the nurse's
arms when she was born and taken care of her ever since. The two--the tall Kentucky girl and
the bent mammy--arrived at the Stone Ranch one day in June, and Richard, done then with bridges
and looking after his ranch interests, had already fallen violently in love with Betty. She
was delicate, but, if those in Medicine Bend who remembered her said true, a lovely creature.
Remaining in the mountains was the last thing Betty had ever thought of, but no one, man or
woman, could withstand Dick Dunning. She fell quite in love with him the first time she set
eyes on him in Medicine Bend, for he was very handsome in the saddle, and Betty was fairly
wild about horses. So Dick Dunning wooed a fond mistress and married her and buried her, and
all within hardly more than a year.

But in that year they were very happy, never two happier, and when she slept away her suffering
she left him, as a legacy, a tiny baby girl. Puss brought the mite of a creature in its swaddling-clothes
to the sick mother,--very, very sick then,--and poor Betty turned her dark eyes on it, kissed
it, looked at her husband and whispered "Dicksie," and died. Dicksie had been Betty's pet name
for her mountain lover, so the father said the child's name should be Dicksie and nothing else;
and his heart broke and soon he died. Nothing else, storm or flood, death or disaster, had
ever moved Dick Dunning; then a single blow killed him. He rode once in a while over the ranch,
a great tract by that time of twenty thousand acres, all in one body, all under fence, up and
down both sides of the big river, in part irrigated, swarming with cattle--none of it stirred
Dick! and with little Dicksie in his arms he slept away his suffering.

So Dicksie was left, as her mother had been, to Puss, while Lance looked after the ranch, swore
at the price of cattle, and played cards at Medicine Bend. At ten, Dicksie, as thoroughly spoiled
as a pet baby could be by a fool mammy, a fond cousin, and a galaxy of devoted cowboys, was
sent, in spite of crying and flinging, to a far-away convent--her father had planned everything--where
in many tears she learned that there were other things in the world besides cattle and mountains
and sunshine and tall, broad-hatted horsemen to swing from their stirrups and pick her hat
from the ground--just to see little Dicksie laugh--when they swooped past the house to the
corrals. When she came back from Kentucky, her grandmother dead and her schooldays finished,
all the land she could see in the valley was hers, and all the living creatures in the fields.
It seemed perfectly natural, because since childhood even the distant mountains and their snows
had been Dicksie's.

CHAPTER VI

THE FINAL APPEAL

Sinclair's discharge was a matter of comment for the whole country, from the ranch-houses to
the ranges. For a time Sinclair himself refused utterly to believe that McCloud could keep
him off the division. His determination to get back led him to carry his appeal to the highest
quarters, to Glover and to Bucks himself. But Sinclair, able as he was, had passed the limit
of endurance and had long been marked for an accounting. He had been a railroad man to whom
the West spelled license, and, while a valuable man, had long been a source of demoralization
to the forces of the division. In the railroad life clearly defined plans are often too deeply
laid to fathom, and it was impossible for even so acute a man as Sinclair to realize that he
was not the victim of an accident, but that he must look to his own record for the real explanation
of his undoing. He was not the only man to suffer in the shake-out that took place under the
new superintendent; but he seemed the only one unable to realize that Bucks, patient and long-suffering,
had put McCloud into the mountain saddle expressly to deal with cases such as his. In the West
sympathy is quick but not always discerning. Medicine Bend took Sinclair's grievance as its
own. No other man in the service had Sinclair's following, and within a week petitions were
being circulated through the town not asking merely but calling for his reinstatement. The
sporting element of the community to a man were behind Sinclair because he was a sport; the
range men were with him because his growing ranch on the Frenchman made him one of them; his
own men were with him because he was a far-seeing pirate and divided liberally. Among the railroad
men, too, he had much sympathy. Sinclair had always been lavish with presents; brides were
remembered by Sinclair, and babies were not forgotten. He could sit up all night with a railroad
man that had been hurt, and he could play poker all night with one that was not afraid of getting
hurt. In his way, he was a division autocrat, whose vices were varnished by virtues such as
these. His hold on the people was so strong that they could not believe the company would not
reinstate him. In spite of the appointment of his successor, Phil Hailey, a mountain boy and
the son of an old-time bridge foreman, rumor assigned again and again definite dates for Sinclair's
return to work; but the dates never materialized. The bridge machinery of the big division
moved on in even rhythm. A final and determined appeal from the deposed autocrat for a hearing
at last brought Glover and Morris Blood, the general manager, to Medicine Bend for a final
conference. Callahan too was there with his pipe, and they talked quietly with Sinclair--reminded
him of how often he had been warned, showed him how complete a record they had of his plundering,
and Glover gave to him Bucks's final word that he could never again work on the mountain division.

A pride grown monstrous with prestige long undisputed broke under the final blow. The big fellow
put his face in his hands and burst into tears, and the men before him sat confused and uncomfortable
at his outburst of feeling. It was only for a moment. Sinclair raised his hand, shook his long
hair, and swore an oath against the company and the men that curled the very smoke in Callahan's
pipe, Callahan, outraged at the insolence, sprang to his feet, resenting Sinclair's fury. Choking
with anger he warned him not to go too far. The two were ready to spring at each other's throat
when Farrell Kennedy stepped between them. Sinclair, drunk with rage, called for McCloud; but
he submitted quietly to Kennedy's reproof, and with a semblance of self-control begged that
McCloud be sent for. Kennedy, without complying, gradually pushed Sinclair out of the room
and, without seeming officious, walked with him down the hall and quite out of the building.

CHAPTER VII

IN MARION'S SHOP

In Boney Street, Medicine Bend, stands an early-day row of one-story buildings; they once made
up a prosperous block, which has long since fallen into the decay of paintless days. There
is in Boney Street a livery stable, a second-hand store, a laundry, a bakery, a moribund grocery,
and a bicycle shop, and at the time of this story there was also Marion Sinclair's millinery
shop; but the better class of Medicine Bend business, such as the gambling houses, saloons,
pawnshops, restaurants, barber shops, and those sensitive, clean-shaven, and alert establishments
known as "gents' stores," had deserted Boney Street for many years. Bats fly in the dark of
Boney Street while Front Street at the same hour is a blaze of electricity and frontier hilarity.
The millinery store stood next to the corner of Fort Street. The lot lay in an "L," and at
the rear of the store the first owner had built a small connecting cottage to live in. This
faced on Fort Street, so that Marion had her shop and living-rooms communicating, and yet apart.
The store building is still pointed out as the former shop of Marion Sinclair, where George
McCloud boarded when the Crawling Stone Line was built, where Whispering Smith might often
have been seen, where Sinclair himself was last seen alive in Medicine Bend, where Dicksie
Dunning's horse dragged her senseless one wild mountain night, and where, indeed, for a time
the affairs of the whole mountain division seemed to tangle in very hard knots.

As to the millinery business, it was never, after Marion bought the shop, more than moderately
successful. The demand that existed in Medicine Bend for red hats of the picture sort Marion
declined to recognize. For customers who sought these she turned out hats of sombre coloring
calculated to inspire gloom rather than revelry, and she naturally failed to hold what might
be termed the miscellaneous business. But after Dicksie Dunning of the Stone Ranch, fresh from
the convent, rode into the shop, or if not into it nearly so, and, gliding through the door,
ordered a hat out of hand, Marion always had some business. All Medicine Bend knew Dicksie
Dunning, who dressed stunningly, rode famously, and was so winningly democratic that half the
town never called her anything, at a distance, but Dicksie.

The first hat was a small affair but haughty. The materials were unheard of in Marion's stock
and had to be sent for. Marion's arrangements with the jobbing houses always had a C. O. D.
complexion; the jobbers maintained that this saved book-keeping, and Marion, who of course
never knew any better, paid the double express charges like a lamb. She acted, too, as banker
for the other impecunious tradespeople in the block, and as this included nearly all of them
she was often pressed for funds herself. McCloud undertook sometimes to intervene and straighten
out her millinery affairs. One evening he went so far as to attempt an inventory of her stock
and some schedule of her accounts; but Marion, with the front-shop curtains closely drawn and
McCloud perspiring on a step-ladder, inspecting boxes of feathers and asking stern questions,
would look so pathetically sweet and helpless when she tried to recall what things cost that
McCloud could not be angry with her; indeed, the pretty eyes behind the patient spectacles
would disarm any one. In the end he took inventory on the basis of the retail prices, dividing
it afterward by five, as Marion estimated the average profit in the business at five hundred
per cent.--this being what the woman she bought out had told her.

How then, McCloud asked himself, could Marion be normally hard pressed for money? He talked
to her learnedly about fixed charges, but even these seemed difficult to arrive at. There was
no rent, because the building belonged to the railroad company, and when the real-estate and
tax man came around and talked to McCloud about rent for the Boney Street property, McCloud
told him to chase himself. There was no insurance, because no one would dream of insuring Marion's
stock boxes; there were no bills payable, because no travelling man would advise a line of
credit to an inexperienced and, what was worse, an unpractical milliner. Marion did her own
trimming, so there were no salaries except to Katie Dancing. It puzzled McCloud to find the
leak. How could he know that Marion was keeping nearly all the block supplied with funds? So
McCloud continued to raise the price of his table-board, and, though Marion insisted he was
paying her too much, held that he must be eating her out of house and home.

In her dining-room, which connected through a curtained door with the shop, McCloud sat one
day alone eating his dinner. Marion was in front serving a customer. McCloud heard voices in
the shop, but gave no heed till a man walked through the curtained doorway and he saw Murray
Sinclair standing before him. The stormy interview with Callahan and Blood at the Wickiup had
taken place just a week before, and McCloud, after what Sinclair had then threatened, though
not prepared, felt as he saw him that anything might occur. McCloud being in possession of
the little room, however, the initiative fell on Sinclair, who, looking his best, snatched
his hat from his head and bowed ironically. "My mistake," he said blandly.

"Come right in," returned McCloud, not knowing whether Marion had a possible hand in her husband's
unexpected appearance. "Do you want to see me?"

"I don't," smiled Sinclair; "and to be perfectly frank," he added with studied consideration,
"I wish to God I never had seen you. Well--you've thrown me, McCloud."

"You've thrown yourself, haven't you, Murray?"

"From your point of view, of course. But, McCloud, this is a small country for two points of
view. Do you want to get out of it, or do you want me to?"

"The country suits me, Sinclair."

"No man that has ever played me dirt can stay here while I stay." Sinclair, with a hand on
the portière, was moving from the doorway into the room. McCloud in a leisurely way rose, though
with a slightly flushed face, and at that juncture Marion ran into the room and spoke abruptly.
"Here is the silk, Mr. Sinclair," she exclaimed, handing to him a package she had not finished
wrapping. "I meant you to wait in the other room."

"It was an accidental intrusion," returned Sinclair, maintaining his irony. "I have apologized,
and Mr. McCloud and I understand one another better than ever."

"Please say to Miss Dunning," continued Marion, nervous and insistent, "that the band for her
riding-hat hasn't come yet, but it should be here to-morrow."

As she spoke McCloud leaned across the table, resolved to take advantage of the opening, if
it cost him his life. "And by the way, Mr. Sinclair, Miss Dunning wished me to say to you that
the lovely bay colt you sent her had sprung his shoulder badly, the hind shoulder, I think,
but they are doing everything possible for it and they think it will make a great horse."

Sinclair's snort at the information was a marvel of indecision. Was he being made fun of? Should
he draw and end it? But Marion faced him resolutely as he stood, and talking in the most business-like
way she backed him out of the room and to the shop door. Balked of his opportunity, he retreated
stubbornly but with the utmost politeness, and left with a grin, lashing his tail, so to speak.

Coming back, Marion tried to hide her uneasiness under even tones to McCloud. "I'm sorry he
disturbed you. I was attending to a customer and had to ask him to wait a moment."

"Don't apologize for having a customer."

"He lives over beyond the Stone Ranch, you know, and is taking some things out for the Dunnings
to-day. He likes an excuse to come in here because it annoys me. Finish your dinner, Mr. McCloud."

"Thank you, I'm done."

"But you haven't eaten anything. Isn't your steak right?"

"It's fine, but that man--well, you know how I like him and how he likes me. I'll content myself
with digesting my temper."

CHAPTER VIII

SMOKY CREEK BRIDGE

It was not alone that a defiance makes a bad dinner sauce: there was more than this for McCloud
to feed on. He was forced to confess to himself as he walked back to the Wickiup that the most
annoying feature of the incident was the least important, namely, that his only enemy in the
country should be intrusted with commissions from the Stone Ranch and be carrying packages
for Dicksie Dunning. It was Sinclair's trick to do things for people, and to make himself so
useful that they must like first his obligingness and afterward himself. Sinclair, McCloud
knew, was close in many ways to Lance Dunning. It was said to have been his influence that
won Dunning's consent to sell a right of way across the ranch for the new Crawling Stone Line.
But McCloud felt it useless to disguise the fact to himself that he now had a second keen interest
in the Crawling Stone country--not alone a dream of a line, but a dream of a girl. Sitting
moodily in his office, with his feet on the desk, a few nights after his encounter with Sinclair,
he recalled her nod as she said good-by. It had seemed the least bit encouraging, and he meditated
anew on the only twenty minutes of real pleasurable excitement he had ever felt in his life,
the twenty minutes with Dicksie Dunning at Smoky Creek. Her intimates, he had heard, called
her Dicksie, and he was vaguely envying her intimates when the night despatcher, Rooney Lee,
opened the door and disturbed his reflections.

"How is Number One, Rooney?" called McCloud, as if nothing but the thought of a train movement
ever entered his head.

Rooney Lee paused. In his hand he held a message. Rooney's cheeks were hollow and his sunken
eyes were large. His face, which was singularly a night face, would shock a stranger, but any
man on the division would have given his life for Rooney. The simple fellow had but two living
interests--his train-sheets and his chewing tobacco. Sometimes I think that every railroad
man earns his salary--even the president. But Rooney was a Past Worthy Master in that unnumbered
lodge of railroad slaves who do killing work and have left, when they die, only a little tobacco
to show for it. It was on Rooney's account that McCloud's order banishing cuspidors from his
office had been rescinded. A few evenings of agony on the despatcher's part when in consultation
with his chief, the mournful wandering of his uncomplaining eyes, his struggle to raise an
obstinate window before he could answer a question, would have moved a heart harder than McCloud's.
The cuspidor had been restored to one corner of the large room, and to this corner Rooney,
like a man with a jaw full of birdshot, always walked first. When he turned back to face his
chief his face had lost its haunted expression, and he answered with solemn cheer, "On time,"
or "Fourteen minutes late," as the case might be. This night his face showed something out
of the ordinary, and he faced McCloud with evident uneasiness. "Holy smoke, Mr. McCloud, here's
a ripper! We've lost Smoky Creek Bridge."

"Lost Smoky Creek Bridge?" echoed McCloud, rising in amazement.

"Burned to-night. Seventy-seven was flagged by the man at the pump station."

"That's a tie-up for your life!" exclaimed McCloud, reaching for the message. "How could it
catch fire? Is it burned up?"

"I can't get anything on that yet; this came from Canby. I'll have a good wire in a few minutes
and get it all for you."

"Have Phil Hailey and Hyde notified, Rooney, and Reed and Brill Young, and get up a train.
Smoky Creek Bridge! By heavens, we are ripped up the back now! What can we do there, Rooney?"
He was talking to himself. "There isn't a thing for it on God's earth but switchbacks and five-per-cent.
grades down to the bottom of the creek and cribbing across it till the new line is ready. Wire
Callahan and Morris Blood, and get everything you can for me before we start."

Ten hours later and many hundreds of miles from the mountain division, President Bucks and
a companion were riding in the peace of a June morning down the beautiful Mohawk Valley with
an earlier and illustrious railroad man, William C. Brown. The three men were at breakfast
in Brown's car. A message was brought in for Bucks. He read it and passed it to his companion,
Whispering Smith, who sat at Brown's left hand. The message was from Callahan with the news
of the burning of Smoky Creek Bridge. Details were few, because no one on the West End could
suggest a plausible cause for the fire.

"What do you think of it, Gordon?" demanded Bucks bluntly.

Whispering Smith seemed at all times bordering on good-natured surprise, and in that normal
condition he read Callahan's message. Everything surprised Whispering Smith, even his salary;
but an important consequence was that nothing excited him. He seemed to accommodate himself
to the unexpected through habitual surprise. It showed markedly in his eyes, which were bright
and quite wide open, and, save for his eyes, no feature about him would fix itself in the memory.
His round, pleasant face, his heavy brown mustache, the medium build that concealed under its
commonplace symmetry an unusual strength, his slightly rounding shoulders bespeaking a not
too serious estimate of himself--every characteristic, even to his unobtrusive suit and black
hat, made him distinctly an ordinary man--one to be met in the street to-day and passed, and
forgotten to-morrow.

He was laughing under Bucks's scrutiny when he handed the message back. "Why, I don't know
a thing about it, not a thing; but taking a long shot and speaking by and far, I should say
it looks something like first blood for Sinclair," he suggested, and to change the subject
lifted his cup of coffee.

"Then it looks like you for the mountains to-night instead of for Weber and Fields's," retorted
Bucks, reaching for a cigar. "Brown, why have you never learned to smoke?"

CHAPTER IX

THE MISUNDERSTANDING

No attempt was made to minimize the truth that the blow to the division was a staggering one.
The loss of Smoky Creek Bridge put almost a thousand miles of the mountain division out of
business. Perishable freight and time freight were diverted to other lines. Passengers were
transferred; lunches were served to them in the deep valley, and they were supplied by an ingenuous
advertising department with pictures of the historic bridge as it had long stood, and their
addresses were taken with the promise of a picture of the ruins. Smoky Creek Bridge had long
been famous in mountain song and story. For one generation of Western railroad men it had stood
as a monument to the earliest effort to conquer the Rockies with a railroad. Built long before
the days of steel, this high and slender link in the first transcontinental line had for thirty
years served faithfully at its danger-post, only to fall in the end at the hands of a bridge
assassin; nor has the mystery of its fate ever completely been solved, though it is believed
to lie with Murray Sinclair in the Frenchman hills. The engineering department and the operating
department united in a tremendous effort to bring about a resumption of traffic. Glover's men,
pulled off construction, were sent forward in trainloads. Dancing's linemen strung arc-lights
along the creek until the canyon twinkled at night like a mountain village, and men in three
shifts worked elbow to elbow unceasingly to run the switchbacks down to the creek-bed. There,
by cribbing across the bottom, they got in a temporary line.

Train movement was thrown into a spectacle of confusion. Upon the incessant and well-ordered
activities of the road the burning of the bridge fell like the heel of a heavy boot on an ant-hill;
but the railroad men like ants rose to the emergency, and, where the possible failed, achieved
the impossible.

McCloud spent his days at the creek and his nights at Medicine Bend with his assistant and
his chief despatcher, advising, counselling, studying out trouble reports, and steadying wherever
he could the weakened lines of his operating forces. He was getting his first taste of the
trials of the hardest-worked and poorest-paid man in the operating department of a railroad--the
division superintendent.

To these were added personal annoyances. A trainload of Duck Bar steers, shipped by Lance Dunning
from the Crawling Stone Ranch, had been caught west of the bridge the very night of the fire.
They had been loaded at Tipton and shipped to catch a good market, and under extravagant promises
from the live-stock agent of a quick run to Chicago. When Lance Dunning learned that his cattle
had been caught west of the break and would have to be unloaded, he swore up a horse in hot
haste and started for Medicine Bend. McCloud, who had not closed his eyes for sixty hours,
had just got into Medicine Bend from Smoky Creek and was sitting at his desk buried in a mass
of papers, but he ordered the cattleman admitted. He was, in fact, eager to meet the manager
of the big ranch and the cousin of Dicksie. Lance Dunning stood above six feet in height, and
was a handsome man, in spite of the hard lines around his eyes, as he walked in; but neither
his manner nor his expression was amiable.

"Are you Mr. McCloud? I've been here three times this afternoon to see you," said he, ignoring
McCloud's answer and a proffered chair. "This is your office, isn't it?"

McCloud, a little surprised, answered again and civilly: "It certainly is; but I have been
at Smoky Creek for two or three days."

"What have you done with my cattle?"

"The Duck Bar train was run back to Point of Rocks and the cattle were unloaded at the yard."

Lance Dunning spoke with increasing harshness: "By whose order was that done? Why wasn't I
notified? Have they had feed or water?"

"All the stock caught west of the bridge was sent back for feed and water by my orders. It
has all been taken care of. You should have been notified, certainly; it is the business of
the stock agent to see to that. Let me inquire about it while you are here, Mr. Dunning," suggested
McCloud, ringing for his clerk.

Dunning lost no time in expressing himself. "I don't want my cattle held at Point of Rocks!"
he said angrily. "Your Point of Rocks yards are infected. My cattle shouldn't have been sent
there."

"Oh, no! The old yards where they had a touch of fever were burned off the face of the earth
a year ago. The new yards are perfectly sanitary. The loss of the bridge has crippled us, you
know. Your cattle are being well cared for, Mr. Dunning, and if you doubt it you may go up
and give our men any orders you like in the matter at our expense."

"You're taking altogether too much on yourself when you run my stock over the country in this
way," exclaimed Dunning, refusing to be placated.

"How am I to get to Point of Rocks--walk there?"

"Not at all," returned McCloud, ringing up his clerk and asking for a pass, which was brought
back in a moment and handed to Dunning. "The cattle," continued McCloud, "can be run down,
unloaded, and driven around the break to-morrow--with the loss of only two days."

"And in the meantime I lose my market."

"It is too bad, certainly, but I suppose it will be several days before we can get a line across
Smoky Creek."

"Why weren't the cattle sent through that way yesterday? What have they been held at Point
of Rocks for? I call the thing badly managed."

"We couldn't get the empty cars up from Piedmont for the transfer until to-day; empties are
very scarce everywhere now."

"There always have been empties here when they were wanted until lately. There's been no head
or tail to anything on this division for six months."

"I'm sorry that you have that impression."

"That impression is very general," declared the stockman, with an oath, "and if you keep on
discharging the only men on this division that are competent to handle a break like this, it
is likely to continue!"

"Just a moment!" McCloud's finger rose pointedly. "My failure to please you in caring for your
stock in an emergency may be properly a matter for comment; your opinion as to the way I am
running this division is, of course, your own: but don't attempt to criticise the retention
or discharge of any man on my payroll!"

Dunning strode toward him. "I'm a shipper on this line; when it suits me to criticise you or
your methods, or anybody else's, I expect to do so," he retorted in high tones.

"But you cannot tell me how to run my business!" thundered McCloud, leaning over the table
in front of him.

As the two men glared at each other Rooney Lee opened the door. His surprise at the situation
amounted to consternation. He shuffled to the corner of the room, and while McCloud and Dunning
engaged hotly again, Rooney, from the corner, threw a shot of his own into the quarrel. "On
time!" he roared.

The angry men turned. "What's on time?" asked McCloud curtly.

"Number One; she's in and changing engines. I told them you were going West," declared Rooney
in so deep tones that his fiction would never have been suspected. If his cue had been, "My
lord, the conductor waits," it could not have been rung in more opportunely.

Dunning, to emphasize, without a further word, his disgust for the situation and his contempt
for the management, tore into scraps the pass that had been given him, threw the scraps on
the floor, took a cigar from his pocket and lighted it; insolence could do no more.

McCloud looked over at the despatcher. "No, I am not going West, Rooney. But if you will be
good enough to stay here and find out from this man just how this railroad ought to be run,
I will go to bed. He can tell you; the microbe seems to be working in his mind right now,"
said McCloud, slamming down the roll-top of his desk. And with Lance Dunning glaring at him,
somewhat speechless, he put on his hat and walked out of the room.

It was but one of many disagreeable incidents due to the loss of the bridge. Complications
arising from the tie-up followed him at every turn. It seemed as if he could not get away from
trouble following trouble. After forty hours further of toil, relieved by four hours of sleep,
McCloud found himself, rather dead than alive, back at Medicine Bend and in the little dining-room
at Marion's. Coming in at the cottage door on Fort Street, he dropped into a chair. The cottage
rooms were empty. He heard Marion's voice in the front shop; she was engaged with a customer.
Putting his head on the table to wait a moment, nature asserted itself and McCloud fell asleep.
He woke hearing a voice that he had heard in dreams. Perhaps no other voice could have wakened
him, for he slept for a few minutes a death-like sleep. At all events, Dicksie Dunning was
in the front room and McCloud heard her. She was talking with Marion about the burning of Smoky
Creek Bridge.

"Every one is talking about it yet," Dicksie was saying. "If I had lost my best friend I couldn't
have felt worse; you know, my father built it. I rode over there the day of the fire, and down
into the creek, so I could look up where it stood. I never realized before how high and how
long it was; and when I remembered how proud father always was of his work there--Cousin Lance
has often told me--I sat down right on the ground and cried. Really, the ruins were the most
pathetic thing you ever saw, Marion, with great clouds of smoke rolling up from the canyon
that day; the place looked so lonely when I rode away that every time I turned to look back
my eyes filled with tears. Poor daddy! I am almost glad he didn't live to see it. How times
have changed in railroading, haven't they? Mr. Sinclair was over just the other night, and
he said if they kept using this new coal in the engines they would burn up everything on the
division. Do you know, I have been waiting in town three or four hours now for Cousin Lance?
I feel almost like a tramp. He is coming from the West with the stock train. It was due here
hours ago, but they never seem to know when anything is to get here the way things are run
on the railroad now. I want to give Cousin Lance some mail before he goes through."

"The passenger trains crossed the creek over the switchbacks hours ago, and they say the emergency
grades are first-rate," said Marion Sinclair, on the defensive. "The stock trains must have
followed right along. Your cousin is sure to be here pretty soon. Probably Mr. McCloud will
know which train he is on, and Mr. Lee telephoned that Mr. McCloud would be over here at three
o'clock for his dinner. He ought to be here now."

"Oh, dear, then I must go!"

"But he can probably tell you just when your cousin will be in."

"I wouldn't meet him for worlds!"

"You wouldn't? Why, Mr. McCloud is delightful."

"Oh, not for worlds, Marion! You know he is discharging all the best of the older men, the
men that have made the road everything it is, and of course we can't help sympathizing with
them over our way. For my part, I think it is terrible, after a man has given all of his life
to building up a railroad, that he should be thrown out to starve in that way by new managers,
Marion."

McCloud felt himself shrinking within his weary clothes. Resentment seemed to have died. He
felt too exhausted to undertake controversy, even if it were to be thought of, and it was not.

Nothing further was needed to complete his humiliation. He picked up his hat and with the thought
of getting out as quietly as he had come in. In rising he swept a tumbler at his elbow from
the table. The glass broke on the floor, and Marion exclaimed, "What is that?" and started
for the dining-room.

It was too late to get away. McCloud stepped to the portières of the trimming-room door and
pushed them aside. Marion stood with a hat in her hand, and Dicksie, sitting at the table,
was looking directly at the intruder as he appeared in the doorway. She saw in him her pleasant
acquaintance of the wreck at Smoky Creek, whose name she had not learned. In her surprise she
rose to her feet, and Marion spoke quickly: "Oh, Mr. McCloud, is it you? I did not hear you
come in."

Dicksie's face, which had lighted, became a spectacle of confusion after she heard the name.
McCloud, conscious of the awkwardness of his position and the disorder of his garb, said the
worst thing at once: "I fear I am inadvertently overhearing your conversation."

He looked at Dicksie as he spoke, chiefly because he could not help it, and this made matters
hopeless.

She flushed more deeply. "I cannot conceive why our conversation should invite a listener."

Her words did not, of course, help to steady him. "I tried to get away," he stammered, "when
I realized I was a part of it."

"In any event," she exclaimed hastily, "if you are Mr. McCloud I think it unpardonable to do
anything like that!"

"I am Mr. McCloud, though I should rather be anybody else; and I am sorry that I was unable
to help hearing what was said; I----"

"Marion, will you be kind enough to give me my gloves?" said Dicksie, holding out her hand.

Marion, having tried once or twice to intervene, stood between the firing-lines in helpless
amazement. Her exclamations were lost; the two before her gave no heed to ordinary intervention.

McCloud flushed at being cut off, but he bowed. "Of course," he said, "if you will listen to
no explanation I can only withdraw."

He went back, dinnerless, to work all night; but the switchbacks were doing capitally, and
all night long, trains were rolling through Medicine Bend from the West in an endless string.
In the morning the yard was nearly cleared of westbound tonnage. Moreover, the mail in the
morning brought compensation. A letter came from Glover telling him not to worry himself to
death over the tie-up, and one came from Bucks telling him to make ready for the building of
the Crawling Stone Line.

McCloud told Rooney Lee that if anybody asked for him to report him dead, and going to bed
slept twenty-four hours.

CHAPTER X

SWEEPING ORDERS

The burning of Smoky Creek Bridge was hardly off the minds of the mountain men when a disaster
of a different sort befell the division. In the Rat Valley east of Sleepy Cat the main line
springs between two ranges of hills with a dip and a long supported grade in each direction.
At the point of the dip there is a switch from which a spur runs to a granite quarry. The track
for two miles is straight and the switch-target and lights are seen easily from either direction
save at one particular moment of the day--a moment which is in the valley neither quite day
nor quite night. Even this disadvantage occurs to trains east-bound only, because due to unusual
circumstances. When the sun in a burst of dawning glory shows itself above the crest of the
eastern range an engineman, east-bound, may be so blinded by the rays streaming from the rising
sun that he cannot see the switch at the foot of the grade. For these few moments he is helpless
should anything be wrong with the quarry switch. Down this grade, a few weeks after the Smoky
Creek fire, came a double-headed stock train from the Short Line with forty cars of steers.
The switch stood open; this much was afterward abundantly proved. The train came down the grade
very fast to gain speed for the hill ahead of it. The head engineman, too late, saw the open
target. He applied the emergency air, threw his engine over, and whistled the alarm. The mightiest
efforts of a dozen engines would have been powerless to check the heavy train. On the quarry
track stood three flat cars loaded with granite blocks for the abutment of the new Smoky Creek
Bridge. On a sanded track, rolling at thirty miles an hour and screaming in the clutches of
the burning brakes, the heavy engines struck the switch like an avalanche, reared upon the
granite-laden flats, and with forty loads of cattle plunged into the canyon below; not a car
remained on the rails. The head brakeman, riding in the second cab, was instantly killed, and
the engine crews, who jumped, were badly hurt.

The whole operating department of the road was stirred. What made the affair more dreadful
was that it had occurred on the time of Number Six, the east-bound passenger train, held that
morning at Sleepy Cat by an engine failure. Glover came to look into the matter. The testimony
of all tended to one conclusion--that the quarry switch had been thrown at some time between
four-thirty and five o'clock that morning. Inferences were many: tramps during the early summer
had been unusually troublesome and many of them had been rigorously handled by trainmen; robbery
might have been a motive, as the express cars on train Number Six carried heavy specie shipments
from the coast.

Yet a means so horrible as well as so awkward and ineffective seemed unlike mountain outlaws.
Strange men from headquarters were on the ground as soon as they could reach the wreck, men
from the special-service department, and a stock inspector who greatly resembled Whispering
Smith was on the ground looking into the brands of the wrecked cattle. Glover was much in consultation
with him, and there were two or three of the division men, such as Anderson, Young, McCloud,
and Lee, who knew him but could answer no inquiries concerning his long stay at the wreck.

A third and more exciting event soon put the quarry wreck into the background. Ten days afterward
an east-bound passenger train was flagged in the night at Sugar Buttes, twelve miles west of
Sleepy Cat. When the heavy train slowed up, two men boarded the engine and with pistols compelled
the engineman to cut off the express cars and pull them to the water-tank a mile east of the
station. Three men there in waiting forced the express car, blew open the safe, and the gang
rode away half an hour later loaded with gold coin and currency.

Had a stick of dynamite been exploded under the Wickiup there could not have been more excitement
at Medicine Bend. Within three hours after the news reached the town a posse under Sheriff
Van Horn, with a carload of horseflesh and fourteen guns, was started for Sugar Buttes. The
trail led north and the pursuers rode until nearly nightfall. They crossed Dutch Flat and rode
single file into a wooded canyon, where they came upon traces of a camp-fire. Van Horn, leading,
jumped from his horse and thrust his hand into the ashes; they were still warm, and he shouted
to his men to ride up. As he called out, a rifle cracked from the box-elder trees ahead of
him. The sheriff fell, shot through the head, and a deputy springing from his saddle to pick
him up was shot in precisely the same way, through the head. The riderless horses bolted; the
posse, thrown into a panic, did not fire a shot, and for an hour dared not ride back for the
bodies. After dark they got the two dead men and at midnight rode with them into Sleepy Cat.

When the news reached McCloud he was talking with Bucks over the wires. Bucks had got into
headquarters at the river late that night, and was getting details from McCloud of the Sugar
Buttes robbery when the superintendent sent him the news of the killing of Van Horn and the
deputy. In the answer that Bucks sent came a name new to the wires of the mountain division
and rarely seen even in special correspondence, but Hughie Morrison, who took the message,
never forgot that name; indeed, it was soon to be thrown sharply into the spotlight of the
mountain railroad stage. Hughie repeated the message to get it letter-perfect; to handle stuff
at the Wickiup signed "J. S. B." was like handling diamonds on a jeweller's tongs or arteries
on a surgeon's hook; and, in truth, Bucks's words were the arteries and pulse-beat of the mountain
division. Hughie handed the message to McCloud and stood by while the superintendent read:

    Whispering Smith is due in Cheyenne to-morrow. Meet him at the
    Wickiup Sunday morning; he has full authority. I have told him
    to get these fellows, if it takes all the money in the
    treasury, and not to stop till he cleans them out of the Rocky
    Mountains. J. S. B.

CHAPTER XI

AT THE THREE HORSES

"Clean them out of the Rocky Mountains; that is a pretty good contract," mused the man in McCloud's
office on Sunday morning. He sat opposite McCloud in Bucks's old easy chair and held in his
hand Bucks's telegram. As he spoke he raised his eyebrows and settled back, but the unusual
depth of the chair and the shortness of his legs left his chin helpless in his black tie, so
that he was really no better off except that he had changed one position of discomfort for
another. "I wonder, now," he mused, sitting forward again as McCloud watched him, "I wonder--you
know, George, the Andes are, strictly speaking, a part of the great North American chain--whether
Bucks meant to include the South American ranges in that message?" and a look of mildly good-natured
anticipation overspread his face.

"Suppose you wire him and find out," suggested McCloud.

"No, George, no! Bucks never was accurate in geographical expressions. Besides, he is shifty
and would probably cover his tracks by telling me to report progress when I got to Panama."

A clerk opened the outer office door. "Mr. Dancing asks if he can see you, Mr. McCloud."

"Tell him I am busy."

Bill Dancing, close on the clerk's heels, spoke for himself. "I know it, Mr. McCloud, I know
it!" he interposed urgently, "but let me speak to you just a moment." Hat in hand, Bill, because
no one would knock him down to keep him out, pushed into the room. "I've got a plan," he urged,
"in regards to getting these hold-ups."

"How are you, Bill?" exclaimed the man in the easy chair, jumping hastily to his feet and shaking
Dancing's hand. Then quite as hastily he sat down, crossed his knees violently, stared at the
giant lineman, and exclaimed, "Let's have it!"

Dancing looked at him in silence and with some contempt. The trainmaster had broken in on the
superintendent for a moment and the two were conferring in an undertone. "What might your name
be, mister?" growled Dancing, addressing with some condescension the man in the easy chair.

The man waved his hand as if it were immaterial and answered with a single word: "Forgotten!"

"How's that?"

"Forgotten!"

"That's a blamed queer name----"

"On the contrary, it's a very common name and that is just the trouble: it's forgotten."

"What do you want, Bill?" demanded McCloud, turning to the lineman.

"Is this man all right?" asked Dancing, jerking his thumb toward the easy chair.

"I can't say; you'll have to ask him."

"I'll save you that trouble, Bill, by saying that if it's for the good of the division I am
all right. Death to its enemies, damme, say I. Now go on, William, and give us your plan in
regards to getting these hold-ups--yes."

Dancing looked from one man to the other, but McCloud appeared preoccupied and his visitor
seemed wholly serious. "I don't want to take too much on myself--" Bill began, speaking to McCloud.

"You look as if you could carry a fair-sized load, William, provided it bore the right label,"
suggested the visitor, entirely amiable.

"--But nobody has felt worse over this thing and recent things----"

"Recent things," echoed the easy chair.

"--happening to the division that I have. Now I know there's been trouble on the division----"

"I think you are putting it too strong there, Bill, but let it pass."

"--there's been differences; misunderstandings and differences. So I says to myself maybe something
might be done to get everybody together and bury the differences, like this: Murray Sinclair
is in town; he feels bad over this thing, like any railroad man would. He's a mountain man,
quick as the quickest with a gun, a good trailer, rides like a fiend, and can catch a streak
of sunshine travelling on a pass. Why not put him at the head of a party to run 'em down?"

"Run 'em down," nodded the stranger.

"Differences such as be or may be----"

"May be----"

"Being discussed when he brings 'em in dead or alive, and not before. That's what I said to
Murray Sinclair, and Murray Sinclair is ready for to take hold this minute and do what he can
if he's asked. I told him plain I could promise no promises; that, I says, lays with George
McCloud. Was I right, was I wrong? If I was wrong, right me; if I was right, say so. All I
want is harmony."

The new man nodded approval. "Bully, Bill!" he exclaimed heartily.

"Mister," protested the lineman, with simple dignity, "I'd just a little rather you wouldn't
bully me nor Bill me."

"All in good part, Bill, as you shall see; all in good part. Now before Mr. McCloud gives you
his decision I want to be allowed a word. Your idea looks good to me. At first I may say it
didn't. I am candid; I say it didn't. It looked like setting a dog to catch his own tail. Mind
you, I don't say it can't be done. A dog can catch his own tail; they do do it," proclaimed
the stranger in a low and emphatic undertone. "But," he added, moderating his utterance, "when
they succeed--who gets anything out of it but the dog?" Bill Dancing, somewhat clouded and
not deeming it well to be drawn into any damaging admissions, looked around for a cigar, and
not seeing one, looked solemnly at the new Solomon and stroked his beard. "That is how it looked
to me at first," concluded the orator; "but, I say now it looks good to me, and as a stranger
I may say I favor it."

Dancing tried to look unconcerned and seemed disposed to be friendly. "What might be your line
of business?"

"Real estate. I am from Chicago. I sold everything that was for sale in Chicago and came out
here to stake out the Spanish Sinks and the Great Salt Lake--yes. It's drying up and there's
an immense opportunity for claims along the shore. I've been looking into it."

"Into the claims or into the lake?" asked McCloud.

"Into both; and, Mr. McCloud, I want to say I favor Mr. Dancing's idea, that's all. Right wrongs
no man. Let Bill see Sinclair and see what they can figure out." And having spoken, the stranger
sank back and tried to look comfortable.

"I'll talk with you later about it, Bill," said McCloud briefly.

"Meantime, Bill, see Sinclair and report," suggested the stranger.

"It's as good as done," announced Dancing, taking up his hat, "and, Mr. McCloud, might I have
a little advance for cigars and things?"

"Cigars and ammunition--of course. See Sykes, William, see Sykes; if the office is closed go
to his house--and see what will happen to you--" added the visitor in an aside, "and tell him
to telephone up to Mr. McCloud for instruction," he concluded unceremoniously.

"Now why do you want to start Bill on a fool business like that?" asked McCloud, as Bill Dancing
took long steps from the room toward the office of Sykes, the cashier.

"He didn't know me to-day, but he will to-morrow," said the stranger reflectively. "Gods, what
I've seen that man go through in the days of the giants! Why, George, this will keep the boys
talking, and they have to do something. Spend the money; the company is making it too fast
anyway; they moved twenty-two thousand cars one day last week. Personally I'm glad to have
a little fun out of it; it will be hell pure and undefiled long before we get through. This
will be an easy way of letting Sinclair know I am here. Bill will report me confidentially
to him as a suspicious personage."

To the astonishment of Sykes, the superintendent confirmed over the telephone Dancing's statement
that he was to draw some expense money. Bill asked for twenty-five dollars. Sykes offered him
two, and Bill with some indignation accepted five. He spent all of this in trying to find Sinclair,
and on the strength of his story to the boys borrowed five dollars more to prosecute the search.
At ten o'clock that night he ran into Sinclair playing cards in the big room above the Three
Horses.

The Three Horses still rears its hospitable two-story front in Fort Street, the only one of
the Medicine Bend gambling houses that goes back to the days of '67; and it is the boast of
its owners that since the key was thrown away, thirty-nine years ago, its doors have never
been closed, night or day, except once for two hours during the funeral of Dave Hawk. Bill
Dancing drew Sinclair from his game and told him of the talk with McCloud, touching it up with
natural enthusiasm. The bridgeman took the news in high good humor and slapped Dancing on the
back. "Did you see him alone, Bill?" asked Sinclair, with interest. "Come over here, come along.
I want you to meet a good friend. Here, Harvey, shake hands with Bill Dancing. Bill, this is
old Harvey Du Sang, meanest man in the mountains to his enemies and the whitest to his friends--eh,
Harvey?"

Harvey seemed uncommunicative. Studying his hand, he asked in a sour way whether it was a jackpot,
and upon being told that it was not, pushed forward some chips and looked stupidly up--though
Harvey was by no means stupid. "Proud to know you, sir," said Bill, bending frankly as he put
out his hand. "Proud to know any friend of Murray Sinclair's. What might be your business?"

Again Du Sang appeared abstracted. He looked up at the giant lineman, who, in spite of his
own size and strength, could have crushed him between his fingers, and hitched his chair a
little, but got no further toward an answer and paid no attention whatever to Bill's extended hand.

"Cow business, Bill," interposed Sinclair. "Where? Why, up near the park, Bill, up near the
park. Bill is an old friend of mine, Harvey. Shake hands with George Seagrue, Bill, and you
know Henry Karg--and old Stormy Gorman--well, I guess you know him too," exclaimed Sinclair,
introducing the other players. "Look here a minute, Harvey."

Harvey, much against his inclination, was drawn from the table and retired with Sinclair and
Dancing to an empty corner, where Dancing told his story again. At the conclusion of it Harvey
rather snorted. Sinclair asked questions. "Was anybody else there when you saw McCloud, Bill?"

"One man," answered Bill impressively.

"Who?"

"A stranger to me."

"A stranger? What did he look like?"

"Slender man and kind of odd talking, with a sandy mustache."

"Hear his name?"

"He told me his name, but it's skipped me, I declare. He's kind of dark-complected like."

"Stranger, eh?" mused Du Sang; his eyes were wandering over the room.

"Slender man," repeated Bill, "but I didn't take much notice of him. Said he was in the real-estate
business."

"In the real-estate business? And did he sit there while you talked this over with the college
guy?" muttered Du Sang.

"He is all right, boys, and he said you'd know his name if I could speak it," declared Bill.

"Look anything like that man standing with his hands in his pockets over there by the wheel?"
asked Du Sang, turning his back carefully on a new-comer as he made the suggestion.

"Where--there? No! Yes, hold on, that's the man there now! Hold on, now!" urged Bill, struggling
with the excitement of ten hours and ten dollars all in one day. "His name sounded like Fogarty."

As Dancing spoke, Sinclair's eyes riveted on the new face at the other side of the gambling-room.
"Fogarty, hell!" he exclaimed, starting. "Stand right still, Du Sang; don't look around. That
man is Whispering Smith."

CHAPTER XII

PARLEY

It was recalled one evening not long ago at the Wickiup that the affair with Sinclair had all
taken place within a period of two years, and that practically all of the actors in the event
had been together and in friendly relation on a Thanksgiving Day at the Dunning ranch not so
very long before the trouble began. Dicksie Dunning was away at school at the time, and Lance
Dunning was celebrating with a riding and shooting fest and a barbecue.

The whole country had been invited. Bucks was in the mountains on an inspection trip, and Bill
Dancing drove him with a party of railroad men over from Medicine Bend. The mountain men for
a hundred and fifty miles around were out. Gene and Bob Johnson, from Oroville and the Peace
River, had come with their friends. From Williams Cache there was not only a big delegation--more
of one than was really desirable--but it was led by old John Rebstock himself. When the invitation
is general, lines cannot be too closely drawn. Not only was Lance Dunning something of a sport
himself, but on the Long Range it is part of a stockman's creed to be on good terms with his
neighbors. At a Thanksgiving Day barbecue not even a mountain sheriff would ask questions,
and Ed Banks, though present, respected the holiday truce. Cowboys rode that day in the roping
contest who were from Mission Creek and from Two Feather River.

Among the railroad people were George McCloud, Anderson, the assistant superintendent, Farrell
Kennedy, chief of the special service, and his right-hand man, Bob Scott. In especial, Sinclair's
presence at the barbecue was recalled. He had some cronies with him from among his up-country
following, and was introducing his new bridge foreman, Karg, afterward known as Flat Nose,
and George Seagrue, the Montana cowboy. Sinclair fraternized that day with the Williams Cache
men, and it was remarked even then that though a railroad man he appeared somewhat outside
the railroad circle. When the shooting matches were announced a brown-eyed railroad man was
asked to enter. He had been out of the mountains for some time and was a comparative stranger
in the gathering, but the Williams Cache men had not forgotten him; Rebstock, especially, wanted
to see him shoot. While much of the time out of the mountains on railroad business, he was
known to be closely in Bucks's counsels, and as to the mountains themselves, he was reputed
to know them better than Bucks or Glover himself knew them. This was Whispering Smith; but,
beyond a low-voiced greeting or an expression of surprise at meeting an old acquaintance, he
avoided talk. When urged to shoot he resisted all persuasion and backed up his refusal by showing
a bruise on his trigger finger. He declined even to act as judge in the contest, suggesting
the sheriff, Ed Banks, for that office.

The rifle matches were held in the hills above the ranch-house, and in the contest between
the ranches, for which a sweepstakes had been arranged, Sinclair entered Seagrue, who was then
working for him. Seagrue shot all the morning and steadily held up the credit of the Frenchman
Valley Ranch against the field. Neither continued shooting nor severe tests availed to upset
Sinclair's entry, and riding back after the matches with the prize purse in his pocket, Seagrue,
who was tall, light-haired, and perfectly built, made a new honor for himself on a dare from
Stormy Gorman, the foreman of the Dunning ranch. Gorman, who had ridden a race back with Sinclair,
was at the foot of the long hill, down which the crowd was riding, when he stopped, yelled
back at Seagrue, and, swinging his hat from his head, laid it on a sloping rock beside the trail.

"You'd better not do that, Stormy," said Sinclair. "Seagrue will put a hole through it."

Gorman laughed jealously. "If he can hit it, let him hit it."

At the top of the hill Seagrue had dismounted and was making ready to shoot. Whispering Smith,
at his side, had halted with the party, and the cowboy knelt to adjust his sights. On his knee
he turned to Whispering Smith, whom he seemed to know, with an abrupt question: "How far do
you call it?"

The answer was made without hesitation: "Give it seven hundred and fifty yards, Seagrue."

The cowboy made ready, brought his rifle to his shoulder, and fired. The slug passed through
the crown of the hat, and a shower of splinters flying back from the rock blew the felt into
a sieve. Gorman's curiosity, as well as that of everybody else, seemed satisfied, and, gaining
the level ground, the party broke into a helter-skelter race for the revolver-shooting.

In this Sinclair himself had entered, and after the early matches found only one troublesome
contestant--Du Sang from the Cache, who was present under Rebstock's wing. After Sinclair and
Du Sang had tied in test after test at shooting out of the saddle, Whispering Smith, who lost
sight of nothing in the gun-play, called for a pack of cards, stripped the aces from the deck,
and had a little conference with the judge. The two contestants, Sinclair and Du Sang, were
ordered back thirty-five paces on their horses, and the railroad man, walking over to the targets,
held out between the thumb and forefinger of his left hand the ace of clubs. The man that should
first spot the pip out of the card was to take the prize, a Cheyenne saddle. Sinclair shot,
and his horse, perfectly trained, stood like a statue. The card flew from Smith's hand, but
the bullet had struck the ace almost an inch above the pip, and a second ace was held out for
Du Sang. As he raised his gun his horse moved. He spurred angrily, circled quickly about, halted,
and instantly fired. It was not alone that his bullet cut the shoulder of the club pip on the
card: the whole movement, beginning with the circling dash of the horse under the spur, the
sudden halt, and the instantly accurate aim, raised a quick, approving yell for the new-comer.
The signal was given for Sinclair, and a third ace went up. In the silence Sinclair, with deliberate
care, brought his gun down on the card, fired, and cut the pip cleanly from the white field.
Du Sang was urged to shoot again, but his horse annoyed him and he would not.

With a little speech the prize was given by Ed Banks to Sinclair. "Here's hoping your gun will
never be trained on me, Murray," smiled the modest sheriff.

Sinclair responded in high humor. He had every reason to feel good. His horses had won the
running races, and his crowd had the honors with the guns. He turned on Du Sang, who sat close
by in the circle of horsemen, and, holding the big prize out toward him on his knee, asked
him to accept it. "It's yours by rights anyway, Du Sang," declared Sinclair. "You're a whole
lot better shot than I am, every turn of the road. You've shot all day from a nervous horse."

Not only would Sinclair not allow a refusal of his gift, but, to make his generosity worth
while, he dispatched Flat Nose to the corral, and the foreman rode back leading the pony that
had won the half-mile dash. Sinclair cinched the prize saddle on the colt with his own hands,
led the beast to Du Sang, placed the bridle in his hand, and bowed. "From a jay to a marksman,"
he said, saluting.

Du Sang, greatly embarrassed by the affair--he had curious pink eyes--blinked and got away
to the stables. When Rebstock joined him the Williams Cache party were saddling to go home.
Du Sang made no reference to his gift horse and saddle, but spoke of the man that had held
the target aces. "He must be a sucker!" declared Du Sang, with an oath. "I wouldn't do that
for any man on top of ground. Who is he?"

"That man?" wheezed Rebstock. "Never have no dealings with him. He plays 'most any kind of
a game. He's always ready to play, and holds aces most of the time. Don't you remember my telling
about the man that got Chuck Williams and hauled him out of the Cache on a buckboard? That's
the man. Here, he give me this for you; it's your card." Rebstock handed Du Sang the target
ace of clubs. "Why didn't you thank Murray Sinclair, you mule?"

Du Sang, whose eyelashes were white, blinked at the hole through the card, and looked around
as he rode back across the field for the man that had held it; but Whispering Smith had disappeared.

He was at that moment walking past the barbecue pit with George McCloud. "Rebstock talks a
great deal about your shooting, Gordon," said McCloud to his companion.

"He and I once had a little private match of our own. It was on the Peace River, over a bunch
of steers. Since then we have got along very well, though he has an exaggerated opinion of
my ability. Rebstock's worst failing is his eyesight. It bothers him in seeing brands. He's
liable to brand a critter half a dozen times. That albino, Du Sang, is a queer duck. Sinclair
gave him a fine horse. There they go." The Cache riders were running their horses and whooping
across the creek. "What a hand a State's prison warden at Fort City could draw out of that
crowd, George!" continued McCloud's companion. "If the right man should get busy with that
bunch of horses Sinclair has got together, and organize those up-country fellows for mischief,
wouldn't it make things hum on the mountain division for a while?"

McCloud did not meet the host, Lance Dunning, that day, nor since the day of the barbecue had
Du Sang or Sinclair seen Whispering Smith until the night Du Sang spotted him near the wheel
in the Three Horses. Du Sang at once drew out of his game and left the room. Sinclair in the
meantime had undertaken a quarrelsome interview with Whispering Smith.

"I supposed you knew I was here," said Smith to him amiably. "Of course I don't travel in a
private car or carry a bill-board on my back, but I haven't been hiding."

"The last time we talked," returned Sinclair, measuring words carefully, "you were going to
stay out of the mountains."

"I should have been glad to, Murray. Affairs are in such shape on the division now that somebody
had to come, so they sent for me."

The two men were sitting at a table. Whispering Smith was cutting and leisurely mixing a pack
of cards.

"Well, so far as I'm concerned, I'm out of it," Sinclair went on after a pause, "but, however
that may be, if you're back here looking for trouble there's no reason, I guess, why you can't
find it."

"That's not it. I'm not here looking for trouble; I'm here to fix this thing up. What do you want?"

"Not a thing."

"I'm willing to do anything fair and right," declared Whispering Smith, raising his voice a
little above the hum of the rooms.

"Fair and right is an old song."

"And a good one to sing in this country just now. I'll do anything I can to adjust any grievance,
Murray. What do you want?"

Sinclair for a moment was silent, and his answer made plain his unwillingness to speak at all.
"There never would have been a grievance if I'd been treated like a white man." His eyes burned
sullenly. "I've been treated like a dog."

"That is not it."

"That is it," declared Sinclair savagely, "and they'll find it's it."

"Murray, I want to say only this--only this to make things clear. Bucks feels that he's been
treated worse than a dog."

"Then let him put me back where I belong."

"It's a little late for that, Murray; a little late," said Smith gently. "Shouldn't you rather
take good money and get off the division? Mind you, I say good money, Murray--and peace."

Sinclair answered without the slightest hesitation: "Not while that man McCloud is here."

Whispering Smith smiled. "I've got no authority to kill McCloud."

"There are plenty of men in the mountains that don't need any."

"But let's start fair," urged Whispering Smith softly. He leaned forward with one finger extended
in confidence. "Don't let us have any misunderstanding on the start. Let McCloud alone. If
he is killed--now I'm speaking fair and open and making no threats, but I know how it will
come out--there will be nothing but killing here for six months. We will make just that memorandum
on McCloud. Now about the main question. Every sensible man in the world wants something."

"I know men that have been going a long time without what they wanted."

Smith flushed and nodded. "You needn't have said that, but no matter. Every sensible man wants
something Murray. This is a big country. There's a World's Fair running somewhere all the time
in it. Why not travel a little? What do you want?"

"I want my job, or I want a new superintendent here."

"Just exactly the two things, and, by heavens! the only two, I can't manage. Come once more
and I'll meet you."

"No!" Sinclair rose to his feet. "No--damn your money! This is my home. The high country is
my country; it's where my friends are."

"It's filled with your friends; I know that. But don't put your trust in your friends. They
will stay by you, I know; but once in a long while there will be a false friend, Murray, one
that will sell you--remember that."

"I stay."

Whispering Smith looked up in admiration. "I know you're game. It isn't necessary for me to
say that to you. But think of the fight you are going into against this company. You can worry
them; you've done it. But a bronco might as well try to buck a locomotive as for one man or
six or six hundred to win out in the way you are playing."

"I will look out for my friends; others--" Sinclair hitched his belt and paused, but Whispering
Smith, cutting and running the cards, gave no heed. His eyes were fixed on the green cloth
under his fingers. "Others--" repeated Sinclair.

"Others?" echoed Whispering Smith good-naturedly.

"May look out for themselves."

"Of course, of course! Well, if this is the end of it, I'm sorry."

"You will be sorry if you mix in a quarrel that is none of yours."

"Why, Murray, I never had a quarrel with a man in my life."

"You are pretty smooth, but you can't drive me out of this country. I know how well you'd like
to do it; and, take notice, there's one trail you can't cross even if you stay here. I suppose
you understand that."

Smith felt his heart leap. He sat in his chair turning the pack slowly, but with only one hand
now; the other hand was free. Sinclair eyed him sidewise. Smith moistened his lips and when
he replied spoke slowly: "There is no need of dragging any allusion to her into it. For that
matter, I told Bucks he should have sent any man but me. If I'm in the way, Sinclair, if my
presence here is all that stands in the way, I'll go back and stay back as before, and send
any one else you like or Bucks likes. Are you willing to say that I stand in the way of a settlement?"

Sinclair sat down and put his hands on the table. "No; your matter and mine is another affair.
All I want between you and me is fair and right."

Whispering Smith's eyes were on the cards. "You've always had it."

"Then keep away from her."

"Don't tell me what to do."

"Then don't tell me."

"I'm not telling you. You will do as you please; so will I. I left here because Marion asked
me to. I am here now because I have been sent here. It is in the course of my business. I have
my living to earn and my friends to protect. Don't dictate to me, because it would be of no use."

"Well, you know now how to get into trouble."

"Every one knows that; few know how to keep out."

"You can't lay your finger on me at any turn of the road."

"Not if you behave yourself."

"And you can't bully me."

"Surely not. No hard feelings, Murray. I came for a friendly talk, and if it's all the same
to you I'll watch this wheel awhile and then go over to the Wickiup. I leave first--that's
understood, I hope--and if your pink-eyed friend is waiting outside tell him there is nothing
doing, will you, Murray? Who is the albino, by the way? You don't know him? I think I do. Fort
City, if I remember. Well, good-night, Murray."

It was after twelve o'clock and the room had filled up. Roulette-balls were dropping, and above
the faro-table the extra lights were on. The dealers, fresh from supper, were putting things
in order for the long trick.

At the Wickiup Whispering Smith found McCloud in the office signing letters. "I can do nothing
with him," said Smith, drawing down a window-shade before he seated himself to detail his talk
with Sinclair. "He wants a fight."

McCloud put down his pen. "If I am the disturber it would be better for me to get out."

"That would be hauling down the flag across the whole division. It is too late for that. If
he didn't centre the fight on you he would centre it somewhere else. The whole question is,
who is going to run this division, Sinclair and his gang or the company? and it is as easy
to meet them on one point as another. I know of no way of making this kind of an affair pleasant.
I am going to do some riding, as I told you. Kennedy is working up through the Deep Creek country,
and has three men with him. I shall ride toward the Cache and meet him somewhere near South
Mission Pass."

"Gordon, would it do any good to ask a few questions?"

"Ask as many as you like, my dear boy, but don't be disappointed if I can't answer them. I
can look wise, but I don't know anything. You know what we are up against. This fellow has
grown a tiger among the wolves, and he has turned the pack loose on us. One thing I ask you
to do. Don't expose yourself at night. Your life isn't worth a coupling-pin if you do."

McCloud raised his hand. "Take care of yourself. If you are murdered in this fight I shall
know I got you in and that I am to blame."

"And suppose you were?" Smith had risen from his chair. He had few mannerisms, and recalling
the man the few times I have seen him, the only impression he has left on me is that of quiet
and gentleness. "Suppose you were?" He was resting one arm on top of McCloud's desk. "What
of it? You have done for me up here what I couldn't do, George. You have been kind to Marion
when she hadn't a friend near. You have stood between him and her when I couldn't be here to
do it, and when she didn't want me to--helped her when I hadn't the privilege of doing it."
McCloud put up his hand in protest, but it was unheeded. "How many times it has been in my
heart to kill that man. She knows it; she prays it may never happen. That is why she stays
here and has kept me out of the mountains. She says they would talk about her if I lived in
the same town, and I have stayed away." He threw himself back into the chair. "It's going beyond
both of us now. I've kept the promise I made to her to-day to do all in my power to settle
this thing without bloodshed. It will not be settled in that way, George."

"Was he at Sugar Buttes?"

"If not, his gang was there. The quick get-away, the short turn on Van Horn, killing two men
to rattle the posse--it all bears Sinclair's ear-marks. He has gone too far. He has piled up
plunder till he is reckless. He is crazy with greed and insane with revenge. He thinks he can
gallop over this division and scare Bucks till he gets down on his knees to him. Bucks will
never do it. I know him, and I tell you Bucks will never do it. He is like that man in Washington:
he will fight it to the death. He would fight Sinclair if he had to come up here and meet him
single-handed, but, he will never have to do it. He put you here, George, to round that man
up. This is the price for your advancement, and you must pay it."

"It is all right for me to pay it, but I don't want you to pay it. Will you have a care for
yourself, Gordon?"

"Will you?"

"Yes."

"You need never ask me to be careful," Smith went on. "That is my business. I asked you to
watch your window-shades at night, and when I came in just now I found one up. It is you who
are likely to forget, and in this kind of a game a man never forgets but once. I'll lie down
on the Lincoln lounge, George."

"Get into the bed."

"No; I like the lounge, and I'm off early."

In the private room of the superintendent, provided as a sleeping apartment in the old headquarters
building many years before hotel facilities reached Medicine Bend, stood the only curio the
Wickiup possessed--the Lincoln lounge. When the car that carried the remains of Abraham Lincoln
from Washington to Springfield was dismantled, the Wickiup fell heir to one piece of its elaborate
furnishings, the lounge, and the lounge still remains as an early-day relic. Whispering Smith
walked into the bedroom and disposed himself in an incredibly short time. "I've borrowed one
of your pillows, George," he called out presently.

"Take both."

"One's enough. I hope," he went on, rolling himself like a hen into the double blanket, "the
horse Kennedy has left me will be all right; he got three from Bill Dancing. Bill Dancing,"
he snorted, driving his nose into the pillow as if in final memorandum for the night, "he will
get himself killed if he fools around Sinclair too much now."

McCloud, under a light shaded above his desk, opened a roll of blue-prints. He was going to
follow a construction gang up the Crawling Stone in the morning and wanted to look over the
surveys. Whispering Smith, breathing regularly, lay not far away. It was late when McCloud
put away his maps, entered the inner room, and looked at his friend.

He lay like a boy asleep. On the chair beside his head he had placed his old-fashioned hunting-case
watch, as big as an alarm-clock, the kind a railroad man would wind up with a spike-maul. Beside
the watch he had laid his huge revolver in its worn leather scabbard. Breathing peacefully,
he lay quite at his companion's mercy, and McCloud, looking down on this man who never made
a mistake, never forgot a danger, and never took an unnecessary chance, thought of what between
men confidence may sometimes mean. He sat a moment with folded arms on the side of his bed,
studying the tired face, defenceless in the slumber of fatigue. When he turned out the light
and lay down, he wondered whether, somewhere in the valley of the great river to which he was
to take his men in the morning, he should encounter the slight and reckless horsewoman who
had blazed so in anger when he stood before her at Marion's. He had struggled against her charm
too long. She had become, how or when he could not tell, not alone a pretty woman but a fascinating
one--the creature of his constant thought. Already she meant more to him than all else in the
world. He well knew that if called on to choose between Dicksie and all else he could only
choose her. But as he drew together the curtains of thought and sleep stole in upon him, he
was resolved first to have Dicksie; to have all else if he could, but, in any case, Dicksie
Dunning. When he awoke day was breaking in the mountains. The huge silver watch, the low-voiced
man, and the formidable six-shooter had disappeared. It was time to get up, and Marion Sinclair
had promised an early breakfast.

CHAPTER XIII

THE TURN IN THE STORM

The beginning of the Crawling Stone Line marked the first determined effort under President
Bucks, while undertaking the reconstruction of the system for through traffic, to develop the
rich local territory tributary to the mountain division. New policies in construction dated
from the same period. Glover, with an enormous capital staked for the new undertakings, gave
orders to push the building every month in the year, and for the first time in mountain railroad-building
winter was to be ignored. The older mountain men met the innovation as they met any departure
from their traditions, with curiosity and distrust. On the other hand, the new and younger
blood took hold with confidence, and when Glover called, "Yo, heave ho!" at headquarters, they
bent themselves clear across the system for a hard pull together.

McCloud, resting the operating on the shoulders of his assistant Anderson, devoted himself
wholly to forwarding the construction plans, and his first clash over winter road-building
in the Rockies came with his own right-hand man, Mears. McCloud put in a switch below Piedmont,
opened a material-yard, and began track-laying toward the lower Crawling Stone Valley, when
Mears said it was time to stop work till spring. When McCloud told him he wanted track across
the divide and into the lower valley by spring, Mears threw up his hands. But there was metal
in the old man, and he was for orders all the time. He kept up a running fire of protests and
forebodings about the danger of exposing men during the winter season, but stuck to his post.
Glover sent along the men, and although two out of every three deserted the day after they
arrived, Mears kept a force in hand, and crowded the track up the new grade as fast as the
ties and steel came in, working day in and day out with one eye on the clouds and one on the
tie-line and hoping every day for orders to stop.

December slipped away to Christmas with the steel still going down and the disaffected element
among the railroad men at Medicine Bend waiting for disaster. The spectacle of McCloud handling
a flying column on the Crawling Stone work in the face of the most treacherous weather in the
mountain year was one that brought out constant criticism of him among Sinclair's sympathizers
and friends, and while McCloud laughed and pushed ahead on the work, they waited only for his
discomfiture. Christmas Day found McCloud at the front, with men still very scarce, but Mears's
gang at work and laying steel. The work train was in charge of Stevens, the freight conductor,
who had been set back after the Smoky Creek wreck and was slowly climbing back to position.
They were working in the usual way, with the flat cars ahead pushed by the engine, the caboose
coupled to the tender being on the extreme hind end of the train.

At two o'clock on Christmas afternoon, when there was not a cloud in the sky, the horizon thickened
in the east. Within thirty minutes the mountains from end to end of the sky-line were lost
in the sweep of a coming wind, and at three o'clock snow struck the valley like a pall. Mears,
greatly disturbed, ordered the men off the grade and into the caboose. McCloud had been inspecting
culverts ahead, and had started for the train when the snow drove across the valley. It blotted
the landscape from sight so fast that he was glad after an anxious five minutes to regain the
ties and find himself safely with his men.

But when McCloud came in the men were bordering on a panic. Mears, with his two foremen, had
gone ahead to hunt McCloud up, and had passed him in the storm; it was already impossible to
see, or to hear an ordinary sound ten yards away. McCloud ordered the flat cars cut off the
train and the engine whistle sounded at short intervals, and, taking Stevens, buttoned his
reefer and started up the grade after the three trackmen. They fired their revolvers as they
went on, but the storm tossed their signals on the ears of Mears and his companions from every
quarter of the compass. McCloud was standing on the last tie and planning with his companion
how best to keep the grade as the two advanced, when the engine signals suddenly changed. "Now
that sounds like one of Bill Dancing's games," said McCloud to his companion. "What the deuce
is it, Stevens?"

Stevens, who knew a little of everything, recognized the signals in an instant and threw up
his hands. "It's Morse code, Mr. McCloud, and they are in--Mears and the foremen--and us for
the train as quick as the Lord will let us; that's what they're whistling."

"So much for an education, Stevens. Bully for you! Come on!"

They regained the flat cars and made their way back to the caboose and engine, which stood
uncoupled. McCloud got into the cab with Dancing and Stevens. Mears, from the caboose ahead,
signalled all in, and, with a whistling scream, the engine started to back the caboose to Piedmont.
They had hardly more than got under full headway when a difficulty became apparent to the little
group around the superintendent. They were riding an unballasted track and using such speed
as they dared to escape from a situation that had become perilous. But the light caboose, packed
like a sardine-box with men, was dancing a hornpipe on the rail-joints. McCloud felt the peril,
and the lurching of the car could be seen in the jerk of the engine tender to which it was
coupled. Apprehensive, he crawled back on the coal to watch the caboose himself, and stayed
long enough to see that the rapidly drifting snow threatened to derail the outfit any minute.
He got back to the cab and ordered a stop. "This won't do!" said he to Stevens and the engineman.
"We can't back that caboose loaded with men through this storm. We shall be off the track in
five minutes."

"Try it slow," suggested Stevens.

"If we had the time," returned McCloud; "but the snow is drifting on us. We've got to make
a run for it if we ever get back, and we must have the engine in front of that way car with
her pilot headed for the drifts. Let's look at things."

Dancing and Stevens, followed by McCloud, dropped out of the gangway. Mears opened the caboose
door and the four men went forward to inspect the track and the trucks. In the lee of the caboose
a council was held. The roar of the wind was like the surge of many waters, and the snow had
whitened into storm. They were ten miles from a habitation, and, but for the single track they
were travelling, might as well have been a hundred miles so far as reaching a place of safety
was concerned. They were without food, with a caboose packed with men on their hands, and they
realized that their supply of fuel for either engine or caboose was perilously slender.

"Get your men ready with their tools, Pat," said McCloud to Mears.

"What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to turn the train around and put the nose of the engine into it."

"Turn the train around--why, yes, that would make it easy. I'd be glad to see it turned around.
But where's your turntable, Mr. McCloud?" asked Mears.

"How are you going to turn your train around on a single track?" asked Stevens darkly.

"I'm going to turn the track around. I know about where we are, I think. There's a little stretch
just beyond this curve where the grade is flush with the ground. Ask your engineman to run
back very slowly and watch for the bell-rope. I'll ride on the front platform of the caboose
till we get to where we want to go to work. Lose no time, Pat; tell your men it's now or never.
If we are caught here we may stay till they carry us home, and the success of this little game
depends on having everything ready and working quick."

Stevens, who stayed close to McCloud, pulled the cord within five minutes, and before the caboose
had stopped the men were tumbling out of it. McCloud led Mears and his foreman up the track.
They tramped a hundred yards back and forth, and, with steel tapes for safety lines, swung
a hundred feet out on each side of the track to make sure of the ground. "This will do," announced
McCloud; "you waited here half a day for steel a week ago; I know the ground. Break that joint,
Pat." He pointed to the rail under his foot. "Pass ahead with the engine and car about a thousand
feet," he said to the conductor, "and when I give you a signal back up slow and look out for
a thirty-degree curve--without any elevation, either. Get out all your men with lining-bars."

The engine and caboose faded in the blur of the blizzard as the break was made in the track.
"Take those bars and divide your men into batches of ten with foremen that can make signs,
if they can't talk English," directed McCloud. "Work lively now, and throw this track to the
south!"

Pretty much everybody--Japs, Italians, and Greeks--understood the game they were playing. McCloud
said afterward he would match his Piedmont hundred in making a movable Y against any two hundred
experts Glover could pick; they had had the experience, he added, when the move meant their
last counter in the game of mountain life or death. The Piedmont "hundred," to McCloud's mind,
were after that day past masters in the art of track-shifting. Working in a driving cloud of
grit and snow, the ignorant, the dull, and the slow rose to the occasion. Bill Dancing, Pat
Mears and his foreman, and Stevens moved about in the driving snow like giants. The howling
storm rang with the shouting of the foremen, the guttural cries of the Japs, and the clank
of the lining-bars as rail-length after rail-length of the heavy track was slued bodily from
the grade alignment and swung around in a short curve to a right angle out on the open ground.

McCloud at last gave the awaited signal, and, with keen-eyed, anxious men watching every revolution
of the cautious driving-wheels, the engine, hissing and pausing as the air-brakes went off
and on, pushed the light caboose slowly out on the rough spur to its extreme end and stopped
with the pilot facing the main track at right angles; but before it had reached its halting-place
spike-mauls were ringing at the fish-plates where a moment before it had left the line on the
curve. The track at that point was cut again, and under a long line of bars and a renewed shouting
it was thrown gradually quite across the long gap in the main line, and the new joints in a
very rough curve were made fast just as the engine, running now with its pilot ahead, steamed
slowly around the new curve and without accident regained the regular grade. It was greeted
by a screeching yell as the men climbed into the caboose, for the engine stood safely headed
into the teeth of the storm for Piedmont. The ten miles to cover were now a matter of less
than thirty minutes, and the construction train drew into the Piedmont yards just as the telegraph
wires were heating from headquarters with orders annulling freights, ordering ploughs on outgoing
engines, and battening the division hatches for a grapple with a Christmas blizzard.

No man came back better pleased than Stevens. "That man is all right," said he to Mears, nodding
his head toward McCloud, as they walked up from the caboose. "That's all I want to say. Some
of these fellows have been a little shy about going out with him; they've hounded me for months
about stepping over his way when Sinclair and his mugs struck. I reckon I played my hand about
right."

CHAPTER XIV

THE QUARREL

Spring found the construction of the valley line well advanced, and the grades nearing the
lands of the Dunning ranch. Right-of-way men had been working for months with Lance Dunning,
over the line, and McCloud had been called frequently into consultation to adjust the surveys
to objections raised by Dicksie's cousin to the crossing of the ranch lands. Even when the
proceedings had been closed, a strong current of discontent set from the managing head of the
Stone Ranch. Rumors of Lance Dunning's dissatisfaction often reached the railroad people. Vague
talk of an extensive irrigation scheme planned by Sinclair for the Crawling Stone Valley crept
into the newspapers, and it was generally understood that Lance Dunning had expressed himself
favorably to the enterprise.

Dicksie gave slight heed to matters as weighty as these. She spent much of her time on horseback,
with Jim under the saddle; and in Medicine Bend, where she rode with frequency, Marion's shop
became her favorite abiding-place. Dicksie ordered hats until Marion's conscience rose and
she practically refused to supply any more. But the spirited controversy on this point, as
on many others--Dicksie's haughtiness and Marion's restraint, quite unmoved by any show of
displeasure--ended always in drawing the two closer to each other.

At home Dicksie's fancies at that time ran to chickens, and crate after crate of thoroughbreds
and clutch after clutch of eggs were brought over the pass from far-away countries. But the
coyotes stole the chickens and kept the hens in such a state of excitement that they could
not be got to sit effectively. Nest after nest Dicksie had the mortification of seeing deserted
at critical moments and left to furred prowlers of the foothills and canyons. Once she had
managed to shoot a particularly bold coyote, only to be overcome with remorse at seeing its
death-struggle. She gained reputation with her cousin and the men, but was ever afterward assailed
with the reflection that the poor fellow might have been providing for a hungry family. Housekeeping
cares rested lightly on Dicksie. Puss had charge of the house, and her mistress concerned herself
more with the setting of Jim's shoes than with the dust on the elk heads over the fireplace
in the dining-room. Her Medicine Bend horseshoer stood in much greater awe of her than Puss
did, because if he ever left a mistake on Jim's heels Dicksie could, and would, point it coldly
out.

One March afternoon, coming home from Medicine Bend, she saw at some distance before her a
party of men on horseback. She was riding a trail leading from the pass road that followed
the hills, and the party was coming up the bridge road from the lower ranch. Dicksie had good
eyes, and something unusual in the riding of the men was soon apparent to her. Losing and regaining
sight of them at different turns in the trail, she made out, as she rode among the trees, that
they were cowboys of her own ranch, and riding, under evident excitement, about a strange horseman.
She recognized in the escort Stormy Gorman, the ferocious foreman of the ranch, and Denison
and Jim Baugh, two of the most reckless of the men. These three carried rifles slung across
their pommels, and in front of them rode the stranger.

Fragments of the breakfast-table talk of the morning came back to Dicksie's mind. The railroad
graders were in the valley below the ranch, and she had heard her cousin say a good deal on
a point she cared little about, as to where the railroad should cross the Stone Ranch. Approaching
the fork of the two roads toward which she and the cowboys were riding, she checked her horse
in the shade of a cottonwood tree, and as the party rode up the draw she saw the horseman under
surveillance. It was George McCloud.

Unluckily, as she caught a glimpse of him she was conscious that he was looking at her. She
bent forward to hide a momentary confusion, spoke briskly to her horse, and rode out of sight.
At Marion's she had carefully avoided him. Her precipitancy at their last meeting had seemed,
on reflection, unfortunate. She felt that she must have appeared to him shockingly rude, and
there was in her recalling of the scene an unconfessed impression that she had been to blame.
Often when Marion spoke of him, which she did without the slightest reserve and with no reference
as to whether Dicksie liked it or not, it had been in Dicksie's mind to bring up the subject
of the disagreeable scene, hoping that Marion would suggest a way for making some kind of unembarrassing
amends. But such opportunities had slipped away unimproved, and here was the new railroad superintendent,
whom their bluff neighbor Sinclair never referred to other than as the college guy, being brought
apparently as a prisoner to the Stone Ranch.

Busied with her thoughts, Dicksie rode slowly along the upper trails until a long détour brought
her around the corrals and in at the back of the house. Throwing her lines to the ground, she
alighted and through the back porch door made her way unobserved to her room. From the office
across the big hall she heard men's voices in dispute, and she slipped into the dining-room,
where she could hear and might see without being seen. The office was filled with cowboys.
Lance Dunning, standing with a cigar in his hand and one leg thrown over a corner of the table,
was facing McCloud, who stood before him with his hand on a chair. Lance was speaking as Dicksie
looked into the room, and in curt tones: "My men were acting under my orders."

"You have no right to give such orders," McCloud said distinctly, "nor to detain me, nor to
obstruct our free passage along the right of way you have agreed to convey to us under our survey."

"Damn your survey! I never had a plat of any such survey. I don't recognize any such survey.
And if your right-of-way men had ever said a word about crossing the creek above the flume
I never would have given you a right of way at all."

"There were never but two lines run below the creek; after you raised objection I ran them
both, and both were above the flume."

"Well, you can't put a grade there. I and some of my neighbors are going to dam up that basin,
and the irrigation laws will protect our rights."

"I certainly can't put a grade in below the flume, and you refuse to talk about our crossing
above it."

"I certainly do."

"Why not let us cross where we are, and run a new level for your ditch that will put the flume
higher up?"

"You will have to cross below the flume where it stands, or you won't cross the ranch at all."

McCloud was silent for a moment. "I am using a supported grade there for eight miles to get
over the hill within a three-tenths limit. I can't drop back there. We might as well not build
at all if we can't hold our grade, whereas it would be very simple to run a new line for your
ditch, and my engineers will do it for you without a dollar of expense to you, Mr. Dunning."

Lance Dunning waved his hand as an ultimatum. "Cross where I tell you to cross, or keep off
the Stone Ranch. Is that English?"

"It certainly is. But in matter of fact we must cross on the survey agreed on in the contract
for a right-of-way deed."

"I don't recognize any contract obtained under false representations."

"Do you accuse me of false representations?"

Lance Dunning flipped the ash from his cigar. "Who are you?"

"I am just a plain, every-day civil engineer, but you must not talk false representations in
any contract drawn under my hand."

"I am talking facts. Whispering Smith may have rigged the joker--I don't know. Whoever rigged
it, it has been rigged all right."

"Any charge against Whispering Smith is a charge against me. He is not here to defend himself,
but he needs no defence. You have charged me already with misleading surveys. I was telephoned
for this morning to come over to see why you had held up our work, and your men cover me with
rifles while I am riding on a public road."

"You have been warned, or your men have, to keep off this ranch. Your man Stevens cut our wires
this morning----"

"As he had a perfect right to do on our right of way."

"If you think so, stranger, go ahead again!"

"Oh, no! We won't have civil war--not right away, at least. And if you and your men have threatened
and browbeaten me enough for to-day, I will go."

"Don't set foot on the Stone Ranch again, and don't send any men here to trespass, mark you!"

"I mark you perfectly. I did not set foot willingly on your ranch to-day. I was dragged on
it. Where the men are grading now, they will finish their work."

"No, they won't."

"What, would you drive us off land you have already deeded?"

"The first man that cuts our wires or orders them cut where they were strung yesterday will
get into trouble."

"Then don't string any wires on land that belongs to us, for they will certainly come down
if you do."

Lance Dunning turned in a passion. "I'll put a bullet through you if you touch a barb of Stone
Ranch wire!"

Stormy Gorman jumped forward with his hand covering the grip of his six-shooter. "Yes, damn
you, and I'll put another!"

"Cousin Lance!" Dicksie Dunning advanced swiftly into the room. "You are under our own roof,
and you are wrong to talk in that way."

Her cousin stared at her. "Dicksie, this is no place for you!"

"It is when my cousin is in danger of forgetting he is a gentleman."

"You are interfering with what you know nothing about!" exclaimed Lance angrily.

"I know what is due to every one under this roof."

"Will you be good enough to leave this room?"

"Not if there is to be any shooting or threats of shooting that involve my cousin."

"Dicksie, leave the room!"

There was a hush. The cowboys dropped back. Dicksie stood motionless. She gave no sign in her
manner that she heard the words, but she looked very steadily at her cousin. "You forget yourself!"
was all she said.

"I am master here!"

"Also my cousin," murmured Dicksie evenly.

"You don't understand this matter at all!" declared Lance Dunning vehemently.

"Nothing could justify your language."

"Do you think I am going to allow this railroad company to ruin this ranch while I am responsible
here? You have no business interfering, I say!"

"I think I have."

"These matters are not of your affair!"

"Not of my affair?" The listeners stood riveted. McCloud felt himself swallowing, and took
a step backward with an effort as Dicksie advanced. Her hair, loosened by her ride, spread
low upon her head. She stood in her saddle habit, with her quirt still in hand. "Any affair
that may lead my cousin into shooting is my affair. I make it mine. This is my father's roof.
I neither know nor care anything about what led to this quarrel, but the quarrel is mine now.
I will not allow my cousin to plunge into anything that may cost him his life or ruin it."
She turned suddenly, and her eyes fell on McCloud. "I am not willing to leave either myself
or my cousin in a false position. I regret especially that Mr. McCloud should be brought into
so unpleasant a scene, because he has already suffered rudeness at my own hands----"

McCloud flushed. He raised his hand slightly.

"And I am very sorry for it," added Dicksie, before he could speak. Then, turning, she withdrew
from the room.

"I am sure," said McCloud slowly, as he spoke again to her cousin, "there need be no serious
controversy over the right-of-way matter, Mr. Dunning. I certainly shall not precipitate any.
Suppose you give me a chance to ride over the ground with you again and let us see whether
we can't arrive at some conclusion?"

But Lance was angry, and nursed his wrath a long time.

CHAPTER XV

THE SHOT IN THE PASS

Dicksie walked hurriedly through the dining-room and out upon the rear porch. Her horse was
standing where she had left him. Her heart beat furiously as she caught up the reins, but she
sprang into the saddle and rode rapidly away. The flood of her temper had brought a disregard
of consequence: it was in the glow of her eyes, the lines of her lips, and the tremor of her
nostrils as she breathed long and deeply on her flying horse.

When she checked Jim she had ridden miles, but not without a course nor without a purpose.
Where the roads ahead of her parted to lead down the river and over the Elbow Pass to Medicine
Bend, she halted within a clump of trees almost where she had first seen McCloud. Beyond the
Mission Mountains the sun was setting in a fire like that which glowed under her eyes. She
could have counted her heart-beats as the crimson ball sank below the verge of the horizon
and the shadows threw up the silver thread of the big river and deepened across the heavy green
of the alfalfa fields. Where Dicksie sat, struggling with her bounding pulse and holding Jim
tightly in, no one from the ranch or, indeed, from the up-country could pass her unseen. She
was waiting for a horseman, and the sun had set but a few minutes when she heard a sharp gallop
coming down the upper road from the hills.

All her brave plans, terror-stricken at the sound of the hoof-beats, fled from her utterly.
She was stunned by the suddenness of the crisis. She had meant to stop McCloud and speak to
him, but before she could summon her courage a tall, slender man on horseback dashed past within
a few feet of her. She could almost have touched him as he flew by, and a horse less steady
than Jim would have shied under her. Dicksie caught her breath. She did not know this man--she
had seen only his eyes, oddly bright in the twilight as he passed--but he was not of the ranch.
He must have come from the hill road, she concluded, down which she herself had just ridden.
He was somewhere from the North, for he sat his horse like a statue and rode like the wind.

But the encounter nerved her to her resolve. Some leaden moments passed, and McCloud, galloping
at a far milder pace toward the fork of the roads, checked his speed as he approached. He saw
a woman on horseback waiting in his path.

"Mr. McCloud!"

"Miss Dunning!"

"I could not forgive myself if I waited too long to warn you that threats have been made against
your life. Not of the kind you heard to-day. My cousin is not a murderer, and never could be,
I am sure, in spite of his talk; but I was frightened at the thought that if anything dreadful
should happen his name would be brought into it. There are enemies of yours in this country
to be feared, and it is against these that I warn you. Good-night!"

"Surely you won't ride away without giving me a chance to thank you!" exclaimed McCloud. Dicksie
checked her horse. "I owe you a double debt of gratitude," he added, "and I am anxious to assure
you that we desire nothing that will injure your interests in any way in crossing your lands."

"I know nothing about those matters, because my cousin manages everything. It is growing late
and you have a good way to go, so good-night."

"But you will allow me to ride back to the house with you?"

"Oh, no, indeed, thank you!"

"It will soon be dark and you are alone."

"No, no! I am quite safe and I have only a short ride. It is you who have far to go," and she
spoke again to Jim, who started briskly.

"Miss Dunning, won't you listen just a moment? Please don't run away!" McCloud was trying to
come up with her. "Won't you hear me a moment? I have suffered some little humiliation to-day;
I should really rather be shot up than have more put on me. I am a man and you are a woman,
and it is already dark. Isn't it for me to see you safely to the house? Won't you at least
pretend I can act as an escort and let me go with you? I should make a poor figure trying to
catch you on horseback----"

Dicksie nodded naïvely. "With that horse."

"With any horse--I know that," said McCloud, keeping at her side.

"But I can't let you ride back with me," declared Dicksie, urging Jim and looking directly
at McCloud for the first time. "How could I explain?"

"Let me explain. I am famous for explaining," urged McCloud, spurring too.

"And will you tell me what I should be doing while you were explaining?" she asked.

"Perhaps getting ready a first aid for the injured."

"I feel as if I ought to run away," declared Dicksie, since she had clearly decided not to.
"It will have to be a compromise, I suppose. You must not ride farther than the first gate,
and let us take this trail instead of the road. Now make your horse go as fast as you can and
I'll keep up."

But McCloud's horse, though not a wonder, went too fast to suit his rider, who divided his
efforts between checking him and keeping up the conversation. When McCloud dismounted to open
Dicksie's gate, and stood in the twilight with his hat in his hand and his bridle over his
arm, he was telling a story about Marion Sinclair, and Dicksie in the saddle, tapping her knee
with her bridle-rein, was looking down and past him as if the light upon his face were too
bright. Before she would start away she made him remount, and he said good-by only after half
a promise from her that she would show him sometime a trail to the top of Bridger's Peak, with
a view of the Peace River on the east and the whole Mission Range and the park country on the
north. Then she rode away at an amazing run, nodding back as he sat still holding his hat above
his head.

McCloud galloped toward the pass with one determination--that he would have a horse, and a
good one, one that could travel with Jim, if it cost him his salary. He exulted as he rode,
for the day had brought him everything he wished, and humiliation had been swallowed up in
triumph. It was nearly dark when he reached the crest between the hills. At this point the
southern grade of the pass winds sharply, whence its name, the Elbow; but from the head of
the pass the grade may be commanded at intervals for half a mile. Trotting down this road with
his head in a whirl of excitement, McCloud heard the crack of a rifle; at the same instant
he felt a sharp slap at his hat. Instinct works on all brave men very much alike. McCloud dropped
forward in his saddle, and, seeking no explanation, laid his head low and spurred Bill Dancing's
horse for life or death. The horse, quite amazed, bolted and swerved down the grade like a
snipe, with his rider crouching close for a second shot. But no second shot came, and after
another mile McCloud ventured to take off his hat and put his finger through the holes in it,
though he did not stop his horse to make the examination. When they reached the open country
the horse had settled into a fast, long stride that not only redeemed his reputation but relieved
his rider's nerves.

When McCloud entered his office it was half-past nine o'clock, and the first thing he did before
turning on the lights was to draw the window-shades. He examined the hat again, with sensations
that were new to him--fear, resentment, and a hearty hatred of his enemies. But all the while
the picture of Dicksie remained. He thought of her nodding to him as they parted in the saddle,
and her picture blotted out all that had followed.

CHAPTER XVI

AT THE WICKIUP

Two nights later Whispering Smith rode into Medicine Bend. "I've been up around Williams Cache,"
he said, answering McCloud's greeting as he entered the upstairs office. "How goes it?" He
was in his riding rig, just as he had come from a late supper.

When he asked for news McCloud told him the story of the trouble with Lance Dunning over the
survey, and added that he had referred the matter to Glover. He told then of his unpleasant
surprise when riding home afterward.

"Yes," assented Smith, looking with feverish interest at McCloud's head; "I heard about it."

"That's odd, for I haven't said a word about the matter to anybody but Marion Sinclair, and
you haven't seen her."

"I heard up the country. It is great luck that he missed you."

"Who missed me?"

"The man that was after you."

"The bullet went through my hat."

"Let me see the hat."

McCloud produced it. It was a heavy, broad-brimmed Stetson, with a bullet-hole cut cleanly
through the front and the back of the crown. Smith made McCloud put the hat on and describe
his position when the shot was fired. McCloud stood up, and Whispering Smith eyed him and put
questions.

"What do you think of it?" asked McCloud when he had done.

Smith leaned forward on the table and pushed McCloud's hat toward him as if the incident were
closed. "There is no question in my mind, and there never has been, but that Stetson puts up
the best hat worn on the range."

McCloud raised his eyebrows. "Why, thank you! Your conclusion clears things so. After you speak
a man has nothing to do but guess."

"But, by Heaven, George," exclaimed Smith, speaking with unaccustomed fervor, "Miss Dicksie
Dunning is a hummer, isn't she? That child will have the whole range going in another year.
To think of her standing up and lashing her cousin in that way when he was browbeating a railroad
man!"

"Where did you hear about that?"

"The whole Crawling Stone country is talking about it. You never told me you had a misunderstanding
with Dicksie Dunning at Marion's. Loosen up!"

"I will loosen up in the way you do. What scared me most, Gordon, was waiting for the second
shot. Why didn't he fire again?"

"Doubtless he thought he had you the first time. Any man big enough to start after you is not
used to shooting twice at two hundred and fifty yards. He probably thought you were falling
out of the saddle; and it was dark. I can account for everything but your reaching the pass
so late. How did you spend all your time between the ranch and the foothills?"

McCloud saw there was no escape from telling of his meeting with Dicksie Dunning, of her warning,
and of his ride to the gate with her. Every point brought a suppressed exclamation from Whispering
Smith. "So she gave you your life," he mused. "Good for her! If you had got into the pass on
time you could not have got away--the cards were stacked for you. He overestimated you a little,
George; just a little. Good men make mistakes. The sport of circumstances that we are! The
sport of circumstances!"

"Now tell me how you heard so much about it, Gordon, and where?"

"Through a friend, but forget it."

"Do you know who shot at me?"

"Yes."

"I think I do, too. I think it was the fellow that shot so well with the rifle at the barbecue--what
was his name? He was working for Sinclair, and perhaps is yet."

"You mean Seagrue, the Montana cowboy? No, you are wrong. Seagrue is a man-killer, but a square
one."

"How do you know?"

"I will tell you sometime--but this was not Seagrue."

"One of Dunning's men, was it? Stormy Gorman?"

"No, no, a very different sort! Stormy is a wind-bag. The man that is after you is in town
at this minute, and he has come to stay until he finishes his job."

"The devil! That's what makes your eyes so bright, is it? Do you know him?"

"I have seen him. You may see him yourself if you want to."

"I'd like nothing better. When?"

"To-night--in thirty minutes." McCloud closed his desk. There was a rap at the door.

"That must be Kennedy," said Smith. "I haven't seen him, but I sent word for him to meet me
here." The door opened and Kennedy entered the room.

"Sit down, Farrell," said Whispering Smith easily. "Ve gates?"

"How's that?"

"Wie geht es? Don't pretend you can't make out my German. He is trying to let on he is not
a Dutchman," observed Whispering Smith to McCloud. "You wouldn't believe it, but I can remember
when Farrell wore wooden shoes and lighted his pipe with a candle. He sleeps under a feather-bed
yet. Du Sang is in town, Farrell."

"Du Sang!" echoed the tall man with mild interest as he picked up a ruler and, throwing his
leg on the edge of the table, looked cheerful. "How long has Du Sang been in town? Visiting
friends or doing business?"

"He is after your superintendent. He has been here since four o'clock, I reckon, and I've ridden
a hard road to-day to get in in time to talk it over with him. Want to go?"

Kennedy slapped his leg with the ruler. "I always want to go, don't I?"

"Farrell, if you hadn't been a railroad man you would have made a great undertaker, do you
know that?" Kennedy, slapping his leg, showed his ivory teeth. "You have such an instinct for
funerals," added Whispering Smith.

"Now, Mr. Smith! Well, who are we waiting for? I'm ready," said Kennedy, taking out his revolver
and examining it.

McCloud put on his new hat and asked if he should take a gun. "You are really accompanying
me as my guest, George," explained Whispering Smith reproachfully. "Won't it be fun to shove
this man right under Du Sang's nose and make him bat his eyes?" he added to Kennedy. "Well,
put one in your pocket if you like, George, provided you have one that will go off when sufficiently
urged."

McCloud opened the drawer of the table and took from it a revolver. Whispering Smith reached
out his hand for the gun, examined it, and handed it back.

"You don't like it."

Smith smiled a sickly approbation. "A forty-five gun with a thirty-eight bore, George? A little
light for shock; a little light. A bullet is intended to knock a man down; not necessarily
to kill him, but, if possible, to keep him from killing you. Never mind, we all have our fads.
Come on!"

At the foot of the stairs Whispering Smith stopped. "Now I don't know where we shall find this
man, but we'll try the Three Horses." As they started down the street McCloud took the inside
of the sidewalk, but Smith dropped behind and brought McCloud into the middle. They failed
to find Du Sang at the Three Horses, and leaving started to round up the street. They visited
many places, but each was entered in the same way. Kennedy sauntered in first and moved slowly
ahead. He was to step aside only in case he saw Du Sang. McCloud in every instance followed
him, with Whispering Smith just behind, amiably surprised. They spent an hour in and out of
the Front Street resorts, but their search was fruitless.

"You are sure he is in town?" asked Kennedy. The three men stood deliberating in the shadow
of a side street.

"Sure!" answered Whispering Smith. "Of course, if he turns the trick he wants to get away quietly.
He is lying low. Who is that, Farrell?" A man passing out of the shadow of a shade tree was
crossing Fort Street a hundred feet away.

"It looks like our party," whispered Kennedy. "No, stop a bit!" They drew back into the shadow.
"That is Du Sang," said Kennedy; "I know his hobble."

CHAPTER XVII

A TEST

Du Sang had the sidewise gait of a wolf, and crossed the street with the choppy walk of the
man out of a long saddle. Being both uncertain and quick, he was a man to slip a trail easily.
He travelled around the block and disappeared among the many open doors that blazed along Hill
Street. Less alert trailers than the two behind him would have been at fault; but when he entered
the place he was looking for, Kennedy was so close that Du Sang could have spoken to him had
he turned around.

Kennedy passed directly ahead. A moment later Whispering Smith put his head inside the door
of the joint Du Sang had entered, withdrew it, and, rejoining his companions, spoke in an undertone:
"A negro dive; he's lying low. Now we will keep our regular order. It's a half-basement, with
a bar on the left; crap games at the table behind the screen on the right. Kennedy, will you
take the rear end of the bar? It covers the whole room and the back door. George, pass in ahead
of me and step just to the left of the slot machine; you've got the front door there and everything
behind the screen, and I can get close to Du Sang. Look for a thinnish, yellow-faced man with
a brown hat and a brown shirt--and pink eyes--shooting craps under this window. I'll shoot
craps with him. Is your heart pumping, George? Never mind, this is easy! Farrell, you're first!"

The dive, badly lighted and ventilated, was counted tough among tough places. White men and
colored mixed before the bar and about the tables. When Smith stepped around the screen and
into the flare of the hanging lamps, Du Sang stood in the small corner below the screened street
window. McCloud, though vitally interested in looking at the man that had come to town to kill
him, felt his attention continually wandering back to Whispering Smith. The clatter of the
rolling dice, the guttural jargon of the negro gamblers, the drift of men to and from the bar,
and the clouds of tobacco smoke made a hazy background for the stoop-shouldered man with his
gray hat and shabby coat, dust-covered and travel-stained. Industriously licking the broken
wrapper of a cheap cigar and rolling it fondly under his forefinger, he was making his way
unostentatiously toward Du Sang. Thirty-odd men were in the saloon, but only two knew what
the storm centre moving slowly across the room might develop. Kennedy, seeing everything and
talking pleasantly with one of the barkeepers, his close-set teeth gleaming twenty feet away,
stood at the end of the bar sliding an empty glass between his hands. Whispering Smith pushed
past the on-lookers to get to the end of the table where Du Sang was shooting. He made no effort
to attract Du Sang's attention, and when the latter looked up he could have pulled the gray
hat from the head of the man whose brown eyes were mildly fixed on Du Sang's dice; they were
lying just in front of Smith. Looking indifferently at the intruder, Du Sang reached for the
dice: just ahead of his right hand, Whispering Smith's right hand, the finger-tips extended
on the table, rested in front of them; it might have been through accident or it might have
been through design. In his left hand Smith held the broken cigar, and without looking at Du
Sang he passed the wrapper again over the tip of his tongue and slowly across his lips.

Du Sang now looked sharply at him, and Smith looked at his cigar. Others were playing around
the semicircular table--it might mean nothing. Du Sang waited. Smith lifted his right hand
from the table and felt in his waistcoat for a match. Du Sang, however, made no effort to take
up the dice. He watched Whispering Smith scratch a match on the table, and, either because
it failed to light or through design, it was scratched the second time on the table, marking
a cross between the two dice.

The meanest negro in the joint would not have stood that, yet Du Sang hesitated. Whispering
Smith, mildly surprised, looked up. "Hello, Pearline! You shooting here?" He pushed the dice
back toward the outlaw. "Shoot again!"

Du Sang, scowling, snapped the dice and threw badly.

"Up jump the devil, is it? Shoot again!" And, pushing back the dice, Smith moved closer to
Du Sang. The two men touched arms. Du Sang, threatened in a way wholly new to him, waited like
a snake braved by a mysterious enemy. His eyes blinked like a badger's. He caught up the dice
and threw. "Is that the best you can do?" asked Smith. "See here!" He took up the dice. "Shoot
with me!" Smith threw the dice up the table toward Du Sang. Once he threw craps, but, reaching
directly in front of Du Sang, he picked the dice up and threw eleven. "Shoot with me, Du Sang."

"What's your game?" snapped Du Sang, with an oath.

"What do you care, if I've got the coin? I'll throw you for twenty-dollar gold pieces."

Du Sang's eyes glittered. Unable to understand the reason for the affront, he stood like a
cat waiting to spring. "This is my game!" he snarled.

"Then play it."

"Look here, what do you want?" he demanded angrily.

Smith stepped closer. "Any game you've got. I'll throw you left-handed, Du Sang." With his
right hand he snapped the dice under Du Sang's nose and looked squarely into his eyes. "Got
any Sugar Buttes money?"

Du Sang for an instant looked keenly back; his eyes contracted in that time to a mere narrow
slit; then, sudden as thought, he sprang back into the corner. He knew now. This was the man
who held the aces at the barbecue, the railroad man--Whispering Smith. Kennedy, directly across
the table, watched the lightning-like move. For the first time the crap-dealer looked impatiently
up.

It was a showdown. No one watching the two men under the window breathed for a moment. Whispering
Smith, motionless, only watched the half-closed eyes. "You can't shoot craps," he said coldly.
"What can you shoot, Pearline? You can't stop a man on horseback."

Du Sang knew he must try for a quick kill or make a retreat. He took in the field at a glance.
Kennedy's teeth gleamed only ten feet away, and with his right hand half under his coat lapel
he toyed with his watch-chain. McCloud had moved in from the slot machine and stood at the
point of the table, looking at Du Sang and laughing at him. Whispering Smith threw off all
pretence. "Take your hand away from your gun, you albino! I'll blow your head off left-handed
if you pull! Will you get out of this town to-night? If you can't drop a man in the saddle
at two hundred and fifty yards, what do you think you'd look like after a break with me? Go
back to the whelp that hired you, and tell him when he wants a friend of mine to send a man
that can shoot. If you are within twenty miles of Medicine Bend at daylight I'll rope you like
a fat cow and drag you down Front Street!"

Du Sang, with burning eyes, shrank narrower and smaller into his corner, ready to shoot if
he had to, but not liking the chances. No man in Williams Cache could pull or shoot with Du
Sang, but no man in the mountains had ever drawn successfully against the man that faced him.

Whispering Smith saw that he would not draw. He taunted him again in low tones, and, backing
away, spoke laughingly to McCloud. While Kennedy covered the corner, Smith backed to the door
and waited for the two to join him. They halted a moment at the door, then they backed slowly
up the steps and out into the street.

There was no talk till they reached the Wickiup office. "Now, will some of you tell me who
Du Sang is?" asked McCloud, after Kennedy and Whispering Smith with banter and laughing had
gone over the scene.

Kennedy picked up the ruler. "The wickedest, cruelest man in the bunch--and the best shot."

"Where is your hat, George--the one he put the bullet through?" asked Whispering Smith, limp
in the big chair. "Burn it up; he thinks he missed you. Burn it up now. Never let him find
out what a close call you had. Du Sang! Yes, he is cold-blooded as a wild-cat and cruel as
a soft bullet. Du Sang would shoot a dying man, George, just to keep him squirming in the dirt.
Did you ever see such eyes in a human being, set like that and blinking so in the light? It's
bad enough to watch a man when you can see his eyes. Here's hoping we're done with him!"

CHAPTER XVIII

NEW PLANS

Callahan crushed the tobacco under his thumb in the palm of his right hand. "So I am sorry
to add," he concluded, speaking to McCloud, "that you are now out of a job." The two men were
facing each other across the table in McCloud's office. "Personally, I am not sorry to say
it, either," added Callahan, slowly filling the bowl of his pipe.

McCloud said nothing to the point, as there seemed to be nothing to say until he had heard
more. "I never knew before that you were left-handed," he returned evasively.

"It's a lucky thing, because it won't do for a freight-traffic man, nowadays, to let his right
hand know what his left hand does," observed Callahan, feeling for a match. "I am the only
left-handed man in the traffic department, but the man that handles the rebates, Jimmie Black,
is cross-eyed. Bucks offered to send him to Chicago to have Bryson straighten his eyes, but
Jimmie thinks it is better to have them as they are for the present, so he can look at a thing
in two different ways--one for the Interstate Commerce Commission and one for himself. You
haven't heard, then?" continued Callahan, returning to his riddle about McCloud's job. "Why,
Lance Dunning has gone into the United States Court and got an injunction against us on the
Crawling Stone Line--tied us up tighter than zero. No more construction there for a year at
least. Dunning comes in for himself and for a cousin who is his ward, and three or four little
ranchers have filed bills--so it's up to the lawyers for eighty per cent. of the gate receipts
and peace. Personally, I'm glad of it. It gives you a chance to look after this operating for
a year yourself. We are going to be swamped with freight traffic this year, and I want it moved
through the mountains like checkers for the next six months. You know what I mean, George."

To McCloud the news came, in spite of himself, as a blow. The results he had attained in building
through the lower valley had given him a name among the engineers of the whole line. The splendid
showing of the winter construction, on which he had depended to enable him to finish the whole
work within the year, was by this news brought to naught. Those of the railroad men who said
he could not deliver a completed line within the year could never be answered now. And there
was some slight bitterness in the reflection that the very stumbling-block to hold him back,
to rob him of his chance for a reputation with men like Glover and Bucks, should be the lands
of Dicksie Dunning.

He made no complaint. On the division he took hold with new energy and bent his faculties on
the operating problems. At Marion's he saw Dicksie at intervals, and only to fall more hopelessly
under her spell each time. She could be serious and she could be volatile and she could be
something between which he could never quite make out. She could be serious with him when he
was serious, and totally irresponsible the next minute with Marion. On the other hand, when
McCloud attempted to be flippant, Dicksie could be confusingly grave. Once when he was bantering
with her at Marion's she tried to say something about her regret that complications over the
right of way should have arisen; but McCloud made light of it, and waved the matter aside as
if he were a cavalier. Dicksie did not like it, but it was only that he was afraid she would
realize he was a mere railroad superintendent with hopes of a record for promotion quite blasted.
And as if this obstacle to a greater reputation were not enough, a wilier enemy threatened
in the spring to leave only shreds and patches of what he had already earned.

The Crawling Stone River is said to embody, historically, all of the deceits known to mountain
streams. Below the Box Canyon it ploughs through a great bed of yielding silt, its own deposit
between the two imposing lines of bluffs that resist its wanderings from side to side of the
wide valley. This fertile soil makes up the rich lands that are the envy of less fortunate
regions in the Great Basin; but the Crawling Stone is not a river to give quiet title to one
acre of its own making. The toil of its centuries spreads beautifully green under the June
skies, and the unsuspecting settler, lulled into security by many years of the river's repose,
settles on its level bench lands and lays out his long lines of possession; but the Sioux will
tell you in their own talk that this man is but a tenant at will; that in another time and
at another place the stranger will inherit his fields; and that the Crawling Stone always comes
back for its own.

This was the peril that Glover and McCloud essayed when they ran a three-tenths grade and laid
an eighty-pound rail up two hundred and fifty miles of the valley. It was in local and exclusive
territory a rich prize, and they brought to their undertaking not, perhaps, greater abilities
than other men, but incomparably greater material resources than earlier American engineers
had possessed.

Success such as theirs is cumulative: when the work is done one man stands for it, but it represents
the work of a thousand men in every walk of American industry. Where the credit must lie with
the engineer who achieves is in the application of these enormous reserves of industrial triumphs
to the particular conditions he faces in the problem before him; in the application lies the
genius called success, and this is always new. Moreover, men like Glover and McCloud were fitted
for a fight with a mountain river because trained in the Western school, where poverty or resource
had sharpened the wits. The building of the Crawling Stone Line came with the dawn of a new
day in American capital, when figures that had slept in fairies' dreams woke into every-day
use, and when enlarged calculation among men controlling hitherto unheard-of sums of money
demanded the best and most permanent methods of construction to insure enduring economies in
operating. Thus the constructing of the Crawling Stone Line opened in itself new chapters in
Rocky Mountain railroad-building. An equipment of machinery, much of which had never before
been applied to such building, had been assembled by the engineers. Steam-shovels had been
sent in battalions, grading-machines and dump-wagons had gone forward in trainloads, and an
army of men were operating in the valley. A huge steel bridge three thousand feet long was
now being thrown across the river below the Dunning ranch.

The winter had been an unusual one even in a land of winters. The season's fall of snow had
not been above an average, but it had fallen in the spring and had been followed by excessively
low temperatures throughout the mountains. June came again, but a strange June. The first rise
of the Crawling Stone had not moved out the winter frost, and the stream lay bound from bank
to bank, and for hundreds of miles, under three feet of ice. When June opened, backward and
cold, there had been no spring. Heavy frosts lasting until the middle of the month gave sudden
way to summer heat, and the Indians on the upper-valley reservation began moving back into
the hills. Then came the rise. Creek after creek in the higher mountains, ice-bound for six
months, burst without warning into flood. Soft winds struck with the sun and stripped the mountain
walls of their snow. Rains set in on the desert, and far in the high northwest the Crawling
Stone lifting its four-foot cap of ice like a bed of feathers began rolling it end over end
down the valley. In the Box, forty feet of water struck the canyon walls and ice-floes were
hurled like torpedoes against the granite spurs: the Crawling Stone was starting after its own.

When the river rose, the earlier talk of Dunning's men had been that the Crawling Stone would
put an end to the railroad pretensions by washing the two hundred and fifty miles of track
back to the Peace River, where it had started. This much in the beginning was easy to predict;
but the railroad men had turned out in force to fight for their holdings, and while the ranchers
were laughing, the river was flowing over the bench lands in the upper valley.

At the Dunning ranch the confidence of the men in their own security gave way to confusion
as the river, spreading behind the ice-jams into broad lakes and bursting in torrents through
its barriers, continued to rise. Treacherous in its broad and yellow quiet, lifting its muddy
head in the stillness of the night, moving unheard over broad sandy bottoms, backing noiselessly
into forgotten channels, stealing through heavy alfalfa pastures, eating a channel down a slender
furrow--then, with the soil melting from the root, the plant has toppled at the head, the rivulet
has grown a stream; night falls, and in the morning where yesterday smiling miles of green
fields looked up to the sun rolls a mad flood of waters: this is the Crawling Stone.

CHAPTER XIX

THE CRAWLING STONE RISE

So sudden was the onset of the river that the trained riders of the big ranch were taken completely
aback, and hundreds of head of Dunning cattle were swept away before they could be removed
to points of safety. Fresh alarms came with every hour of the day and night, and the telephones
up and down the valley rang incessantly with appeals from neighbor to neighbor. Lance Dunning,
calling out the reserves of his vocabulary, swore tremendously and directed the operations
against the river. These seemed, indeed, to consist mainly of hard riding and hard language
on the part of everybody. Murray Sinclair, although he had sold his ranch on the Crawling Stone
and was concentrating his holdings on the Frenchman, was everywhere in evidence. He was the
first at a point of danger and the last to ride away from the slipping acres where the muddy
flood undercut; but no defiance seemed to disturb the Crawling Stone, which kept alarmingly
at work.

Above the alfalfa lands on the long bench north of the house the river, in changing its course
many years earlier, had left a depression known as Mud Lake. It had become separated from the
main channel of the Crawling Stone by a high, narrow barrier in the form of a bench deposited
by the receding waters of some earlier flood, and added to by sand-storms sweeping among the
willows that overspread it. Without an effective head or definite system of work the efforts
of the men at the Stone Ranch were of no more consequence than if they had spent their time
in waving blankets at the river. Twenty men riding in together to tell Lance Dunning that the
river was washing out the tree claims above Mud Lake made no perceptible difference in the
event. Dicksie, though an inexperienced girl, saw with helpless clearness the futility of it
all. The alarms and the continual failures of the army of able-bodied men directed by Sinclair
and her cousin wore on her spirit. The river rose until each succeeding inch became a menace
to the life and property of the ranch, and in the midst of it came the word that the river
was cutting into the willows and heading for Mud Lake. All knew what that meant. If the Crawling
Stone should take its old channel, not alone were the two square miles of alfalfa doomed: it
would sweep away every vestige of the long stacks below the corrals, take the barns, and lap
the slope in front of the ranch-house itself.

Terror seized Dicksie. She telephoned in her distress for Marion, begging her to come up before
they should all be swept away; and Marion, turning the shop over to Katie Dancing, got into
the ranch-wagon that Dicksie had sent and started for the Crawling Stone. The confusion along
the river road as the wagon approached the ranch showed Marion the seriousness of the situation.
Settlers driven from their homes in the upper valley formed almost a procession of misery-stricken
people, making their way on horseback, on foot, and in wagons toward Medicine Bend. With them
they were bringing all they had saved from the flood--the little bunch of cows, the wagonload
of hogs, the household effects, the ponies--as if war or pestilence had struck the valley.

At noon Marion arrived. The ranch-house was deserted, and the men were all at the river. Puss
stuck her head out of the kitchen window, and Dicksie ran out and threw herself into Marion's
arms. Late news from the front had been the worst: the cutting above Mud Lake had weakened
the last barrier that held off the river, and every available man was fighting the current
at that point.

Marion heard it all while eating a luncheon. Dicksie, beset with anxiety, could not stay in
the house. The man that had driven Marion over, saddled horses in the afternoon and the two
women rode up above Mud Lake, now become through rainfall and seepage from the river a long,
shallow lagoon. For an hour they watched the shovelling and carrying of sandbags, and rode
toward the river to the very edge of the disappearing willows, where the bank was melting away
before the undercut of the resistless current. They rode away with a common feeling--a conviction
that the fight was a losing one, and that another day would see the ruin complete.

"Dicksie," exclaimed Marion--they were riding to the house as she spoke--"I'll tell you what
we can do!" She hesitated a moment. "I will tell you what we can do! Are you plucky?"

Dicksie looked at Marion pathetically.

"If you are plucky enough to do it, we can keep the river off yet. I have an idea. I will go,
but you must come along."

"Marion, what do you mean? Don't you think I would go anywhere to save the ranch? I should
like to know where you dare go in this country that I dare not!"

"Then ride with me over to the railroad camp by the new bridge. We will ask Mr. McCloud to
bring some of his men over. He can stop the river; he knows how."

Dicksie caught her breath. "Oh, Marion! that would do no good, even if I could do it. Why,
the railroad has been all swept away in the lower valley."

"How do you know?"

"So every one says."

"Who is every one?"

"Cousin Lance, Mr. Sinclair--all the men. I heard that a week ago."

"Dicksie, don't believe it. You don't know these railroad men. They understand this kind of
thing; cattlemen, you know, don't. If you will go with me we can get help. I feel just as sure
that those men can control the river as I do that I am looking at you--that is, if anybody
can. The question is, do you want to make the effort?"

They talked until they left the horses and entered the house. When they sat down, Dicksie put
her hands to her face. "Oh, I wish you had said nothing about it! How can I go to him and ask
for help now--after Cousin Lance has gone into court about the line and everything? And of
course my name is in it all."

"Dicksie, don't raise spectres that have nothing to do with the case. If we go to him and ask
him for help he will give it to us if he can; if he can't, what harm is done? He has been up
and down the river for three weeks, and he has an army of men camped over by the bridge. I
know that, because Mr. Smith rode in from there a few days ago."

"What, Whispering Smith? Oh, if he is there I would not go for worlds!"

"Pray, why not?"

"Why, he is such an awful man!"

"That is absurd, Dicksie."

Dicksie looked grave. "Marion, no man in this part of the country has a good word to say for
Whispering Smith."

"Perhaps you have forgotten, Dicksie, that you live in a very rough part of the country," returned
Marion coolly. "No man that he has ever hunted down would have anything pleasant to say about
him; nor would the friends of such a man be likely to say a good word of him. There are many
on the range, Dicksie, that have no respect for life or law or anything else, and they naturally
hate a man like Whispering Smith----"

"But, Marion, he killed----"

"I know. He killed a man named Williams a few years ago, while you were at school--one of the
worst men that ever infested this country. Williams Cache is named after that man; he made
the most beautiful spot in all these mountains a nest of thieves and murderers. But did you
know that Williams shot down Gordon Smith's only brother, a trainmaster, in cold blood in front
of the Wickiup at Medicine Bend? No, you never heard that in this part of the country, did
you? They had a cow-thief for sheriff then, and no officer in Medicine Bend would go after
the murderer. He rode in and out of town as if he owned it, and no one dared say a word, and,
mind you, Gordon Smith's brother had never seen the man in his life until he walked up and
shot him dead. Oh, this was a peaceful country a few years ago! Gordon Smith was right-of-way
man in the mountains then. He buried his brother, and asked the officers what they were going
to do about getting the murderer. They laughed at him. He made no protest, except to ask for
a deputy United States marshal's commission. When he got it he started for Williams Cache after
Williams in a buckboard--think of it, Dicksie--and didn't they laugh at him! He did not even
know the trails, and imagine riding two hundred miles in a buckboard to arrest a man in the
mountains! He was gone six weeks, and came back with Williams's body strapped to the buckboard
behind him. He never told the story; all he said when he handed in his commission and went
back to his work was that the man was killed in a fair fight. Hate him! No wonder they hate
him--the Williams Cache gang and all their friends on the range! Your cousin thinks it policy
to placate that element, hoping that they won't steal your cattle if you are friendly with
them. I know nothing about that, but I do know something about Whispering Smith. It will be
a bad day for Williams Cache when they start him up again. But what has that to do with your
trouble? He will not eat you up if you go to the camp, Dicksie. You are just raising bogies."

They had moved to the front porch and Marion was sitting in the rocking-chair. Dicksie stood
with her back against one of the pillars and looked at her. As Marion finished Dicksie turned
and, with her hand on her forehead, looked in wretchedness of mind out on the valley. As far,
in many directions, as the eye could reach the waters spread yellow in the flood of sunshine
across the lowlands. There was a moment of silence. Dicksie turned her back on the alarming
sight. "Marion, I can't do it!"

"Oh, yes, you can if you want to, Dicksie!" Dicksie looked at her with tearless eyes. "It is
only a question of being plucky enough," insisted Marion.

"Pluck has nothing to do with it!" exclaimed Dicksie in fiery tones. "I should like to know
why you are always talking about my not having courage! This isn't a question of courage. How
can I go to a man that I talked to as I talked to him in your house and ask for help? How can
I go to him after my cousin has threatened to kill him, and gone into court to prevent his
coming on our land? Shouldn't I look beautiful asking help from him?"

Marion rocked with perfect composure. "No, dear, you would not look beautiful asking help,
but you would look sensible. It is so easy to be beautiful and so hard to be sensible."

"You are just as horrid as you can be, Marion Sinclair!"

"I know that, too, dear. All I wanted to say is that you would look very sensible just now
in asking help from Mr. McCloud."

"I don't care--I won't do it. I will never do it, not if every foot of the ranch tumbles into
the river. I hope it will! Nobody cares anything about me. I have no friends but thieves and
outlaws."

"Dicksie!" Marion rose.

"That is what you said."

"I did not. I am your friend. How dare you call me names?" demanded Marion, taking the petulant
girl in her arms. "Don't you think I care anything about you? There are people in this country
that you have never seen who know you and love you almost as much as I do. Don't let any silly
pride prevent your being sensible, dear." Dicksie burst into tears. Marion drew her over to
the settee, and she had her cry out. When it was over they changed the subject. Dicksie went
to her room. It was a long time before she came down again, but Marion rocked in patience:
she was resolved to let Dicksie fight it out herself.

When Dicksie came down, Marion stood at the foot of the stairs. The young mistress of Crawling
Stone Ranch descended step by step very slowly. "Marion," she said simply, "I will go with you."

CHAPTER XX

AT THE DIKE

Marion caught her closely to her heart. "I knew you would go if I got you angry, dear. But
you are so slow to anger. Mr. McCloud is just the same way. Mr. Smith says when he does get
angry he can do anything. He is very like you in so many ways."

Dicksie was wiping her eyes. "Is he, Marion? Well, what shall I wear?"

"Just your riding-clothes, dear, and a smile. He won't know what you have on. It is you he
will want to see. But I've been thinking of something else. What will your Cousin Lance say?
Suppose he should object?"

"Object! I should like to see him object after losing the fight himself." Marion laughed. "Well,
do you think you can find the way down there for us?"

"I can find any way anywhere within a hundred miles of here."

On the 20th of June McCloud did have something of an army of men in the Crawling Stone Valley.
Of these, two hundred and fifty were in the vicinity of the bridge, the abutments and piers
of which were being put in just below the Dunning ranch. Near at hand Bill Dancing, with a
big gang, had been for some time watching the ice and dynamiting the jams. McCloud brought
in more men as the river continued to rise. The danger line on the gauges was at length submerged,
and for three days the main-line construction camps had been robbed of men to guard the soft
grades above and below the bridge. The new track up and down the valley had become a highway
of escape from the flood, and the track patrols were met at every curve by cattle, horses,
deer, wolves, and coyotes fleeing from the waste of waters that spread over the bottoms.

Through the Dunning ranch the Crawling Stone River makes a far bend across the valley to the
north and east. The extraordinary volume of water now pouring through the Box Canyon exposed
ten thousand acres of the ranch to the caprice of the river, and if at the point of its tremendous
sweep to the north it should cut back into its old channel the change would wipe the entire
body of ranch alfalfa lands off the face of the valley. With the heat of the lengthening June
days a vast steam rose from the chill waters of the river, marking in ominous windings the
channel of the main stream through a yellow sea which, ignoring the usual landmarks of trees
and dunes, flanked the current broadly on either side. Late in the afternoon of the day that
Dicksie with Marion sought McCloud, a storm drifted down the Topah Topah Hills, and heavy showers
broke across the valley.

At nightfall the rain had passed and the mist lifted from the river. Above the bluffs rolling
patches of cloud obscured the face of the moon, but the distant thunder had ceased, and at
midnight the valley near the bridge lay in a stillness broken only by the hoarse calls of the
patrols and far-off megaphones. From the bridge camp, which lay on high ground near the grade,
the distant lamps of the track-walkers could be seen moving dimly.

Before the camp-fire in front of McCloud's tent a group of men, smoking and talking, sat or
lay sprawled on tarpaulins, drying themselves after the long day. Among them were the weather-beaten
remnants of the old guard of the mountain-river workers, men who had ridden in the caboose
the night that Hailey went to his death, and had fought the Spider Water with Glover. Bill
Dancing, huge, lumbering, awkward as a bear and as shifty, was talking, because with no apparent
effort he could talk all night, and was a valuable man at keeping the camp awake. Bill Dancing
talked and, after Sinclair's name had been dropped from the roll, ate and drank more than any
two men on the division. A little apart, McCloud lay on a leather caboose cushion trying to
get a nap.

"It was the day George McCloud came," continued Dancing, spinning a continuous story. "Nobody
was drinking--Murray Sinclair started that yarn. I was getting fixed up a little for to meet
George McCloud, so I asked the barber for some tonic, and he understood me for to say dye for
my whiskers, and he gets out the dye and begins to dye my whiskers. My cigar went out whilst
he was shampooing me, and my whiskers was wet up with the dye. He turned around to put down
th' bottle, and I started for to light my cigar with a parlor-match, and, by gum! away went
my whiskers on fire--burnt jus' like a tumbleweed. There was the barbers all running around
at once trying for to choke me with towels, and running for water, and me sitting there blazing
like a tar-barrel. That's all there was to that story. I went over to Doc Torpy's and got bandaged
up, and he wanted me for to go to the hospit'l--but I was going for to meet George McCloud."
Bill raised his voice a little and threw his tones carelessly over toward the caboose cushion:
"And I was the on'y man on the platform when his train pulled in. His car was on the hind end.
I walked back and waited for some one to come out. It was about seven o'clock in the evening
and they was eating dinner inside, so I set up on the fence for a minute, and who do you think
got out of the car? That boy laying right over there. 'Where's your dad?' says I; that's exactly
what I said. 'Dead,' says he. 'Dead!' says I, surprised-like. 'Dead,' says he, 'for many years.'
'Where's the new superintendent?' says I. 'I'm the new superintendent,' says he. Well, sir,
you could have blowed me over with a air-hose. 'Go 'way,' I says. 'What's the matter with your
face, Bill?' he says, while I was looking at him; now that's straight. That was George McCloud,
right over there, the first time I ever set eyes on him or him on me. The assertion was met
with silence such as might be termed marked.

"Bucks told him," continued Bill Dancing, in corroborative detail, "that when he got to Medicine
Bend one man would be waiting for to meet him. 'He met me,' says Bucks; 'he's met every superintendent
since my time; he'll meet you. Go right up and speak to him,' Bucks says; 'it'll be all right.'"

"Oh, hell, Bill!" protested an indignant chorus.

"Well, what's er matter with you fellows? Didn't you ask me to tell the story?" demanded Dancing
angrily. "If you know it better than I do, tell it! Give me some tobacco, Chris," said Bill,
honoring with the request the only man in the circle who had shown no scepticism, because he
spoke English with difficulty. "And say, Chris, go down and read the bridge gauge, will you?
It's close on twelve o'clock, and he's to be called when it reaches twenty-eight feet. I said
the boy could never run the division without help from every man on it, and that's what I'm
giving him, and I don't care who knows it," said Bill Dancing, raising his voice not too much.
"Bucks says that any man that c'n run this division c'n run any railroad on earth. Shoo! now
who's this coming here on horseback? Clouding up again, too, by gum!"

The man sent to the bridge had turned back, and behind his lantern Dancing heard the tread
of horses. He stood at one side of the camp-fire while two visitors rode up; they were women.
Dancing stood dumb as they advanced into the firelight. The one ahead spoke: "Mr. Dancing,
don't you know me?" As she stopped her horse the light of the fire struck her face. "Why, Mis'
Sinclair!"

"Yes, and Miss Dunning is with me," returned Marion. Bill staggered. "This is an awful place
to get to; we have been nearly drowned, and we want to see Mr. McCloud."

McCloud, roused by Marion's voice, came forward. "You were asleep," said she as he greeted
her. "I am so sorry we have disturbed you!" She looked careworn and a little forlorn, yet but
a little considering the struggle she and Dicksie had made to reach the camp.

Light blazed from the camp-fire, where Dicksie stood talking with Dancing about horses.

"They are in desperate straits up at the ranch," Marion went on, when McCloud had assured her
of her welcome. "I don't see how they can save it. The river is starting to flow into the old
channel and there's a big pond right in the alfalfa fields."

"It will play the deuce with things if it gets through there," mused McCloud. "I wonder how
the river is? I've been asleep. O Bill!" he called to Dancing, "what water have you got?"

"Twenty-eight six just now, sir. She's a-raising very, very slow, Mr. McCloud."

"So I am responsible for this invasion," continued Marion calmly. "I've been up with Dicksie
at the ranch; she sent for me. Just think of it--no woman but old Puss within ten miles of
the poor child! And they have been trying everywhere to get bags, and you have all the bags,
and the men have been buzzing around over there for a week like bumblebees and doing just about
as much good. She and I talked it all over this afternoon, and I told her I was coming over
here to see you, and we started out together--and merciful goodness, such a time as we have had!"

"But you started out together; where did you leave her?"

"There she stands the other side of the fire. O Dicksie!"

"Why did you not tell me she was here!" exclaimed McCloud.

Dicksie came into the light as he hastened over. If she was uncertain in manner, he was not.
He met her, laughing just enough to relieve the tension of which both for an instant were conscious.
She gave him her hand when he put his out, though he felt that it trembled a little. "Such
a ride as you have had! Why did you not send me word? I would have come to you!" he exclaimed,
throwing reproach into the words.

Dicksie raised her eyes. "I wanted to ask you whether you would sell us some grain-sacks, Mr.
McCloud, to use at the river, if you could spare them?"

"Sacks? Why, of course, all you want! But how did you ever get here? In all this water, and
two lone women! You have been in danger to-night. Indeed you have--don't tell me! And you are
both wet; I know it. Your feet must be wet. Come to the fire. O Bill!" he called to Dancing,
"what's the matter with your wood? Let us have a fire, won't you?--one worth while; and build
another in front of my tent. I can't believe you have ridden here all the way from the ranch,
two of you alone!" exclaimed McCloud, hastening boxes up to the fire for seats.

Marion laughed. "Dicksie can go anywhere! I couldn't have ridden from the house to the barns
alone."

"Then tell me how you could do it?" demanded McCloud, devouring Dicksie with his eyes.

Dicksie looked at the fire. "I know all the roads pretty well. We did get lost once," she confessed
in a low voice, "but we got out again."

"The roads are all underwater, though."

"What time is it, please?"

McCloud looked at his watch. "Two minutes past twelve."

Dicksie started. "Past twelve? Oh, this is dreadful! We must start right back, Marion. I had
no idea we had been five hours coming five miles."

McCloud looked at her, as if still unable to comprehend what she had accomplished in crossing
the flooded bottoms. Her eyes fell back to the fire. "What a blaze!" she murmured as the driftwood
snapped and roared. "It's fine for to-night, isn't it?"

"I know you both must have been in the water," he insisted, leaning forward in front of Dicksie
to feel Marion's skirt.

"I'm not wet!" declared Marion, drawing back.

"Nonsense, you are wet as a rat! Tell me," he asked, looking at Dicksie, "about your trouble
up at the bend. I know something about it. Are the men there to-night? Given up, have they?
Too bad! Do open your jackets and try to dry yourselves, both of you, and I'll take a look
at the river."

"Suppose--I only say suppose--you first take a look at me." The voice came from behind the
group at the fire, and the three turned together.

"By Heaven, Gordon Smith!" exclaimed McCloud. "Where did you come from?"

Whispering Smith stood in the gloom in patience. "Where do I look as if I had come from? Why
don't you ask me whether I'm wet? And won't you introduce me--but this is Miss Dicksie Dunning,
I am sure."

Marion with laughter hastened the introduction.

"And you are wet, of course," said McCloud, feeling Smith's shoulder.

"No, only soaked. I have fallen into the river two or three times, and the last time a big
rhinoceros of yours down the grade, a section foreman named Klein, was obliging enough to pull
me out. Oh, no! I was not looking for you," he ran on, answering McCloud's question; "not when
he pulled me out. I was just looking for a farm or a ladder or something. Klein, for a man
named Small, is the biggest Dutchman I ever saw. 'Tell me, Klein,' I asked, after he had quit
dragging me out--he's a Hanoverian--'where did you get your pull? And how about your height?
Did your grandfather serve as a grenadier under old Frederick William and was he kidnapped?'
Bill, don't feed my horse for a while. And Klein tried to light a cigar I had just taken from
my pocket and given him--fancy! the Germans are a remarkable people--and sat down to tell me
his history, when some friend down the line began bawling through a megaphone, and all that
poor Klein had time to say was that he had had no supper, nor dinner, nor yet breakfast, and
would be obliged for some by the boat he forwarded me in." And, in closing, Whispering Smith
looked cheerfully around at Marion, at McCloud, and last and longest of all at Dicksie Dunning.

"Did you come from across the river?" asked Dicksie, adjusting her wet skirt meekly over her knees.

"You are soaking wet," observed Whispering Smith. "Across the river?" he echoed. "Well, hardly,
my dear Miss Dunning! Every bridge is out down the valley except the railroad bridge and there
are a few things I don't tackle; one is the Crawling Stone on a tear. No, this was across a
little break in this man McCloud's track. I came, to be frank, from the Dunning Ranch to look
up two women who rode away from there at seven o'clock to-night, and I want to say that they
gave me the ride of my life," and Whispering Smith looked all around the circle and back again
and smiled.

Dicksie spoke in amazement. "How did you know we rode away? You were not at the ranch when
we left."

"Oh, don't ask him!" cried Marion.

"He knows everything," explained McCloud.

Whispering Smith turned to Dicksie. "I was interested in knowing that they got safely to their
destination--whatever it might be, which was none of my business. I happened to see a man that
had seen them start, that was all. You don't understand? Well, if you want it in plain English,
I made it my business to see a man who made it his business to see them. It's all very simple,
but these people like to make a mystery of it. Good women are scarcer than riches, and more
to be prized than fine gold--in my judgment--so I rode after them."

Marion put her hand for a moment on his coat sleeve; he looked at Dicksie with another laugh
and spoke to her because he dared not look toward Marion. "Going back to-night, do you say?
You never are."

Dicksie answered quite in earnest: "Oh, but we are. We must!"

"Why did you come, then? It's taken half the night to get here, and will take a night and a
half at least to get back."

"We came to ask Mr. McCloud for some grain-sacks--you know, they have nothing to work with
at the ranch," said Marion; "and he said we might have some and we are to send for them in
the morning."

"I see. But we may as well talk plainly." Smith looked at Dicksie. "You are as brave and as
game as a girl can be, I know, or you couldn't have done this. Sacks full of sand, with the
boys at the ranch to handle them, would do no more good to-morrow at the bend than bladders.
The river is flowing into Squaw Lake above there now. A hundred men that know the game might
check things yet if they're there by daylight. Nobody else, and nothing else on God's earth, can."

There was silence before the fire. McCloud broke it: "I can put the hundred men there at daylight,
Gordon, if Miss Dunning and her cousin want them," said McCloud.

Marion sprang to her feet. "Oh, will you do that, Mr. McCloud?"

McCloud looked at Dicksie. "If they are wanted."

Dicksie tried to look at the fire. "We have hardly deserved help from Mr. McCloud at the ranch,"
she said at last.

He put out his hand. "I must object. The first wreck I ever had on this division Miss Dunning
rode twenty miles to offer help. Isn't that true? Why, I would walk a hundred miles to return
the offer to her. Perhaps your cousin would object," he suggested, turning to Dicksie; "but
no, I think we can manage that. Now what are we going to do? You two can't go back to-night,
that is certain."

"We must."

"Then you will have to go in boats," said Whispering Smith.

"But the hill road?"

"There is five feet of water across it in half a dozen places. I swam my horse through, so
I ought to know."

"It is all back-water, of course, Miss Dunning," explained McCloud. "Not dangerous."

"But moist," suggested Whispering Smith, "especially in the dark."

McCloud looked at Marion. "Then let's be sensible," he said. "You and Miss Dunning can have
my tent as soon as we have supper."

"Supper!"

"Supper is served to all on duty at twelve o'clock, and we're on duty, aren't we? They're about
ready to serve now; we eat in the tent," he added, holding out his hand as he heard the patter
of raindrops. "Rain again! No matter, we shall be dry under canvas."

Dicksie had never seen an engineers' field headquarters. Lanterns lighted the interior, and
the folding-table in the middle was strewn with papers which McCloud swept off into a camp-chest.
Two double cots with an aisle between them stood at the head of the tent, and, spread with
bright Hudson Bay blankets, looked fresh and undisturbed. A box-table near the head-pole held
an alarm-clock, a telegraph key, and a telephone, and the wires ran up the pole behind it.
Leather jackets and sweaters lay on boxes under the tent-walls, and heavy boots stood in disorderly
array along the foot of the cots. These McCloud, with apologies, kicked into the corners.

"Is this where you stay?" asked Dicksie.

"Four of us sleep in the cots, when we can, and an indefinite number lie on the ground when
it rains."

Marion looked around her. "What do you do when it thunders?"

The two men were pulling boxes out for seats; McCloud did not stop to look up. "I crawl under
the bed--the others don't seem to mind it."

"Which is your bed?"

"Whichever I can crawl under quickest. I usually sleep there." He pointed to the one on the right.

"I thought so. It has the blanket folded back so neatly, just as if there were sheets under
it. I'll bet there aren't any."

"Do you think this is a summer resort? Knisely, my assistant, sleeps there, but of course we
are never both in bed at the same time; he's down the river to-night. It's a sort of continuous
performance, you know." McCloud looked at Dicksie. "Take off your coat, won't you, please?"

Whispering Smith was trying to drag a chest from the foot of the cot, and Marion stood watching.
"What are you trying to do?"

"Get this over to the table for a seat."

"Silly man! why don't you move the table?"

Dicksie was taking off her coat. "How inviting it all is!" she smiled. "And this is where you
stay?"

"When it rains," answered McCloud. "Let me have your hat, too."

"My hair is a sight, I know. We rode over rocks and up gullies into the brush----"

"And through lakes--oh, I know! I can't conceive how you ever got here at all. Your hair is
all right. This is camp, anyway. But if you want a glass you can have one. Knisely is a great
swell; he's just from school, and has no end of things. I'll rob his bag."

"Don't disturb Mr. Knisely's bag for the world!"

"But you are not taking off your hat. You seem to have something on your mind."

"Help me to get it off my mind, will you, please?"

"If you will let me."

"Tell me how to thank you for your generosity. I came all the way over here to-night to ask
you for just the help you have offered, and I could not--it stuck in my throat. But that wasn't
what was on my mind. Tell me what you thought when I acted so dreadfully at Marion's."

"I didn't deserve anything better after placing myself in such a fool position. Why don't you
ask me what I thought the day you acted so beautifully at Crawling Stone Ranch? I thought that
the finest thing I ever saw."

"You were not to blame at Marion's."

"I seemed to be, which is just as bad. I am going to start the 'phones going. It's up to me
to make good, you know, in about four hours with a lot of men and material. Aren't you going
to take off your hat?--and your gloves are soaking wet."

McCloud took down the receiver, and Dicksie put her hands slowly to her head to unpin her hat.
It was a broad hat of scarlet felt rolled high above her forehead, and an eagle's quill caught
in the black rosette swept across the front. As she stood in her clinging riding-skirt and
her severely plain scarlet waist with only a black ascot falling over it, Whispering Smith
looked at her. His eyes did not rest on the picture too long, but his glance was searching.
He spoke in an aside to Marion. Marion laughed as she turned her head from where Dicksie was
talking again with McCloud. "The best of it is," murmured Marion, "she hasn't a suspicion of
how lovely she really is."

CHAPTER XXI

SUPPER IN CAMP

"Will you never be done with your telephoning?" asked Marion. McCloud was still planning the
assembling of the men and teams for the morning. Breakfast and transportation were to be arranged
for, and the men and teams and material were to be selected from where they could best be spared.
Dicksie, with the fingers of one hand moving softly over the telegraph key, sat on a box listening
to McCloud's conferences and orders.

"Cherry says everything is served. Isn't it, Cherry?" Marion called to the Japanese boy.

Cherry laughed with a guttural joy.

"We are ready for it," announced McCloud, rising. "How are we to sit?"

"You are to sit at the head of your own table," said Marion. "I serve the coffee, so I sit
at the foot; and Mr. Smith may pass the beans over there, and Dicksie, you are to pour the
condensed milk into the cups."

"Or into the river, just as you like," suggested Whispering Smith.

McCloud looked at Marion Sinclair. "Really," he exclaimed, "wherever you are it's fair weather!
When I see you, no matter how tangled up things are, I feel right away they are coming out.
And this man is another."

"Another what?" demanded Whispering Smith.

"Another care-killer." McCloud, speaking to Dicksie, nodded toward his companion. "Troubles
slip from your shoulders when he swaggers in, though he's not of the slightest use in the world.
I have only one thing against him. It is a physical peculiarity, but an indefensible one. You
may not have noticed it, but he is bowlegged."

"From riding your scrub railroad horses. I feel like a sailor ashore when I get off one. Are
you going to eat all the bacon, Mr. McCloud, or do we draw a portion of it? I didn't start
out with supper to-night."

"Take it all. I suppose it would be useless to ask where you have been to-day?"

"Not in the least, but it would be useless to tell. I am violating no confidence, though, in
saying I'm hungry. I certainly shouldn't eat this stuff if I weren't, should you, Miss Dunning?
And I don't believe you are eating, by the way. Where is your appetite? Your ride ought to
have sharpened it. I'm afraid you are downcast. Oh, don't deny it; it is very plain: but your
worry is unnecessary."

"If the rain would only stop," said Marion, "everybody would cheer up. They haven't seen the
sun at the ranch for ten days."

"This rain doesn't count so far as the high water is concerned," said McCloud. "It is the weather
two hundred and fifty miles above here that is of more consequence to us, and there it is clear
to-night. As long as the tent doesn't leak I rather like it. Sing your song about fair weather,
Gordon."

"But can the men work in such a downpour?" ventured Dicksie.

The two men looked serious and Marion laughed.

"In the morning you will see a hundred of them marching forward with umbrellas, Mr. McCloud
leading. The Japs carry fans, of course."

"I wish I could forget we are in trouble at home," said Dicksie, taking the badinage gracefully.
"Worrying people are such a nuisance. Don't protest, for every one knows they are."

"But we are all in trouble," insisted Whispering Smith. "Trouble! Why, bless you, it really
is a blessing; pretty successfully disguised, I admit, sometimes, but still a blessing. I'm
in trouble all the time, right now, up to my neck in trouble, and the water rising this minute.
Look at this man," he nodded toward McCloud. "He is in trouble, and the five hundred under
him, they are in all kinds of trouble. I shouldn't know how to sleep without trouble," continued
Whispering Smith, warming to the contention. "Without trouble I lose my appetite. McCloud,
don't be tight; pass the bread."

"Never heard him do so well," declared McCloud, looking at Marion.

"Seriously, now," Whispering Smith went on, "don't you know people who, if they were thoroughly
prosperous, would be intolerable--simply intolerable? I know several such. All thoroughly prosperous
people are a nuisance. That is a general proposition, and I stand by it. Go over your list
of acquaintances and you will admit it is true. Here's to trouble! May it always chasten and
never overwhelm us: our greatest bugbear and our best friend! It sifts our friends and unmasks
our enemies. Like a lovely woman, it woos us----"

"Oh, never!" exclaimed Marion. "A lovely woman doesn't woo, she is wooed!"

"What are you looking for, perfection in rhetorical figure? This is extemporaneous."

"But it won't do!"

"And asks to be conquered," suggested Whispering Smith.

"Asks! Oh, scandalous, Mr. Smith!"

"It is easy to see why he never could get any one to marry him," declared McCloud over the bacon.

"Hold on, then! Like lovely woman, it does not seek us, we seek it," persisted the orator,
"That at least is so, isn't it?"

"It is better," assented Marion.

"And it waits to be conquered. How is that?"

Marion turned to Dicksie. "You are not helping a bit. What do you think?"

"I don't think woman and trouble ought to be associated even in figure; and I think 'waits'
is horrid," and Dicksie looked gravely at Whispering Smith.

McCloud, too, looked at him. "You're in trouble now yourself."

"And I brought it on myself. So we do seek it, don't we? And trouble, I must hold, is like
woman. 'Waits' I strike out as unpleasantly suggestive; let it go. So, then, trouble is like
a lovely woman, loveliest when conquered. Now, Miss Dunning, if you have a spark of human kindness
you won't turn me down on that proposition. By the way, I have something put down about trouble."

He was laughing. Dicksie asked herself if this could be the man about whom floated so many
accusations of coldness and cruelty and death. He drew a note-book from a waistcoat pocket.

"Oh, it's in the note-book! There comes the black note-book," exclaimed McCloud.

"Don't make fun of my note-book!"

"I shouldn't dare." McCloud pointed to it as he spoke to Dicksie. "You should see what is in
that note-book: the record, I suppose, of every man in the mountains and of a great many outside."

"And countless other things," added Marion.

"Such as what?" asked Dicksie.

"Such as you, for example," said Marion.

"Am I a thing?"

"A sweet thing, of course," said Marion ironically. "Yes, you; with color of eyes, hair, length
of index finger of the right hand, curvature of thumb, disposition--whether peaceable or otherwise,
and prison record, if any."

"And number of your watch," added McCloud.

"How dreadful!"

Whispering Smith eyed Dicksie benignly. "They are talking this nonsense to distract us, of
course, but I am bound to read you what I have here, if you will graciously submit."

"Submit? I wait to hear it," laughed Dicksie.

"My training in prosody is the slightest, as will appear," he continued, "and synecdoche and
Schenectady were always on the verge of getting mixed when I went to school. My sentiment may
be termed obvious, but I want to offer a slight apology on behalf of trouble; it is abused
too much. I submit this

                         "SONG TO TROUBLE

             "Here's to the measure of every man's worth,
               Though when men are wanting it grieves us.
             Hearts that are hollow we're better without,
               Hearts that are loyal it leaves us.

             "Trouble's the dowry of every man's birth,
               A nettle adversity flings us;
             It yields to the grip of the masterful hand,
               When we play coward it stings us.

"Chorus."

"Don't say chorus; that's common."

"I have to say chorus. My verses don't speak for themselves, and no one would know it was a
chorus if I didn't explain. Besides, I'm short a line in the chorus, and that is what I'm waiting
for to finish the song.

         "Chorus:

         "Then here's to the bumper that proves every friend!
           And though in the drinking it wrings us,
         Here's to the cup that we drain to the end,
           And here's to--

There I stick. I can't work out the last line."

"And here's to the hearts that it brings us!" exclaimed Dicksie.

"Fine!" cried McCloud. "'Here's to the hearts that it brings us!'"

Dicksie threw back her head and laughed with the others. Then Whispering Smith looked grave.
"There is a difficulty," said he, knitting his brows. "You have spoiled my song."

"Oh, Mr. Smith, I hope not! Have I?"

"Your line is so much better than what I have that it makes my stuff sound cheap."

"Oh, no, Gordon!" interposed McCloud. "You don't see that one reason why Miss Dunning's line
sounds better than yours is owing to the differences in your voices. If she will repeat the
chorus, finishing with her line, you will see the difference."

"Miss Dunning, take the note-book," begged Whispering Smith.

"And rise, of course," suggested McCloud.

"Oh, the note-book! I shall be afraid to hold it. Where are the verses, Mr. Smith? Is this
fine handwriting yours?

         Then here's to the bumper that proves every friend!

Isn't that true?

              And though when we drink it it wrings us,

--and it does sometimes!

             Here's to the cup that we drain to the end,

Even women have to be plucky, don't they, Marion?

             And here's to the hearts that it brings us!"

Whispering Smith rose before the applause subsided. "I ask you to drink this, standing, in
condensed milk."

"Have we enough to stand in?" interposed Dicksie.

"If we stand together in trouble, that ought to be enough," observed McCloud.

"We're doing that without rising, aren't we?" asked Marion. "If we hadn't been in trouble we
shouldn't have ventured to this camp to-night."

"And if you had not put me to the trouble of following you--and it was a lot of trouble!--I
shouldn't have been in camp to-night," said Whispering Smith.

"And if I had not been in trouble this camp wouldn't have been here to-night," declared McCloud.
"What have we to thank for it all but trouble?"

A voice called the superintendent's name through the tent door. "Mr. McCloud?"

"And there is more trouble," added McCloud. "What is it, Bill?"

"Twenty-eight and nine tenths on the gauge, sir."

McCloud looked at his companions. "I told you so. Up three-tenths. Thank you, Bill; I'll be
with you in a minute. Tell Cherry to come and take away the supper things, will you? That is
about all the water we shall get to-night, I think. It's all we want," added McCloud, glancing
at his watch. "I'm going to take a look at the river. We shall be quiet now around here until
half-past three, and if you, Marion, and Miss Dunning will take the tent, you can have two
hours' rest before we start. Bill Dancing will guard you against intrusion, and if you want
ice-water ring twice."

CHAPTER XXII

A TALK WITH WHISPERING SMITH

When Whispering Smith had followed McCloud from the tent, Dicksie turned to Marion and caught
her hand. "Is this the terrible man I have heard about?" she murmured. "And I thought him ferocious!
But is he as pitiless as they say, Marion?"

Marion laughed--a troubled little laugh of surprise and sadness. "Dear, he isn't pitiless at
all. He has unpleasant things to do, and does them. He is the man on whom the railroad relies
to repress the lawlessness that breaks out in the mountains at times and interferes with the
operating of the road. It frightens people away, and prevents others from coming in to settle.
Railroads want law and order. Robbery and murders don't make business for railroads. They depend
on settlers for developing a country, don't you know; otherwise they would have no traffic,
not to speak of wanting their trains and men let alone. When Mr. Bucks undertook to open up
this country to settlers, he needed a man of patience and endurance and with courage and skill
in dealing with lawless men, and no man has ever succeeded so well as this terrible man you
have heard about. He is terrible, my dear, to lawless men, not to any one else. He is terrible
in resource and in daring, but not in anything else I know of, and I knew him when he was a
boy and wore a big pink worsted scarf when he went skating."

"I should like to have seen that scarf," said Dicksie reflectively. She rose and looked around
the tent. In a few minutes she made Marion lie down on one of the cots. Then she walked to
the front of the tent, opened the flap, and looked out.

Whispering Smith was sitting before the fire. Rain was falling, but Dicksie put on her close-fitting
black coat, raised the door-flap, and walked noiselessly from the tent and up behind him. "Alone
in the rain?" she asked.

She had expected to see him start at her voice, but he did not, though he rose and turned around.
"Not now," he answered as he offered her his box with a smile.

"Are you taking your hat off for me in the rain? Put it on again!" she insisted with a little
tone of command, and she was conscious of gratification when he obeyed amiably.

"I won't take your box unless you can find another!" she said. "Oh, you have another! I came
out to tell you what a dreadful man I thought you were, and to apologize."

"Never mind apologizing. Lots of people think worse than that of me and don't apologize. I'm
sorry I have no shelter to offer you, except to sit on this side and take the rain."

"Why should you take the rain for me?"

"You are a woman."

"But a stranger to you."

"Only in a way."

Dicksie gazed for a moment at the fire. "You won't think me abrupt, will you?" she said, turning
to him, "but, as truly as I live, I cannot account for you, Mr. Smith. I guess at the ranch
we don't know what goes on in the world. Everything I see of you contradicts everything I have
heard of you."

"You haven't seen much of me yet, you know, and you may have heard much better accounts of
me than I deserve. Still, it isn't surprising you can't account for me; in fact, it would be
surprising if you could. Nobody pretends to do that. You must not be shocked if I can't even
account for myself. Do you know what a derelict is? A ship that has been abandoned but never
wholly sinks."

"Please don't make fun of me! How did you happen to come into the mountains? I do want to understand
things better."

"Why, you are in real earnest, aren't you? But I am not making fun of you. Do you know President
Bucks? No? Too bad! He's a very handsome old bachelor. And he is one of those men who get all
sorts of men to do all sorts of things for them. You know, building and operating railroads
in this part of the country is no joke. The mountains are filled with men that don't care for
God, man, or the devil. Sometimes they furnish their own ammunition to fight with and don't
bother the railroad for years; at such times the railroad leaves them alone. For my part, I
never quarrel with a man that doesn't quarrel with the road. Then comes a time when they get
after us, shooting our men or robbing our agents or stopping our trains. Of course we have
to get busy then. A few years ago they worried Bucks till they nearly turned his hair gray.
At that unfortunate time I happened into his office with a letter of introduction from his
closest Chicago friend, Willis Howard, prince of good men, the man that made the Palmer House
famous--yes. Now I had come out here, Miss Dunning--I almost said Miss Dicksie, because I hear
it so much----"

"I should be greatly set up to hear you call me Dicksie. And I have wondered a thousand times
about your name. Dare I ask--why do they call you Whispering Smith? You don't whisper."

He laughed with abundance of good-humor. "That is a ridiculous accident, and it all came about
when I lived in Chicago. Do you know anything about the infernal climate there? Well, in Chicago
I used to lose my voice whenever I caught a cold--sometimes for weeks together. So they began
calling me Whispering Smith, and I've never been able to shake the name. Odd, isn't it? But
I came out to go into the real-estate business. I was looking for some gold-bearing farm lands
where I could raise quartz, don't you know, and such things--yes. I don't mind telling you
this, though I wouldn't tell it to everybody----"

"Certainly not," assented Dicksie, drawing her skirt around to sit in closer confidence.

"I wanted to get rich quick," murmured Whispering Smith, confidentially.

"Almost criminal, wasn't it?"

"I wanted to have evening clothes."

"Yes."

"And for once in my life two pairs of suspenders--a modest ambition, but a gnawing one. Would
you believe it? Before I left Bucks's office he had hired me for a railroad man. When he asked
me what I could do, and I admitted a little experience in handling real estate, he brought
his fist down on the table and swore I should be his right-of-way man."

"How about the mining?"

Whispering Smith waved his hand in something of the proud manner in which Bucks could wave
his presidential hand. "My business, Bucks said, need not interfere with that, not in the least;
he said that I could do all the mining I wanted to, and I have done all the mining I wanted
to. But here is the singular thing that happened: I opened up my office and had nothing to
do; they didn't seem to want any right of way just then. I kept getting my check every month,
and wasn't doing a hand's turn but riding over the country and shooting jack-rabbits. But,
Lord, I love this country! Did you know I used to be a cowboy in the mountains years ago? Indeed
I did. I know it almost as well as you do. I mined more or less in the meantime. Occasionally
I would go to Bucks--you say you don't know him?--too bad!--and tell him candidly I wasn't
doing a thing to earn my salary. At such times he would only ask me how I liked the job," and
Whispering Smith's heavy eyebrows rose in mild surprise at the recollection. "One day when
I was talking with him he handed me a telegram from the desert saying that a night operator
at a lonely station had been shot and a switch misplaced and a train nearly wrecked. He asked
me what I thought of it. I discovered that the poor fellow had shot himself, and in the end
we had to put him in the insane asylum to save him from the penitentiary--but that was where
my trouble began.

"It ended in my having to organize the special service on the whole road to look after a thousand
and one things that nobody else had--well, let us say time or inclination to look after: fraud
and theft and violence and all that sort of disagreeable thing. Then one day the cat crawled
out of the bag. What do you think? That man who is now president of this road had somewhere
seen a highly colored story about me in a magazine, a ten-cent magazine, you know. He had spotted
me the first time I walked into his office, and told me a long time afterward it was just like
seeing a man walk out of a book, and that he had hard work to keep from falling on my neck.
He knew what he wanted me for; it was just this thing. I left Chicago to get away from it,
and this is the result. It is not all that kind of thing, oh, no! When they want to cross a
reservation I have a winter in Washington with our attorneys and dine with old friends in the
White House, and the next winter I may be on snowshoes chasing a band of rustlers. I swore
long ago I would do no more of it--that I couldn't and wouldn't. But it is Bucks. I can't go
back on him. He is amiable and I am soft. He says he is going to have a crown and harp for
me some day, but I fancy--that is, I have an intimation--that there will be a red-hot protest
at the bar of Heaven," he lowered his tone, "from a certain unmentionable quarter when I undertake
to put the vestments on. By the way, I hear you are interested in chickens. Oh, yes, I've heard
a lot about you! Bob Johnson, over at Oroville, has some pretty bantams I want to tell you about."

Whether he talked railroad or chickens, it was all one: Dicksie sat spellbound; and when he
announced it was half-past three o'clock and time to rouse Marion, she was amazed.

Dawn showed in the east. The men eating breakfast in tents were to be sent on a work-train
up a piece of Y-track that led as near as they could be taken to where they were needed. The
train had pulled out when Dicksie, Marion, McCloud, and Whispering Smith took horses to get
across to the hills and through to the ranch-house. They had ridden slowly for some distance
when McCloud was called back. The party returned and rode together into the mists that hung
below the bridge. They came out upon a little party of men standing with lanterns on a piece
of track where the river had taken the entire grade and raced furiously through the gap. Fog
shrouded the light of the lanterns and lent gloom to the silence, but the women could see the
group that McCloud had joined. Standing above his companions on a pile of ties, a tall young
man holding a megaphone waited. Out of the darkness there came presently a loud calling. The
tall young man at intervals bawled vigorously into the fog in answer. Far away could be heard,
in the intervals of silence, the faint clang of the work-train engine-bell. Again the voice
came out of the fog. McCloud took the megaphone and called repeatedly. Two men rowed a boat
out of the back-water behind the grade, and when McCloud stepped into it, it was released on
a line while the oarsmen guided it across the flood until it disappeared. The two megaphone
voices could still be heard. After a time the boat was pulled back again, and McCloud stepped
out of it. He spoke a moment with the men, rejoined his party, and climbed into the saddle.
"Now we are off," said he.

"What was it all about?" asked Whispering Smith.

"Your friend Klein is over there. Nobody could understand what he said except that he wanted
me. When I got here I couldn't make out what he was talking about, so they let us out in the
boat on a line. Half-way across the break I made out what was troubling him. He said he was
going to lose three hundred feet of track, and wanted to know what to do."

"And you told him, of course?"

"Yes."

"What did you tell him?"

"I told him to lose it."

"I could have done that myself."

"Why didn't you?"

CHAPTER XXIII

AT THE RIVER

They found the ranch-house as Marion and Dicksie had left it, deserted. Puss told them every
one was at the river. McCloud did not approve Dicksie's plan of going down to see her cousin
first. "Why not let me ride down and manage it without bringing you into it at all?" he suggested.
"It can be done." And after further discussion it was so arranged.

McCloud and Smith had been joined by Dancing on horseback, and they made their way around Squaw
Lake and across the fields. The fog was rolling up from the willows at the bend. Men were chopping
in the brush, and McCloud and his companion soon met Lance Dunning riding up the narrow strip
of sand that held the river off the ranch.

McCloud greeted Dunning, regardless of his amazement, as if he had parted from him the day
before. "How are you making it over here?" he asked. "We are in pretty good shape at the moment
down below, and I thought I would ride over to see if we could do anything for you. This is
what you call pretty fair water for this part of the valley, isn't it?"

Lance swallowed his astonishment. "This isn't water, McCloud; this is hell." He took off his
hat and wiped his forehead. "Well, I call this white, anyway, and no mistake--I do indeed,
sir! This is Whispering Smith, isn't it? Glad to see you at Crawling Stone, sir." Which served
not only to surprise but to please Whispering Smith.

"Some of my men were free," continued McCloud; "I switched some mattresses and sacks around
the Y, thinking they might come in play here for you at the bend. They are at your service
if you think you need them."

"Need them!" Lance swore fiercely and from the bottom of his heart. He was glad to get help
from any quarter and made no bones about it. Moreover, McCloud lessened the embarrassment by
explaining that he had a personal interest in holding the channel where it ran, lest a change
above might threaten the approaches already built to the bridge; and Whispering Smith, who
would have been on terms with the catfish if he had been flung into the middle of the Crawling
Stone, contributed at once, like a reënforced spring, to the ease of the situation.

Lance again took off his hat and wiped the sweat of anxiety from his dripping forehead. "Whatever
differences of opinion I may have with your damned company, I have no lack of esteem personally,
McCloud, for you, sir, by Heaven! How many men did you bring?"

"And whatever wheels you Crawling Stone ranchers may have in your heads on the subject of irrigation,"
returned McCloud evenly, "I have no lack of esteem personally, Mr. Dunning, for you. I brought
a hundred."

"Do you want to take charge here? I'm frank, sir; you understand this game and I don't."

"Suppose we look the situation over; meantime, all our supplies have to be brought across from
the Y. What should you think, Mr. Dunning, of putting all the teams you can at that end of
the work?"

"Every man that can be spared from the river shall go at it. Come over here and look at our
work and judge for yourself."

They rode to where the forces assembled by Lance were throwing up embankments and riprapping.
There was hurried running to and fro, a violent dragging about of willows, and a good deal
of shouting.

Dunning, with some excitement, watched McCloud's face to note the effect of the activity on
him, but McCloud's expression, naturally reserved, reflected nothing of his views on the subject.
Dunning waved his hand at the lively scene. "They've been at it all night. How many would you
take away, sir?"

"You might take them all away, as far as the river is concerned," said McCloud after a moment.

"What? Hell! All?"

"They are not doing anything, are they, but running around in a circle? And those fellows over
there might as well be making mud pies as riprapping at that point. What we need there is a
mattress and sandbags--and plenty of them. Bill," directed McCloud in an even tone of business
as he turned to Dancing, "see how quick you can get your gangs over here with what sacks they
can carry and walk fast. If you will put your men on horses, Mr. Dunning, they can help like
everything. That bank won't last a great while the way the river is getting under it now."
Dancing wheeled like an elephant on his bronco and clattered away through the mud. Lance Dunning,
recovering from his surprise, started his men back for the wagons, and McCloud, dismounting,
walked with him to the water's edge to plan the fight for what was left of the strip in front
of the alfalfa fields.

When Whispering Smith got back to the house he was in good-humor. He joined Dicksie and Marion
in the dining-room, where they were drinking coffee. Afterward Dicksie ordered horses saddled
and the three rode to the river. Up and down the bank as far as they could see in the misty
rain, men were moving slowly about--more men, it seemed to Dicksie, than she had ever seen
together in her life. The confusion and the noise had disappeared. No one appeared to hurry,
but every one had something to do, and, from the gangs who with sledges were sinking "dead-men"
among the trees to hold the cables of the mattress that was about to be sunk, and the Japs
who were diligently preparing to float and load it, to the men that were filling and wheeling
the sandbags, no one appeared excited. McCloud joined the visitors for a few moments and then
went back to where Dancing and his men on life-lines were guiding the mattress to its resting-place.
In spite of the gloom of the rain, which Whispering Smith said was breaking, Dicksie rode back
to the house in much better spirits with her two guests; and when they came from luncheon the
sun, as Smith had predicted, was shining.

"Oh, come out!" cried Dicksie, at the door. Marion had a letter to write and went upstairs,
but Whispering Smith followed Dicksie. "Does everything you say come true?" she demanded as
she stood in the sunshine.

She was demure with light-heartedness and he looked at her approvingly. "I hope nothing I may
say ever will come true unless it makes you happy," he answered lightly. "It would be a shame
if it did anything else."

She pointed two accusing fingers at him. "Do you know what you promised last night? You have
forgotten already! You said you would tell me why my leghorns are eating their feathers off."

"Let me talk with them."

"Just what I should like. Come on!" said Dicksie, leading the way to the chicken-yard. "I want
you to see my bantams too. I have three of the dearest little things. One is setting. They
are over the way. Come see them first. And, oh, you must see my new game chickens. Truly, you
never saw anything as handsome as Cæsar--he's the rooster; and I have six pullets. Cæsar is
perfectly superb."

When the two reached the chicken-houses Dicksie examined the nest where she was setting the
bantam hen. "This miserable hen will not set," she exclaimed in despair. "See here, Mr. Smith,
she has left her nest again and is scratching around on the ground. Isn't it a shame? I've
tied a cord around her leg so she couldn't run away, and she is hobbling around like a scrub pony."

"Perhaps the eggs are too warm," suggested her companion. "I have had great success in cases
like this with powdered ice--not using too much, of course; just shave the ice gently and rub
it over the eggs one at a time; it will often result in refreshing the attention of the hen."

Dicksie looked grave. "Aren't you ashamed to make fun of me?"

Whispering Smith seemed taken aback. "Is it really serious business?"

"Of course."

"Very good. Let me watch this hen for a few minutes and diagnose her. You go on to your other
chickens. I'll stay here and think."

Dicksie went down through the yards. When she came back, Whispering Smith was sitting on a
cracker-box watching the bantam. The chicken was making desperate efforts to get off Dicksie's
cord and join its companions in the runway. Smith was eying the bantam critically when Dicksie
rejoined him. "Do you usually," he asked, looking suddenly up, "have success in setting roosters?"

"Now you are having fun with me again."

"No, by Heaven! I am not."

"Have you diagnosed the case?"

"I have, and I have diagnosed it as a case of mistaken identity."

"Identity?"

"And misapplied energy. Miss Dicksie, you have tied up the wrong bird. This is not a bantam
hen at all; this is a bantam rooster. Now that is my judgment. Compare him with the others.
Notice how much darker his plumage is--it's the rooster," declared Whispering Smith, wiping
the perplexity from his brow. "Don't feel bad, not at all. Cut him loose, Miss Dicksie--don't
hesitate; do it on my responsibility. Now let's look at the cannibal leghorns--and great Cæsar."

CHAPTER XXIV

BETWEEN GIRLHOOD AND WOMANHOOD

About nine o'clock that night Puss ushered McCloud in from the river. Dicksie came running
downstairs to meet him. "Your cousin insisted I should come up to the house for some supper,"
said McCloud dryly. "I could have taken camp fare with the men. Gordon stayed there with him."

Dicksie held his hat in her hand, and her eyes were bright in the firelight. Puss must have
thought the two made a handsome couple, for she lingered, as she started for the kitchen, to
look back.

"Puss," exclaimed her mistress, "fry a chicken right away! A big one, Puss! Mr. McCloud is
very hungry, I know. And be quick, do! Oh, how is the river, Mr. McCloud?"

"Behaving like a lamb. It hasn't fallen much, but the pressure seems to be off the bank, if
you know what that means?"

"You must be a magician! Things changed the minute you came!"

"The last doctor usually gets credit for the cure, you know."

"Oh, I know all about that. Don't you want to freshen up? Should you mind coming right to my
room? Marion is in hers," explained Dicksie, "and I am never sure of Cousin Lance's,--he has
so many boots."

When she had disposed of McCloud she flew to the kitchen. Puss was starting after a chicken.
"Take a lantern, Puss!" whispered Dicksie vehemently.

"No, indeed; dis nigger don' need no lantern fo' chickens, Miss Dicksie."

"But get a good one, Puss, and make haste, do! Mr. McCloud must be starved! Where is the baking
powder? I'll get the biscuits started."

Puss turned fiercely. "Now look-a heah, yo' can't make biscuits! Yo' jes' go se' down wif dat
young gen'm'n! Jes' lemme lone, ef yo' please! Dis ain't de firs' time I killed chickens, Miss
Dicksie, an' made biscuits. Jes' clair out an' se' down! Place f'r young ladies is in de parlor!
Ol' Puss can cook supper f'r one man yet--ef she has to!"

"Oh, yes, Puss, certainly, I know, of course; only, get a nice chicken!" and with the parting
admonition Dicksie, smoothing her hair wildly, hastened back to the living-room.

But the harm was done. Puss, more excited than her mistress, lost her head when she got to
the chicken-yard, and with sufficiently bad results. When Dicksie ran out a few moments afterward
for a glass of water for McCloud, Puss was calmly wiping her hands, and in the sink lay the
quivering form of young Cæsar. Dicksie caught her favorite up by the legs and suppressed a
cry. There could be no mistake. She cast a burning look on Puss. It would do no good to storm
now. Dicksie only wrung her hands and returned to McCloud.

He rose in the happiest mood. He could not see what a torment Dicksie was in, and took the
water without asking himself why it trembled in her hand. Her restrained manner did not worry
him, for he felt that his fight at the river was won, and the prospect of fried chicken composed
him. Even the long hour before Puss, calm and inviting in a white cap and apron, appeared to
announce supper, passed like a dream. When Dicksie rose to lead the way to the dining-room,
McCloud walked on air; the high color about her eyes intoxicated him. Not till half the fried
chicken, with many compliments from McCloud, had disappeared, and the plate had gone out for
the second dozen biscuits, did he notice Dicksie's abstraction.

"I'm sure you need worry no longer about the water," he observed reassuringly. "I think the
worst of the danger is past."

Dicksie looked at the table-cloth with wide-open eyes. "I feel sure that it is. I am no longer
worrying about that."

"It's nothing I can do or leave undone, is it?" asked McCloud, laughing a little as he implied
in his tone that she must be worrying about something.

Dicksie made a gesture of alarm. "Oh, no, no; nothing!"

"It's a pretty good plan not to worry about anything."

"Do you think so?"

"Why, we all thought so last night. Heavens!" McCloud drew back in his chair. "I never offered
you a piece of chicken! What have I been thinking of?"

"Oh, I wouldn't eat it anyway!" cried Dicksie.

"You wouldn't? It is delicious. Do have a plate and a wing at least."

"Really, I could not bear to think of it," she said pathetically.

He spoke lower. "Something is troubling you. I have no right to a confidence, I know," he added,
taking a biscuit.

Her eyes fell to the floor. "It is nothing. Pray, don't mind me. May I fill your cup?" she
asked, looking up. "I am afraid I worry too much over what has happened and can't be helped.
Do you never do that?"

McCloud, laughing wretchedly, tore Cæsar's last leg from his body. "No indeed. I never worry
over what can't be helped."

They left the dining-room. Marion came down. But they had hardly seated themselves before the
living-room fire when a messenger arrived with word that McCloud was wanted at the river. His
chagrin at being dragged away was so apparent that Marion and Dicksie sympathized with him
and laughed at him. "'I never worry about what can't be helped,'" Dicksie murmured.

He looked at Marion. "That's a shot at me. You don't want to go down, do you?" he asked ironically,
looking from one to the other.

"Why, of course I'll go down," responded Dicksie promptly. "Marion caught cold last night,
I guess, so you will excuse her, I know. I will be back in an hour, Marion, and you can toast
your cold while I'm gone."

"But you mustn't go alone!" protested McCloud.

Dicksie lifted her chin the least bit. "I shall be going with you, shall I not? And if the
messenger has gone back I shall have to guide you. You never could find your way alone."

"But I can go," interposed Marion, rising.

"Not at all; you can not go!" announced Dicksie. "I can protect both Mr. McCloud and myself.
If he should arrive down there under the wing of two women he would never hear the last of
it. I am mistress here still, I think; and I sha'n't be leaving home, you know, to make the trip!"

McCloud looked at Marion. "I never worry over what can't be helped--though it is dollars to
cents that those fellows don't need me down there any more than a cat needs two tails. And
how will you get back?" he asked, turning to Dicksie.

"I will ride back!" returned Dicksie loftily. "But you may, if you like, help me get my horse up."

"Are you sure you can find your way back?" persisted McCloud.

Dicksie looked at him in surprise. "Find my way back?" she echoed softly. "I could not lose
it. I can ride over any part of this country at noon or at midnight, asleep or awake, with
a saddle or without, with a bridle or without, with a trail or without. I've ridden every horse
that has ever come on the Crawling Stone Ranch. I could ride when I was three years old. Find
my way back?"

The messenger had gone when the two rode from the house. The sky was heavily overcast, and
the wind blew such a gale from the south and west that one could hardly hear what the other
said. McCloud could not have ridden from the house to the barn in the utter darkness, but his
horse followed Dicksie's. She halted frequently on the trail for him to come up with her, and
after they had crossed the alfalfa fields McCloud did not care whether they ever found the
path again or not. "It's great, isn't it?" he exclaimed, coming up to her after opening a gate
in the dark. "Where are you?"

"This way," laughed Dicksie. "Look out for the trail here. Give me your hand and let your horse
have his head. If he slips, drop off quick on this side." McCloud caught her hand. They rode
for a moment in silence, the horses stepping cautiously. "All right now," said Dicksie; "you
may let go." But McCloud kept his horse up close and clung to the warm hand. "The camp is just
around the hill," murmured Dicksie, trying to pull away. "But of course if you would like to
ride in holding my hand you may!"

"No," said McCloud, "of course not--not for worlds! But, Miss Dicksie, couldn't we ride back
to the house and ride around the other way into camp? I think the other way into the camp--say,
around by the railroad bridge--would be prettier, don't you?"

For answer she touched Jim lightly with her lines and his spring released her hand very effectively.
As she did so the trail turned, and the camp-fire, whipped in the high wind, blazed before them.

Whispering Smith and Lance Dunning were sitting together as the two galloped up. Smith helped
Dicksie to alight. She was conscious of her color and that her eyes were now unduly bright.
Moreover, Whispering Smith's glance rested so calmly on both McCloud's face and her own that
Dicksie felt as if he saw quite through her and knew everything that had happened since they
left the house.

Lance was talking to McCloud. "Don't abuse the wind," McCloud was saying. "It's our best friend
to-night, Mr. Dunning. It is blowing the water off-shore. Where is the trouble?" For answer
Dunning led McCloud off toward the Bend, and Dicksie was left alone with Whispering Smith.

He made a seat for her on the windward side of the big fire. When she had seated herself she
looked up in great contentment to ask if he was not going to sit down beside her. The brown
coat, the high black hat, and the big eyes of Whispering Smith had already become a part of
her mental store. She saw that he seemed preoccupied, and sought to draw him out of his abstraction.

"I am so glad you and Mr. McCloud are getting acquainted with Cousin Lance," she said. "And
do you mind my giving you a confidence, Mr. Smith? Lance has been so unreasonable about this
matter of the railroad's coming up the valley and powwowing so much with lawyers and ranchers
that he has been forgetting about everything at home. He is so much older than I am that he
ought to be the sensible one of the family, don't you think so? It frightens me to have him
losing at cards and drinking. I am afraid he will get into some shooting affair. I don't understand
what has come over him, and I worry about it. I believe you could influence him if you knew him."

"What makes you think that?" asked Whispering Smith, but his eyes were on the fire.

"Because these men he spends his time with in town--the men who fight and shoot so much--are
afraid of you. Don't laugh at me. I know it is quite true in spite of their talk. I was afraid
of you myself until----"

"Until we made verse together."

"Until you made verse and I spoiled it. But I think it is because I don't understand things
that I am so afraid. I am not naturally a coward. I'm sure I could not be afraid of you if
I understood things better. And there is Marion. She puzzles me. She will never speak of her
husband--I don't know why. And I don't know why Mr. McCloud is so hard on Mr. Sinclair--Mr.
Sinclair seems so kind and good-natured."

Whispering Smith looked from the fire into Dicksie's eyes. "What should you say if I gave you
a confidence?"

She opened her heart to his searching gaze. "Would you trust me with a confidence?"

He answered without hesitation. "You shall see. Now, I have many things I can't talk about,
you understand. But if I had to give you a secret this instant that carried my life, I shouldn't
fear to do it--so much for trusting you. Only this, too, as to what I say: don't ever quote
me or let it appear that you any more than know me. Can you manage that? Really? Very good;
you will understand why in a minute. The man that is stirring up all this trouble with your
Cousin Lance and in this whole country is your kind and good-natured neighbor, Mr. Sinclair.
I am prejudiced against him; let us admit that on the start, and remember it in estimating
what I say. But Sinclair is the man who has turned your cousin's head, as well as made things
in other ways unpleasant for several of us. Sinclair--I tell you so you will understand everything,
more than your cousin, Mr. McCloud, or Marion Sinclair understand--Sinclair is a train-wrecker
and a murderer. That makes you breathe hard, doesn't it? but it is so. Sinclair is fairly educated
and highly intelligent, capable in every way, daring to the limit, and, in a way, fascinating;
it is no wonder he has a following. But his following is divided into two classes: the men
that know all the secrets, and the men that don't--men like Rebstock and Du Sang, and men like
your cousin and a hundred or so sports in Medicine Bend, who see only the glamour of Sinclair's
pace. Your cousin sympathizes with Sinclair when he doesn't actually side with him. All this
has helped to turn Sinclair's head, and this is exactly the situation you and McCloud and I
and a lot of others are up against. They don't know all this, but I know it, and now you know
it. Let me tell you something that comes close to home. You have a cowboy on the ranch named
Karg--he is called Flat Nose. Karg was a railroad man. He is a cattle-thief, a train-robber,
a murderer, and a spy. I should not tell you this if you were not game to the last drop of
your blood. But I think I know you better than you know yourself, though you never saw me until
last night. Karg is Sinclair's spy at your ranch, and you must never feel it or know it; but
he is there to keep your cousin's sympathy with Sinclair, and to lure your cousin his way.
And Karg will try to kill George McCloud every time he sets foot on this ranch, remember that."

"Then Mr. McCloud ought not to be here. I don't want him to stay if he is in danger!" exclaimed
Dicksie.

"But I do want him to come here as if it mattered nothing, and I shall try to take care of
him. I have a man among your own men, a cowboy named Wickwire, who will be watching Karg, and
who is just as quick, and Karg, not knowing he was watched, would be taken unawares. If Wickwire
goes elsewhere to work some one else will take his place here. Karg is not on the ranch now;
he is up North, hunting up some of your steers that were run off last month by his own cronies.
Now do you think I am giving you confidence?"

She looked at him steadily. "If I can only deserve it all." In the distance she heard the calling
of the men at the river borne on the wind. The shock of what had been told her, the strangeness
of the night and of the scene, left her calm. Fear had given way to responsibility and Dicksie
seemed to know herself.

"You have nothing whatever to do to deserve it but keep your own counsel. But listen a moment
longer--for this is what I have been leading up to," he said. "Marion will get a message to-morrow,
a message from Sinclair, asking her to come to see him at his ranch-house before she goes back.
I don't know what he wants--but she is his wife. He has treated her infamously; that is why
she will not live with him and does not speak of him. But you know how strange a woman is--or
perhaps you don't: she doesn't always cease to care for a man when she ceases to trust him.
I am not in Marion's confidence, Miss Dicksie. She is another man's wife. I cannot tell how
she feels toward him; I know she has often tried to reclaim him from his deviltry. She may
try again, that is, she may, for one reason or another, go to him as he asks. I could not interfere,
if I would. I have no right to if I could, and I will not. Now this is what I'm trying to get
up the courage to ask you. Should you dare to go with her to Sinclair's ranch if she decides
to go to him?"

"Certainly I should dare."

"After all you know?"

"After all I know--why not?"

"Then in case she does go and you go with her, you will know nothing whatever about anything,
of course, unless you get the story from her. What I fear is that which possibly may come of
their interview. He may try to kill her--don't be frightened. He will not succeed if you can
only make sure he doesn't lead her away on horseback from the ranch-house or get her alone
in a room. She has few friends. I respect and honor her because she and I grew up as children
together in the same little town in Wisconsin. I know her folks, all of them, and I've promised
them--you know--to have a kind of care of her."

"I think I know."

He looked self-conscious even at her tone of understanding. "I need not try to deceive you;
your instinct would be poor if it did not tell you more than I ought to. He came along and
turned her head. You need fear nothing for yourself in going with her, and nothing for her
if you can cover just those two points--can you remember? Not to let her go away with him on
horseback, and not to leave her where she will be alone with him in the house?"

"I can and will. I think as much of Marion as you do. I am proud to be able to do something
for you. How little I have known you! I thought you were everything I didn't want to know."

"It's nothing," he returned easily, "except that Sinclair has stirred up your cousin and the
ranchers as well as the Williams Cache gang, and that makes talk about me. I have to do what
I can to make this a peaceable country to live in. The railroad wants decent people here and
doesn't want the other kind, and it falls on me, unfortunately, to keep the other kind moving.
I don't like it, but we can none of us do quite what we please in making a living. Let me tell
you this"--he turned to fix his eyes seriously on hers: "Believe anything you hear of me except
that I have ever taken human life willingly or save in discharge of my duty. But this kind
of work makes my own life an uncertainty, as you can see. I do almost literally carry my life
in my hand, for if my hand is not quicker every time than a man's eye, I am done for then and
there."

"It is dreadful to think of."

"Not exactly that, but it is something I can't afford to forget."

"What would become of the lives of the friends you protect if you were killed?"

"You say you care for Marion Sinclair. I should like to think if anything should happen to
me you wouldn't forget her?"

"I never will."

He smiled. "Then I put her in charge of the man closest to me, George McCloud, and the woman
she thinks the most of in the world--except her mother. What is this, are they back? Yonder
they come."

"We found nothing serious," McCloud said, answering their questions as he approached with Lance
Dunning. "The current is really swinging away, but the bank is caving in where it was undermined
last night." He stopped before Dicksie. "I am trying to get your cousin to go to the house
and go to bed. I am going to stay all night, but there is no necessity for his staying."

"Damn it, McCloud, it's not right," protested Lance, taking off his hat and wiping his forehead.
"You need the sleep more than I do. I say he is the one to go to bed to-night," continued Lance,
putting it up to Whispering Smith. "And I insist, by the Almighty, that you two take him back
to the house with you now!"

Whispering Smith raised his hand. "If this is merely a family quarrel about who shall go to
bed, let us compromise. You two stay up all night and let me go to bed."

Lance, however, was obdurate.

"It seems to be a family characteristic of the Dunnings to have their own way," ventured McCloud,
after some further dispute. "If you will have it so, Mr. Dunning, you may stand watch to-night
and I will go to the house."

Riding back with McCloud, Dicksie and Whispering Smith discussed the flood. McCloud disclaimed
credit for the improvement in the situation. "If the current had held against us as it did
yesterday, nothing I could have done would have turned it," he said.

"Honesty is the best policy, of course," observed Whispering Smith. "I like to see a modest
man--and you want to remind him of all this when he sends in his bill," he suggested, speaking
to Dicksie in the dark. "But," he added, turning to McCloud, "admitting that you are right,
don't take the trouble to advertise your view of it around here. It would be only decent strategy
for us in the valley just now to take a little of the credit due to the wind."

CHAPTER XXV

THE MAN ON THE FRENCHMAN

Sinclair's place on the Frenchman backed up on a sharp rise against the foothills of the Bridger
range, and the ranch buildings were strung along the creek. The ranch-house stood on ground
high enough to command the country for miles up and down the valley.

Only two roads lead from Medicine Bend and the south into the Frenchman country: one a wagon-road
following Smoky Creek and running through Dale Canyon; the other a pack-road, known as the
Gridley trail, crossing the Topah Topah Hills and making a short cut from the Dunning ranch
on the Crawling Stone to the Frenchman. The entire valley is, in fact, so difficult of access,
save by the long and roundabout wagon-road, that the sight of a complete outfit of buildings
such as that put up by Sinclair always came as a surprise to the traveller who, reaching the
crest of the hills, looked suddenly down a thousand feet on his well-ordered sheds and barns
and corrals.

The rider who reaches the Topah Topah crest on the Gridley trail now sees in the valley below
only traces of what was so laboriously planned and perfectly maintained a few years ago. But
even the ruins left on the Frenchman show the herculean labor undertaken by the man in setting
up a comfortable and even an elaborate establishment in so inaccessible a spot. His defiance
of all ordinary means of doing things was shown in his preference for bringing much of his
building-material over the trail instead of around by the Smoky Creek road. A good part of
the lumber that went into his house was packed over the Gridley trail. His piano was brought
through the canyon on a wagon, but the mechanical player for the piano and his wagons themselves
were packed over the trail on the backs of mules. A heavy steel range for the kitchen had been
brought over the same way. For Sinclair no work was hard enough, none went fast enough, and
revelry never rose high enough. During the time of his activity in the Frenchman Valley Sinclair
had the best-appointed place between Williams Cache and the Crawling Stone, and in the Crawling
Stone only the Dunning ranch would bear comparison with his own. On the Frenchman Sinclair
kept an establishment the fame of which is still foremost in mountain story. Here his cows
ranged the canyons and the hills for miles, and his horses were known from Medicine Bend to
Fort Tracy. Here he rallied his men, laid snares for his enemies, dispensed a reckless hospitality,
ruled his men with an oath and a blow, and carried a six-shooter to explain orders and answer
questions with.

Over the Gridley trail from the Crawling Stone Marion and Dicksie Dunning rode early in the
morning the day after McCloud and his men left the Stone Ranch with their work done. The trail
is a good three hours long, and they reached Sinclair's place at about ten o'clock. He was
waiting for Marion--she had sent word she should come--and he came out of the front door into
the sunshine with a smile of welcome when he saw Dicksie with her. Dicksie, long an admirer
of Sinclair's, as women usually were, had recast somewhat violently her opinions of him. She
faced him now with a criminal consciousness that she knew too much. The weight of the dreadful
secret weighed on her, and her responsibility in the issue of the day ahead did not help to
make her greeting an easy one. One thing only was fixed in her mind and reflected in the tension
of her lips and her eyes: the resolve to keep at every cost the promise she had given. For
Dicksie had fallen under the spell of a man even more compelling than Sinclair, and felt strangely
bounden to what she had said.

Sinclair, however, had spirit enough to smooth quite away every embarrassment. "Bachelor's
quarters," he explained roughly and pleasantly, as he led the two women toward the house. "Cowmen
make poor housekeepers, but you must feel at home." And when Dicksie, looking at his Indian
rugs on the floors, the walls, and the couches, said she thought he had little to apologize
for, Sinclair looked gratified and took off his hat again. "Just a moment," he said, standing
at the side of the door. "I've never been able to get Marion over here before, so it happens
that a woman's foot has never entered the new house. I want to watch one of you cross the threshold
for the first time."

Dicksie, moving ahead, retreated with a laugh. "You first, then, Marion."

"No, Dicksie, you."

"Never! you first." So Marion, quite red and wretchedly ill at ease, walked into the ranch-house
first.

Sinclair shone nowhere better than as a host. When he had placed his guests comfortably in
the living-room he told them the story of the building of the house. Then he made a cicerone
of himself, and explained, with running comments, each feature of his plan as he showed how
it had been carried out through the various rooms. Surprised at the attractiveness of things,
Dicksie found herself making mental notes for her own use, and began asking questions. Sinclair
was superb in answering, but the danger of admiring things became at once apparent, for when
Dicksie exclaimed over a handsome bearskin, a rich dark brown grizzly-skin of unusual size,
Sinclair told the story of the killing, bared his tremendous forearm to show where the polished
claws had ripped him, and, disregarding Dicksie's protests, insisted on sending the skin over
to Crawling Stone Ranch as a souvenir of her visit.

"I live a great deal alone over here," he said, waving Dicksie's continued refusal magnificently
aside as he moved into the next room. "I've got a few good dogs, and I hunt just enough to
keep my hand in with a rifle." Dicksie quailed a little at the smile that went with the words.
"The men, at least the kind I mix with, don't care for grizzly-skins, and to enjoy anything
you've got to have sympathetic company--don't you know that?" he asked, looking admiringly
at Dicksie. "I've got another skin for you--a silver-tip," he added in deep, gentle tones,
addressing Marion. "It has a fine head, as fine as I ever saw in the Smithsonian. It is down
at Medicine Bend now, being dressed and mounted. By the way, I've forgotten to ask you, Miss
Dicksie, about the high water. How did you get through at the ranch?"

Dicksie, sitting on the piano-bench, looked up with resolution. "Bravely!" she exclaimed. "Mr.
McCloud came to our rescue with bags and mattresses and a hundred men, and he has put in a
revetement a thousand feet long. Oh, we are regular river experts at our house now! Had you
any trouble here, Mr. Sinclair?"

"No, the Frenchman behaves pretty well in the rock. We had forty feet of water here one day,
though; forty feet, that's right. McCloud, yes; able fellow, I guess, too, though he and I
don't hit it off." Sinclair sat back in his chair, and as he spoke he spoke magnanimously.
"He doesn't like me, but that is no fault of his; railroad men, and good ones, too, sometimes
get started wrong with one another. Well, I'm glad he took care of you. Try that piano, Miss
Dicksie, will you? I don't know much about pianos, but that ought to be a good one. I would
wheel the player over for you, but any one that plays as beautifully as you do ought not to
be allowed to use a player. Marion, I want to talk a few minutes with you, may I? Do you mind
going out under the cottonwood?"

Dicksie's heart jumped. "Don't be gone long, Marion," she exclaimed impulsively, "for you know,
Mr. Sinclair, we must get back by two o'clock." And Dicksie, pale with apprehension, looked
at them both. Marion, quite composed, nodded reassuringly and followed Sinclair out of doors
into the sunshine.

For a few minutes Dicksie fingered wildly on the piano at some half-forgotten air, and in a
fever of excitement walked out on the porch to see where they were. To her relief, she saw
Marion sitting near Sinclair under the big tree in front of the house, where the horses stood.
Dicksie, with her hands on her girdle, walked forlornly back and forth, hummed a tune, sat
down in a rocking-chair, fanned herself, rose, walked back and forth again, and reflected that
she was perfectly helpless, and that Sinclair might kill Marion a hundred times before she
could reach her. And the thought that Marion was perhaps wholly unconscious of danger increased
her anxiety.

She sat down in despair. How could Whispering Smith have allowed any one he had a care for
to be exposed in this dreadful way? Trying to think what to do, Dicksie hurried back into the
living-room, walked to the piano, took the pile of sheet-music from the top, and sat down to
thumb it over. She threw song after song on the chair beside her. They were sheets of gaudy
coon songs and ragtime with flaring covers, and they seemed to give off odors of cheap perfume.
Dicksie hardly saw the titles as she passed them over, but of a sudden she stopped. Between
two sheets of the music lay a small handkerchief. It was mussed, and in the corner of it "Nellie"
was written conspicuously in a laundry mark. The odor of musk became in an instant sickening.
Dicksie threw the music disdainfully aside, and sprang up with a flushed face to leave the
room. Sinclair's remark about the first woman to cross his threshold came back to her. From
that moment Dicksie hated him. But no sooner had she seated herself on the porch than she remembered
she had left her hat in the house, and rose to go in after it. She was resolved not to leave
it under the roof another moment, and she had resolved to go over and wait where her horse
was tied. As she reëntered the doorway she stopped. In the room she had just left a cowboy
sat at the table, taking apart a revolver to clean it. The revolver was spread in its parts
before him, but across the table lay a rifle. The man had not been in the room when she left
it a moment before.

Dicksie passed behind him. He paid no attention to her; he had not looked up when she entered
the room. Passing behind him once more to go out, Dicksie looked through the open window before
which he sat. Sinclair and Marion sitting under the cottonwood tree were in plain sight, and
the muzzle of the rifle where it lay covered them. Dicksie thrilled, but the man was busy with
his work. Breathing deeply, she walked out on the porch again. Sinclair, she thought, was looking
straight at her, and in her anxiety to appear unconscious she turned, walked to the end of
the house, and at the corner almost ran into a man sitting out of doors in the shade mending
a saddle. He had removed his belt to work, and his revolver lay in the holster on the bench,
its grip just within reach of his hand. Dicksie walked in front of him, but he did not look
up. She turned as if changing her mind, and with a little flirt of her riding-skirt sat down
in the porch chair, feeling a faint moisture upon her forehead.

                  *       *       *       *       *

"I am going to leave this country, Marion," Sinclair was saying. "There's nothing here for
me; I can see that. What's the use of my eating my heart out over the way I've been treated?
I've given the best years of my life to this railroad, and now they turn me down with a kick
and a curse. It's the old story of the Indian and his dog, only I don't propose to let them
make soup of me. I'm going to the coast, Marion. I'm going to California, where I wanted to
go when we were married, and I wish to God we had gone there then. All our troubles might never
have been if I had got in with a different crowd from these cow-boozers on the start. And,
Marion, I want to know whether you'll give me another chance and go with me."

Sinclair, on the bench and leaning against the tree, sat with folded arms looking at his wife.
Marion in a hickory chair faced him.

"No one would like to see you be all you ought to be more than I, Murray; but you are the only
one in the world that can ever give yourself another chance to be that."

"The fellows in the saddle here now have denied me every chance to make a man of myself again
on the railroad--you know that, Marion. In fact, they never did give me the show I was entitled
to. I ought to have had Hailey's place. Bucks never treated me right in that; he never pushed
me in the way he pushed other men that were just as bad as I ever was. It discouraged me; that's
the reason I went to pieces."

"It could be no reason for treating me as you treated me: for bringing drunken men and drunken
women into our house, and driving me out of it unless I would be what you were and what they were."

"I know I haven't treated you right; I've treated you shamefully. I will do anything on earth
you say to square it. I will! Recollect, I had lived among men and in the same country with
women like that for years before I knew you. I didn't know how to treat you; I admit it. Give
me another chance, Marion."

"I gave you all that I had when I married you, Murray. I haven't anything more to give to any
man. You would be disappointed in me if I could ever live with you again, and I could not do
that without living a lie every day."

He bent forward, looking at the ground. He talked of their first meeting in Wisconsin; of the
happiness of their little courtship; he brought up California again, and the Northwest coast,
where, he told her, a great railroad was to be built and he should find the chance he needed
to make a record for himself--it had been promised him--a chance to be the man his abilities
entitled him to be in railroading. "And I've got a customer for the ranch and the cows, Marion.
I don't care for this business--damn the cows! let somebody else chase after 'em through the
sleet. I've done well; I've made money--a lot of money--the last two years in my cattle deals,
and I've got it put away, Marion; you need never lift your hand to work in our house again.
We can live in California, and live well, under our own orange trees, whether I work or not.
All I want to know is, will you go with me?"

"No! I will not go with you, Murray."

He moved in his seat and threw his head up appealingly. "Why not?"

"I will never be dishonest with you; I never have been and I never will be. I have nothing
in my heart to give you, and I will not live upon your money. I am earning my own living. I
am as content as I ever can be, and I shall stay where I am and do what I am doing till I die,
probably. And this is why I came when you asked me to; to tell you the exact truth. I am not
a girl any longer--I never can be again. I am a woman. What I was before I married you I never
can be again, and you have no right to ask me to be a hypocrite and say I can love you--for
that is what it all comes to--when I have no such thing in my heart or life for you. It is
dead and gone, and I cannot help it."

"That sounds pretty hard, Marion."

"It is only the truth. It sounded fearfully hard to me when you told me that woman was your
friend--that you knew her before you knew me and would know her after I was dead; that she
was as good as I, and that if I didn't entertain her you would. But it was the truth; you told
me the truth, and it was better that you told it--as it is better now that I tell it to you."

"I was drunk. I didn't tell you the truth. A man is a pretty tough animal sometimes, but you
are a woman and a pure one, and I care more for you than for all the other women in the world,
and it is not your nature to be unforgiving."

"It is to be honest."

He looked suddenly up at her and spoke sharply: "Marion, I know why you won't go."

"I have honestly told you."

"No; you have not honestly told me. The real reason is Gordon Smith."

"If he were I should not hesitate to tell you, Murray, but he is not," she said coldly.

Sinclair spoke harshly: "Do you think you can fool me? Don't you suppose I know he spends his
time loafing around your shop?"

Marion flushed indignantly. "It is not true!"

"Don't you suppose I know he writes letters back to Wisconsin to your folks?"

"What have I to do with that? Why shouldn't he write to my mother? Who has a better right?"

"Don't drive me too far. By God! if I go away alone I'll never leave you here to run off with
Whispering Smith--remember that!" She sat in silence. His rage left her perfectly quiet, and
her unmoved expression shamed and in part silenced him. "Don't drive me too far," he muttered
sullenly. "If you do you will be responsible, Marion."

She did not move her eyes from the blue hills on the horizon. "I expect you to kill me sometime;
I feel sure you will. And that you may do." Then she bent her look on him. "You may do it now
if you want to."

His face turned heavy with rage. "Marion," he cried, with an oath, "do you know how close you
are to death at this moment?"

"You may do it now."

He clinched the bench-rail and rose slowly to his feet. Marion sat motionless in the hickory
chair; the sun was shining in her face and her hands were folded in her lap. Dicksie rocked
on the porch. In the shadow of the house the man was mending the saddle.

CHAPTER XXVI

TOWER W

At the end of a long and neglected hall on the second floor of the old bank block in Hill Street,
Whispering Smith had a room in which he made headquarters at Medicine Bend; it was in effect
Whispering Smith's home. A man's room is usually a forlorn affair in spite of any effort to
make it home-like. If he neglects his room it looks barren, and if he ornaments it it looks
fussy. Boys can do something with a den because they are not yet men, and some tincture of
woman's nature still clings to a boy. Girls are born to the deftness that is to become all
theirs in the touch of a woman's hand; but men, if they walk alone, pay the penalty of loneliness.

Whispering Smith, being logical, made no effort to decorate his domestic poverty. All his belongings
were of a simple sort and his room was as bare as a Jesuit's. Moreover, his affairs, being
at times highly particular, did not admit of the presence of a janitor in his quarters, and
he was of necessity his own janitor. His iron bed was spread with a pair of Pullman blankets,
his toilet arrangements included nothing more elaborate than a shaving outfit, and the mirror
above his washstand was only large enough to make a hurried shave, with much neck-stretching,
possible. The table was littered with letters, but it filled up one corner of the room, and
a rocking-chair and a trunk filled up another. The floor was spread with a Navajo blanket,
and near the head of the bed stood an old-fashioned wardrobe. This served not to ward Whispering
Smith's robes, which hung for the most part on his back, but to accommodate his rifles, of
which it contained an array that only a practised man could understand. The wardrobe was more,
however, than an armory. Beside the guns that stood racked in precision along the inner wall,
McCloud had once, to his surprise, seen a violin. It appeared out of keeping in such an atmosphere
and rather the antithesis of force and violence than a complement for it. And again, though
the rifles were disquietingly bright and effective-looking, the violin was old and shabby,
hanging obscurely in its corner, as if, whatever it might have in common with its master, it
had nothing in common with its surroundings.

The door of the room in the course of many years had been mutilated with keyholes and reënforced
with locks until it appeared difficult to choose an opening that would really afford entrance;
but two men besides Whispering Smith carried keys to the room--Kennedy and George McCloud.
They had right of way into it at all hours, and knew how to get in.

McCloud had left the bridge camp on the river for Medicine Bend on the Saturday that Marion
Sinclair--whose husband had finally told her he would give her one more chance to think it
over--returned with Dicksie safely from their trip to the Frenchman ranch.

Whispering Smith, who had been with Bucks and Morris Blood, got back to town the same day.
The president and general manager were at the Wickiup during the afternoon, and left for the
East at nine o'clock in the evening, when their car was attached to an east-bound passenger
train. McCloud took supper afterward with Whispering Smith at a Front Street chop-house, and
the two men separated at eleven o'clock. It was three hours later when McCloud tapped on the
door of Smith's room, and in a moment opened it. "Awake, Gordon?"

"Sure: come in. What is it?"

"The second section of the passenger train--Number Three, with the express cars--was stopped
at Tower W to-night. Oliver Sollers was pulling; he is badly shot up, and one of the messengers
was shot all to pieces. They cracked the through safe, emptied it, and made a clean get-away."

"Tower W--two hundred and seventy-six miles. Have you ordered up an engine?"

"Yes."

"Where's Kennedy?"

A second voice answered: "Right here."

"Strike a light, Farrell. What about the horses?"

"They're being loaded."

"Is the line clear?"

"Rooney Lee is clearing it."

"Spike it, George, and leave every westbound train in siding, with the engine cut loose and
plenty of steam, till we get by. It's now or never this time. Two hundred and seventy-six miles;
they're giving us our money's worth. Who's going with us, Farrell?"

"Bob Scott, Reed Young, and Brill, if Reed can get him at Sleepy Cat. Dancing is loading the
horses."

"I want Ed Banks to lead a posse straight from here for Williams Cache; Dancing can go with
him. And telephone Gene and Bob Johnson to sit down in Canadian Pass till they grow to the
rocks, but not to let anybody through if they want to live after I see them. They've got all
the instructions; all they need is the word. It's a long chance, but I think these are our
friends. You can head Banks off by telephone somewhere if we change our minds when we get a
trail. Start Brill Young and a good man from Sleepy Cat ahead of us, George, if you can, in
a baggage car with any horses that they can get there. They can be at Tower W by daybreak and
perhaps pick up a trail before we reach there, and we shall have fresh horses for them. I'm
ready, I guess; let's go. Slam the door, George!" In the hall Whispering Smith threw a pocket-light
on his watch. "I want you to put us there by seven o'clock."

"Charlie Sollers is going to pull you," answered McCloud. "Have you got everything? Then we're
off." The three men tiptoed down the dark hall, down the stairs, and across the street on a
noiseless run for the railroad yard.

The air was chill and the sky clear, with a moon more than half to the full. "Lord, what a
night to ride!" exclaimed Whispering Smith, looking mournfully at the stars. "Well planned,
well planned, I must admit."

The men hastened toward the yard, where lanterns were moving about the car of the train-guards
near the Blue Front stables. The loading board had been lowered, and the horses were being
carefully led into the car. From a switch engine behind the car a shrill cloud of steam billowed
into the air. Across the yard a great passenger engine, its huge white side-rod rising and
falling slowly in the still light of the moon--one of the mountain racers, thick-necked like
an athlete and deep-chested--was backing down for the run with the single car almost across
the west end of the division. Trainmen were running to and from the Wickiup platform. By the
time the horses were loaded the conductor had orders. Until the last minute, Whispering Smith
was in consultation with McCloud, and giving Dancing precise instructions for the posse into
the Cache country. They were still talking at the side door of the car, McCloud and Dancing
on the ground and Whispering Smith squatting on his haunches inside the moving car, when the
engine signalled and the special drew away from the chute, pounded up the long run of the ladder
switch, and moved with gathering speed into the canyon. In the cab Charlie Sollers, crushing
in his hand the tissue that had brought the news of his brother's death, sat at the throttle.
He had no speed orders. They had only told him he had a clear track.

CHAPTER XXVII

PURSUIT

Brill Young picked up a trail Sunday morning at Tower W before the special from Medicine Bend
reached there. The wrecked express car, which had been set out, had no story to tell. "The
only story," said Whispering Smith, as the men climbed into their saddles, "is in the one from
the hoofs, and the sooner we get after it the better."

The country around Tower W, which is itself an operating point on the western end of the division,
a mere speck on the desert, lies high and rolling. To the south, sixty miles away, rise the
Grosse Terre Mountains, and to the north and west lie the solitudes of the Heart range, while
in the northeast are seen the three white Saddle peaks of the Missions. The cool, bright sunshine
of a far and lonely horizon greets the traveller here, and ten miles away from the railroad,
in any direction, a man on horseback and unacquainted with the country would wish himself--mountain
men will tell you--in hell, because it would be easier to ride out of.

To the railroad men the country offered no unusual difficulties. The Youngs were as much at
home on a horse as on a hand car. Kennedy, though a large and powerful man, was inured to hard
riding, and Bob Scott and Whispering Smith in the saddle were merely a part--though an important
part--of their horses; without killing their mounts, they could get out of them every mile
in their legs. The five men covered twenty miles on a trail that read like print. One after
another of the railroad party commented on the carelessness with which it had been left. But
twenty miles south of the railroad, in an open and comparatively easy country, it was swallowed
completely up in the tracks of a hundred horses. The railroad men circled far and wide, only
to find the herd tracks everywhere ahead of them.

"This is a beautiful job," murmured Whispering Smith as the party rode together along the edge
of a creek-bottom. "Now who is their friend down in this country? What man would get out a
bunch of horses like this and work them this hard so early in the morning? Let's hunt that
man up. I like to meet a man that is a friend in need."

Bob Scott spoke: "I saw a man with some horses in a canyon across the creek a few minutes ago,
and I saw a ranch-house behind those buttes when I rode around them."

"Stop! Here's a man riding right into our jaws," muttered Kennedy. "Divide up among the rocks."
A horseman from the south came galloping up the creek, and Kennedy rode out with an ivory smile
to meet him. The two men parleyed for a moment, disputed each other sharply, and rode together
back to the railroad party.

"Haven't seen any men looking for horses this morning, have you?" asked Whispering Smith, eying
the stranger, a squat, square-jawed fellow with a cataract eye.

"I'm looking for horses myself. I ain't seen anybody else. What are you looking for?"

"Is this your bunch of horses that got loose here?" asked Smith.

"No."

"I thought," said Kennedy, smiling, "you said a minute ago they were."

The stranger fixed his cataract on him like a flash-light. "I changed my mind."

Whispering Smith's brows rose protestingly, but he spoke with perfect amiability as he raised
his finger to bring the good eye his way. "You ought to change your hat when you change your
mind. I saw you driving a bunch of horses up that canyon a few minutes ago. Now, Rockstro,
do you still drag your left leg?"

The rancher looked steadily at his new inquisitor, but blinked like a gopher at the sudden
onslaught. "Which of you fellows is Whispering Smith?" he demanded.

"The man with the dough is Whispering Smith every time," was the answer from Smith himself.
"You have about seven years to serve, Rockstro, haven't you? Seven, I think. Now what have
I ever done to you that you should turn a trick like this on me? I knew you were here, and
you knew I knew you were here, and I call this a pretty country; a little smooth right around
here, like the people, but pretty. Have I ever bothered you? Now tell me one thing--what did
you get for covering this trail? I stand to give you two dollars for every one you got last
night for the job, if you'll put us right on the game. Which way did they go?"

"What are you talking about?"

"Get off your horse a minute," suggested Whispering Smith, dismounting, "and step over here
toward the creek." The man, afraid to refuse and unwilling to go, walked haltingly after Smith.

"What is it, Rockstro?" asked his tormentor. "Don't you like this country? What do you want
to go back to the penitentiary for? Aren't you happy here? Now tell me one thing--will you
give up the trail?"

"I don't know the trail."

"I believe you; we shouldn't follow it anyway. Were you paid last night or this morning?"

"I ain't seen a man hereabouts for a week."

"Then you can't tell me whether there were five men or six?"

"You've got one eye as good as mine, and one a whole lot better."

"So it was fixed up for cash a week ago?"

"Everything is cash in this country."

"Well, Rockstro, I'm sorry, but we'll have to take you back with us."

The rancher whipped out a revolver. Whispering Smith caught his wrist. The struggle lasted
only an instant. Rockstro writhed, and the pistol fell to the ground.

"Now, shall I break your arm?" asked Smith, as the man cursed and resisted. "Or will you behave?
We are going right back and you'll have to come with us. We'll send some one down to round
up your horses and sell them, and you can serve out your time--with allowances, of course,
for good conduct, which will cut it down. If I had ever done you a mean turn I would not say
a word. If you could name a friend of yours I had ever done a mean turn to I would not say
a word. Can you name one? I guess not. I have left you as free as the wind here, making only
the rule I make for everybody--to let the railroad alone. This is my thanks. Now, I'll ask
you just one question. I haven't killed you, as I had a perfect right to when you pulled; I
haven't broken your arm, as I would have done if there had been a doctor within twenty-five
miles; and I haven't started you for the pen--not yet. Now I ask you one fair question only:
Did you need the money?"

"Yes, I did need it."

Whispering Smith dropped the man's wrist. "Then I don't say a word. If you needed the money,
I'm not going to send you back--not for mine."

"How can a man make a living in this country," asked the rancher, with a bitter oath, "unless
he picks up everything that's going?"

"Pick up your gun, man! I'm not saying anything, am I?"

"But I'm damned if I can give a double-cross to any man," added Rockstro, stooping for his
revolver.

"I should think less of you, Rockstro, if you did. You don't need money anyway now, but sometime
you may need a friend. I'm going to leave you here. You'll hear no more of this, and I'm going
to ask you a question: Why did you go against this when you knew you'd have to square yourself
with me?"

"They told me you'd be taken care of before it was pulled off."

"They lied to you, didn't they? No matter, you've got their stuff. Now I am going to ask you
one question that I don't know the answer to; it's a fair question, too. Was Du Sang in the
penitentiary with you at Fort City? Answer fair."

"Yes."

"Thank you. Behave yourself and keep your mouth shut. I say nothing this time. Hereafter leave
railroad matters alone, and if the woman should fall sick or you have to have a little money,
come and see me." Smith led the way back to the horses.

"Look here!" muttered Rockstro, following, with his good eye glued on his companion. "I pulled
on you too quick, I guess--quicker'n I'd ought to."

"Don't mention it. You didn't pull quick enough; it is humiliating to have a man that's as
slow as you are pull on me. People that pull on me usually pull and shoot at the same time.
Two distinct movements, Rockstro, should be avoided; they are fatal to success. Come down to
the Bend sometime, and I'll get you a decent gun and give you a few lessons."

Whispering Smith drew his handkerchief as the one-eyed man rode away and he rejoined his companions.
He was resigned, after a sickly fashion. "I like to play blind-man's-buff," he said, wiping
his forehead, "but not so far from good water. They have pulled us half-way to the Grosse Terre
Mountains on a beautiful trail, too beautiful to be true, Farrell--too beautiful to be true.
They have been having fun with us, and they've doubled back, through the Topah Topahs toward
the Mission Mountains and Williams Cache--that is my judgment. And aren't we five able-bodied
jays, gentlemen? Five strong-arm suckers? It is an inelegant word; it is an inelegant feeling.
No matter, we know a few things. There are five good men and a led horse; we can get out of
here by Goose River, find out when we cross the railroad how much they got, and pick them up
somewhere around the Saddle peaks, if they've gone north. That's only a guess, and every man's
guess is good now. What do you think, all of you?"

"If it's the crowd we think it is, would they go straight home? That doesn't look reasonable,
does it?" asked Brill Young.

"If they could put one day between them and pursuit, wouldn't they be safer at home than anywhere
else? And haven't they laid out one day's work for us, good and plenty? Farrell, remember one
thing: there is sometimes a disadvantage in knowing too much about the men you are after. We'll
try Goose River."

It was noon when they struck the railroad. They halted long enough to stop a freight train,
send some telegrams, and ask for news. They got orders from Rooney Lee, had an empty box car
set behind the engine for a special, and, loading their horses at the chute, made a helter-skelter
run for Sleepy Cat. At three o'clock they struck north for the Mission Mountains.

CHAPTER XXVIII

THE SUNDAY MURDER

Banks's posse, leaving Medicine Bend before daybreak, headed northwest. Their instructions
were explicit: to scatter after crossing the Frenchman, watch the trails from the Goose River
country and through the Mission Mountains, and intercept everybody riding north until the posse
from Sleepy Cat or Whispering Smith should communicate with them from the southwest. Nine men
rode in the party that crossed the Crawling Stone Sunday morning at sunrise with Ed Banks.

After leaving the river the three white-capped Saddles of the Mission range afford a landmark
for more than a hundred miles, and toward these the party pressed steadily all day. The southern
pass of the Missions opens on the north slope of the range into a pretty valley known as Mission
Springs Valley, and the springs are the head-waters of Deep Creek. The posse did not quite
obey the instructions, and following a natural instinct of safety five of them, after Banks
and his three deputies had scattered, bunched again, and at dark crossed Deep Creek at some
distance below the springs. It was afterward known that these five men had been seen entering
the valley from the east at sundown just as four of the men they wanted rode down South Mission
Pass toward the springs. That they knew they would soon be cut off, or must cut their way through
the line which Ed Banks, ahead of them, was posting at every gateway to Williams Cache, was
probably clear to them. Four men rode that evening from Tower W through the south pass; the
fifth man had already left the party. The four men were headed for Williams Cache and had reason
to believe, until they sighted Banks's men, that their path was open.

They halted to take counsel on the suspicious-looking posse far below them, and while their
cruelly exhausted horses rested, Du Sang, always in Sinclair's absence the brains of the gang,
planned the escape over Deep Creek at Baggs's crossing. At dusk they divided: two men lurking
in the brush along the creek rode as close as they could, unobserved, toward the crossing,
while Du Sang and the cowboy Karg, known as Flat Nose, rode down to Baggs's ranch at the foot
of the pass.

At that point Dan Baggs, an old locomotive engineer, had taken a homestead, got together a
little bunch of cattle, and was living alone with his son, a boy of ten years. It was a hard
country and too close to Williams Cache for comfort, but Dan got on with everybody because
the toughest man in the Cache country could get a meal, a feed for his horse, and a place to
sleep at Baggs's, without charge, when he needed it.

Ed Banks, by hard riding, got to the crossing at five o'clock, and told Baggs of the hold-up
and the shooting of Oliver Sollers. The news stirred the old engineman, and his excitement
threw him off his guard. Banks rode straight on for the middle pass, leaving word that two
of his men would be along within half an hour to watch the pass and the ranch crossing, and
asking Baggs to put up some kind of a fight for the crossing until more of the posse came up--at
the least, to make sure that nobody got any fresh horses.

The boy was cooking supper in the kitchen, and Baggs had done his milking and gone back to
the corral, when two men rode around the corner of the barn and asked if they could get something
to eat. Poor Baggs sold his life in six words: "Why, yes; be you Banks's men?"

Du Sang answered: "No; we're from Sheriff Coon's office at Oroville, looking up a bunch of
Duck Bar steers that's been run somewhere up Deep Creek. Can we stay here all night?"

They dismounted and disarmed Baggs's suspicions, though the condition of their horses might
have warned him had he had his senses. The unfortunate man had probably fixed it in his mind
that a ride from Tower W to Deep Creek in sixteen hours was a physical impossibility.

"Stay here? Sure! I want you to stay," said Baggs bluffly. "Looks to me like I seen you down
at Crawling Stone, ain't I?" he asked of Karg.

Karg was lighting a cigarette. "I used to mark at the Dunning ranch," he answered, throwing
away his match.

"That's hit. Good! The boy's cooking supper. Step up to the kitchen and tell him to cut ham
for four more."

"Four?"

"Two of Ed Banks's men will be here by six o'clock. Heard about the hold-up? They stopped Number
Three at Tower W last night and shot Ollie Sollers, as white a boy as ever pulled a throttle.
Boys, a man that'll kill a locomotive engineer is worse'n an Indian; I'd help skin him."

"The hell you would!" cried Du Sang. "Well, don't you want to start in on me? I killed Sollers.
Look at me; ain't I handsome? What you going to do about it?"

Before Baggs could think Du Sang was shooting him down. It was wanton. Du Sang stood in no
need of the butchery; the escape could have been made without it. His victim had pulled an
engine throttle too long to show the white feather, but he was dying by the time he had dragged
a revolver from his pocket. Du Sang did the killing alone. At least, Flat Nose, who alone saw
all of the murder, afterward maintained that he did not draw because he had no occasion to,
and that Baggs was dead before he, Karg, had finished his cigarette. With his right arm broken
and two bullets through his chest, Baggs fell on his face. That, however, did not check his
murderer. Rising to his knees, Baggs begged for his life. "For God's sake! I'm helpless, gentlemen!
I'm helpless. Don't kill me like a dog!" But Du Sang, emptying his pistol, threw his rifle
to his shoulder and sent bullet after bullet crashing through the shapeless form writhing and
twitching before him until he had beaten it in the dust soft and flat and still.

Banks's men came up within an hour to find the ranch-house deserted. They saw a lantern in
the yard below, and near the corral gate they found the little boy in the darkness, screaming
beside his father's body. The sheriff's men carried the old engineman to the house; others
of the posse crossed the creek during the evening, and at eleven o'clock Whispering Smith rode
down from the south pass to find that four of the men they were after had taken fresh horses,
after killing Baggs, and passed safely through the cordon Banks had drawn around the pass and
along Deep Creek. Bill Dancing, who had ridden with Banks's men, was at the house when Whispering
Smith arrived. He found some supper in the kitchen, and the tired man and the giant ate together.

Whispering Smith was too experienced a campaigner to complain. His party had struck a trail
fifty miles north of Sleepy Cat and followed it to the Missions. He knew now who he was after,
and knew that they were bottled up in the Cache for the night. The sheriff's men were sleeping
on the floor of the living-room when Smith came in from the kitchen. He sat down before the
fire. At intervals sobs came from the bedroom where the body lay, and after listening a moment,
Whispering Smith got stiffly up, and, tiptoeing to still the jingle of his spurs, took the
candle from the table, pushed aside the curtain, and entered the bedroom.

The little boy was lying on his face, with his arm around his father's neck, talking to him.
Whispering Smith bent a moment over the bed, and, setting the candle on the table, put his
hand on the boy's shoulder. He disengaged the hand from the cold neck, and sitting down took
it in his own. Talking low to the little fellow, he got his attention after much patient effort
and got him to speak. He made him, though struggling with terror, to understand that he had
come to be his friend, and after the child had sobbed his grief into a strange heart he ceased
to tremble, and told his name and his story, and described the two horsemen and the horses
they had left. Smith listened quietly. "Have you had any supper, Dannie? No? You must have
something to eat. Can't you eat anything? But there is a nice pan of fresh milk in the kitchen."

A burst of tears interrupted him. "Daddie just brought in the milk, and I was frying the ham,
and I heard them shooting."

"See how he took care of you till the last minute, and left something for you after he was
gone. Suppose he could speak now, don't you think he would want you to do as I say? I am your
next friend now, for you are going to be a railroad man and have a big engine."

Dannie looked up. "Dad wasn't afraid of those men."

"Wasn't he, Dannie?"

"He said we would be all right and not to be afraid."

"Did he?"

"He said Whispering Smith was coming."

"My poor boy."

"He is coming, don't be afraid. Do you know Whispering Smith? He is coming. The men to-night
all said he was coming."

The little fellow for a long time could not be coaxed away from his father, but his companion
at length got him to the kitchen. When they came back to the bedroom the strange man was talking
to him once more about his father. "We must try to think how he would like things done now,
mustn't we? All of us felt so bad when we rode in and had so much to do we couldn't attend
to taking care of your father. Did you know there are two men out at the crossing now, guarding
it with rifles? But if you and I keep real quiet we can do something for him while the men
are asleep; they have to ride all day to-morrow. We must wash his face and hands, don't you
think so? And brush his hair and his beard. If you could just find the basin and some water
and a towel--you couldn't find a brush, could you? Could you, honestly? Well! I call that a
good boy--we shall have to have you on the railroad, sure. We must try to find some fresh clothes--these
are cut and stained; then I will change his clothes, and we shall all feel better. Don't disturb
the men; they are tired."

They worked together by the candle-light. When they had done, the boy had a violent crying
spell, but Whispering Smith got him to lie down beside him on a blanket spread on the floor,
where Smith got his back against the sod wall and took the boy's head in his arm. He waited
patiently for the boy to go to sleep, but Dan was afraid the murderers would come back. Once
he lifted his head in a confidence. "Did you know my daddy used to run an engine?"

"No, I did not; but in the morning you must tell me all about it."

Whenever there was a noise in the next room the child roused. After some time a new voice was
heard; Kennedy had come and was asking questions. "Wake up here, somebody! Where is Whispering
Smith?"

Dancing answered: "He's right there in the bedroom, Farrell, staying with the boy."

There was some stirring. Kennedy talked a little and at length stretched himself on the floor.
When all was still again, Dannie's hand crept slowly from the breast of his companion up to
his chin, and the little hand, feeling softly every feature, stole over the strange face.

"What is it, Dannie?"

"Are you Whispering Smith?"

"Yes, Dannie. Shut your eyes."

At three o'clock, when Kennedy lighted a candle and looked in, Smith was sitting with his back
against the wall. The boy lay on his arm. Both were fast asleep. On the bed the dead man lay
with a handkerchief over his face.

CHAPTER XXIX

WILLIAMS CACHE

Ed Banks had been recalled before daybreak from the middle pass. Two of the men wanted were
now known to have crossed the creek, which meant they must work out of the country through
Williams Cache.

"If you will take your best two men, Ed," said Whispering Smith, sitting down with Banks at
breakfast, "and strike straight for Canadian Pass to help Gene and Bob Johnson, I'll undertake
to ride in and talk to Rebstock while Kennedy and Bob Scott watch Deep Creek. The boy gives
a good description, and the two men that did the job here are Du Sang and Flat Nose. Did I
tell you how we picked up the trail yesterday? Magpies. They shot a scrub horse that gave out
on them and skinned the brand. It hastened the banquet, but we got there before the birds were
all seated. Great luck, wasn't it? And it gave us a beautiful trail. One of the party crossed
the Goose River at American Fork, and Brill Young and Reed followed him. Four came through
the Mission Mountains; that is a cinch and they are in the Cache--and if they get out it is
our fault personally, Ed, and not the Lord's."

Williams Cache lies in the form of a great horn, with a narrow entrance at the lower end known
as the Door, and a rock fissure at the upper end leading into Canadian Pass; but this fissure
is so narrow that a man with a rifle could withstand a regiment. For a hundred miles east and
west rise the granite walls of the Mission range, broken nowhere save by the formation known
as the Cache. Even this does not penetrate the range; it is a pocket, and runs not over half-way
into it and out again. But no man really knows the Cache; the most that may be said is that
the main valley is known, and it is known as the roughest mountain fissure between the Spanish
Sinks and the Mantrap country. Williams Cache lies between walls two thousand feet high, and
within it is a small labyrinth of canyons. A generation ago, when Medicine Bend for one winter
was the terminus of the overland railroad, vigilantes mercilessly cleaned out the town, and
the few outlaws that escaped the shotgun and the noose at Medicine Bend found refuge in a far-away
and unknown mountain gorge once named by French trappers the Cache. Years after these outcasts
had come to infest it came one desperado more ferocious than all that had gone before. He made
a frontier retreat of the Cache, and left to it the legacy of his evil name, Williams. Since
his day it has served, as it served before, for the haunt of outlawed men. No honest man lives
in Williams Cache, and few men of any sort live there long, since their lives are lives of
violence; neither the law nor a woman crosses Deep Creek. But from the day of Williams to this
day the Cache has had its ruler, and when Whispering Smith rode with a little party through
the Door into the Cache the morning after the murder in Mission Valley he sent an envoy to
Rebstock, whose success as a cattle-thief had brought its inevitable penalty. It had made Rebstock
a man of consequence and of property and a man subject to the anxieties and annoyances of such
responsibility.

Sitting once in the Three Horses at Medicine Bend, Rebstock had talked with Whispering Smith.
"I used to have a good time," he growled. "When I was rustling a little bunch of steers, just
a small bunch all by myself, and hadn't a cent in the world, no place to sleep and nothing
to eat, I had a good time. Now I have to keep my money in the bank; that ain't pleasant--you
know that. Every man that brings a bunch of cattle across Deep Creek has stole 'em, and expects
me to buy 'em or lend him money. I'm busy with inspecters all the time, deviling with brands,
standing off the Stock Association and all kinds of trouble. I've got too many cows, too much
money. I'm afraid somebody will shoot me if I go to sleep, or poison me if I take a drink.
Whispering Smith, I'd like to give you a half-interest in my business. That's on the square.
You're a young man, and handy; it wouldn't cost you a cent, and you can have half of the whole
shooting-match if you'll cross Deep Creek and help me run the gang." Such was Rebstock free
from anxiety and in a confidential moment. Under pressure he was, like all men, different.

Whispering Smith had acquaintance even in the Cache, and after a little careful reconnoitring
he found a crippled-up thief, driving a milch cow down the Cache, who was willing to take a
message to the boss.

Whispering Smith gave his instructions explicitly, facing the messenger, as the two sat in
their saddles, with an importunate eye. "Say to Rebstock exactly these words," he insisted.
"This is from Whispering Smith: I want Du Sang. He killed a friend of mine last night at Mission
Springs. I happened to be near there and know he rode in last night. He can't get out; the
Canadian is plugged. I won't stand for the killing, and it is Du Sang or a clean-up in the
Cache all around, and then I'll get Du Sang anyway. Regards."

Riding circumspectly in and about the entrance to the Cache, the party waited an hour for an
answer. When the answer came, it was unsatisfactory. Rebstock declined to appear upon so trivial
a matter, and Whispering Smith refused to specify a further grievance. More parley and stronger
messages were necessary to stir the Deep Creek monarch, but at last he sent word asking Whispering
Smith to come to his cabin accompanied only by Kennedy.

The two railroad men rode up the canyon together. "And now I will show you a lean and hungry
thief grown monstrous and miserly, Farrell," said Whispering Smith.

At the head of a short pocket between two sheer granite walls they saw Rebstock's weather-beaten
cabin, and he stood in front of it smoking. He looked moodily at his visitors out of eyes buried
between rolls of fat. Whispering Smith was a little harsh as the two shook hands, but he dismounted
and followed Rebstock into the house.

"What are you so high and mighty about?" he demanded, throwing his hat on the table near which
Rebstock had seated himself. "Why don't you come out when I send a man to you, or send word
what you will do? What have you got to kick about? Haven't you been treated right?"

Being in no position to complain, but shrewdly aware that much unpleasantness was in the wind,
Rebstock beat about the bush. He had had rheumatism; he couldn't ride; he had been in bed three
weeks and hadn't seen Du Sang for three months. "You ain't chasing up here after Du Sang because
he killed a man at Mission Springs. I know better than that. That ain't the first man he's
killed, and it ain't a' goin' to be the last."

Whispering Smith lifted his finger and for the first time smiled. "Now there you err, Rebstock--it
is 'a goin' to be' the last. So you think I'm after you, do you? Well, if I were, what are
you going to do about it? Rebstock, do you think, if I wanted you, I would send a message for
you to come out and meet me? Not on your life! When I want you I'll come to your shack and
drag you out by the hair of the head. Sit down!" roared Whispering Smith.

Rebstock, who weighed at least two hundred and seventy-five pounds, had lifted himself up to
glare and swear freely. Now he dropped angrily back into his chair. "Well, who do you want?"
he bellowed in kind.

A smile softened the asperity of the railroad man's face. "That's a fair question and I give
you a straight answer. I'm not bluffing: I want Du Sang."

Rebstock squirmed. He swore with shortened breath that he knew nothing about Du Sang; that
Du Sang had stolen his cattle; that hanging was too good for him; that he would join any posse
in searching for him; and that he had not seen him for three months.

"Likely enough," assented Whispering Smith, "but this is wasting time. He rode in here last
night after killing old Dan Baggs. Your estimable nephew Barney is with him, and Karg is with
him, and I want them; but, in especial and particular, I want Du Sang."

Rebstock denied, protested, wheezed, and stormed, but Whispering Smith was immovable. He would
not stir from the Cache upon any promises. Rebstock offered to surrender any one else in the
Cache--hinted strongly at two different men for whom handsome rewards were out; but every compromise
suggested was met with the same good-natured words: "I want Du Sang."

At last the smile changed on Whispering Smith's face. It lighted his eyes still, but with a
different expression. "See here, Rebstock, you and I have always got along, haven't we? I've
no desire to crowd any man to the wall that is a man. Now I am going to tell you the simple
truth. Du Sang has got you scared to death. That man is a faker, Rebstock. Because he kills
men right and left without any provocation, you think he is dangerous. He isn't; there are
a dozen men in the Cache just as good with a gun as Du Sang is. Don't shake your head. I know
what I'm talking about. He is a jay with a gun, and you may tell him I said so; do you hear?
Tell him to come out if he wants me to demonstrate it. He has got everybody, including you,
scared to death. Now, I say, don't be silly. I want Du Sang."

Rebstock rose to his feet solemnly and pointed his finger at Whispering Smith. "Whispering
Smith, you know me--"

"I know you for a fat rascal."

"That's all right. You know me, and, just as you say, we always get along because we both got
sense."

"You're hiding yours to-day, Rebstock."

"No matter; I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll give you all the horseflesh you can kill and all
the men you can hire to go after him, and I'll bury your dead myself. You think he can't shoot?
I give you a tip on the square." Whispering Smith snorted. "He'll shoot the four buttons off
your coat in four shots." Smith kicked Rebstock's dog contemptuously. "And do it while you
are falling down. I've seen him do it," persisted Rebstock, moist with perspiration. "I'm not
looking for a chance to go against a sure thing; I wash my hands of the job."

Whispering Smith rose. "It was no trick to see he had you scared to death. You are losing your
wits, old man. The albino is a faker, and I tell you I am going to run him out of the country."
Whispering Smith reached for his hat. "Our treaty ends right here. You promised to harbor no
man in your sink that ever went against our road. You know as well as I do that this man, with
four others, held up our train night before last at Tower W, shot our engineman to death for
mere delight, killed a messenger, took sixty-five thousand dollars out of the through safe,
and made his good get-away. Now, don't lie; you know every word of it, and you thought you
could pull it out of me by a bluff. I track him to your door. He is inside the Cache this minute.
You know every curve and canyon and pocket and washout in it, and every cut-throat and jail-bird
in it, and they pay you blood-money and hush-money every month; and when I ask you not to give
up a dozen men the company is entitled to, but merely to send this pink-eyed lobster out with
his guns to talk with me, you wash your hands of the job, do you? Now listen. If you don't
send Du Sang into the open before noon to-morrow, I'll run every living steer and every living
man out of Williams Cache before I cross the Crawling Stone again, so help me God! And I'll
send for cowboys within thirty minutes to begin the job. I'll scrape your Deep Creek canyons
till the rattlesnakes squeal. I'll make Williams Cache so wild that a timber-wolf can't follow
his own trail through it. You'll break with me, will you, Rebstock? Then wind up your bank
account; before I finish with you I'll put you in stripes and feed buzzards off your table."

Rebstock's face was apoplectic. He choked with a torrent of oaths. Whispering Smith, paying
no attention, walked out to where Kennedy was waiting. He swung into the saddle, ignoring Rebstock's
abjurations, and with Kennedy rode away.

"It is hard to do anything with a man that is scared to death," said Smith to his companion.
"Then, too, Rebstock's nephew is probably in this. In any case, when Du Sang has got Rebstock
scared, he is a dangerous man to be abroad. We have got to smoke him out, Farrell. Lance Dunning
insisted the other day he wanted to do me a favor. I'll see if he'll lend me Stormy Gorman
and some of his cowpunchers for a round-up. We've got to smoke Du Sang out. A round-up is the
thing. But, by Heaven, if that round-up is actually pulled off it will be a classic when you
and I are gone."

Thirty minutes afterward, messengers had taken the Frenchman trail for Lance Dunning's cowboys.

CHAPTER XXX

THE FIGHT IN THE CACHE

A clear night and a good moon made a long ride possible, and the Crawling Stone contingent,
headed by Stormy Gorman, began coming into the railroad camp by three o'clock the next morning.
With them rode the two Youngs, who had lost the trail they followed across Goose River and
joined the cowboys on the road to the north.

The party divided under Kennedy and Smith, who rode through the Door into the Cache just before
daybreak.

"I don't know what I am steering you against this morning, Farrell," said Whispering Smith.
"Certainly I should hate to run you into Du Sang, but we can't tell where we shall strike him.
If we have laid out the work right I ought to see him as soon as anybody does. Accidents do
happen, but remember he will never be any more dangerous than he is at the first moment. Get
him to talk. He gets nervous if he can't shoot right away. When you pull, get a bullet into
his stomach at the start, if you possibly can, to spoil his aim. We mustn't make the mistake
of underestimating him. Rebstock is right: he is a fright with a revolver, and Sinclair and
Seagrue are the only men in the mountains that can handle a rifle with him. Now we split here;
and good luck!"

"Don't you want to take Brill Young with you?"

"You take both the Youngs, Farrell. We shall be among rocks, and if he tries to rush us there
is cover."

Stormy Gorman with four Crawling Stone cowboys followed Whispering Smith. Every rider on the
range had a grievance against Williams Cache, and any of them would have been glad to undertake
reprisals against the rustlers under the wing of Whispering Smith.

Just how in the mountains--without telegraph, newspapers, and all ordinary means of publicity--news
travels so fast may not certainly be said. The scattered lines of telephone wires help, but
news outstrips the wires. Moreover, there are no telephones in the Mission Mountains. But on
the morning that the round-up party rode into the Cache it was known in the streets of Medicine
Bend that the Tower W men had been tracked into the north country; that some, if not all, of
them were in Williams Cache; that an ultimatum had been given, and that Whispering Smith and
Kennedy had already ridden in with their men to make it good.

Whispering Smith, with the cowboys, took the rough country to the left, and Kennedy and his
party took the south prong of the Cache Creek. The instructions were to make a clean sweep
as the line advanced. Behind the centre rode three men to take stock driven in from the wings.
Word that was brief but reasonable had been sent everywhere ahead. Every man, it was promised,
that could prove property should have a chance to do so at the Door that day and the next;
but any brands that showed stolen cattle, or that had been skinned or tampered with in any
way, were to be turned over to the Stock Association for the benefit of owners.

The very first pocket raided started a row and uncovered eighty head of five-year-old steers
bearing a mutilated Duck Bar brand. It was like poking at rattlesnakes to undertake to clean
out the grassy retreats of the Cache, but the work was pushed on in spite of protests, threats,
and resistance. Every man that rode out openly to make a protest was referred calmly to Rebstock,
and before very long Rebstock's cabin had more men around it than had been seen together in
the Cache for years. The impression that the whole jig was up, and that the refugees had been
sold out by their own boss, was one that no railroad man undertook to discourage. The cowboys
insisted on the cattle, with the assurance that Rebstock could explain everything. By noon
the Cache was in an uproar. The cowboys were riding carefully, and their guards, rifles in
hand, were watching the corners. Ahead of the slowly moving line with the growing bunch of
cattle behind it, flourished as it were rather conspicuously, fugitive riders dashed back and
forth with curses and yells across the narrow valley. If it had been Whispering Smith's intention
to raise a large-sized row it was apparent that he had been successful. Rebstock, driven to
desperation, held council after council to determine what to do. Sorties were discussed, ambushes
considered, and a pitched battle was planned. But, while ideas were plentiful, no one aspired
to lead an attack on Whispering Smith.

Moreover, Williams Cache, it was conceded, would in the end be worsted if the company and the
cowmen together seriously undertook with men and unlimited money to clean it out. Whispering
Smith's party had no explanation to offer for the round-up, but when Rebstock made it known
that the fight was over sending out Du Sang, the rage of the rustlers turned on Du Sang. Again,
however, no man wanted to take up personally with Du Sang the question of the reasonableness
of Whispering Smith's demand. Instead of doing so, they fell on Rebstock and demanded that
if he were boss he make good and send Du Sang out.

Of all this commotion the railroad men saw only the outward indications. As the excitement
grew on both sides there was perhaps a little more of display in the way the cattle were run
in, especially when some long-lost bunch was brought to light and welcomed with yells from
the centre. A steer was killed at noon, everybody fed, and the line moved forward. The wind,
which had slept in the sunshine of the morning, rose in the afternoon, and the dust whirled
in little clouds where men or animals moved. From the centre two men had gone back with the
cattle gathered up to that time, and Bill Dancing, with Smith, Stormy Gorman, and two of the
cowboys, were heading a draw to cross to the north side of the Cache, when three men rode out
into the road five hundred yards ahead, and halted.

Whispering Smith spoke: "There come our men; stop here. This ground in front of us looks good
to me; they may have chosen something over there that suits them better. Feel your guns and
we'll start forward slowly; don't take your eyes off the bunch, whatever you do. Bill, you
go back and help the men with the cattle; there will be four of us against three then."

"Not for mine!" said Bill Dancing bluntly. "You may need help from an old fool yet. I'll see
you through this and look after the cattle afterward."

"Then, Stormy, one or two of you go back," urged Whispering Smith, speaking to the cowboy foreman
without turning his eyes. "There's no need of five of us in this."

But Stormy swore violently. "You go back yourself," exclaimed Stormy, when he could control
his feelings. "We'll bring them fellows in for you in ten minutes with their hands in the air."

"I know you would; I know it. But I'm paid for this sort of thing and you are not, and I advise
no man to take unnecessary chances. If you all want to stay, why, stay; but don't ride ahead
of the line, and let me do all the talking. See that your guns are loose--you'll never have
but one chance to pull, and don't pull till you're ready. The albino is riding in the middle
now, isn't he? And a little back, playing for a quick drop. Watch him. Who is that on the right?
Can it be George Seagrue? Well, this is a bunch. And I guess Karg is with them."

Holding their horses to a slow walk, the two parties gingerly approached each other. When the
Cache riders halted the railroad riders halted; and when the three rode the five rode: but
the three rode with absolute alignment and acted as one, while Whispering Smith had trouble
in holding his men back until the two lines were fifty feet apart.

By this time the youngest of the cowboys had steadied and was thinking hard. Whispering Smith
halted. In perfect order and sitting their horses as if they were riding parade, the horses
ambling at a snail's pace, the Cache riders advanced in the sunshine like one man. When Du
Sang and his companions reined up, less than twelve feet separated the two lines.

In his tan shirt, Du Sang, with his yellow hair, his white eyelashes, and his narrow face,
was the least impressive of the three men. The Norwegian, Seagrue, rode on the right, his florid
blood showing under the tan on his neck and arms. He spoke to the cowboys from the ranch, and
on the left the young fellow Karg, with the broken nose, black-eyed and alert, looked the men
over in front of him and nodded to Dancing. Du Sang and his companions wore short-armed shirts;
rifles were slung at their pommels, and revolvers stuck in their hip-scabbards. Whispering
Smith, in his dusty suit of khaki, was the only man in either line who showed no revolver,
but a hammerless or muley Savage rifle hung beside his pommel.

Du Sang, blinking, spoke first: "Which of you fellows is heading this round-up?"

"I am heading the round-up," said Whispering Smith. "Why? Have we got some of your cattle?"

The two men spoke as quietly as school-teachers. Whispering Smith's expression in no way changed,
except that as he spoke he lifted his eyebrows a little more than usual.

Du Sang looked at him closely as he went on: "What kind of a way is this to treat anybody?
To ride into a valley like this and drive a man's cows away from his door without notice or
papers? Is your name Smith?"

"My name is Smith; yours is Du Sang. Yes, I'll tell you, Du Sang. I carry an inspector's card
from the Mountain Stock Association--do you want to see it? When we get these cattle to the
Door, any man in the Cache may come forward and prove his property. I shall leave instructions
to that effect when we go, for I want you to go to Medicine Bend with me, Du Sang, as soon
as convenient, and the men that are with me will finish the round-up."

"What do you want me for? There's no papers out against me, is there?"

"No, but I'm an officer, Du Sang. I'll see to the papers; I want you for murder."

"So they tell me. Well, you're after the wrong man. But I'll go with you; I don't care about that."

"Neither do I, Du Sang; and as you have some friends along, I won't break up the party. They
may come, too."

"What for?"

"For stopping a train at Tower W Saturday night."

The three men looked at one another and laughed.

Du Sang with an oath spoke again: "The men you want are in Canada by this time. I can't speak
for my friends; I don't know whether they want to go or not. As far as I am concerned, I haven't
killed anybody that I know of. I suppose you'll pay my expenses back?"

"Why, yes, Du Sang, if you were coming back I would pay your expenses; but you are not coming
back. You are riding down Williams Cache for the last time; you've ridden down it too many
times already. This round-up is especially for you. Don't deceive yourself; when you ride with
me this time out of the Cache, you won't come back."

Du Sang laughed, but his blinking eyes were as steady as a cat's. It did not escape Whispering
Smith's notice that the mettlesome horses ridden by the outlaws were continually working around
to the right of his party. He spoke amiably to Karg: "If you can't manage that horse, Karg,
I can. Play fair. It looks to me as if you and Du Sang were getting ready to run for it, and
leave George Seagrue to shoot his way through alone."

Du Sang, with some annoyance, intervened: "That's all right; I'll go with you. I'd rather see
your papers, but if you're Whispering Smith it's all right. I'm due to shoot out a little game
sometime with you at Medicine Bend, anyway."

"Any time, Du Sang; only don't let your hand wabble next time. It's too close to your gun now
to pull right."

"Well, I told you I was going to come, didn't I? And I'm coming--now!"

With the last word he whipped out his gun. There was a crash of bullets. Questioned once by
McCloud and reproached for taking chances, Whispering Smith answered simply. "I have to take
chances," he said. "All I ask is an even break."

But Kennedy had said there was no such thing as an even break with Whispering Smith. A few
men in a generation amuse, baffle, and mystify other men with an art based on the principle
that the action of the hand is quicker than the action of the eye. With Whispering Smith the
drawing of a revolver and the art of throwing his shots instantly from wherever his hand rested
was pure sleight-of-hand. To a dexterity so fatal he added a judgment that had not failed when
confronted with deceit. From the moment that Du Sang first spoke, Smith, convinced that he
meant to shoot his way through the line, waited only for the moment to come. When Du Sang's
hand moved like a flash of light, Whispering Smith, who was holding his coat lapels in his
hands, struck his pistol from the scabbard over his heart and threw a bullet at him before
he could fire, as a conjurer throws a vanishing coin into the air. Spurring his horse fearfully
as he did so, he dashed at Du Sang and Karg, leaped his horse through their line and, wheeling
at arm's length, shot again. Bill Dancing jumped in his saddle, swayed, and toppled to the
ground. Stormy Gorman gave a single whoop at the spectacle and, with his two cowboys at his
heels, fled for life.

More serious than all, Smith found himself among three fast revolvers, working from an unmanageable
horse. The beast tried to follow the fleeing cowboys, and when faced sharply about showed temper.
The trained horses of the outlaws stood like statues, but Smith had to fight with his horse
bucking at every shot. He threw his bullets as best he could first over one shoulder and then
over the other, and used the last cartridge in his revolver with Du Sang, Seagrue, and Karg
shooting at him every time they could fire without hitting one another.

It was not the first time the Williams Cache gang had sworn to get him and had worked together
to do it, but for the first time it looked as if they might do it. A single chance was left
to Whispering Smith for his life, and with his coat slashed with bullets, he took it. For an
instant his life hung on the success of a trick so appallingly awkward that a cleverer man
might have failed in turning it. If his rifle should play free in the scabbard as he reached
for it, he could fall to the ground, releasing it as he plunged from the saddle, and make a
fight on his feet. If the rifle failed to release he was a dead man. To so narrow an issue
are the cleverest combinations sometimes brought by chance. He dropped his empty revolver,
ducked like a mud-hen on his horse's neck, threw back his leg, and, with all the precision
he could summon, caught the grip of his muley in both hands. He made his fall heavily to the
ground, landing on his shoulder. But as he keeled from the saddle the last thing that rolled
over the saddle, like the flash of a porpoise fin, was the barrel of the rifle, secure in his
hands. Karg, on horseback, was already bending over him, revolver in hand, but the shot was
never fired. A thirty-thirty bullet from the ground knocked the gun into the air and tore every
knuckle from Karg's hand. Du Sang spurred in from the right. A rifle-slug like an axe at the
root caught him through the middle. His fingers stiffened. His six-shooter fell to the ground
and he clutched his side. Seagrue, ducking low, put spurs to his horse, and Whispering Smith,
covered with dust, rose on the battle-field alone.

Hats, revolvers, and coats lay about him. Face downward, the huge bulk of Bill Dancing was
stretched motionless in the road. Karg, crouching beside his fallen horse, held up the bloody
stump of his gun hand, and Du Sang, fifty yards away, reeling like a drunken man in his saddle,
spurred his horse in an aimless circle. Whispering Smith, running softly to the side of his
own trembling animal, threw himself into the saddle, and, adjusting his rifle sights as the
beast plunged down the draw, gave chase to Seagrue.

CHAPTER XXXI

THE DEATH OF DU SANG

Whispering Smith, with his horse in a lather, rode slowly back twenty minutes later with Seagrue
disarmed ahead of him. The deserted battle-ground was alive with men. Stormy Gorman, hot for
blood, had come back, captured Karg, and begun swearing all over again, and Smith listened
with amiable surprise while he explained that seeing Dancing killed, and not being able to
tell from Whispering Smith's peculiar tactics which side he was shooting at, Gorman and his
companions had gone for help. While they angrily surrounded Karg and Seagrue, Smith slipped
from his horse where Bill Dancing lay, lifted the huge head from the dust, and tried to turn
the giant over. A groan greeted the attempt.

"Bill, open your eyes! Why would you not do as I wanted you to?" he murmured bitterly to himself.
A second groan answered him. Smith called for water, and from a canteen drenched the pallid
forehead, talking softly meanwhile; but his efforts to restore consciousness were unavailing.
He turned to where two of the cowboys had dragged Karg to the ground and three others had their
old companion Seagrue in hand. While two held huge revolvers within six inches of his head,
the third was adjusting a rope-knot under his ear.

Whispering Smith became interested. "Hold on!" said he mildly, "what is loose? What are you
going to do?"

"We're going to hang these fellows," answered Stormy, with a volley of hair-raising imprecations.

"Oh, no! Just put them on horses under guard."

"That's what we're going to do," exclaimed the foreman. "Only we're going to run 'em over to
those cottonwoods and drive the horses out from under 'em. Stand still, you tow-headed cow-thief!"
he cried, slipping the noose up tight on George Seagrue's neck.

"See here," returned Whispering Smith, showing some annoyance, "you may be joking, but I am
not. Either do as I tell you or release those men."

"Well, I guess we are not joking very much. You heard me, didn't you?" demanded Stormy angrily.
"We are going to string these damned critters up right here in the draw on the first tree."

Whispering Smith drew a pocket-knife and walked to Flat Nose, slit the rope around his neck,
pushed him out of the circle, and stood in front of him. "You can't play horse with my prisoners,"
he said curtly. "Get over here, Karg. Come, now, who is going to walk in first? You act like
a school-boy, Gorman."

Hard words and a wrangle followed, but Smith did not change expression, and there was a backdown.
"Have you fellows let Du Sang get away while you were playing fool here?" he asked.

"Du Sang's over the hill there on his horse, and full of fight yet," exclaimed one.

"Then we will look him up," suggested Smith. "Come, Seagrue."

"Don't go over there. He'll get you if you do," cried Gorman.

"Let us see about that. Seagrue, you and Karg walk ahead. Don't duck or run, either of you. Go on."

Just over the brow of the hill near which the fight had taken place, a man lay below a ledge
of granite. The horse from which he had fallen was grazing close by, but the man had dragged
himself out of the blinding sun to the shade of the sagebrush above the rock--the trail of
it all lay very plain on the hard ground. Watching him narrowly, Smith, with his prisoners
ahead and the cowboys riding in a circle behind, approached.

"Du Sang?"

The man in the sagebrush turned his head.

Smith walked to him and bent down. "Are you suffering much, Du Sang?"

The wounded man, sinking with shock and internal hemorrhage, uttered a string of oaths.

Smith listened quietly till he had done; then he knelt beside him and put his hand on Du Sang's
hand. "Tell me where you are hit, Du Sang. Put your hand to it. Is it the stomach? Let me turn
you on your side. Easy. Does your belt hurt? Just a minute, now; I can loosen that."

"I know you," muttered Du Sang thickly. Then his eyes--terrible, rolling, pink eyes--brightened
and he swore violently.

"Du Sang, you are not bleeding much, but I'm afraid you are badly hit," said Whispering Smith.
"Is there anything I can do for you?"

"Get me some water."

A creek flowed at no great distance below the hill, but the cowboys refused to go for water.
Whispering Smith would have gone with Seagrue and Karg, but Du Sang begged him not to leave
him alone lest Gorman should kill him. Smith canvassed the situation a moment. "I'll put you
on my horse," said he at length, "and take you down to the creek."

He turned to the cowboys and asked them to help, but they refused to touch Du Sang.

Whispering Smith kept his patience. "Karg, take that horse's head," said he. "Come here, Seagrue;
help me lift Du Sang on the horse. The boys seem to be afraid of getting blood on their hands."

With Whispering Smith and Seagrue supporting Du Sang in the saddle and Karg leading the horse,
the cavalcade moved slowly down to the creek, where a tiny stream purled among the rocks. The
water revived the injured man for a moment; he had even strength enough, with some help, to
ride again; and, moving in the same halting order, they took him to Rebstock's cabin. Rebstock,
at the door, refused to let the sinking man be brought into the house. He cursed Du Sang as
the cause of all the trouble. But Du Sang cursed him with usury, and, while Whispering Smith
listened, told Rebstock with bitter oaths that if he had given the boy Barney anything but
a scrub horse they never would have been trailed. More than this concerning the affair Du Sang
would not say, and never said. The procession turned from the door. Seagrue led the way to
Rebstock's stable, and they laid Du Sang on some hay.

Afterward they got a cot under him. With surprising vitality he talked a long time to Whispering
Smith, but at last fell into a stupor. At nine o'clock that night he sat up. Ed Banks and Kennedy
were standing beside the cot. Du Sang became delirious, and in his delirium called the name
of Whispering Smith; but Smith was at Baggs's cabin with Bill Dancing. In a spasm of pain,
Du Sang, opening his eyes, suddenly threw himself back. The cot broke, and the dying man rolled
under the feet of the frightened horses. In the light of the lanterns they lifted him back,
but he was bleeding slowly at the mouth, quite dead.

The surgeon, afterward, found two fatal wounds upon him. The first shot, passing through the
stomach, explained Du Sang's failure to kill at a distance in which, uninjured, he could have
placed five shots within the compass of a silver dollar. Firing for Whispering Smith's heart,
he had, despite the fearful shock, put four bullets through his coat before the rifle-ball
from the ground, tearing at right angles across the path of the first bullet, had cut down
his life to a question of hours.

Bill Dancing, who had been hit in the head and stunned, had been moved back to the cabin at
Mission Spring, and lay in the little bedroom. A doctor at Oroville had been sent for, but
had not come. At midnight of the second day, Smith, who was beside his bed, saw him rouse up,
and noted the brightness of his eyes as he looked around. "Bill," he declared hopefully, as
he sat beside the bed, "you are better, hang it! I know you are. How do you feel?"

"Ain't that blamed doctor here yet? Then give me my boots. I'm going back to Medicine Bend
to Doc Torpy."

In the morning Whispering Smith, who had cleansed and dressed the wound and felt sure the bullet
had not penetrated the skull, offered no objection to the proposal beyond cautioning him to
ride slowly. "You can go down part way with the prisoners, Bill," suggested Whispering Smith.
"Brill Young is going to take them to Oroville, and you can act as chairman of the guard."

Before the party started, Smith called Seagrue to him. "George, you saved my life once. Do
you remember--in the Pan Handle? Well, I gave you yours twice in the Cache day before yesterday.
I don't know how badly you are into this thing. If you kept clear of the killing at Tower W
I will do what I can for you. Don't talk to anybody."

CHAPTER XXXII

McLOUD AND DICKSIE

News of the fight in Williams Cache reached Medicine Bend in the night. Horsemen, filling in
the gaps between telephones leading to the north country, made the circuit complete, but the
accounts, confused and colored in the repeating, came in a cloud of conflicting rumors. In
the streets, little groups of men discussed the fragmentary reports as they came from the railroad
offices. Toward morning, Sleepy Cat, nearer the scene of the fight, began sending in telegraphic
reports in which truth and rumor were strangely mixed. McCloud waited at the wires all night,
hoping for trustworthy advices as to the result, but received none. Even during the morning
nothing came, and the silence seemed more ominous than the bad news of the early night. Routine
business was almost suspended and McCloud and Rooney Lee kept the wires warm with inquiries,
but neither the telephone nor the telegraph would yield any definite word as to what had actually
happened in the Williams Cache fight. It was easy to fear the worst.

At the noon hour McCloud was signing letters when Dicksie Dunning walked hurriedly up the hall
and hesitated in the passageway before the open door of his office. He gave an exclamation
as he pushed back his chair. She was in her riding-suit just as she had slipped from her saddle.
"Oh, Mr. McCloud, have you heard the awful news? Whispering Smith was killed yesterday in Williams
Cache by Du Sang."

McCloud stiffened a little. "I hope that can't be true. We have had nothing here but rumors;
perhaps it is these that you have heard."

"No, no! Blake, one of our men, was in the fight and got back at the ranch at nine o'clock
this morning. I heard the story myself, and I rode right in to--to see Marion, and my courage
failed me--I came here first. Does she know, do you think? Blake saw him fall from the saddle
after he was shot, and everybody ran away, and Du Sang and two other men were firing at him
as he lay on the ground. He could not possibly have escaped with his life, Blake said; he must
have been riddled with bullets. Isn't it terrible?" She sobbed suddenly, and McCloud, stunned
at her words, led her to his chair and bent over her.

"If his death means this to you, think of what it means to me!"

A flood of sympathy bore them together. The moment was hardly one for interruption, but the
despatcher's door opened and Rooney Lee halted, thunderstruck, on the threshold.

Dicksie's hand disappeared in her handkerchief. McCloud had been in wrecks before, and gathered
himself together unmoved. "What is it, Rooney?"

The very calmness of the two at the table disconcerted the despatcher. He held the message
in his hand and shuffled his feet. "Give me your despatch," said McCloud impatiently.

Quite unable to take his hollow eyes off Dicksie, poor Rooney advanced, handed the telegram
to McCloud, and beat an awkward retreat.

McCloud devoured the words of the message at a glance.

"Ah!" he cried, "this is from Gordon himself, sent from Sleepy Cat. He must be safe and unhurt!
Listen:

    "Three of the Tower W men trailed into Williams Cache. In
    resisting arrest this morning, Du Sang was wounded and is
    dying to-night. Two prisoners, Karg and Seagrue. G. S.

"Those are Gordon's initials; it is the signature over which he telegraphs me. You see, this
was sent last night long after Blake left. He is safe; I will stake my life on it."

Dicksie sank back while McCloud re-read the message. "Oh, isn't that a relief?" she exclaimed.
"But how can it be? I can't understand it at all; but he is safe, isn't he? I was heartbroken
when I heard he was killed. Marion ought to know of this," she said, rising. "I am going to
tell her."

"And may I come over after I tell Rooney Lee to repeat this to headquarters?"

"Why, of course, if you want to."

When McCloud reached the cottage Dicksie met him. "Katie Dancing's mother is sick, and she
has gone home. Poor Marion is all alone this morning, and half dead with a sick headache,"
said Dicksie. "But I told her, and she said she shouldn't mind the headache now at all."

"But what are you going to do?"

"I am going to get dinner; do you want to help?"

"I'm going to help."

"Oh, you are? That would be very funny."

"Funny or not, I'm going to help."

"You would only be in the way."

"You don't know whether I should or not."

"I know I should do much better if you would go back and run the railroad a few minutes."

"The railroad be hanged. I am for dinner."

"But I will get dinner for you."

"You need not. I can get it for myself."

"You are perfectly absurd, and if we stand here disputing, Marion won't have anything to eat."

They went into the kitchen disputing about what should be cooked. At the end of an hour they
had two fires going--one in the stove and one in Dicksie's cheeks. By that time it had been
decided to have a luncheon instead of a dinner. Dicksie attempted some soup, and McCloud found
a strip of bacon, and after he had cooked it, Dicksie, with her riding-skirt pinned up and
her sleeves delightfully rolled back, began frying eggs. When Marion, unable longer to withstand
the excitement, appeared, the engineer, flushed with endeavor, was making toast.

The three sat down at table together. They found they had forgotten the coffee, but Marion
was not allowed to move from her chair. When the coffee was made ready the bacon had been eaten
and more had to be fried. McCloud proved able for any part of the programme, and when they
rose it was four o'clock and too late, McCloud declared, to go back to the office that afternoon.

Marion and Dicksie, after a time, attempted jointly to get rid of him, but they found they
could not, so the three talked about Whispering Smith. When the women tried to discourage McCloud
by talking hats he played the wheezy piano, and when Dicksie spoke about going home he declared
he would ride home with her. But Dicksie had no mind that he should, and when he asked to know
why, without realizing what a flush lingered in his face, she said only, no; if she had reasons
she would give none. McCloud persisted, because under the flush about his eyes was the resolve
that he would take one long ride that evening, in any event. He had made up his mind for that
ride--a longer one than he had ever taken before or expected ever to take again--and would
not be balked.

Dicksie, insisting upon going home, went so far as to have her horse brought from the stable.
To her surprise, a horse for McCloud came over with it. Quiet to the verge of solemnity, but
with McCloud following, Dicksie walked with admirable firmness out of the shop to the curb.
McCloud gave her rein to her, and with a smile stood waiting to help her mount.

She was drawing on her second glove. "You are not going with me."

"You'll let me ride the same road, won't you--even if I can't keep up?"

Dicksie looked at his mount. "It would be difficult to keep up, with that horse."

"Would you ride away from me just because you have a better horse?"

"No, not just because I have a better horse."

He looked steadily at her without speaking.

"Why must you ride home with me when I don't want you to?" she asked reproachfully. Fear had
come upon her and she did not know what she was saying. She saw only the expression of his
eyes and looked away, but she knew that his eyes followed her. The sun had set. The deserted
street lay in the white half-light of a mountain evening, and the day's radiance was dying
in the sky. In lower tones he spoke again, and she turned deadly white.

"I've wanted so long to say this, Dicksie, that I might as well be dead as to try to keep it
back any longer. That's why I want to ride home with you if you are going to let me." He turned
to stroke her horse's head. Dicksie stood seemingly helpless. McCloud slipped his finger into
his waistcoat pocket and held something out in his hand. "This shell pin fell from your hair
that night you were at camp by the bridge--do you remember? I couldn't bear to give it back."

Dicksie's eyes opened wide. "Let me see it. I don't think that is mine."

"Great Heaven! Have I been carrying Marion Sinclair's pin for a month?" exclaimed McCloud.
"Well, I won't lose any time in returning it to her, at any rate."

"Where are you going?" Dicksie's voice was faint.

"I'm going to give Marion her pin."

"Do nothing of the sort! Come here! Give it to me."

"Dicksie, dare you tell me, after a shock like that, it really is your pin?"

"Oh, I don't know whose pin it is!"

"Why, what is the matter?"

"Give me the pin!" She put her hands unsteadily up under her hat. "Here, for Heaven's sake,
if you must have something, take this comb!" She slipped from her head the shell that held
her knotted hair. He caught her hand and kissed it, and she could not get it away.

"You are dear," murmured Dicksie, "if you are silly. The reason I wouldn't let you ride home
with me is because I was afraid you might get shot. How do you suppose I should feel if you
were killed? Or don't you think I have any feeling?"

"But, Dicksie, is it all right?"

"How do I know? What do you mean? I will not let you ride home with me, and you will not let
me ride home alone. Tie Jim again. I am going to stay with Marion all night."

CHAPTER XXXIII

THE LAUGH OF A WOMAN

Within an hour, Marion, working over a hat in the trimming-room, was startled to hear the cottage
door open, and to see Dicksie quite unconcernedly walk in. To Marion's exclamation of surprise
she returned only a laugh. "I have changed my mind, dear. I am going to stay all night."

Marion kissed her approvingly. "Really, you are getting so sensible I shan't know you, Dicksie.
In fact, I believe this is the most sensible thing you were ever guilty of."

"Glad you think so," returned Dicksie dryly, unpinning her hat. "I certainly hope it is. Mr.
McCloud persuaded me it wasn't right for me to ride home alone, and I knew better than he what
danger there was for him in riding home with me--so here I am. He is coming over for supper,
too, in a few minutes."

When McCloud arrived he brought with him a porterhouse steak, and Marion was again driven from
the kitchen. At the end of an hour, Dicksie, engrossed over the broiler, was putting the finishing
touches to the steak, and McCloud, more engrossed, was watching her, when a diffident and surprised-looking
person appeared in the kitchen doorway and put his hand undecidedly on the casing. While he
stood, Dicksie turned abruptly to McCloud.

"Oh, by the way, I have forgotten something! Will you do me a favor?"

"Certainly! Do you want money or a pass?"

"No, not money," said Dicksie, lifting the steak on her forks, "though you might give me a pass."

"But I should hate to have you go away anywhere----"

"I don't want to go anywhere, but I never had a pass, and I think it would be kind of nice
to have one just to keep. Don't you?"

"Why, yes; you might put it in the bank and have it drawing interest."

"This steak is. Do they give interest on passes?"

"Well, a good deal of interest is felt in them--on this division at least. What is the favor?"

"Yes, what is it? How can I think? Oh, I know! If they don't put Jim in a box stall to-night
he will kill some of the horses over there. Will you telephone the stables?"

"Won't you give me the number and let me telephone?" asked a voice behind them. They turned
in astonishment and saw Whispering Smith. "I am surprised," he added calmly, "to see a man
of your intelligence, George, trying to broil a steak with the lower door of your stove wide
open. Close the lower door and cut out the draft through the fire. Don't stare, George; put
back the broiler. And haven't you made a radical mistake to start with?" he asked, stepping
between the confused couple. "Are you not trying to broil a roast of beef?"

"Where did you come from?" demanded McCloud, as Marion came in from the dining-room.

"Don't search me the very first thing," protested Whispering Smith.

"But we've been frightened to death here for twenty-four hours. Are you really alive and unhurt?
This young lady rode in twenty miles this morning and came to the office in tears to get news
of you."

Smith looked mildly at Dicksie. "Did you shed a tear for me? I should like to have seen just
one! Where did I come from? I reported in wild over the telephone ten minutes ago. Didn't Marion
tell you? She is so forgetful. That is what causes wrecks, Marion. I have been in the saddle
since three o'clock this morning, thank you, and have had nothing for five days but raw steer
garnished with sunshine."

The four sat down to supper, and Whispering Smith began to talk. He told the story of the chase
to the Cache, the defiance from Rebstock, and the tardy appearance of the men he wanted. "Du
Sang meant to shoot his way through us and make a dash for it. There really was nothing else
for him to do. Banks and Kennedy were up above, even if he could have ridden out through the
upper canyon, which is very doubtful with all the water now. After a little talk back and forth,
Du Sang drew, and of course then it was every man for himself. He was hit twice and he died
Sunday night, but the other two were not seriously hurt. What can you do? It is either kill
or get killed with those fellows, and, of course, I talked plainly to Du Sang. He had butchered
a man at Mission Springs just the night before, and deserved hanging a dozen times over. He
meant from the start, he told me afterward, to get me. Oh, Miss Dunning, may I have some more
coffee? Haven't I an agreeable part of the railroad business, don't you think? I shouldn't
have pushed in here to-night, but I saw the lights when I rode by awhile ago; they looked so
good I couldn't resist."

McCloud leaned forward. "You call it pushing in, do you, Gordon? Do you know what this young
lady did this morning? One of her cowboys came down from the Cache early with the word that
you had been killed in the fight by Du Sang. He said he saw you drop from your saddle to the
ground with Du Sang shooting at you. She ordered up her horse, without a word, and rode twenty
miles in an hour and a half to find out here what we had heard. She 'pushed in' at the Wickiup,
where she never had been before in her life, and wandered through it alone looking for my office,
to find out from me whether I hadn't something to contradict the bad news. While we talked,
in came your despatch from Sleepy Cat. Never was one better timed! And when she knew you were
safe her eyes filled again."

Whispering Smith looked at Dicksie quizzically. Her confusion was delightful. He rose, lifted
her hand in his own, and, bending, kissed it.

They talked till late, and when Dicksie walked out on the porch McCloud followed to smoke.
Whispering Smith still sat at the table talking to Marion, and the two heard the sound of the
low voices outside. At intervals Dicksie's laugh came in through the open door.

Whispering Smith, listening, said nothing for some time, but once she laughed peculiarly. He
pricked up his ears. "What has been happening since I left town?"

"What do you mean?" asked Marion Sinclair.

He nodded toward the porch. "McCloud and Dicksie out there. They have been fixing things up."

"Nonsense! What do you mean?"

"I mean they are engaged."

"Never in the world!"

"I may be slow in reading a trail," said Smith modestly, "but when a woman laughs like that
I think there's something doing. Don't you believe it? Call them in and ask them. You won't?
Well, I will. Take them in separate rooms. You ask her and I'll ask him."

In spite of Marion's protests the two were brought in. "I am required by Mr. Smith to ask you
a very silly question, Dicksie," said Marion, taking her into the living-room. "Answer yes
or no. Are you engaged to anybody?"

"What a question! Why, no!"

"Marion Sinclair wants to know just one thing, George," said Whispering Smith to McCloud after
he had taken him into the dark shop. "She feels she ought to know because she is in a way Dicksie's
chaperone, you know, and she feels that you are willing she should know. I don't want to be
too serious, but answer yes or no. Are you engaged to Dicksie?"

"Why, yes. I----"

"That's all; go back to the porch," directed Whispering Smith. McCloud obeyed orders.

Marion, alone in the living-room, was waiting for the inquisitor, and her face wore a look
of triumph. "You are not such a mind-reader after all, are you? I told you they weren't."

"I told you they were," contended Whispering Smith.

"She says they are not," insisted Marion.

"He says they are," returned Whispering Smith, "And, what's more, I'll bet my saddle against
the shop they are. I could be mistaken in anything but that laugh."

CHAPTER XXXIV

A MIDNIGHT VISIT

The lights, but one, were out. McCloud and Whispering Smith had gone, and Marion was locking
up the house for the night, when she was halted by a knock at the shop door. It was a summons
that she thought she knew, but the last in the world that she wanted to hear or to answer.
Dicksie had gone to the bedroom, and standing between the portières that curtained the work-room
from the shop, Marion in the half-light listened, hesitating whether to ignore or to answer
the midnight intruder. But experience, and bitter experience, had taught her there was only
one way to meet that particular summons, and that was to act, whether at noon or at midnight,
without fear. She waited until the knocking had been twice repeated, turned up the light, and
going to the door drew the bolt; Sinclair stood before her, and she drew back for him to enter.
"Dicksie Dunning is with me to-night," said Marion, with her hand on the latch, "and we shall
have to talk here."

Sinclair took off his hat. "I knew you had company," he returned in the low, gentle tone that
Marion knew very well, "so I came late. And I heard to-night, for the first time, that this
railroad crowd is after me--God knows why; but they have to earn their salary somehow. I want
to keep out of trouble if I can. I won't kill anybody if they don't force me to it. They've
scared nearly all my men away from the ranch already; one crippled-up cowboy is all I have
got to help me look after the cattle. But I won't quarrel with them, Marion, if I can get away
from here peaceably, so I've come to talk it over once more with you. I'm going away and I
want you to go with me; I've got enough to keep us as well as the best of them and as long
as we live. You've given me a good lesson. I needed it, girlie----"

"Don't call me that!"

He laughed kindly. "Why, that's what it used to be; that's what I want it to be again. I don't
blame you. You're worth all the women I ever knew, Marion. I've learned to appreciate some
few things in the lonely months I've spent up on the Frenchman; but I've felt while I was there
as if I were working for both of us. I've got a buyer in sight now for the cattle and the land.
I'm ready to clean up and say good-by to trouble--all I want is for you to give me the one
chance I've asked for and go along."

They stood facing each other under the dim light. She listened intently to every word, though
in her terror she might not have heard or understood all of them. One thing she did very clearly
understand, and that was why he had come and what he wanted. To that she held her mind tenaciously,
and for that she shaped her answer. "I cannot go with you--now or ever."

He waited a moment. "We always got along, Marion, when I behaved myself."

"I hope you always will behave yourself; but I could no more go with you than I could make
myself again what I was years ago, Murray. I wish you nothing but good; but our ways parted
long ago."

"Stop and think a minute, Marion. I offer you more and offer it more honestly than I ever offered
it before, because I know myself better. I am alone in the world--strong, and better able to
care for you than I was when I undertook to----"

"I have never complained."

"That's what makes me more anxious to show you now that I can and will do what's right."

"Oh, you multiply words! It is too late for you to be here. You are in danger, you say; for
the love of Heaven, leave me and go away!"

"You know me, Marion, when my mind is made up. I won't leave without you." He leaned with one
hand against the ribbon showcase. "If you don't want to go I will stay right here and pay off
the scores I owe. Two men here have stirred this country up too long, anyway. I don't care
much how soon anybody gets me after I round them up. But to-night I felt like this: you and
I started out in life together, and we ought to live it out or die together, whether it's to-night,
Marion, or twenty years from to-night."

"If you want to kill me to-night, I have no resistance to make."

Sinclair sat down on a low counter-stool, and, bending forward, held his head between his hands.
"It oughtn't all to end here. I know you, and I know you want to do what's right. I couldn't
kill you without killing myself; you know that." He straightened up slowly. "Here!" He slipped
his revolver from his hip-holster and held the grip of the gun toward her. "Use it on me if
you want to. It is your chance to end everything; it may save several lives if you do. I won't
leave McCloud here to crow over me, and, by God, I won't leave you here for Whispering Smith!
I'll settle with him anyhow. Take the pistol! What are you afraid of? Take it! Use it! I don't
want to live without you. If you make me do it, you're to blame for the consequences."

She stood with wide-open eyes, but uttered no word.

"You won't touch it--then you care a little for me yet," he murmured.

"No! Do not say so. But I will not do murder."

"Think about the other, then. Go with me and everything will be all right. I will come back
some evening soon for my answer. And until then, if those two men have any use for life, let
them keep in the clear. I heard to-night that Du Sang is killed. Do you know whether it is true?"

"It is true."

An oath half escaping showed how the confirmation cut him. "And Whispering Smith got away!
It is Du Sang's own fault; I told him to keep out of that trap. I stay in the open; and I'm
not Du Sang. I'll choose my own ground for the finish when they want it with me, and when I
go I'll take company--I'll promise you that. Good-night, Marion. Will you shake hands?"

"No."

"Damn it, I like your grit, girl! Well, good-night, anyway."

She closed the door. She had even strength enough to bolt it before his footsteps died away.
She put out the light and felt her way blindly back to the work-room. She staggered through
it, clutching at the curtains, and fell in the darkness into Dicksie's arms.

"Marion dear, don't speak," Dicksie whispered. "I heard everything. Oh, Marion!" she cried,
suddenly conscious of the inertness of the burden in her arms. "Oh, what shall I do?"

Moved by fright to her utmost strength, Dicksie drew the unconscious woman back to her room
and managed to lay her on the bed. Marion opened her eyes a few minutes later to see the lights
burning, to hear the telephone bell ringing, and to find Dicksie on the edge of the bed beside her.

"Oh, Marion, thank Heaven, you are reviving! I have been frightened to death. Don't mind the
telephone; it is Mr. McCloud. I didn't know what to do, so I telephoned him."

"But you had better answer him," said Marion faintly. The telephone bell was ringing wildly.

"Oh, no! he can wait. How are you, dear? I don't wonder you were frightened to death. Marion,
he means to kill us--every one!"

"No, Dicksie. He will kill me and kill himself; that is where it will end. Dicksie, do answer
the telephone. What are you thinking of? Mr. McCloud will be at the door in five minutes. Do
you want him in the street to-night?"

Dicksie fled to the telephone, and an excited conference over the wire closed in seeming reassurance
at both ends. By that time Marion had regained her steadiness, but she could not talk of what
had passed. At times, as the two lay together in the darkness, Marion spoke, but it was not
to be answered. "I do not know," she murmured once wearily. "Perhaps I am doing wrong; perhaps
I ought to go with him. I wish, oh, I wish I knew what I ought to do!"

CHAPTER XXXV

THE CALL

Beyond receiving reports from Kennedy and Banks, who in the interval rode into town and rode
out again on their separate and silent ways, Whispering Smith for two days seemed to do nothing.
Yet instinct keener than silence kept the people of Medicine Bend on edge during those two
days, and when President Bucks's car came in on the evening of the second day, the town knew
from current rumors that Banks had gone to the Frenchman ranch with a warrant on a serious
charge for Sinclair. In the president's car Bucks and McCloud, after a late dinner, were joined
by Whispering Smith, and the president heard the first connected story of the events of the
fortnight that had passed. Bucks made no comment until he had heard everything. "And they rode
Sinclair's horses," he said in conclusion.

"Sinclair's horses," returned Whispering Smith, "and they are all accounted for. One horse
supplied by Rebstock was shot where they crossed Stampede Creek. It had given out and they
had a fresh horse in the willows, for they shot the scrub half a mile up one of the canyons
near the crossing. The magpies attracted my attention to it. A piece of skin a foot square
had been cut out of the flank."

"You got there before the birds."

"It was about an even thing," said Smith. "Anyway, we were there in time to see the horse."

"And Sinclair was away from the ranch from Saturday noon till Sunday night?"

"A rancher living over on Stampede Creek saw the five men when they crossed Saturday afternoon.
The fellow was scared and lied to me about it, but he told Wickwire who they were."

"Now, who is Wickwire?" asked Bucks.

"You ought to remember Wickwire, George," remarked Whispering Smith, turning to McCloud. "You
haven't forgotten the Smoky Creek wreck? Do you remember the tramp who had his legs crushed
and lay in the sun all morning? You put him in your car and sent him down here to the railroad
hospital and Barnhardt took care of him. That was Wickwire. Not a bad fellow, either; he can
talk pretty straight and shoot pretty straight. How do I know? Because he has told me the story
and I've seen him shoot. There, you see, is one friend that you never reckoned on. He used
to be a cowboy, and I got him a job working for Sinclair on the Frenchman; he has worked at
Dunning's and other places on the Crawling Stone. He hates Sinclair with a deadly hatred for
some reason. Just lately Wickwire set up for himself on Little Crawling Stone."

"I have noticed that fellow's ranch," remarked McCloud.

"I couldn't leave him at Sinclair's," continued Whispering Smith frankly. "The fellow was on
my mind all the time. I felt certain he would kill Sinclair or get killed if he stayed there.
And then, when I took him away they sprang Tower W on me! That is the price, not of having
a conscience, for I haven't any, but of listening to the voice that echoes where my conscience
used to be," said the railroad man, moving uneasily in his chair.

Bucks broke the ash from his cigar into the tray on the table. "You are restless to-night,
Gordon--and it isn't like you, either."

"It is in the air. There has been a dead calm for two days. Something is due to happen to-night.
I wish I could hear from Banks; he started with the papers for Sinclair's yesterday while I
went to Oroville to sweat Karg. Blood-poisoning has set in and it is rather important to us
to get a confession. There's a horse!" He stepped to the window. "Coming fast, too. Now, I
wonder--no, he's gone by."

Five minutes later a messenger came to the car from the Wickiup with word that Kennedy was
looking for Whispering Smith. Bucks, McCloud, and Smith left the car together and walked up
to McCloud's office.

Kennedy, sitting on the edge of the table, was tapping his leg nervously with a ruler. "Bad
news, Gordon."

"Not from Ed Banks?"

"Sinclair got him this morning."

Whispering Smith sat down. "Go on."

"Banks and I picked up Wickwire on the Crawling Stone early, and we rode over to the Frenchman.
Wickwire said Sinclair had been up at Williams Cache the day before, and he didn't think he
was home. Of course I knew the Cache was watched and he wouldn't be there long, so Ed asked
me to stay in the cottonwoods and watch the creek for him. He and Wickwire couldn't find anybody
home when they got to the ranch-house and they rode down the corral together to look over the
horses."

Whispering Smith's hand fell helplessly on the table. "Rode down together! For God's sake,
why didn't one of them stay at the house?"

"Sinclair rode out from behind the barn and hit Wickwire in the arm before they saw him. Banks
turned and opened on him, and Wickwire ducked for the creek. Sinclair put a soft bullet through
Banks's shoulder--tore it pretty bad, Gordon--and made his get-away before Wickwire and I could
reach the barn again. I got Ed on his horse and back to Wickwire's, and we sent one of the
boys to Oroville for a doctor. After Banks fell out of the saddle and was helpless Sinclair
talked to him before I came up. 'You ought to have kept out of this, Ed,' he said. 'This is
a railroad fight. Why didn't they send the head of their own gang after me?'--naming you."
Kennedy nodded toward Whispering Smith.

"Naming me."

"Banks says, 'I'm sheriff of this county, and will be a long time yet!' I took the papers from
his breast pocket," continued Kennedy. "You can see where he was hit." Kennedy laid the sheriff's
packet on the table. Bucks drew his chair forward and, with his cigar between his fingers,
picked the packet up and opened it. Kennedy went on: "Ed told Sinclair if he couldn't land
him himself that he knew a man who could and would before he was a week older. He meant you,
Gordon, and the last thing Ed told me was that he wanted you to serve the papers on Sinclair."

A silence fell on the company. One of the documents passing under Bucks's hand caught his eye
and he opened it. It was the warrant for Sinclair. He read it without comment, folded it, and,
looking at Whispering Smith, pushed it toward him. "Then this, I guess, Gordon, belongs to you."

Starting from a revery, Whispering Smith reached for the warrant. He looked for a moment at
the blood-stained caption. "Yes," he said, "this, I guess, belongs to me."

CHAPTER XXXVI

DUTY

The stir of the town over the shooting of Banks seemed to Marion, in her distress, to point
an accusing finger at her. The disgrace of what she had felt herself powerless to prevent now
weighed on her mind, and she asked herself whether, after all, the responsibility of this murder
was not upon her. Even putting aside this painful doubt, she bore the name of the man who had
savagely defied accountability and now, it seemed to her, was dragging her with him through
the slough of blood and dishonor into which he had plunged.

The wretched thought would return that had she listened to him, had she consented to go away,
this outbreak might have been prevented. And what horror might not another day bring--what
lives still closer to her life be taken? For herself she cared less; but she knew that Sinclair,
now that he had begun, would not stop. In whichever way her thoughts turned, wretchedness was
upon them, and the day went in one of those despairing and indecisive battles that each one
within his own heart must fight at times with heaviness and doubt.

McCloud called her over the telephone in the afternoon to say that he was going West on the
evening train and would not be over for supper. She wished he could have come, for her loneliness
began to be insupportable.

Toward sunset she put on her hat and started for the post-office. In the meantime, Dicksie,
at home, had called McCloud up and told him she was coming down for the night. He immediately
cancelled his plans for going West, and when Marion returned at dusk she found him with Dicksie
at the cottage. The three had supper. Afterward Dicksie and McCloud went out for a walk, and
Marion was alone in the house when the shop door opened and Whispering Smith walked in. It
was dusk.

"Don't light the lamps, Marion," he said, sitting down on a counter-stool as he took off his
hat. "I want to talk to you just a minute, if you don't mind. You know what has happened. I
am called on now to go after Sinclair. I have tried to avoid it, but my hand has been forced.
To-day I've been placing horses. I am going to ride to-night with the warrant. I have given
him a start of twenty-four hours, hoping he may get out of the country. To stay here means
only death to him in the end, and, what is worse, the killing of more and innocent men. But
he won't leave the country; do you think he will?"

"Oh, I do not know! I am afraid he will not."

"I do not think I have ever hesitated before at any call of this kind; nor at what such a call
will probably sometime mean; but this man I have known since we were boys."

"If I had never seen him!"

"That brings up another point that has been worrying me all day. I could not help knowing what
you have had to go through in this country. It is a tough country for any woman. Your people
and mine were always close together and I have felt bound to do what I could to----"

"Don't be afraid to say it--make my path easier."

"Something like that, though there's been little real doing. What this situation in which Sinclair
is now placed may still mean to you I do not know, but I would not add a straw to the weight
of your troubles. I came to-night to ask a plain question. If he doesn't leave the country
I have got to meet him. You know what, in all human probability, that will mean. From such
a meeting only one of us can come back. Which shall it be?"

"I'm afraid I don't understand you--do you ask me this question? How can I know which it shall
be? What is it you mean?"

"I mean I will not take his life in a fight--if it comes to that--if you would rather he should
come back."

A sob almost refused an answer to him. "How can you ask me so terrible a question?"

"It is a question that means a good deal to me, of course, and I don't know just what it means
to you: that is the point I am up against. I may have no choice in the matter, but I must decide
what to try to do if I have one. Am I to remember first that he is your husband?"

There was a silence. "What shall I say--what can I say? God help me, how am I to answer a question
like that?"

"How am I to answer it?"

Her voice was low and pitiful when her answer came: "You must do your duty."

"What is my duty then? To serve the paper that has been given to me, I know--but not necessarily
to defend my life at the price of his. The play of a chance lies in deciding that; I can keep
the chance or give it away; that is for you to say. Or take the question of duty again. You
are alone and your friends are few. Haven't I any duty toward you, perhaps? I don't know a
woman's heart. I used to think I did, but I don't. My duty to this company that I work for
is only the duty of a servant. If I go, another takes my place; it means nothing except taking
one name off the payroll and putting another on. Whatever he may have done, this man is your
husband; if his death would cause you a pang, it shall not be laid at my door. We ought to
understand each other on that point fairly before I start to-night."

"Can you ask me whether you ought not to take every means to defend your own life? or whether
any consideration ought to come before that? I think not. I should be a wicked woman if I were
to wish evil to him, wretched as he has made me. I am a wretched woman, whichever way I turn.
But I should be less than human if I could say that to me your death would not be a cruel,
cruel blow."

There was a moment of silence. "Dicksie understood you to say that you were in doubt as to
whether you ought to go away with him when he asked you to go. That is why I was unsettled
in my mind."

"The only reason why I doubted was that I thought by going I might save better lives than mine.
I could willingly give up my life to do that. But to stain it by going back to such a man--God
help me!"

"I think I understand. If the unfortunate should happen before I come back I hope only this:
that you will not hate me because I am the man on whom the responsibility has fallen. I haven't
sought it. And if I should not come back at all, it is only--good-by."

He saw her clasp her hands convulsively. "I will not say it! I will pray on my knees that you
do come back."

"Good-night, Marion. Some one is at the cottage door."

"It is probably Mr. McCloud and Dicksie. I will let them in."

CHAPTER XXXVII

WICKWIRE

McCloud and Dicksie met them at the porch door. Marion, unnerved, went directly to her room.
Whispering Smith stopped to speak to Dicksie and McCloud interposed. "Bob Scott telephoned
the office just now he had a man from Oroville who wanted to see you right away, Gordon," said
he. "I told him to send him over here. It is Wickwire."

"Wickwire," repeated Whispering Smith. "Wickwire has no business here that I know of; no doubt
it is something I ought to know of. And, by the way, you ought to see this man," he said, turning
again to Dicksie. "If McCloud tells the story right, Wickwire is a sort of protégé of yours,
Miss Dicksie, though neither of you seems to have known it. He is the tramp cowboy who was
smashed up in the wreck at Smoky Creek. He is not a bad man, but whiskey, you know, beats some
decent men." A footstep fell on the porch. "There he comes now, I reckon. Shall I let him in
a minute?"

"Oh, I should like to see him! He has been at the ranch at different times, you know."

Smith opened the door and stepping out on the porch, talked with the new-comer. In a moment
he brought him in. Dicksie had seated herself on the sofa, McCloud stood in the doorway of
the dining-room, and Whispering Smith laid one arm on the table as he sat down beside it with
his face above the dark shade of the lamp. Before him stood Wickwire. The half-light threw
him up tall and dark, but it showed the heavy shock of black hair falling over his forehead,
and the broad, thin face of a mountain man.

"He has just been telling me that Seagrue is loose," Whispering Smith explained pleasantly.
"Who turned the trick, Wickwire?"

"Sheriff Coon and a deputy jailer started with Seagrue for Medicine Bend this morning. Coming
through Horse Eye Canyon, Murray Sinclair and Barney Rebstock got a clean drop on them, took
Seagrue, and they all rode off together. They didn't make any bones about it, either. Their
gang has got lots of friends over there, you know. They rode into Atlantic City and stayed
over an hour. Coon tracked them there and got up a posse of six men. The three were standing
in front of the bank when the sheriff rode into town. Sinclair and Seagrue got on their horses
and started off. Rebstock went back to get another drink. When he came out of the saloon he
gave the posse a gun-fight all by himself, and wounded two men and made his get-away."

