"It must, nevertheless, be admitted, that there are dangers to the student in some respects
peculiar, affecting deeply the principles of action, and which require a greater care to be
prevented, because of the influence which he is destined to exert in future life. The very
cultivation of mind has frequently a tendency to impair the moral sensibilities, to induce
that pride of conscious ability and variety of attainments, which, as they are most of all
affections offensive to God, so they become, surely, though insensibly, most pernicious in
their influence upon the individuals themselves who cherish them, and contribute to poison
those streams which ought only to carry abroad health and blessing to the world. That spirit
of emulation, also, which is naturally excited among so many aspirants for an honorable distinction,
too often leads, on the one hand, in those who excel, to an overweening selfishness and an
insatiable ambition, which, in the course of life, sacrifice all principle and the highest
interests of society to private gratification; and, on the other, in those whose hopes are
disappointed, to a destroying negligence and sensuality. Nor is it to be denied, that the unsanctified
literature of antiquity, and many of the productions of our own times, which have the greatest
power of attraction over the minds of youth, cannot be assiduously cultivated without danger
of corrupting the moral sentiments, and ministering strength to the wrong affections of the
mind. Against these evils, and others, more immediately pernicious, which are incident to numerous
associations of youth, a moral influence, pure, constraining and habitual, requires to be exerted.
It is now more than ever demanded, and the fact is most creditable to the spirit of the times,
that a literary institution should be a safe resort, and no other advantages will, in the common
estimation, compensate for defect and failure in this particular. The relations which every
individual student sustains to God and to eternity, call imperiously and aloud, that the great
principles of moral obligation, the everlasting distinctions between right and wrong, the methods
of the Divine administration, and the solemnities of eternal retribution, should be kept before
him, in all their significancy, and enforced by the constraining motives of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, without which all secondary authority and influence will be comparatively vain. The
relations also of the whole body of students to their country and the world demand, and the
admonition is sounded out from every corner of our land, from the city, and the field, and
even from the desert, that here should be laid the foundation of those virtuous habits, of
that reverence for God, and practical regard for His ordinances, without which the influence
of our educated men will gradually undermine the fair fabric of our national freedom, and the
ruins of our country will be heaped up for an everlasting memorial, that neither liberty, nor
learning, nor wealth, nor arts, nor arms, can stay the decline of that people among whom the
redeeming spirit of Christianity has no permanent abode. I know, indeed, that college is no
place for infusing or fostering sectarian prejudices, nor for preferring the weapons of sectarian
warfare. No spirit of party should walk abroad on this common ground. No distinctive privileges
of a denomination should here be ever claimed or allowed. But, as none are exempted from their
obligations to God, and none are safe without His blessing, it is most evident that this should
be the first and last of our labor with those who are themselves immortal, and whose influence
is so connected with the highest interests of their fellow men, to encourage a spirit of inwrought
piety, and instill the lessons of practical obedience. That is the noblest of all efforts which
has respect to the preparation of mind for the service of its Creator among its kindred intelligences,
and for the joys of an immortal life. And that will be a glorious consummation (may it be ours
to hasten it) when the destined alliance between religion and learning shall be perfected,
and their united influence shall be employed, and shall prevail, to raise a world from ignorance
and sin and wretchedness, to the dignity and the privilege of the sons of God. And let us hope,
both in regard to this college, whose interests we now cherish, and all other kindred institutions,
that amidst the changes of society by which they are occasionally affected, and the adversities
by which they are depressed, we shall see the vindication of that rule of Providence by which
good is always educed from evil. Let us believe that those prejudices and mistakes and errors
and abuses, which are wont, in undisturbed prosperity, to become inveterate, shall be done
away; that those improvements which may be expected to flow from the influence of free governments
and a free Christianity shall prevail, and shall contribute to make the reign of liberty and
knowledge and truth not only universal in extent, but perpetual in duration."

President Lord's official course was marked by a judicious conservatism.

In nothing was this more conspicuous than in his treatment of the matter of "college honors."
Near the close of his administration, the occasion requiring, he published a statement, in
which we find the following language:

"It will be recollected that about a quarter of a century ago there arose a simultaneous questioning
among the students at most of the New England colleges, in regard to college appointments in
general. It was a spontaneous movement of the young men, consequent upon an unusual religious
awakening among them, and seemed a common reaction of conscience against a common injurious
custom. The students of this college were excited more than others. At least, they were more
demonstrative. By memorial, they unanimously requested the Trustees to abolish the existing system.

"The Trustees gave great attention to the request. Having ascertained that the Faculty would
readily try the experiment of a change, although but two of them were convinced of its utility,
they set aside the existing system of exhibitions, prizes, assignments, etc., and ordained
the present system, which fully and consistently excludes the principle of the old. This action
of the Trustees was thorough, consistent, and decisive, and was far in advance of what had
taken place in any other institution. It gave great content to the students. It was followed
by many tokens of public approbation. The Faculty at once found their administration relieved,
simplified, and greatly facilitated in general. The college rapidly attained to a degree of
patronage and prosperity unprecedented in its history.

"After a few years, a severe outside pressure produced a degree of anxiety in regard to the
prudence, if not the principle, of the change. Some distinguished alumni of the college, and
other gentlemen, remonstrated against it as an innovation not soundly moral and conservative,
but radical and disorganizing. They feared that the college would lose its tone and dignity
among learned institutions. The Trustees, though not convinced, were stirred, and again asked
the judgment of the Faculty.

"The Faculty replied, that, although they had not, as a body, recommended the adoption of the
new system, they had given it, as duty required, a fair experiment, and were constrained to
say, that it had turned out better than their expectations. Notwithstanding some inconvenience,
it had obviated serious evils, had secured unquestionable benefits, and had given a decided
impulse to the college. They were not prepared to advise its discontinuance. Whereupon the
Trustees resolved to adhere.

"Yet, after another short term of years, changes having occurred both in the Trustees and Faculty,
and the outside pressure still continuing, the subject again came under the discussion of the
Board. In that instance it was formally proposed by a majority of the Faculty. Some new members
had been added to that body, who had had no experience, as college officers, of the old system.
Others had left it, and some had seen reasons to change their opinions. A large majority requested
that the old régime, or something analogous to it, should be restored.

"The minority confidently protested. They had had experience on both sides, and were satisfied
that the new system had greatly the advantage of the old, both in respect to principle and
practical results.

"The Trustees gave the subject their attentive consideration, canvassed conflicting reasons,
and still adhered. They enjoined it upon the Faculty to abide by the new system, and to keep
its principle inviolate in the college discipline.

"Since that time the question has been at rest. Whatever differences of opinion may have existed
in the Board or in the Faculty, they have not interfered with the regular and faithful administration
of affairs upon the prescribed basis. The college has not suffered. It has not ceased to flourish,
in respect to sound instruction, easy and effective discipline, a righteous order, thorough
scholarship, a liberal patronage, and an honorable position. It is believed to be not behind
any of its sister colleges in the proper characteristics of a learned institution, even though
measured not by its best, but its average scholarship, as determined by lot, in the exercises
of the Commencement. Its order has become so well settled and understood in this respect, that
any reversal of it, principle apart, might be attended with inconveniences and hazards more
than sufficient to counterbalance any supposed possible or probable advantages.

"But it is eminently due to the learned Memorialists [Alumni], and to other friends and patrons
of the college, to explain more fully the theory on which the Trustees have acted, and which
applies equally to the questions now in hand. Wherefore your Committee go on to observe, as
first principles:

"1. That a college is a public institution, designed and incorporated to qualify young men
for leaders of the Church and the State.

"2. That the requisite qualifications for such leadership are knowledge, wisdom, and virtue.
Accidental accomplishments are important in giving prominence and effect to more substantial
qualities; but these are fundamental and indispensable. Without them the public interests,
so far as connected with college, have no security.

"3. That these qualifications are valueless in separation from each other; and are then likely
to be injurious in proportion to the degree of culture. Knowledge without wisdom is insane
and mischievous; and both without virtue serve but to give greater energy and efficiency to
those naturally destructive elements which are common both to individuals and society. Virtue
alone, if it could be supposed to exist without knowledge and wisdom, would be but an idea,
or an emotion, and practically futile.

"4. That the organization and discipline of a college constitute what we denominate its order;
and the highest responsibility rests on its appointed guardians, to perfect and preserve this
necessary order agreeably to the highest standards that are known among men.

"5. That the ultimate standard, binding on all Christian educators, is the Scripture; and their
ultimate responsibility is to God. Great latitude is given them by the State; and they are
not held accountable to the civil authorities, in the widest exercise of their discretion,
while they infringe not upon the civil statutes. The State leaves them to their own opinions
and policy, within the terms of their chartered privileges and the laws in general. The Church
has no control over them whatever but in respect to patronage, when they are constituted as
mere civil corporations; and it may not interfere with them but as individual men; nor then,
if they happen to sustain no individual and personal relations to it. But the State and the
Church are equally ordained of God; and all educators are responsible to Him that the comprehensive
order of their institutions shall be in agreement with the principles of His Word, and thereby
subservient to the public good.

"6. That the order of a college is, first, mechanical, in respect to its forms, arrangements,
and observances; and, secondly, moral, in respect to principle.

"7. That college mechanism in general should have respect to the most perfect development of
the powers of students, and be carried on with great exactness and fidelity; that any want
of symmetry, proportion, finish, balance, and executive ability, or frequent experimenting
and change to meet internal difficulties, or the humors and caprices of society, must tend
to failure and dishonor. But that no mechanism, however organically perfect or judiciously
administered, that does not embody a righteous moral principle, or that cannot be operated
in consistency with it, can be otherwise than injurious in its ultimate results.

"Whereupon your Committee propose, that a system of scholarships and prizes, as such systems
have usually obtained, cannot be introduced into college mechanism, or be carried on, consistently
with righteous principle, and favorably to virtue in young men, or to true knowledge and wisdom,
so far as these presuppose virtue, and depend upon it."

In regard to the views here set forth, it is proper to remark, that reasoning which had much
force, a score of years since, would possibly have less at the present time.

In regard to this period the librarian says:

"In 1830, the three libraries must have numbered in volumes between 12,000 and 13,000, with
slight difference in numbers, the college library being the largest, and the United Fraternity's
the smallest. The first library catalogue of the latter society was printed previous to 1840,
and contained the titles of 4,900 volumes.

"In 1840, the libraries obtained better accommodations by the erection of Reed Hall, which
was so far completed that the books were shelved just before the Commencement. They were given
the second floor of the building, an amount of space which then seemed to give ample room for
additions, as the three libraries together numbered only 15,000 volumes. The college library
occupied the east half of the floor, while the west side was divided between the two society
libraries. The books were first shelved against the wall, then alcoves and cases were added
as long as space remained, while for several years previous to the present time the least valuable
books have been removed to make space for additions.

"In the college library, borrowers have generally been excluded from the rooms in which books
are kept, while the reverse has been true in the society libraries.

"In June, 1841, the professors of the college with the assistance of some of the gentlemen
of the vicinity formed a society since known as the 'Northern Academy.' This society, which
was afterwards chartered and has been continued in different forms until the present time,
early began the formation of a library. While many old books have been collected, its principal
value lies in pamphlets and files of newspapers, some of which covering a number of years extend
back beyond the Revolution. This collection, now swelled to several thousand, has always been
in connection with the college library, although for several years a want of shelf room and
a greater want of funds to place it in usable condition, have made it of little practical value.
In 1850, the three libraries having changed little comparatively, numbered 19,000 volumes.
The 'Northern Academy,' exclusive of the unbound, had over 1,000 volumes, thus making fully
20,000 volumes accessible. A distinction must be made between the figures given under the different
dates (which indicate the number that were actually in the libraries), and the number according
to catalogues. The latter were made by adding to former lists the books received during different
years, when in fact the additions during some of these years did not more than make good the
losses. It frequently happened that ten percent of the catalogued number could not be accounted
for. While the society libraries have continued with nearly the same annual additions--an average
actual yearly increase of over a hundred volumes,--the great growth of the college library
has taken place since 1850. Since that year have been received the donations of books for the
different departments of instruction and the funds upon which the constant growth of the library
depends. Of these funds the first had its origin in 1846, when Edmund Parker of Nashua, Isaac
Parker of Boston, and Joel Parker of Keene, gave $1,000. This was subsequently increased by
the latter to $7,000, and in his will (which founded the Law School), provisions were made,
that will, when available, place this fund at $20,000. In 1852, Dr. George C. Shattuck, whose
name is associated with the Observatory, gave $1,000 for the department of Mathematics as applied
to Mechanics and Astronomy. To this during the same year he added $200 for Natural Philosophy
and Astronomy, and $800 for the Latin language and Literature. At the same time Dr. Roswell
Shurtleff, Emeritus Professor, gave $1,000 for better providing with books the departments
of Intellectual and Moral Philosophy and Political Economy. These three donations were intended
principally for the use of instructors, and were accompanied with restrictions from general
circulation. In 1859, by the will of Dr. Henry Bond of Philadelphia, several hundred volumes
were received, and provisions were made for a library fund which when available will be about
$11,000. The late Hon. Samuel Appleton established in 1845, a fund which was increased in 1854,
and is known as the Appleton Fund. The income of this has been partially applied to the purchase
of books relating to Natural Philosophy."

"The Press" in Hanover is worthy of notice in this connection. We quote from a published address
by Professor Sanborn:

"No man lives in Hanover to-day, who can tell when any newspaper was first printed in the town,
or when it ceased to be printed. Even the papers themselves have perished. Here and there,
a stray number, or possibly a bound volume, may be found among the useless lumber of an attic.
There was a press in Hanover, before the close of the last century. It is reported that a newspaper
was published there prior to the year 1799. I have been unable to find a copy of it. In 1799,
Mr. Webster delivered a Fourth-of-July oration before the citizens of Hanover, which was published
in that town. A eulogy, by the same orator, on a deceased classmate, was also published the
next year. Moses Davis, a citizen of the place, began the publication of the 'Dartmouth Gazette,'
August 27, 1799. How long he continued to edit and publish the paper, I cannot certainly ascertain.
A paper bearing that name was published for at least twenty years. I have a number of the 'Dartmouth
Gazette' dated June 23, 1819, being No. XLIII., vol. 19. The whole number to this date of the
paper, in this form, is 1025. It was then printed and published by Charles Spear. It would
seem, therefore, that the paper which originated with Moses Davis, lived for more than twenty
years. It was a valuable paper, containing a careful summary of foreign news, sometimes long
orations of English statesmen, and an accurate record of local events. The original pieces
were quite numerous, written by occasional contributors, many of them students of the college.
The editorials were brief; in fact, a majority of the early numbers contain no words which
appear as editorial. The political articles were decidedly favorable to the Federal party,
but moderate in tone. During the first three years of the existence of this paper, Daniel Webster,
then a student, was a frequent contributor; he wrote both prose and poetry, more frequently
the latter. The topics were trite, but the thoughts were always serious and elevated. In the
issue of December 9, 1799, Mr. Webster published a poem on winter; he was then a Junior in
college. The European wars commanded his attention and saddened his reflections.

"Mr. Webster continued to write for the paper after leaving college. In his published correspondence,
there is a letter from the editor importuning him to write the 'Newsboy's Message' for January,
1803. He says: 'I want a genuinely Federal address, and you are the very person to write it.
And this solicitation, sir, is not from me alone--some of our most respectable characters join
in the request.'

"The 'Dartmouth Gazette' was the champion of the college during the entire period of its controversy
with the State. Many of the ablest articles written in defence of the college, appeared in
its columns. I regret that I cannot give the entire history of this useful paper; it did a
good work in its day, and we may now say literally, 'peace to its ashes.'

"During a portion of the existence of the 'Dartmouth Gazette,' while it was edited by Charles
Spear, another paper was printed by Moses Davis, called 'The Literary Tablet,' purporting to
be edited by Nicholas Orlando. Whether this is a nomme de plume or a real name, I cannot determine.
Three volumes are known to have been published. It lived for three years at least. The third
volume dates from August, 1805, to August, 1806. It was a folio of four pages, three columns
to a page, of about fourteen inches by twelve in size. It was printed every other Wednesday
for the editor.

"A new paper appeared in Hanover, June, 1820. The prospectus was as follows:

"'A new weekly paper in Hanover, N. H., to be entitled the "Dartmouth Herald." The "Dartmouth
Gazette" having been discontinued, the subscribers, at the solicitation of a number of literary
gentlemen, propose to publish a paper under the above title. Besides advertisements, the "Herald"
will embrace accounts of our National and State Legislatures, and the most interesting articles
of news, foreign and domestic; notices of improvements in the arts and sciences, especially
agriculture and the mechanical arts most practiced in our own country; and essays, original
and selected, upon the mechanical and liberal Arts, Literature, Politics, Morals and Religion.

"'The original articles will be furnished by a society of gentlemen; and it is confidently
expected will not be unworthy of the interesting subjects, to which a considerable space will
be allotted in this paper.

    "'Bannister & Thurston.
    "'Hanover, April 7, 1820.'

"It was a small folio of four pages, twenty by twelve inches in size. It was well filled with
news and original contributions. Its life was brief. Unfortunately, no record was made either
on the printed page or the faithful memory, of the date of its decease, so far as I can learn.

"For several years no periodical was published in Hanover. 'The Magnet,' an octavo of sixteen
pages, edited by students and published by Thomas Mann, appeared in 1835. The first number
bears date October 21, 1835. There seems to have been a rival paper contemporary with this,
called 'The Independent Chronicle.' In the November number of the 'Magnet,' we find this allusion
to it: 'The second number of the "Independent Chronicle" is below criticism.' In the December
number, the 'Magnet' chronicles the demise of its despised rival, with evident satisfaction.
In 1837, another student's periodical appeared, called 'The Scrap Book.' I am unable to write
its history; it was probably of brief duration. In 1839, the students of Dartmouth College
originated a literary periodical called 'The Dartmouth.' It was published, I think, for five
years. The editors were chosen from the undergraduates by the Senior class. Among the editors
of 1840-41, were J. E. Hood and James O. Adams, both of whom have since gained honorable distinction
in a wider field of editorial labor. A few months ago, I received as a present from B. P. Shillaber,
the witty and genial author of the 'Life and Sayings of Mrs. Partington,' and other humorous
works, a volume of 'The Dartmouth,' which he received from Mr. Hood. It was handsomely bound,
and labelled 'Brains' on the back. Mr. Shillaber says of it in a letter, dated July 4, 1872,
'I find, that the volume comprises but a half year ending with Hood's editorship and graduation.
It nevertheless will prove interesting; and it gives me pleasure to present it, with a delightful
memory of Dartmouth to commend the trifle. I thought it might gratify you personally, as several
of your effusions are contained in it. Poor Hood has crossed the dark stream: he died in Colorado
last winter. He held you in enduring regard. The title is a boyish suggestion; but there is
more evidence of "brains" in it than is to be found in many far more pretentious publications.'

"These remarks will apply with equal justice to the entire ten volumes of 'The Dartmouth.'
It was highly creditable to the students who originated and sustained it. 'The Dartmouth' was
printed by Mr. E. A. Allen, who during the continuance of this periodical made several other
ventures in the newspaper line. In this small quarto thirty pages are occupied by a notice of the
life and poetry of Shelley.

I shall not here enter upon a consideration of the cancelled passages of Adonais: they will
appear more appositely further on (see pp. 92-94, &c.). I therefore conclude the present section
by quoting the Quarterly Review article upon Endymion--omitting only a few sentences which do
not refer directly to Keats, but mostly to Leigh Hunt:--

'Reviewers have been sometimes accused of not reading the works which they affected to criticise. On
the present occasion we shall anticipate the author's complaint,
and honestly confess that we have not read his work.

Not that we have been wanting in our duty; far from it; indeed, we have made efforts, almost
as superhuman as the story itself appears to be, to get through it: but, with the fullest stretch
of our perseverance, we are forced to confess that we have not been able to struggle beyond the first
of the four books of which this Poetic Romance consists. We should extremely lament this want
of energy, or whatever it may be, on our parts, were it not for one consolation--namely, that
we are no better acquainted with the meaning of the book through which we have so painfully
toiled than we are with that of the three which we have not looked into.

'It is not that Mr. Keats (if that be his real name, for we almost doubt that any man in his senses
would put his real name to such a rhapsody)--it is not, we say, that the author has not powers
of language, rays of fancy, and gleams of genius. He has all these: but he is unhappily a disciple
of the new school of what has been somewhere called "Cockney Poetry,"
which may be defined to consist of the most incongruous ideas in the
most uncouth language.

'Of this school Mr. Leigh Hunt, as we observed in a former number, aspires to be the hierophant....
This author is a copyist of Mr. Hunt, but he is more unintelligible,
almost as rugged, twice as diffuse, and ten times more tiresome and
absurd, than his prototype, who, though he impudently presumed to
seat himself in the chair of criticism, and to measure his own poetry
by his own standard, yet generally had a meaning.

      But Mr. Keats had advanced no dogmas which he was bound to support
           by examples.

His nonsense, therefore, is quite gratuitous; he writes it for its own sake, and, being bitten
by Mr. Leigh Hunt's insane criticism, more than rivals the insanity of his poetry.

'Mr. Keats's preface hints that his poem was produced under peculiar circumstances. "Knowing within
myself." he says, "the manner in which this poem has been produced, it is not without a feeling
of regret that I make it public. What manner I mean will be quite clear to the reader, who must
soon perceive great inexperience, immaturity, and every error denoting a feverish attempt rather
than a deed accomplished." We humbly beg his pardon, but this does not appear to us to be "quite
so clear"; we really do not know what he means. But the next passage is more intelligible. "The
two first books, and indeed the two last, I feel sensible, are not
of such completion as to warrant their passing the press."

Thus "the two first books" are, even in his own judgment, unfit to
appear, and "the two last" are, it seems, in the same condition; and,
as two and two make four, and as that is the whole number of books,
we have a clear, and we believe a very just, estimate of the entire
work.

'Mr. Keats, however, deprecates criticism on this "immature and feverish
work" in terms which are themselves sufficiently feverish; and we
confess that we should have abstained from inflicting upon him any
of the tortures of the "fierce hell" of criticism[15] which terrify
his imagination if he had not begged to be spared in order that he
might write more; if we had not observed in him a certain degree of
talent which deserves to be put in the right way, or which at least
ought to be warned of the wrong; and if finally he had not told us
that he is of an age and temper which imperiously require mental discipline.

'Of

the story we have been able to make out but little. It seems to be mythological, and probably
relates to the loves of Diana and Endymion; but of this, as the scope of the work has altogether
escaped us, we cannot speak with any degree of certainty, and must therefore content ourselves
with giving some instances of its diction and versification. And here again we are perplexed and
puzzled. At first it appeared to us that Mr. Keats had been amusing himself and wearying his
readers with an immeasurable game at bouts rimés; but, if we recollect rightly, it is an indispensable
condition at this play that the rhymes, when filled up, shall have
a meaning; and our author, as we have already hinted, has no meaning.

He seems to us to write a line at random, and then he follows, not
the thought excited by this line, but that suggested by the rhyme
with which it concludes.

There is hardly a complete couplet enclosing a complete idea in the whole book. He wanders from
one subject to another, from the association, not of ideas, but of
sounds; and the work is composed of hemistichs which, it is quite
evident, have forced themselves upon the author by the mere force
of the catchwords on which they turn.

'We shall select, not as the most striking instance, but as that least liable to suspicion,
a passage from the opening of the poem;--

"Such the sun, the moon, Trees old and young, sprouting a shady boon
For simple sheep; and such are daffodils, With the green world they
live in; and clear rills That for themselves a cooling covert make
'Gainst the hot season; the mid-forest brake Rich with a sprinkling
of fair musk-rose blooms; And such too is the grandeur of the dooms
We have imagined for the mighty dead," &c.

Here it is clear that
the word, and not the idea, moon, produces the simple sheep and their
shady boon, and that "the dooms of the mighty dead" would never have
intruded themselves but for the "fair musk-rose blooms."

'Again:--

"For 'twas the morn.

Apollo's upward fire Made every eastern cloud a silvery pyre Of brightness so unsullied that
therein A melancholy spirit well might win Oblivion, and melt out his essence fine Into the winds.
Rain-scented eglantine Gave temperate sweets to that well-wooing sun; The lark was lost in him; cold
springs had run To warm their chilliest bubbles in the grass; Man's voice was on the mountains;
and the mass Of Nature's lives and wonders pulsed tenfold To feel this sunrise and its glories old."

Here
Apollo's fire produces a pyre--a silvery pyre--of clouds, wherein a spirit might win oblivion,
and melt his essence fine; and scented eglantine gives sweets to the sun, and cold springs had run
into the grass; and then the pulse of the mass pulsed tenfold to feel the glories old of the new-born
day, &c.

'One example more:--

"Be still the unimaginable lodge For solitary thinkings, such as dodge Conception to the very
bourne of heaven, Then leave the naked brain; be still the leaven
That spreading in this dull and clodded earth, Gives it a touch ethereal--a
new birth."

Lodge, dodge--heaven, leaven--earth, birth--such, in six words, is the sum and substance of six
lines.

'We come now to the author's taste in versification. He cannot indeed write a sentence, but
perhaps he may be able to spin a line. Let us see. The following are specimens of his prosodial
notions of our English heroic metre:--

"Dear as the temple's self, so does the moon, The passion poesy, glories
infinite.

"So plenteously all weed-hidden roots.

"Of some strange history, potent to send.

"Before the deep intoxication.

"Her scarf into a fluttering pavilion.

"The stubborn canvas for my voyage prepared.

"Endymion, the cave is secreter Than the isle of Delos. Echo hence shall stir No sighs but
sigh-warm kisses, or light noise Of thy combing hand, the while it travelling cloys And trembles
through my labyrinthine hair."

'By this time our readers must be pretty well satisfied as to the meaning of his sentences and
the structure of his lines. We now present them with some of the new words with which, in imitation of
Mr. Leigh Hunt, he adorns our language.

'We are told that turtles passion their voices; that an arbour was nested, and a lady's locks
gordianed up; and, to supply the place of the nouns thus verbalized,
Mr. Keats, with great fecundity, spawns new ones, such as men-slugs
and human serpentry, the honey-feel of bliss, wives prepare needments,
and so forth.

'Then he has formed new verbs by the process of cutting off their natural tails, the adverbs,
and affixing them to their foreheads. Thus the wine out-sparkled, the multitude up-followed,
and night up-took: the wind up-blows, and the hours are down-sunken.

But, if he sinks some adverbs in the verbs, he compensates the language with adverbs and adjectives
which he separates from the parent stock. Thus a lady whispers pantingly and close, makes hushing
signs, and steers her skiff into a ripply cove, a shower falls refreshfully,
and a vulture has a spreaded tail.

'But enough of Mr. Leigh Hunt and his simple neophyte. It cannot be denied that some of the
blemishes which it points out in Endymion are real blemishes, and very serious ones. The grounds
on which one can fairly object to the criticism are that its tone is purposely ill-natured; its
recognition of merits scanty out of all proportion to its censure
of defects; and its spirit that of prepense disparagement founded
not so much on the poetical errors of Keats as on the fact that he
was a friend of Leigh Hunt, the literary and also the political antagonist
of the Quarterly Review.

The editor, Mr. Gifford, seems always to have been regarded as the author of this criticism--I
presume, correctly so.

That Keats was a friend of Leigh Hunt in the earlier period of his own poetical career is a
fact; but not long after the appearance of the Quarterly Review article
he conceived a good deal of dislike and even animosity against this
literary ally.

Possibly the taunts of the Quarterly Review, and the alienation of Keats from Hunt, had some connexion
as cause and effect.

In a letter from John Keats to his brother George and his sister-in-law occurs the following
passage[16], dated towards the end of 1818: 'Hunt has asked me to meet Tom Moore some day--so
you shall hear of him. The night we went to Novello's there was a complete set-to of Mozart
and punning. I was so completely tired of it that, if I were to follow my own inclinations, I should
never meet any one of that set again; not even Hunt, who is certainly a pleasant fellow in the main,
when you are with him--but in reality he is vain, egotistical, and disgusting in matters of taste,
and in morals. He understands many a beautiful thing; but then, instead of giving other minds
credit for the same degree of perception as he himself professes, he begins an explanation in
such a curious manner that our taste and self-love are offended continually. Hunt does one harm
by making fine things petty, and beautiful things hateful. Through him I am indifferent to Mozart,
I care not for white busts; and many a glorious thing, when associated with him, becomes a
nothing. This distorts one's mind--makes one's thoughts bizarre--perplexes one in the standard of
Beauty.'

For the text of Adonais in the present edition I naturally have recourse to the original Pisan
edition, but without neglecting such alterations as have been properly introduced into later
issues; these will be fully indicated and accounted for in my Notes.

In the minor matters of punctuation, &c., I do not consider myself bound to reproduce the
first or any other edition, but I follow the plan which appears to myself most reasonable and correct;
any point worthy of discussion in these details will also receive attention in the Notes.

ADONAIS:

ITS ARGUMENT.

The poem of Adonais can of course be contemplated from different points of view. Its biographical
relations have been already considered in our preceding sections: its poetical structure and value,
its ideal or spiritual significance, and its particular imagery and
diction, will occupy us much as we proceed.

At present I mean simply to deal with the Argument of Adonais. It has a thread--certainly a slender
thread--of narrative or fable; the personation of the poetic figure Adonais, as distinct from
the actual man John Keats, and the incidents with which that poetic figure is associated. The
numerals which I put in parentheses indicate the stanzas in which
the details occur.

    
    

(1) Adonais is now dead: the Hour which witnessed his loss mourns
him, and is to rouse the other Hours to mourn.

(2) He was the son of the widowed Urania, (6) her youngest and dearest son. (2) He was slain
by a nightly arrow--'pierced by the shaft which flies in darkness.' At the time of his death Urania
was in her paradise (pleasure-garden), slumbering, while Echoes listened to the poems which
he had written as death was impending. (3) Urania should now wake and weep; yet wherefore? 'He is
gone where all things wise and fair descend.' (4) Nevertheless let
her weep and lament.

(7) Adonais had come to Rome. (8) Death and Corruption are now in his chamber, but Corruption
delays as yet to strike. (9) The Dreams whom he nurtured, as a herdsman tends his flock, mourn
around him, (10) One of them was deceived for a moment into supposing that a tear shed by
itself came from the eyes of Adonais, and must indicate that he was still alive. (11) Another
washed his limbs, and a third clipped and shed her locks upon his corpse, &c. (13) Then came
others--Desires, Adorations, Fantasies, &c. (14 to 16) Morning lamented, and Echo, and Spring.
(17) Aibion wailed.

(20) Can it be that the soul alone dies, when nothing else is annihilated? (22) Misery aroused
Urania: urged by Dreams and Echoes, she sprang up, and (23) sought the death-chamber of Adonais,
(24) enduring much suffering from 'barbèd tongues, and thoughts more sharp than they.' (25)
As she arrived, Death was shamed for a moment, and Adonais breathed again: but immediately
afterwards 'Death rose and smiled, and met her vain caress.' (26) Urania would fain have died
along with Adonais; but, chained as she was to Time, this was denied her. (27) She reproached
Adonais for having, though defenceless, dared the dragon in his den. Had he waited till the day of his
maturity, 'the monsters of life's waste' would have fled from him, as (28) the wolves, ravens,
and vultures had fled from, and fawned upon, 'the Pythian of the
age.' (30) Then came the Mountain Shepherds, bewailing Adonais: the
Pilgrim of Eternity, the Lyrist of lerne, and (31) among others, one
frail form, a pard-like spirit.

(34) Urania asked the name of this last Shepherd: he then made bare his branded and ensanguined brow,
which was like Cain's or Christ's. (35) Another Mountain Shepherd, 'the gentlest of the wise,'
leaned over the deathbed. (36) Adonais has drunk poison. Some 'deaf and viperous murderer' gave him
the envenomed draught.

[I must here point out a singular discrepancy in the poem of Adonais, considered as a narrative
or apologue.

Hitherto we had been told that Adonais was killed by an arrow or
dart--he was 'pierced by the shaft which flies in darkness,' and the
man who 'pierced his innocent breast' had incurred the curse of Cain:
he had 'a wound' (stanza 22).

There was also the alternative statement that Adonais, unequipped with the shield of wisdom or
the spear of scorn, had been so rash as to 'dare the unpastured dragon in his den'; and from
this the natural inference is that not any 'shaft which flies in darkness,' but the dragon
himself, had slaughtered the too-venturous youth.

But now we hear that he was done to death by poison. Certainly when we look beneath the symbol
into the thing symbolized, we can see that these divergent allegations
represent the same fact, and the readers of the Elegy are not called
upon to form themselves into a coroner's jury to determine whether
a 'shaft' or a 'dragon' or 'poison' was the instrument of murder:
nevertheless the statements in the text are neither identical nor
reconcileable for purposes of mythical narration, and it seems strange
that the author should not have taken this into account.

It will be found as we proceed (see p. 66) that the reference to
'poison' comes into the poem as a direct reproduction from the Elegy
of Moschus upon Bion--being the passage which forms the second of
the two mottoes to Adonais.]

(36) This murderer, a 'nameless worm,'
was alone callous to the prelude of the forthcoming song.

       (37) Let him live on in remorse and self-contempt.

    (38) Neither should we weep that Adonais has 'fled far from these
carrion-kites that scream below.' His spirit flows back to its fountain,
a portion of the Eternal.

    (39) Indeed, he is not dead nor sleeping, but 'has awakened from
the dream of life.' Not he decays, but we.

(41) Let not us, nor the powers of Nature, mourn for Adonais. (42) He is made one with Nature. (45) In
'the unapparent' he was welcomed by Chatterton, Sidney, Lucan, and (46) many more immortals,
and was hailed as the master of a 'kingless sphere' in a 'heaven of song.' (48) Let any rash
mourner go to Rome, and (49) visit the cemetery. (53) And thou, my heart, why linger and shrink?
Adonais calls thee: be no longer divided from him. (55) The soul of Adonais beacons to thee
'from the abode where the Eternal are.'

This may he the most convenient place for raising a question of leading importance to the Argument
of Adonais--Who is the personage designated under the name Urania?--a question which, so far
as I know, has never yet been mooted among the students of Shelley. Who is Urania? Why is
she represented as the mother of Adonais (Keats), and the chief mourner for his untimely death?

In
mythology the name Urania is assigned to two divinities wholly distinct. The first is one of
the nine Muses, the Muse of Astronomy: the second is Aphrodite (Venus). We may without any hesitation
assume that Shelley meant one of these two: but a decision, as to
which of the two becomes on reflection by no means so obvious as one
might at first suppose.

We will first examine the question as to the Muse Urania.

To say that the poet Keats, figured as Adonais, was son to one of the Muses, appears so natural
and straightforward a symbolic suggestion as to command summary assent. But why, out of the nine
sisters, should the Muse of Astronomy be selected? Keats never wrote about astronomy, and had
no qualifications and no faintest inclination for writing about it: this science, and every
other exact or speculative science, were highly alien from his disposition and turn of mind.
And yet, on casting about for a reason, we can find that after all and in a certain sense there
is one forthcoming, of some considerable amount of relevancy. In the eyes of Shelley, Keats
was principally and above all the poet of Hyperion; and Hyperion
is, strictly speaking, a poem about the sun.

In like manner, Endymion is a poem about the moon. Thus, from one point of view--I cannot see
any other--Keats might be regarded as inspired by, or a son of, the Muse of Astronomy. A subordinate
point of some difficulty arises from stanza 6, where Adonais is spoken of as 'the nursling of
thy [Urania's] widowhood'--which seems to mean, son of Urania, born after the father's death.
Urania is credited in mythology with the motherhood of two sons--Linus, her offspring by Amphimacus,
who was a son of Poseidon, and Hymenaeus, her offspring by Apollo.

It might be idle to puzzle over this question of Urania's 'widowhood,' or to attempt to found
upon it (on the assumption that Urania the Muse is referred to) any theory as to who her deceased
consort could have been: for it is as likely as not that the phrase which I have cited from the
poem is not really intended to define with any sort of precision the parentage of the supposititious
Adonais, but, practically ignoring Adonais, applies to Keats himself, and means simply that
Keats, as the son of the Muse, was born out of time--born in an unpoetical and unappreciative
age.

    Many of my readers will
    recollect that Milton,
    in the elaborate address which opens Book 7 of Paradise Lost, invokes
Urania.

He is careful however to say that he does not mean the Muse Urania, but the spirit of 'Celestial Song,'
sister of Eternal Wisdom, both of them well-pleasing to the 'Almighty Father.' Thus far for Urania the
Muse.

I now come to Aphrodite Urania. This deity is to be carefully distinguished from the Cyprian
or Pandemic Aphrodite: she is different, not only in attribute and
function, but even in personality and origin.

She is the daughter of Heaven (Uranus) and Light; her influence is
heavenly: she is heavenly or spiritual love, as distinct from earthly
or carnal love.

If the personage in Shelley's Elegy is to be regarded, not as the
Muse Urania, but as Aphrodite Urania, she here represents spiritual
or intellectual aspiration, the love of abstract beauty, the divine
element in poesy or art.

As such, Aphrodite Urania would be no less appropriate than Urania or any other Muse to be designated
as the mother of Adonais (Keats). But the more cogent argument in favour of Aphrodite Urania is
to be based upon grounds of analogy or transfer, rather than upon
any reasons of antecedent probability.

The part assigned to Urania in Shelley's Elegy is very closely modelled upon the part assigned
to Aphrodite in the Elegy of Bion upon Adonis (see the section in this volume, Bion and Moschus).
What Aphrodite Cypris does in the Adonis, that Urania does in the Adonais. The resemblances
are exceedingly close, in substance and in detail: the divergences are only such as the altered
conditions naturally dictate. The Cyprian Aphrodite is the bride of Adonis, and as such she bewails
him: the Uranian Aphrodite is the mother of Adonais, and she laments him accordingly. Carnal
relationship and carnal love are transposed into spiritual relationship and spiritual love. The
hands are the hands, in both poems, of Aphrodite: the voices are respectively those of Cypris
and of Urania.

It is also worth observing that the fragmentary poem of Shelley named Prince Athanase, written
in 1817, was at first named Pandemos and Urania; and was intended, as Mrs. Shelley informs
us, to embody the contrast between 'the earthly and unworthy Venus,' and the nobler ideal of
love, the heaven-born or heaven-sent Venus. The poem would thus have borne a certain relation
to Alastor, and also to Epipsychidion. The use of the name 'Urania' in this proposed title may
help to confirm us in the belief that there is no reason why Shelley should not have used the same
name in Adonais with the implied meaning of Aphrodite Urania.

On the whole I am strongly of opinion that the Urania of Adonais is Aphrodite, and not the Muse.

ADONAIS:

GENERAL
EXPOSITION.

The consideration which, in the preceding section, we have bestowed upon the 'Argument' of Adonais
will assist us not a little in grasping the full scope of the poem. It may be broadly divided
into three currents of thought, or (as one might say) into three acts of passion. I. The sense
of grievous loss in the death of John Keats the youthful and aspiring poet, cut short as he
was approaching his prime; and the instinctive impulse to mourning and desolation. 2. The
mythical or symbolic embodiment of the events in the laments of Urania and the Mountain Shepherds,
and in the denunciation of the ruthless destroyer of the peace and life of Adonais. 3. The
rejection of mourning as one-sided, ignorant, and a reversal of the true estimate of the facts;
and a recognition of the eternal destiny of Keats in the world of mind, coupled with the yearning
of Shelley to have done with the vain shows of things in this cycle of mortality, and to be at one
with Keats in the mansions of the everlasting. Such is the evolution of this Elegy; from mourning to
rapture: from a purblind consideration of deathly phenomena to the
illumination of the individual spirit which contemplates the eternity
of spirit as the universal substance.

"I use the term college in the American sense. This, not for the poor purpose of ministering
to national vanity, but because we must needs take things as they are; and for the further
reason that there is much to commend in the shape the institution here assumes. It has hardly
its prototype either in the Fatherland or on the Continent. It has but a partial resemblance
either to the German Gymnasia or to the English preparatory schools, as of Eton and Rugby.
As preliminary to professional study, it is in some respects far in advance of these. It differs
materially, at once from the German and English University, and from the college as embraced
in the latter. University education in Europe was once somewhat rigidly divided into two portions;
the one designed to form the mind for whatever sphere of life; the other, the Brodstudium,
as the Germans significantly term it, a course of training for some particular profession.
Long ago, however, this division became mainly obsolete. 'On the continent,' said an eminent
English scholar, some years since, 'the preparatory education has been dropped; among ourselves,
the professional.' He speaks, of course, comparatively. So far as England is concerned, the
same testimony is borne by a well-informed recent observer. This ancient and wise division
is by us still maintained; with this peculiarity, that the 'preparatory' education, so-called,--by
which is meant the highest form of it,--is the sole work of the colleges. Professional culture
is remitted to other and often separate schools. The undergraduate course is for general training;
it lays the foundation for whatever superstructure. It has no particular reference to any one
pursuit; but, like the first part of the old University course, aims to fit the whole man for
a man's work in any specific line either of study or of action.

"In this conception of the college, there are, it is believed, important advantages. It is
better for preparatory education; it is better for professional. It felicitously discriminates.
It keeps things in their place. It defines and duly magnifies each of the two great departments
of the educational process. It is likelier to dig deep, and build on broad and solid rock;
it tends to symmetry and finish in the superincumbent fabric.

"The college should be marked by a completeness. Rejecting the fragmentary and the unfinished,
the well constituted mind ever craves this. Modern thought, especially, is passing from an
excessive nominalism to a more realistic habit; by many a broad induction, from mere details
to a rounded whole: And nowhere more persistently than in relation to institutions. The college
should be complete as to its objective scheme. There may be onesidedness here. There may be,
for example, an excessive or ill-directed pressing of utilities, as in the speculations of
Mr. Herbert Spencer; or there may be an undue exaltation of what he calls 'the decorative element.'
The theoretic maybe too exclusively pursued; or there may be a practicalness which has too
little of theory, like a cone required to stand firm on its apex. There should be completeness,
also, as touching the subjective aim. It should embrace, in a word, the whole man, and that
not in his Edenic aspects alone, but as a fallen being. You may not overlook even the physical;
the casket not merely, holding all the mental and moral treasures--the frame-work rather, to
which by subtile ties the invisible machinery is linked, and which upholds it as it works.
The world has yet to learn fully how dependent is the inner upon the outer man, and how greatly
the highest achievements of scholarship are facilitated by proper hygienic conditions. As you
pass to the intellectual, it matters little what classification you adopt, whether with the
author of the 'Novum Organum,' in his 'Advancement of Learning,' you resolve all the powers
into those of memory, imagination, and reason, or whether the minuter divisions of a more recent
philosophy are preferred; only be sure that not a single faculty is overlooked or disparaged.
Be it presentative, conservative, reproductive, representative, elaborative, regulative, or
whatever the fine Hamiltonian analysis may suggest, give it its proper place and its proper scope.

"The college should be distinctly and eminently Christian. Not in the narrow, sectarian sense--that
be far from us--but in the broadest evangelical view. Our course of thought culminates here;
and here does all else that has been affirmed find its proper centre and unity. Christianity
is the great unity. In it, as was intimated at the outset, are all the chief elements of organic
influence. It is itself the very acme of completeness, and it tends to all symmetry and finish.
It is at once conservative and progressive, balancing perfectly the impelling and restraining
forces; by a felicitous adjustment of the centripetal and centrifugal, ensuring to human nature
its proper orbit. It is the golden girdle wherewith every institution like this should bind
her garments of strength and beauty about her.

"Were it needful to argue this point, we might put it on the most absolute grounds. All things
are Christ's; all dominions, dignities, potences; it is especially meet that we say, to-day,
all institutions. It is the grossest wrong practically to hold otherwise. It is loss, too,
and nowhere more palpably than in the educational sphere. It is no cant saying to affirm, and
that in a more than merely spiritual sense, that in Christ are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.' At his throne the lines of all science terminate; above all, the science that
has man for its subject. Of all history, for example, rightly read, how is He the burden and
the glory! Otherwise taken, it is a more than Cretan labyrinth. The Christian spirit, besides,
raising the soul to the loftiest planes of thought, giving it the highest communions, bringing
before it the grandest objects, and securing to all its machinery the most harmonious action,
is eminently conducive to intellectual achievement. We have already said something like this
as touching moral culture; but that, be it ever remembered, takes its proper form and direction
only as it is vitally linked with Christianity. What God has joined together let not man put
asunder. Let the studies which we call moral, have all a Christian baptism; and, with all our
getting, let us not stop short of the cardinal points of our most holy faith. Let the Will
be still investigated, not as a brute force, or in a merely intellectual light, but in those
high spiritual aspects in which our great New England metaphysician delighted to present it.
Let Butler, with his curious trestle-work of analogy, bridge, to the forming mind, the chasm
between natural and revealed religion. Let the Christian Evidences be fully unfolded. We can
hardly dispense with them in an age, when by means of 'Westminster Reviews,' and other subtle
organs of infidelity, the old mode of assault being abandoned, a sapping and mining process
is continually going forward. Let Ethical Science,--embracing in its wide sweep the Economy
of Private Life, the Philosophy of Government, and Law, which 'hath its seat in the bosom of
God,'--be all bathed in the light of Calvary. That light is its life. 'Let us with caution
indulge the supposition,' said the Father of our country, 'that morality can be maintained
without religion.' Let the Bible be included among our text-books as the sun is included in
the solar system; and let all the rest revolve in planetary subjection about it. Let it be
studied, not in a professional, much less in a partisan way; but with the conviction that it
is indispensable to the broadest culture; that without theology we have but a straitened anthropology;
that we see not nature aright, but as we look up through it to Nature's God. Be ours, in its
largest significance, the sentiment so devoutly uttered by the old Hebrew bard: 'In Thy light
shall we see light.' And let the discipline of college, so intimately connected with its prosperity,
be fashioned on the model of the Gospel. Let it copy, in its way and measure, the wondrous
harmonies of the redemptive scheme, in which 'mercy and truth are met together, righteousness
and peace have kissed each other.' So shall it bless our halls with some faint reflection of
the Divine fatherhood, and give to our society some happy resemblance to a Christian family."

A prominent feature of President Smith's administration was a greater utilization of the libraries,
and the opening of a reading-room. The librarian says:

"The late Professor Alphæus Crosby contributed considerably to the increase of the classical
books, and Hon. Nathan Crosby has recently furnished the means for commencing a collection
of the works of Dartmouth alumni. It is intended to gather all books and pamphlets which have
been written by graduates. The collection will also include matter relating to them and to
the work of the college.

"In reviewing the history of the library their number is so great that it is impossible to
mention even a small part of the benefactors; their best record is in the well filled shelves
and the large amount of reading done in connection with the studies of the college course.

"One of the departments of the library consists of the books given by the late General Sylvanus
Thayer, founder of the school of engineering, numbering 2,000 volumes.

"Early in its history the members of the Chandler Scientific Department founded the 'Philotechnic
Society,' the library of which, together with some books belonging to the department, contains
1,700 volumes.

"The three society libraries continued under separate management until 1874, although the societies,
as far as literary work is concerned, had for some time given way to the secret societies,
and the interest in them was so slight that only with great difficulty could a quorum be obtained
for ordinary business. During that year an arrangement was made by which the three society
libraries were placed under the same management as the library of the college, the latter receiving
the society taxes which were slightly reduced, assuming all expenses including the support
of the reading-room, and providing for the increase of the library by books to be annually
selected by the Senior class. Under this arrangement the different libraries have been brought
together and considered as departments of one, the hours for drawing and consulting books have
been increased from three hours per week in the society libraries and six in the college, to
twenty-one hours per week, and in many respects the facilities for use have been greatly increased.
Since 1870, the yearly additions for all the libraries have averaged 700 volumes, and they
at present contain exclusive of pamphlets about 45,000 volumes, besides nearly 5,000 books
which are either duplicates or worthless. These figures are independent of the Astronomical
library located at the Observatory, the library of the 'Society of Inquiry,' and of the libraries
of the Medical and Agricultural departments, which will probably be connected with the main
library. The library as it is now constituted is well adapted to the work of the college, and
is especially so in some of the departments of instruction, in connection with which a large
amount of reading is done. There are in use at present three printed catalogues: one of the
college library, printed in 1868; one of the 'Social Friends' library, dated 1859; and one
of the 'United Fraternity' library, issued in 1861. These are supplemented by a card catalogue
arranged under title, author, and subject."

The "Centennial" celebration of the founding of the college, at the Commencement of 1869, was
a season of rare interest and profit to the very large number of alumni and friends of the
college assembled from nearly every quarter of the globe.

The following is the substance of the address of Chief Justice Chase, who presided on the occasion,
as given by Mr. William H. Duncan:

"He began by alluding to the fact that the college received its charter from 'our right trusty
and well beloved John Wentworth, Governor of the Province of New Hampshire,' and said that
the venerable name was 'borne, to-day, by an honored citizen of Illinois,[36] who, like his
ancestor, towered head and shoulders above his fellow men. He also happily referred to the
descendants of the other founders of the college. 'When the college was organized the third
George was heir to the British throne. Under the great Empress Catherine, Russia was prosecuting
that career of aggrandizement then begun which is even now menacing British empire in the East.
Under the fifteenth Louis, in France, that wonderful literary movement was in progress, which
prepared a sympathetic enthusiasm for liberty in America, at length overthrowing, for a time,
monarchy in France. China and Japan were wholly outside the modern community of nations. A
hundred years have passed, and what a new order has arisen! Great Britain has lost an empire,
has gained other empires in Asia and Australia, and extends her dominion around the globe.
France, so great in arts and arms, has seen an empire rise and fall and another empire arise,
in which a wise and skillful ruler is seeking to reconcile personal supremacy with democratic
ideas. Russia, our old friend, seems to withdraw, for the present, at least, her eager gaze
from Constantinople and seeks to establish herself on the Pacific Ocean and in Central Asia.
China sends one of our own citizens, Mr. Burlingame, on an embassy throughout the world to
establish peaceful, commercial, and industrial relations with all the civilized nations. Japan,
too, awakes to the necessity of a more liberal policy, and looks toward a partnership in modern
civilization. Who, seeing this, and reflecting on the manifold agencies at work in the old
world and the prodigious movements in the new, which I cannot even glance at, can help exclaiming,
in the language of the first telegraphic message which was sent to America, 'What hath God
wrought?' How great a part has this college, antedating the Republic, played in all the enterprises
of America! It has been well said of it that three quarters of the globe know the graduates
of Dartmouth. Every State in the Union, certainly, is familiar with their names and their works,
and the influence which they exert is the influence of this college. What an insignificant
beginning was that which has been described, to-day;--what splendid progress! How great the
present, and who can predict the future? Ninety-eight classes of young men have already gone
forth from this institution. Who can measure the religious, the moral, the intellectual, the
political influence, which they have exerted? Great names like Webster and Choate rise at once
to memory, but I refer more particularly to the mighty influence exerted by the vast numbers,
unrecognized upon the theatre of national reputation, which the college has sent into all the
spheres of activity and duty. When I think of the vast momentum for good which has originated
here, and is now in unchecked progress, and must extend beyond all the limits of conception,
I cannot help feeling that it is a great and precious privilege to be in some way identified
as a member of this college. It does not diminish my satisfaction that other graduates of other
American colleges can say the same thing. It rather increases the satisfaction. Glad and thankful
that my name is in the list of those who have been educated here, and have endeavored to do
something for their country and their kind, I rejoice that, under our beneficent institutions,
legions of Americans have the same or greater cause for gladness.'

      [36] Hon. John Wentworth, LL. D.

"After some remarks to the graduating class, the Chief Justice said: 'And let me add, my brethren
of the alumni, a practical word to you. We celebrate to-day the founding of our college. We
come hither to testify our veneration and our affection for our benign Alma Mater. We can hardly
think she is a hundred years old, she looks so fresh and so fair. We are sure that many, many
blessed days are before her, but a mother's days are made happy and delightful by the love
and faithfulness of her children. Much has been done for this institution, recently, much which
makes our hearts glad. The names of the benefactors of the institution, mentioned here to-day,
dwell freshly in the hearts of every graduate, and will live forever; but let us remember,
that while much has been done, much also remains to be done. I do not appeal to you for charity.
I wish that every graduate may feel that the college is, in a most true and noble sense, his
mother, and to remind you of your filial obligations.'"

Addresses having been made by Hon. Ira Perley, LL. D., Hon. Daniel Clark, and Richard B. Kimball,
Esq., Mr. Duncan says:

"Judge Chase called upon Judge Barrett, Vice President of the Association of the Alumni, to
read a poem, which had been furnished for the occasion by George Kent, Esq., of the Class of
1814. He had read but a few stanzas when the rumbling of distant thunder was heard. Then came
a few scattering drops of water pattering upon the roof of the tent, but soon the winds blew,
and the rain descended and fell upon the roof, as if the very windows of heaven had been opened.
There followed such a scene as no tongue, nor pen, nor pencil can describe,--it baffles all
description. Judge Barrett, with the true pluck of an Ethan Allen, stood by his colors, and
the more the wind blew and the storm raged, the louder he read his poetry. But he was obliged
at length to cease, and with his slouched hat and dripping garments left the stage.

"But he was not alone in his misery. The manly and stately form of the Chief Justice, the president
of the college, reverend doctors of divinity, were all in the same condition--they all stood
drenched and dripping, like fountains, in the rain. Even General Sherman had to succumb, once
in his life, and seek the protection of an umbrella. Some huddled under umbrellas, some held
benches over their heads, and some crept beneath the platform.

"The storm passed over, and Judge Barrett came forward and finished reading the poem.

"Hon. James W. Patterson, of the Class of 1848, was then called upon, and spoke with force
and eloquence, receiving the greatest compliment that could be paid him,--the undivided attention
of the audience."

Addresses were also made by Dr. Jabez B. Upham, Samuel H. Taylor, LL. D., Rev. Samuel C. Bartlett,
D.D., and others.

We quote some of the closing passages of the "Historical Address" by President Brown, of Hamilton
College.

"There is not much time to speak of the general policy of the college through these hundred
years of its life, but I may say in brief, that it has been sound and earnest, conservative
and aggressive at the same time. As the motto on its seal,--vox clamantis in deserto,--indicated
and expressed the religious purpose of its founders, so this purpose has never been lost sight
of. Through lustrum after lustrum, and generation after generation, while classes have succeeded
classes, while one corps of instructors have passed away and others have taken their places,
this high purpose of presenting and enforcing the vital and essential truths of the Christian
religion, has never been forgotten or neglected. The power of Christianity in modifying, inspiring,
and directing the energies of modern civilization,--its art, its literature, its commerce,
its laws, its government, has been profoundly felt. Nor has it for a moment been forgotten
that education, to be truly and in the largest degree beneficent, must also be religious,--must
affect that which is deepest in man,--must lead him, if it can, to the contemplation of truths
most personal, central, and essential, must open to him some of those depths where the soul
swings almost helplessly in the midst of experiences and powers unfathomable and infinite,--where
the intellect falters and hesitates and finds no solution of its perplexities till it yields
to faith. Within later years there have been those who have advocated the doctrine that education
should be entirely secular,--that the college should have nothing to do with religious counsels
or advice. Now while I do not think that this would be easy, as our colleges are organized,
without leaving or even inciting the mind to dangerous skepticism, nor possible but by omitting
the most powerful means of moral and intellectual discipline, nor without depriving the soul
of that food which it specially craves, and destitute of which it will grow lean, hungry, and
unsatisfied,--as a matter of history, no such theory of education has found favorable response
among the guardians of Dartmouth. At the same time while the general religious character of
the college has been well ascertained and widely recognized, while the great truths of our
common Christianity have been fully and frankly and earnestly brought to the notice of intelligent
and inquiring minds, it has not been with a narrow, illiberal, and proselyting spirit, not
so as rudely to violate traditionary beliefs, not so as to wound and repel any sincere and
truth loving mind. And this is the consistent and sound position for the college to hold.

"With respect to its curriculum of studies the position of the college has been equally wise.
She has endeavored to make her course as broad, generous, and thorough as possible; equal to
the best in the land; so that her students could feel that no privilege has been denied them
which any means at her disposal could provide. She has endeavored wisely to apportion the elements
of instruction and discipline. She has provided as liberally as possible, by libraries, apparatus,
laboratories, and cabinets for increase in positive knowledge. She has equally insisted on
those exact studies which compel subtleness and precision of thought, which habituate the mind
to long trains of controlled reasoning, which discipline alike the attention and the will,
the conservative and the elaborative powers. She has given full honor to the masterpieces of
human language and human thought, through which, while we come to a more complete knowledge
of peoples and nations, of poetry and eloquence, we feel more profoundly the life of history,
and comprehend the changes of custom and thought, while the finer and more subtle powers of
fancy and imagination stir within the sensitive mind, and gradually by constant and imperceptible
inspiration lift the soul to regions of larger beauty and freedom.

"So may she ever hold on her way, undeluded by specious promises of easier methods, inuring
her students to toil as the price of success; not rigid and motionless, but plastic and adapting
herself to the necessities of different minds; yet never confounding things that differ, nor
vainly hoping on a narrow basis of culture to rear the superstructure of the broadest attainment
and character, but ever determined to make her instructions the most truly liberal and noble.

"With no purpose of personal advantage, but with the deepest filial love and gratitude have
we assembled this day. Of all professions and callings, from many States, from public business
and from engrossing private pursuits,--you, my young friend who have just come, with hesitation
and ingenuous fear, to add your name if you may, to the honored rolls of the college, and you
Sir,[37] whose memory runs back to the beginning of the century, the oldest or nearly the oldest
living alumnus of the college, the contemporary of Chapman and Harvey, and Fletcher, and Parris,
and Weston, and Webster,--you who came from beyond the 'Father of Waters,' and you who have
retreated for a moment from the shore of the dark Atlantic--you Sir,[38] our brother by hearty
and affectionate adoption, who led our armies in that memorable march from the mountain to
the sea, which shall be remembered as long as the march of the Ten Thousand, and repeated in
story and song as long as history and romance shall be written, and you, Sir, who hold the
even scales of justice in that august tribunal, from which Marshall proclaimed the law which
insured to us our ancient name and rights and privileges, unchanged, untarnished, unharmed,--all
of us, my brothers, with one purpose have come up to lay our trophies at the feet of our common
mother, to deck her with fresh garlands, to rejoice in her prosperity, and to promise her our
perpetual homage and love. Let no word of ours ever give her pain or sorrow. Loyal to our heart
of hearts, may we minister so far as we can, to her wants, may we be jealous of her honor,
and solicitous for her prosperity. May no ruthless hand ever hereafter be lifted against her.
May no unholy jealousies rend the fair fabric of her seamless garment. May no narrow or unworthy
spirit mar the harmony of her wise counsels. May she stand to the end as she ever has stood,
for the Church and State, a glory and a defense.

      [37] Job Lyman, Esq., of the class of 1804.

      [38] General Sherman received the highest honorary degree of the
           college in 1866.

President Smith, whose character was a rare union of energy and gentleness, was preëminently
a man of affairs.

The results of his untiring efforts to promote the welfare of the college, in various directions,
will be more fully developed upon subsequent pages. Having performed valuable service for thirteen
years, he resigned his office, on account of failing health, March 1, 1877, and died on the
sixteenth of August following, his wife, Mrs. Sarah Ann (Adams) Smith, surviving him.

CHAPTER XIX.

INAUGURATION OF PRESIDENT BARTLETT.

Rev. Samuel C. Bartlett, D.D., of the Chicago Theological Seminary, was elected the eighth
president of the college. We insert entire his inaugural address, delivered at the Commencement,
June, 1877:

"Certain occasions seem to prescribe their own themes of discourse, and certain themes are
endowed with perpetual life. There are problems with which each coming generation and each
last man grapples as freshly as the first.

"How shall the ripest growth of the ages be imparted to one young soul? Twice, at least, in
a lifetime, is this great question wont to rise solemnly before each thoughtful man--when he
looks forward in youthful hope, and when he looks back in parental solicitude. It is a question
of many forms and multiplying answers. Shall there be a long, fundamental training, wide and
general? or, shall it be closely professional? Shall it be predominantly classic, or scientific,
or esthetic, or empiric? Many, or much? For accomplishment, or for accomplishing? Shall it
fit for the tour of Europe, or for the journey of life? Masculine and feminine, or vaguely
human? Shall it rattle with the drum-beat, bound with gymnastics, court fame by excursive "nines"
not known on Helicon, and challenge British Oxford, alas? with its boat crew? Shall the American
College student follow his option, or his curriculum? And shall the college itself be a school
for schoolmasters, a collection of debating clubs, a reading-room with library attached, an
intellectual quarantine for the plague of riches? or, a place of close and protracted drill,
of definite methods, of prescribed intellectual work? Shall it fulfill the statement of the
Concord sage,--'You send your son to the schoolmasters, and the schoolboys educate him?' or,
shall a strong faculty make and mark the whole tone of the institution?

"In these and other forms is the same fundamental question still thrust sharply before us.
I do not propose to move directly on such a line of bristling bayonets, but to make my way
by a flank movement across this "wilderness" of conflict. It will go far towards determining
the methods of a liberal education, if we first ascertain, as I propose to do, The Chief Elements
of a Manly Culture.

"Obviously the primal condition of all else must be found in a self-prompted activity or wakefulness
of intellect. The time when the drifting faculties begin to feel the helm of will, when the
youth passes from being merely receptive to become aggressive, marks the advent of the true
human era. As in the history of our planet the first remove from the tohu va-vohu was when
the Spirit of God brooded on the deep, and, obedient to the command, light shot out from darkness,
so in man the microcosm, the brooding spirit and commanding purpose mark the first step from
chaos toward cosmos. The mechanical intellect becomes dynamical, and the automatic man becomes
autonomic. It may be with a lower or a higher motion. The mind gropes round restlessly by a
yearning instinct; it may be driven by the strong impulse of native genius; or, it may rise
to the condition of being the facile servant of the forceful will. When the boy at Pisa curiously
watches the oil lamp swinging by its long chain in the cathedral, a pendulum begins to vibrate
in his brain, and falling bodies to count off their intervals; and when afterward he deliberately
fits two lenses in a leaden tube, the moon's mountains, Jupiter's satellites, and Saturn's
rings are all waiting to catch his eye. A thoughtful meditation on the spasms of a dead frog's
leg in Bologna becomes galvanic. The gas breaking on the surface of a brewery vat, well watched
by Priestley, bursts forth into pneumatic chemistry. A spider's web in the Duke of Devonshire's
garden expands in the mind of my lord's gardener, Brown, into a suspension bridge. A sledge
hammer, well swung in Cromarty, opened those New Walks in an Old Field. The diffraction of
light revealed itself to Young in the hues of a soap-bubble. As the genie of the oriental tale
unfolded his huge height from the bottle stamped with Solomon's seal, so the career of Davy
first evolved itself out of old vials and gallipots. When the boy Bowditch was found in all
his leisure moments snatching up his slate and pencil, when Cobbett grappled resolutely with
the grammar, when Cuvier dissected the cuttlefish found upon the shore, or Scott was seen sitting
on a ladder, hour after hour, poring over books, they will be further heard from.

"If such instances illustrate the propulsive force of native genius, they also indicate what
training must do when the impulsive genius is not there. No idler plea was ever entered for
an idler than when he says,--'I have no bent for this, no interest in that, and no genius for
the other.' The animal has his habitat, and stays fast. A complete man is intellectually and
physically a cosmopolite. Till he has gained the power to throw his will-force wherever the
work summons him, most of all to the weak points of his condition, till he has learned to be
his own task-master and overseer, he is but a 'slave of the ring.'

"In most lines the highest gift is the gift of toil. Indeed, men of genius have often been
the most terrible of toilers, and in the regions of highest art. How have the great masters
of music first welded the keys of the organ and harpsichord to their fingers' ends and their
souls' nerves before they poured forth the Creation or the Messiah, the symphonies and sonatas!
Think of Meyerbeer and his fifteen hours of daily work; of Mozart's incessant study of the
masters, and his own eight hundred compositions in his short life; of Mendelssohn's nine years
elaboration of Elijah. Or in the sister art, how we track laborious, continuous study in the
Peruginesque, the Florentine, and the Roman styles successively of Raphael, and in the incredible
activity that crowded a life of thirty-seven years with such a vast number of portraits and
Madonnas, of altar-pieces and frescoes, mythological, historical, and Biblical. And that still
grander contemporary genius, how he wrought by night with the candle in his pasteboard cap,
how he had dissected and studied the human frame like an anatomist or surgeon before he chiseled
the David and Moses, or painted the Sistine chapel, and how the plannings of his busy brain
were always in advance of the powers of a hand that, till the age of eighty-eight, was incessantly
at work.

"The servant is not above his master. The lower intellect can buy at no cheaper price than
the higher, and the hour of full intellectual emancipation comes only when the student has
learned to serve--to turn the whole freshness and sharpness of his intellect on any needful
theme of the hour; it may be the scale of a fossil fish, or the annual movement of a glacier,
the disclosures of the spectrum, or the secrets of the arrow-headed tongue. All great explorers
have been largely their own teachers, and each young scholar has made the best use of all helps
and helpers when he has learned to teach himself. His emancipation, once fairly purchased,
confers on him potentially the freedom of the empire of thought; and, as evermore, the freeman
toils harder than the slave. The strong stimulus of such a self-moved activity, thoroughly
aroused, becomes in Choate or Gladstone the fountain of perpetual youth, and forms the solid
basis of the titanic scholarship of Germany. It stood embodied in the life and motto of the
aged, matchless artist Angelo,--'Ancora imparo,' I am learning still.

"But impulse and activity may move blindly. Another cardinal quality of such a culture, therefore,
must be precision--the close, clean working of the faculties. A memory trained to clear recollection,
what a saving of reiterated labor and of annoying helplessness. A discrimination sharpened
to the nicest discernment of things that differ, though always a shining mark for the arrow
of the satirist, will outlive all shots with his gray-goose shaft; for it shines with the gleam
of tempered steel. An exactness of knowledge that defines all its landmarks, how is it master
of the situation. A precision of speech, born of clear thinking, what controversial battlefields
of sulphurous smoke and scattering fire might it prevent. He has been called a public benefactor
who makes two blades of grass grow where one grew before. He is as great a benefactor, who
in an age of verbiage makes one word perform the function of two. Wonderful is the precision
with which this mental mechanism may be made to work. Some men can even think their best on
their feet in the presence of a great assembly. There are others whose spontaneous thoughts
move by informal syllogisms. Emmons sometimes laid off his common utterances like the heads
of a discourse. Johnson's retorts exploded like a musket, and often struck like a musket-ball.
John Hunter fairly compared his own mind to a bee-hive, all in a hum, but the hum of industry
and order and achievement. It reminds us, by contrast, of other minds formed upon the model
of the wasp's nest, with a superabundance of hum and sting without, and no honey within. It
was of the voluminous works of a distinguished author that Robert Hall remarked,--'They are
a continent of mud, sir.' Nuisances of literature are the men who fill the air with smoke,
relieved by no clear blaze of light. There have been schools of thought that were as smoky
as Pittsburg. We have had 'seers' who made others see nothing, men of 'insight' with no outlook,
scientists who in every critical argument jumped the track of true science, and preachers whose
hazy thoughts and utterances flickered between truth and error. Pity there were not some intellectual
Sing-Sing for the culprit!

"How refreshing, on the other hand, to follow the clear unfolding of the silken threads of
thought that lie side by side, single and in knots and skeins, but never tangled. What a beautiful
process was an investigation by Faraday in electro-magnetism, as he combined his apparatus,
manipulated his material, narrowed his search, eliminated his sources of error, and drew his
careful conclusions. With similar persistent acuteness, in the field of Biblical investigation,
how does Zumpt, by an exhaustive exclusion and combination, at length make the annals of Tacitus
shake hands with the gospel of Luke over the taxing of Cyrenius. In metaphysics, how matchless
the razor-like acuteness with which Hamilton could distinguish, divide, and clear up the questions
that lay piled in confused heaps over the subject of perception. What can be more admirable
than the workings of the trained legal or rather judicial mind, as it walks firmly through
labyrinths of statute and precedent and principle, holding fast its strong but tenuous thread,
till it stands forth in the bright light of day;--it may be some Sir John Jervis, unraveling
in a criminal case the web of sophistries with which a clever counsel has bewildered a jury;
or it may be Marshall or Story, in our own college case, shredding away, one by one, its intricacies,
entanglements, and accretions, till all is delightfully, restfully clear.

"It is a trait all the more to be insisted on in these very times, because there is so strong
a drift toward a seeming clearness which is a real confusion. By two opposite methods do men
now seek to reach that underlying order and majestic simplicity which more and more appear
to mark this universe. The one distinguishes, the other confounds, things that certainly differ.
The one system belongs to the reality and grandeur of nature, the other to the pettiness and
perverseness of man. Not a few seem bent on seeing simplicity and uniformity by the short process
of shutting their eyes upon actual diversity. They proceed not by analytical incision, but
by summary excision. They work with the cleaver and not with the scalpel. What singular denials
of the intuitive facts of universal consciousness, what summary identifications of most palpable
diversities, and what kangaroo-leaps beyond the high wall of their facts, mark many of the
deliverances of those who loudly warn us off from 'the unknowable!' What shall we say of the
steady confusion, in some arguments, of structure and function, and of force with material?
When men, however eminent, openly propose to identify the force which screws together two plates
of metal with the agency which corrodes or dissolves both in an acid, or to identify the affinity
that forms chemical combinations with the vitality that so steadily overrides, suspends, and
counteracts those affinities, is this an ascent into the pure ether, or a plunge in the Cimmerian
dark? When, in opposition to every possible criterion, a man claims that there is but 'one
ultimate form of matter out of which successively the more complex forms of matter are built
up,' is this the advance march of chemistry, or the retrograde to alchemy? When a writer, in
a style however lucid and taking, firmly assumes that there is no essential difference in objects
alike in material elements, but separated by that mighty and mysterious thing, life, is that
the height of wisdom, or the depth of folly? And how such a central paralysis of the mental
retina spreads its darkness, as, for example, in the affirmation that as oxygen and hydrogen
are reciprocally convertible with water, so are water, ammonia, and carbolic acid convertible
into and resolvable from living protoplasm!--a statement said to be as false in chemistry as
it certainly is in physiology. An ordinary merchant's accountant will, if need be, work a week
to correct in his trial balance the variation of a cent. But when he listens to Sir John Lubbock
calmly reckoning the age of the human implements in the valley of the Somme at from one hundred
thousand up to two hundred and forty thousand years; when he sees Croll, in dating the close
of the glacial age, leap down from the height of near eight hundred thousand to eighty thousand
years; when he finds Darwin and Lyell claiming for the period of life on the earth more than
three hundred millions of years, while Tait and Thompson pronounce it 'utterly impossible'
to grant more than ten, or, at most, fifteen millions,--this poor, benighted clerk is bound
to sit and hearken to his masters in all outward solemnity, but he must be excused for a prolonged
inward smile. Who are these, he says, that reckon with a lee-way of hundreds of thousands of
years, and fling the hundreds of millions of years right and left, like pebbles and straws?

"Brilliancy, so-called, is no equivalent or substitute for precision. It is often its worst
enemy. A man may mould himself to think in curves and zig-zags, and not in right lines. He
sends never an arrow, but a boomerang. Or he thinks in poetry instead of prose, deals in analogy
where it should be analysis, puts rhetoric for logic, scatters and not concentrates, and while
he radiates never irradiates. A late divine was suspected of heresy, partly because of his
poetic bias; and one of his volumes was unfortunate for him and his readers, in that for his
central position he planted himself on a figure of speech, and not on a logical proposition.
The well-known story se non vero e ben trovato, of that keenest of lawyers, listening to a
lecture of which every sentence was a gem and every paragraph rich with the spoils of literature,
and replying to the question, "Do you understand all that?" "No, but my daughters do." It was
as beautiful and iridescent as the Staubbach, and as impalpable.

"The more is the pity when a vigorous mind, in the outset of some great discussion, heads for
a fog-bank or a wind-mill. When a man proposes to chronicle a 'Conflict between Religion and
Science,' and makes religion stand indiscriminately for Romanism, Mohammedanism, superstition,
malignant passion, obstinate prejudice, and what not, also confounding Christianity with so-called
Christians, and those often most unrepresentative,--at the same time appropriating to 'Science'
all intellectual activity whatever, though found in good Christian men, and though fostered
and made irrepressible by the fire of that very religion, it is easy to see what must be the
outcome of such a sweepstakes race. There will be a deification of science, and not even a
whited sepulchre erected over the measureless Golgothas of its slaughtered theories. There
will be, on the other hand, the steady suppressio veri concerning books, systems, men, and
events, the occasional though unintended assertio falsi, the eager conversion of theories into
facts, constructions unfair and uncandid and, throughout, with much that is bright and just,
that 'admixture of a lie that doth ever add pleasure' to its author and grief to the judicious.
Such confusions are no doubt often the outgrowth of the will. But a main end of a true culture
is to prevent or expose all such bewilderments, whether helpless or crafty.

"The great predominance of the disciplinary process was what once characterized the English
university system even more than now. It consisted in the exact and exhaustive mastery of certain
limited sections of knowledge and thought, as the gymnastic for all other spheres and toils.
At Oxford, not long ago, four years were spent in mastering some fourteen books. Whatever may
be our criticism of the process, we may not deny its singular effect. In its best estate it
forged many a trenchant blade. To the man who asks for its monument, it can point to British
thought, law, statesmanship. Bacon and Burke, Coke and Eldon, Hooker and Butler, Pitt and Canning,
shall make answer. The whole massive literature of England shall respond.

"But to this precision of working must be furnished material with which to work. Mental fullness
is, therefore, another prime quality of a manly culture. To what degree it should be sought
in the curriculum has been in dispute. It is the American theory, and a growing belief of the
English nation, that the British universities have been defective here. Their men of mark have
traveled later over the broader field.

"Provincialism of intellect is a calamity. All men of great achievements have had to know what
others achieved. The highest monuments are always built with the spoils of the past. Any single
genius, if not an infinitesimal, counts at most but a digit in the vast notation of humanity.
The great masters have been the greatest scholars. Many a bright mind has struggled alone to
beat the air. Behold in some national patent-office a grand mummy-pit of ignorant inventors.

"Those men upon whom so much opprobrium has been heaped, the Schoolmen, were unfortunate chiefly
in the lack of material on which to expend their singular acuteness. Leibnitz was not ashamed
to confess his obligations to them, nor South to avail himself of their subtle distinctions.
Doubtless theology owes them a debt. Some of them have been well called, by Hallam, men 'of
extraordinary powers of discrimination and argument, strengthened in the long meditation of
their cloister by the extinction of every other talent and the exclusion of every other pursuit.
Their age and condition denied them the means of studying polite letters, of observing nature,
or of knowing mankind. Hence the mass of ponderous trifling that has made their name a by-word.
A force, sometimes Herculean, was spent in building and demolishing castles of moonshine.

"A robust mental strength requires various and solid food. The best growth is symmetrical.
There is a common bond--quoddam commune vinculum--in the circle of knowledge, that cannot be
overlooked. Men do not know best what they know only in its isolation. Even Kant offset his
metaphysics by lecturing on geography; and Niebuhr, the historian, struggled hard and well
to keep his equilibrium by throwing himself into the whole circle of natural science and of
affairs. Such, also, are the interdependencies of scholarship, that ample knowledge without
our specialty is needful to save us from blunders within. Olshausen was a brilliant commentator,
and the slightest tinge of chemistry should have kept him from suggesting that the conversion
of water into wine at Cana was but the acceleration of a natural process. A smattering of optics
would have prevented Dr. Williams from repeating the old cavil of Voltaire, that light could
not have been made before the sun. A moderate reflection upon the laws of speech and the method
of Genesis would have restrained Huxley from sneering at the 'marvelous flexibility' of the
Hebrew tongue in the word 'day,' and a New York audience from laughing at the joke rather than
the joker. Some tinge of ethical knowledge should have withheld Max Müller from finding the
grand distinctive mark of humanity in the power of speech. The merest theorist needs some range
of reality for the framework of his theories, and the man of broad principles must have facts
to generalize. Indeed, a good memory is the indispensable servant of large thought, and however
deficient in certain directions, the great thinkers have had large stores. 'The best heads
that have ever existed,' says an idealist,--'Pericles, Plato, Julius Cæsar, Shakespeare, Goethe,
Milton,--were well read, universally educated men, and quite too wise to undervalue letters.
Their opinion has weight, because they had the means of knowing the opposite opinion.'

"While every year increases the impossibility of what used to be called universal knowledge,
it also emphasizes the necessity of a scholarship that has its outlook toward all the vast
provinces of reading and thought. It cannot conquer them, but it can be on treaty relations
with them. The tendency of modern science is, of necessity, steadily toward sectional lines
and division of labor. It is a tendency whose cramping influence is as steadily to be resisted,
even in later life, much more in early training. We are to form ourselves on the model of the
integer rather than the fraction of humanity. The metaphysician cannot afford to be ignorant
of the 'chemistry of a candle' or the 'history of a piece of chalk,' nor the chemist of the
laws of language, the theologian of astronomy and geology, nor the lawyer of the most ancient
code and its history. Mill himself made complaint of Comte's 'great aberration' in ignoring
psychology and logic.

"Intellectual fetichism is born of isolation, and dies hard. While in the great modern uprising
we may boast that the heathen idols have been swept away from three hundred dark islands of
Polynesia, new 'idols of the cave' stalk forth upon the world of civilized thought. We are
just now much bewildered with brightness in streaks, which falls on us like the sunlight from
a boy's bit of glass, and blinds our eyes instead of showing our path. Half-educated persons
seize fragments of principles and snatch at half-truths. Crotchets infest the brains, and hobbies
career through the fields of thought. Polyphemus is after us, a burly wretch with one eye.
Better if that were out.

"The remedy is, to correct our narrowness by a clear view of the wide expanse. We must come
out of our cave. We must link our pursuits to those of humanity. Breadth and robustness given
to the mental constitution in its early training shall go far through life to save us from
partial paralysis or monstrosity.

"To insure this result, however, we must add to that fullness of material the quality of mental
equipoise or mastery, the power of grasping and managing it all. A man is to possess, and not
to be 'possessed with,' his acquisitions. He wants an intellect decisive, incisive, and, if
I might coin a word, concisive.

"The power to unify and organize must go with all right acquisition. Knowledges must be changed
to knowledge. It takes force to handle weight. Some men seem to know more than is healthy for
them. It does not make muscle, but becomes plethoric, dropsical, adipose, or adipocere. Better
to have thought more and acquired less. Frederick W. Robertson, in his prime, wrote,--'I will
answer for it that there are few girls of eighteen who have not read more books than I have;'
and Mrs. Browning confessed,--'I should be wiser if I had not read half as much;' while old
Hobbes, of Malmesbury, caustically remarked,--'If I had read as much as other men I should
know as little.' It may serve as a hint to the omnivorous college student. Cardinal Mezzofanti
knew, it is said, more than a hundred languages. What came of it all? A eulogy on one Emanuele
da Ponte. He never said anything in all the languages he spoke! What constitutes the life of
an intellectual jelly-fish? Even the brilliancy of Macaulay was almost overweighted by the
immensity of his acquisitions. The vivid glitter of details in his memory may sometimes have
dazzled his perception of a tout ensemble, and for principles it was his manner to cite precedents.
A multitude of lesser lights have been almost smothered by superabundance of fuel. A man knows
Milton almost by heart, and Shakespeare too, can quote pages of Homer, has read Chrysostom
for his recreation, is full of history, runs over with statistics right and left, and withal
is strong in mother-wit. But the mother-wit proves not strong enough, perhaps, to push forth
and show itself over the ponderous débris above it, the enormousness, or, if you please, the
enormity of his knowledge.

"It requires a first-class mind to carry a vast load of scientific facts. Hence the many eminent
observers who have been the most illogical of reasoners. What a contrast between Hugh Miller
and his friend Francia; the mind of the latter, as Miller describes it, 'a labyrinth without
a clew, in whose recesses was a vast amount of book-knowledge that never could be used, and
was of no use to himself or any one else;' the former wielding all his stores as he swung his
sledge. What is wanted is the comprehensive hand, and not the prehensile tail.

"Involved in such an equipoise is the decisiveness, the willforce, that not only holds, but
holds the balance. Common as it may be, it is none the less pitiable to be just acute enough
constantly to question, but not to answer--forever to raise difficulties, and never to solve
them. Wakeful, but the wakefulness of weakliness. Fine-strung minds are they often, acquisitive,
subtle, and sensitive, able to look all around their labyrinth and see far into darkness, but
not out to the light. It is by nature rather a German than an Anglo-Saxon habit. It is not
always fatal even there. De Wette, 'the veteran doubter,' rallied at the last, and, like Bunyan's
Feeble-mind, went over almost shouting. In this country, youth often have it somewhat later
than the measles and the small-pox, and come through very well, without even a pock-mark. Sometimes
it becomes epidemic, and assumes a languid or typhoidal cast,--not Positivism, but Agnosticism.
It is rather fashionable to eulogize perplexity and doubt as a mark of strength and genius.
But whatever may be the passing fashion, the collective judgment of the ages has settled it
that the permanent state of mental hesitancy and indecision, in whatever sphere of thought
and action, is and must be a false condition. It indicates the scrofulous diathesis, and calls
for more iron in the blood. It is a lower type of manhood. It abdicates the province of a human
intelligence, which is to seek and find truth. It abrogates the moral obligation to prove all
things, and hold fast that which is good. It revolts from the great problem of life, which
calls on us to know, and to know that we may do. Out upon this apotheosis of doubt. It is the
sick man glorying in his infirmity, the beggar boasting of his intellectual rags.

"The comprehensive and decisive tend naturally to the incisive. The power to take a subject
by its handle and poise it on its centre is perhaps the consummation of merely intellectual
culture. When all its nutriment has been converted into bone and muscle and sinew and nerve,
then the mind bounds to its work, lithe and strong, like a hunting leopard on its game. It
was exactly the power with which our Webster handled his case, till it seemed to the farmer
too simple to require a great man to argue. It was the quality that Lincoln so toiled at through
his early manhood, and so admirably gained,--the power of presenting things clearly to 'plain
people.' You may call it 'the art of putting things,' but it is the art of conceiving things.
It is no trick of style, but a character of thinking, and it marks the harvest-time of a manly
culture.

"I will add to this enumeration one other quality, one without which this harvest will not
ripen. I speak of mental docility and reverence. A man will have looked forth to little purpose
on the universe if he does not see that, even with his expanding circle of light, there is
an ever-enlarging circle of darkness around it. He will have compared his achievements with
those of the race to little profit, if he does not recognize his relative insignificance, gathering
sands on the ocean shore.

"The wide range and rapid outburst of modern learning tend undoubtedly to arrogance and conceit.
We gleefully traverse our new strip of domain, and ask, Were there ever such beings as we?
Yes, doubtless there were,--clearer, greater, and nobler. Wisdom, skill, and strength were
not born with us. All the qualities of manly thought, though with ruder implements and cruder
materials, have been as conspicuously exhibited down through the ages past as in our day. The
power of governing, ability in war, diplomacy in peace, subtle dialectics, clear insight, the
art of conversation, persuasive and impressive speech, high art in every form, whatever constitutes
the test of good manhood, has been here in full force. It would puzzle us yet to lay the stones
of Baalbec, or to carve, move, and set up the great statue of Rameses. Within a generation,
Euclid of Alexandria was teaching geometry in Dartmouth College, and Heraclides and Aristarchus
anticipated Copernicus by sixteen centuries. No man has surpassed the sculptures of Rhodes,
or the paintings of the sixteenth century. The cathedral of Cologne is the offspring of forgotten
brains. Such men as Anselm were educated on the Trivium and Quadrivium. Five hundred years
ago Merton College could show such men as Geoffrey Chaucer, William of Occam, and John Wickliffe.
If the history of science can produce four brighter contemporary names than Napier, Kepler,
Descartes, and Galileo, let them be forthcoming. But when, still earlier by a century and a
half, we behold a man who was not only architect, engineer, and sculptor, and in painting the
rival of Angelo, but who, as Hallam proves, 'anticipated in the compass of a few pages the
discoveries which made Galileo, Kepler, Maestlin, Maurolycus, and Castelli immortal,' it may
well 'strike us,' he suggests 'with something like the awe of supernatural knowledge;' and
in the presence of Leonardo da Vinci the modern scientist of highest rank may stand with uncovered
head.

"If wisdom was not born with us, neither will it die with us. There will be something left
to know. Our facts will be tested, our theories probed, and our assertions exploded by better
minds than ours. If it be true, as Bacon says, 'prudens interrogatio dimidium scientiæ,' it
is also true, 'imprudens assertio excidium scientiæ.' We are in these days treated to 'demonstrations'
which scarcely rise to the level of presumptions, but, rather, of presumption. There is an
accumulation of popular dogmatism that is very likely doomed within a century to be swept into
the same oblivion with the 'Christian Astrology,' of William Lilly and the 'Ars Magna' of Raymond
Lully--a mass of rubbish that is waiting for another Caliph Omar and the bath-fires of Alexandria.

"It will not answer to mistake the despotism of hypothesis for the reign of law, nor physical
law for the great 'I AM.' True thinkers must respect other thinkers and God. They cannot ignore
the primal utterances of consciousness, the laws of logic, nor the truths of history. Foregone
conclusions are not to bar out the deepest facts of human nature, nor the most stupendous events
in the story of the race. Hume may not rule out the settled laws of evidence the moment they
touch the borders of religion; nor may Strauss, by the simple assertion that miracles are impossible,
manacle the arm of God. Comte may not put his extinguisher upon the great underlying verities
of our being, nor Tyndall jump the iron track of his own principles to smuggle into matter
a 'potency and promise' of all 'life.' Huxley cannot play fast and loose with human volition,
nor juggle the trustiness of memory into a state of consciousness, to save his system; nor
may Haeckel lead us at his own sweet creative will through fourteen stages of vertebrate and
eight of invertebrate life up to the great imaginary 'monera,' the father and mother of us
all. It will be time to believe a million things in a lump when one of them is fully proved
in detail. We have no disposition, even with so eminent an authority as St. George Mivart,
to denominate Natural Selection 'a puerile hypothesis.' We will promise to pay our respects
to our 'early progenitor' of 'arboreal habits' and 'ears pointed and capable of movement,'
when he is honestly identified by his ear-marks, and even to worship the original fire-mist
when that is properly shown to be our only Creator, Preserver, and Bountiful Benefactor.

"Meantime, as a late king of Naples was said to have erected the negation of God into a system
of government, not a few eager investigators seem to have assumed it as a basis of science.
And so we reach out by worship 'mostly of the silent sort' toward the unknown and unknowable,
the 'reservoir of organic force, the single source of power,' ourselves 'conscious automatons'
in whom 'mind is the product of the brain,' thought, emotion, and will are but 'the expression
of molecular changes,' to whom all speculations in divinity are a 'disregard of the proper
economy of time,' and to whom, also, as one of them has declared, 'earth is Paradise,' and
all beyond is blank. But it was Mephistopheles who said,--

    "'The little god of this world sticks to the same old way,
    And is as whimsical as on creation's day;
    Life somewhat better might content him,
    But for the gleam of heavenly light which thou hast lent him.
    He calls it Reason--thence his power's increased
    To be far beastlier than any beast.
    Saving thy gracious presence, he to me
    A long-legged grasshopper seems to be,
    That springing flies and flying springs,
    And in the grass the same old ditty sings.
    Would he still lay among the grass he grows in.'

"But even the man of theories might grant that the scheme of one great, governing, guiding,
loving, and holy God is a theory that works wonders in practice for those that heartily receive
it, and is a conception of magnificence beside which even a Nebular Hypothesis with all its
grandeur grows small. And the man of facts may as well recognize what Napoleon saw on St. Helena,--the
one grand fact of the living power of Jesus Christ in history, and to-day; a force that is
mightier than all other forces; a force that all other forces have in vain endeavored to destroy,
or counteract, or arrest; a force that has pushed its way against wit and learning and wealth
and power, and the stake and the rack and the sword and the cannon, till it has shaped the
master forces of the world, inspired its art, formed its social life, subsidized, its great
powers, and wields to-day the heavy battalions; a force that this hour beats in millions of
hearts, all over this globe, with a living warmth beside which the love of science and art
is cold and clammy. Surely it would be not much to ask for the docility to recognize such patent
facts as these. And I must believe that any mind is fundamentally unhinged that despises the
profoundest convictions of the noblest hearts, or speaks lightly of the mighty influence that
has moulded human events and has upheaved the world. It has, in its arrogance, cut adrift and
swung off from the two grand foci of all truth, the human and the divine.

"Of the several qualities,--the wakefulness, precision, fullness, equipoise, and docility--that
form, in other words, the motion, edge, weight, balance, and direction of the forged and tempered
intellect,--I might give many instances. Such men as Thomas Arnold and Mr. Gladstone instantly
rise to the thoughts,--the one by his truth-seeking and truth-finding spirit moulding a generation
of English scholars, the other carrying by the sheer force of his clear-cut intellect and magnanimous
soul the sympathies of a great nation and the admiration of Christendom. But let me rather
single out one name from the land of specialties and limitations,--Barthold George Niebuhr,
the statesman and historian. Not perfect, indeed, but admirable. See him begin in his early
youth by saying,--'I do not ask myself whether I can do a thing; I command myself to do it.'
Read the singular sketch of his intellectual gymnastics at twenty-one, spurring himself to
'inward deep voluntary thought,' 'guarding against society and dissipation,' devoting an hour
each day to clearing up his thoughts on given subjects, and two hours to the round of physical
sciences; exacting of himself 'an extensive knowledge of the facts' of science and history;
holding himself alike accountable for minute 'description,' 'accurate definitions,' 'general
laws,' 'deep reflection,' and 'distinct consciousness of the rules of my moral being,' together
with what he calls the holy resolve--'more and more to purify my soul, so that it may be ready
at all times to return to the eternal source.' How intensely he toiled to counteract a certain
conscious German one-sidedness of mind, visiting England to study all the varied phenomena
of its robust life, and yet writing home from London, at twenty-two,--'I positively shrink
from associating with the young men on account of their unbounded dissoluteness.' His memory,
not inferior to that of Macaulay or Scaliger, he made strictly the servant of his thinking.
Amid all the speculative tendencies of Germany, he became a man of facts and affairs. Overflowing
with details, he probed the facts of history to the quick, and felt for its heart. Fertile
in theory, he preserved the truth of science so pure as 'in the sight of God,' not 'to write
the very smallest thing as certain, of which he was not fully convinced,' nor to overstrain
the weight of a conjecture, nor even to cite as his own the verified quotation he had gained
from another. Practicing on his own maxim to 'open the heart to sincere veneration for all
excellence' in human act and thought, not even his profound admiration for the surpassing genius
of Goethe could draw him into sympathy with the heartlessness and colossal egoism of his later
career. In the midst of public honors he valued more than all his delightful home and literary
life, and his motto was Tecum habita. Surrounded by Pyrrhonism, and bent by the nature of his
studies toward skeptical habits, how grandly he recovered himself in his maturity, and said,--'I
do not know what to do with a metaphysical God, and I will have none but the God of the Bible,
who is heart to heart with us.' 'My son shall believe in the letter of the Old and New Testaments,
and I shall nurture in him from his infancy a firm faith in all that I have lost or feel uncertain
about.' And his last written utterance, signed 'Your Old Niebuhr,' contains a lament that 'depth,
sincerity, originality, heart and affection are disappearing,' and that 'shallowness and arrogance
are becoming universal.' After all allowances for whatever of defect, one can well point to
such a character as an illustrious example of true and manly culture.

"Shall I say that such a culture as I have endeavored to sketch, it is, and will be, the aim
of Dartmouth College to stimulate? "Jack! Pete!" As the brake was released with a clash and rattle
of iron rods, the wheelers threw their weight into their collars and the wagon moved ahead.

Grim,
tireless, world-old sentinels, No Man's Mountains stood guard between the fertile land on their
seaward side and the desolate forgotten wastes of the East. They said to the country of green
life, of progress and growth and civilization, that marched to their line on the West, "Halt!"
and it stopped. To the land of lean want, of gray death, of gaunt hunger, and torturing thirst,
that crept to their feet on the other side, "Stop!" and it came no farther. With no land to till,
no mineral to dig, their very poverty was their protection. With an air of grim finality,
they declared strongly that as they had always been they would always remain; and, at the
beginning of my story, save for that one, slender, man-made trail, their hoary boast had remained
unchallenged.

Steadily, but with frequent rests on the grades, Jefferson Worth's outfit climbed toward the
summit and a little before noon gained the Pass. The loud, rattling rumble of the wagon as the
tires bumped and ground over the stony, rock-floored way, with the sharp ring and clatter of
the iron-shod hoofs of the team, echoed, echoed, and echoed again. Loudly, wildly, the rude sounds
assaulted the stillness until the quiet seemed hopelessly shattered by the din. Softly, tamely,
the sounds drifted away in the clear distance; through groves of live oak, thickets of greasewood,
juniper, manzanita and sage; into canyon and wash; from bluff and ledge; along slope and spur and
shoulder; over ridge and saddle and peak; fainting, dying--the impotent sounds of man's passing
sank into the stillness and were lost. When the team halted for a brief rest it was in a moment as
if the silence had never been broken. Grim, awful, the hills gave no signs of man's presence,
gave that creeping bit of life no heed.

At Mountain Spring--a lonely little pool on the desert side of the huge wall--they stopped for
dinner. When the meal was over, Texas Joe, with the assistance of Pat, filled the water barrels,
while the boy busied himself with the canteen and the Seer and Jefferson Worth looked on.

"'Tis a dhry counthry ahead, I'm thinking'," remarked the Irishman inquiringly as he lifted
another dripping bucket.

"Some," returned Tex. "There are three water holes between here and the river where there's water
sometimes. Mostly, though, when you need it worst, there ain't none there, an' I reckon a dry
water hole is about the most discouragin' proposition there is. They'll all be dry this trip.
There wasn't nothin' but mud at Wolf Wells when we come through last
week."

Again the barren rocks and the grim, forbidding hills echoed the loud sound of wheel and hoof.
Down the steep flank of the mountain, with screaming, grinding brakes, they thundered and clattered
into the narrow hall-way of Devil's Canyon with its sheer walls and
shadowy gloom.

The little stream that trickled down from the tiny spot of green at the spring tried bravely to
follow but soon sank exhausted into the dry waste. A cool wind, like a draft through a tunnel,
was in their faces. After perhaps two hours of this the way widened out, the sides of the canyon
grew lower with now and then gaps and breaks. Then the walls gave way to low, rounded hills,
through which the winding trail lay--a bed of sand and gravel--and here and there appeared clumps of
greasewood and cacti of several varieties.

At length they passed out from between the last of the foot-hills and suddenly--as though a
mighty curtain were lifted--they faced the desert. At their feet the Mesa lay in a blaze of white
sunlight, and beyond and below the edge of the bench the vast King's Basin country.

At the edge of the Mesa Texas halted his team and the little party looked out and away over those
awful reaches of desolate solitude. The Seer and Pat uttered involuntary exclamations. Jefferson
Worth, Texas, and Abe were silent, but the boy's thin features were aglow with eager enthusiasm,
and the face of the driver revealed an interest in the scene that years of familiarity could
not entirely deaden, but the gray mask of the banker betrayed no emotion.

In that view, of such magnitude that miles meant nothing, there was
not a sign of man save the one slender thread of road that was so
soon lost in the distance.

From horizon to horizon, so far that the eye ached in the effort to comprehend it, there was
no cloud to cast a shadow, and the deep sky poured its resistless
flood of light upon the vast dun plain with savage fury, as if to
beat into helplessness any living creature that might chance to be
caught thereon.

And the desert, receiving that flood from the wide, hot sky, mysteriously wove with it soft scarfs
of lilac, misty veils of purple and filmy curtains of rose and pearl
and gold; strangely formed with it wide lakes of blue rimmed with
phantom hills of red and violet-- constantly changing, shifting, scene
on scene, as dream pictures shift and change.

Only the strange, silent life that, through long years, the desert had taught to endure its hardships
was there--the lizard, horned- toad, lean jack-rabbit, gaunt coyote, and their kind. Only the hard
growth that the ages had evolved dotted the floor of the Basin in the near distance--the salt-bush and
greasewood, with here and there clumps of mesquite.

And over it all--over the strange hard life, the weird, constantly shifting scenes, the wondrous,
ever-changing colors--was the dominant, insistent, compelling spirit of the land; a brooding,
dreadful silence; a waiting--waiting--waiting; a mystic call that was at once a threat and a promise;
a still drawing of the line across which no man might go and live, save those master men who should
win the right.

After a while the engineer, pointing, said: "The line of the Southwestern and Continental must
follow the base of those hills away over there--is that right, Texas?"

"That'll be about it," the driver answered. "I hear you're goin' through San Antonio Pass,
an' that's to the north. Rubio City lies about here--" he pointed a little south of east. "Our
road runs through them sand hills that you can see shinin' like gold a-way over there. Dry
River Crossin' is jest beyond. You can see Lone Mountain off here to the south. Hit'll sure be
some warm down there. Look at them dust-devil's dancin'. An' over there, where you see that
yellow mist like, is a big sand storm. We ain't likely to get a long one this time o' the year.
But you can't tell what this old desert 'll do; she's sure some uncertain. La Palma de la Mano
de Dios, the Injuns call it, and I always thought that--all things considerin'--the name fits
mighty close. You can see hit's jest a great big basin."

"The Hollow of God's Hand." repeated the Seer in a low tone. He lifted his hat with an unconscious
gesture of reverence.

The Irishman, as the engineer translated, crossed himself. "Howly
Mither, fwhat a name!"

Jefferson Worth spoke. "Drive on, Texas."

And so, with the yellow dust-devils dancing along their road and that yellow cloud in the distance,
they moved down the slope--down into The King's Basin--into La Palma de la Mano de Dios, The Hollow
of God's Hand.

"Is that true, sir?" asked Abe of the Seer.

"Is what true, son?"

"What Texas said about the ocean."

"Yes it's true. The lowest point of this Basin is nearly three hundred feet below sea level. The
railroad we are going to build follows right around the rim on the other side over there. This slope
that we are going down now is the ancient beach." Then, while they pushed on into the silence and
the heat of that dreadful land, the engineer told the boy and his companions how the ages
had wrought with river and wave and sun and wind to make The King's Basin Desert.

Wolf Wells they found dry as Texas had anticipated.

Phantom Lake also was dry. Occasionally they crossed dry, ancient water courses made by the
river when the land was being formed; sometimes there were glassy, hard, bare alkali flats;
again the trail led through jungle-like patches of desert growth or twisted and wound between
high hummocks. Always there was the wide, hot sky, the glaring flood of light unbroken by shadow
masses to relieve the eye and reflected hotly from the sandy floor
of the old sea-bed.

That evening, when they made camp, a heavy mass of clouds hung over the top of No Man's Mountains
and the long Coast Range that walled in the Basin. Texas Joe, watching these clouds, said nothing;
but when Pat threw on the ground the water left in his cup after drinking, the plainsman opened upon
him with language that startled them all.

The next day, noon found them in the first of the sand hills. There was no sign of vegetation
here, for the huge mounds and ridges of white sand, piled like drifts
of snow, were never quite still.

Always they move eastward before the prevailing winds from the west. Through the greater part
of the year they advance very slowly, but when the fierce gales sweep down from the mountains they
roll forward so swiftly that any object in their path is quickly buried in their smothering depths.

In
the middle of the afternoon Texas climbed to the top of a huge drift to look over the land. The others
saw him stand a moment against the sky, gazing to the northwest, then he turned and slid down
the steep side of the mound to the waiting wagon.

"She's comin'!" he remarked, laconically, "an' she's a big one. I reckon we may as well get as far as
we can."

A few minutes later they saw the sky behind them filling as with a golden mist. The atmosphere, dry and
hot, seemed charged with mysterious, terrible power. The very mules tossed their heads uneasily
and tugged at the reins as if they felt themselves pursued by some
fearful thing.

Straight and hard, with terrific velocity, the wind was coming down through the mountain passes
and sweeping across the wide miles of desert, gathering the sand as it came. Swiftly the golden
mist extended over their heads, a thick, yellow fog, through which the sun shone dully with
a weird, unnatural light. Then the stinging, blinding, choking blast was upon them with pitiless, savage
fury. In a moment all signs of the trail were obliterated. Over the high edges of the drift
the sand curled and streamed like blizzard snow.

About the outfit it whirled and eddied, cutting the faces of the men and forcing them, with closed
eyes, to gasp for breath.

Of their own accord the mules stopped and Texas shouted to Mr. Worth: "It ain't no use for us
to try to go on, sir. There ain't no trail now, and we'd jest drift around."

As far from the lee of a drift as possible, all hands--under the desert man's direction--worked to
rig a tarpaulin on the windward side of the wagon. Then, with the mules unhitched and securely tied
to the vehicle, the men crouched under their rude shelter. The Irishman was choking, coughing,
sputtering and cursing, the engineer laughed good-naturedly at their predicament, and Abe
Lee grinned in sympathy, while Texas Joe accepted the situation grimly with the forbearance
of long experience.

But Jefferson Worth's face was the same expressionless gray mask. He gave no hint of impatience
at the delay; no uneasiness at the situation; no annoyance at the discomfort. It was as though
he had foreseen the situation and had prepared himself to meet it. "How long do you figure this
will last, Tex?" he asked in his colorless voice.

"Not more than three days," returned the driver. "It may be over in three hours."

The morning of the second day they crawled from their blankets beneath the wagon to find the
sky clear and the air free from dust. Eagerly they prepared to move. Against their shelter the
sand had drifted nearly to the top of the wheels, and the wagon-box itself was more than half filled.
The hair, eye-brows, beard and clothing of the men were thickly coated with powdery dust, while
every sign of the trail was gone and the wheels sank heavily into the soft sand.

Three times Texas halted the laboring team and, climbing to the summit of a drift, determined his course
by marks unknown to those who waited below. Again they stopped for
the plainsman to take an observation, and this time the four in the
wagon, watching the figure of the driver against the sky, saw him
turn abruptly and come down to them with long plunging strides. Instinctively
they knew that something unusual had come under his eye.

The Seer
and Jefferson Worth spoke together. "What is it, Tex?"

"A stray horse
about a mile ahead."

For the first time Texas Joe uncoiled the long
lash of his whip and his call "You, Buck! Molly!" was punctuated by
pistol-like cracks that sounded strangely in the death-like silence
of the sandy waste.

As they came within sight of the strange horse
the poor beast staggered wearily to meet the wagon--the broken strap
of his halter swinging loosely from his low-hanging head.

"Look at
the poor baste," said Pat. "'Tis near dead he is wid thirst." He leaped
to the ground and started toward the water barrel in the rear of the
wagon.

"Hold on, Pat," said the colorless voice of Jefferson Worth.
And his words were followed by the report of Texas Joe's forty-five.

The
Irishman turned to see the strange horse lying dead on the sand. "Fwhat
the hell--" he demanded hotly, but Texas was eyeing him coolly, and
something checked the anger of the Irishman.

"You don't seem to sabe,"
drawled the man of the desert, replacing the empty shell in his gun.
"There ain't hardly enough water to carry us through now, an' we may
have to pick up this other outfit."

No one spoke as Pat climbed heavily
back to his seat.

For two miles the tracks of the strange horse were
visible, then they were blotted out by the sand that had filled them.
"He made that much since the blow," was Texas' slow comment. "How
far we are from where he started is all guess."

As they pushed on,
all eyes searched the country eagerly and before long they found the
spot for which they looked. A light spring wagon with a piece of a
halter strap tied to one of the wheels was more than half-buried by
the sand in the lee of a high drift. There was a small water keg,
empty, with its seams already beginning to open in the fierce heat
of the sun, a "grub-box," some bedding and part of a bale of hay-nothing
more.

Jefferson Worth, Pat and the boy attempted to dig in the steep
side of the drift that rose above the half-buried outfit, but at their
every movement tons of the dry sand came sliding down upon them. "It
ain't no use, Mr. Worth," said Texas, as the banker straightened up,
baffled in his effort. "You will never know what's buried in there
until God Almighty uncovers it."

Then the man of the desert and plains
read the story of the tragedy as though he had been an eye witness.
"They was travelin' light an' counted on makin' good time. They must
have counted, too, on, findin' water in the hole." He kicked the empty
keg. "Their supply give out an' then that sand-storm caught 'em and
the horses broke loose. Of course they would go to hunt their stock,
not darin' to be left afoot and without water, an' hits a thousand
to one they never got back to the outfit. We're takin' too many chances
ourselves to lose much time and I don't reckon there's any use, but
we'd better look around maybe."

He directed the little party to scatter
and to keep on the high ground so that they would not lose sight of
each other. They will be attested, in future
times, by his Latin Grammar, published about seven years ago; and by his Hebrew Grammar, which
has since appeared. In each of these works, in a masterly manner, he treats of every matter
proper for the student to know. Each subject is displayed, in a new method, with perspicuity,
conciseness, simplicity, and classic taste. His Greek Grammar, we may suppose, will exhibit
the same traits, when it shall meet the public eye. This last labor he had finished, and committed
to the printer a few months before his decease.[39]

      [39] It was afterward published and much approved.

"'If we turn to take a moral view of this distinguished votary of science, new motives will
increase our esteem. What shall I say of the purity of his manners, his integrity and amiable
virtues? These are too strongly impressed on the minds of all, who knew him, to need description.
He was possessed of great modesty, and a degree of reserve, appearing at times to indicate
diffidence, in the view of those less acquainted. But this, itself, was an effusion of his
goodness, which led to yielding accomodation in matters of minor concern: yet, however, when
the interest of virtue, or society, required him to act, he formed his own opinion, and proceeded
with unshaken firmness. Those intimately acquainted with him can bear witness; and it is confirmed
by invariable traits in his principles and practice, during life.

"'The virtues of Dr. Smith were not compressed within the circle of human relations, which
vanish with time. Contemplating the first cause, the connections and dependencies in the moral
state, his mind was filled with a sense of interminable duties. He was a disciple of Jesus.
The former president admired and loved him, and taught him Theology. An amiable spirit actuated
his whole life, and added peculiar splendor to the closing scene.

"'His intense pursuit of science affected his constitution, and produced debility, which, more
than two years before, began to be observed by his friends. It gradually increased, but not
greatly to interrupt his applications till six weeks before his death. While I revive the affliction
at his departure, its accompanying circumstances will assuage our sorrow. The thoughts of his
resignation to Divine Providence, through all the stages of a disease, that rapidly preyed
upon his vitals, his composure, serenity, and Christian confidence, remain for the consolation
of his friends, and instruction of all.

"'The fame of Dr. Smith does not arise from wealth, nor descent from titled ancestors. It has
no borrowed lustre. He was indebted wholly to his genius, his labors, and his virtues. His
monument will exist in the hearts of his acquaintance; and in the future respect of those,
who shall derive advantage from his exertions.

"'In the immense loss, which his dear family sustain, they have saved a precious legacy; his
example, and lessons of social and religious duties. The church, with mournful regret, will
retain the tenderest affection for their venerable pastor. What shall I say of this seat of
science, now covered with cypress? Those who have trod its hallowed walks, will never forget
his instructions, nor the benevolent effusions of his heart. Where, in the ranges of cultivated
society, is one to be found, qualified with those rare endowments, which can supply the chasm
made by his death?'"

We insert in its appropriate place the contract made with Professor Smith by President Wheelock.[40]

      [40] See Appendix.

His first wife was Mary, daughter of Rev. Ebenezer Cleaveland, of Gloucester, Mass., his second
wife was Susan, daughter of David Mason, of Boston, Mass.

       *       *       *       *       *

Prof. Sylvanus Ripley, who filled the chair of Divinity from 1782 to 1787, was the son of Jonathan
Ripley, and was born at Halifax, Mass., September 29, 1749.

In introducing him to the favorable notice of Mr. Wheelock, previous to the commencement of
his religious life, Rev. William Patten says: "Gracious exercises alone excepted, I know not
a more promising young man."

Some extracts from President Wheelock's "Narratives," relating to Prof. Ripley's missionary
labors, are worthy of attention.

"Mr. Sylvanus Ripley, who finished his course of collegiate studies here last fall, very cheerfully
complied with the openings of Providence, to undertake a mission to the tribes in Canada, and
accordingly prepared for that purpose, and set out with Lieut. Thomas Taylor, whom he had made
choice of for his companion in that tour, as he had been long a captive with the French and
Indians in those parts, and was well acquainted with the customs of both, and with their country,
and could serve him as an interpreter. He sat out July 17, well recommended to the Lieut.-governor
and Commander-in-chief, and others of that province, by his Excellency Governor Wentworth,
and others. The special design of his journey was to see what door, or doors, was, or might
be opened for him, or others, to go as missionaries among them, to open a way for intercourse
between them and this school, and obtain a number of suitable youth, if it may be, to receive
an education here; in the choice of which, he will have special respect to the children, whose
parents were in former wars captivated by the Indians, and were naturalized, and married among
them."

"September 26, 1772. A delay of sending the foregoing narrative to the press, gives an opportunity
to oblige my friends with a short account of the success of Mr. Ripley's mission to Canada.

"He returned on the 21st instant, with his companion and interpreter, Lieut. Taylor, and brought
with them ten youths, eight belonging to the tribe at Caughnawaga, near Montreal, and two of
the tribe at Lorette, near Quebec. Soon after his arrival at the former of these places, he
made known to them the errand on which he was sent, and disclosed the proposal of sending a
number of their children to this school for an education; and left it to their consideration,
till he should go and wait upon the Commander-in-chief of that province at Quebec. And after
he had passed through the small-pox, which he took by inoculation, as it was judged unsafe
for him to travel that country without it, he went to Quebec. But his Honor the Governor, as
well as other English gentlemen, were apprehensive that the Indians were so bigoted to the
Romish religion, that there was no hope of success, and advised him not to go on that errand
to Lorette: he accordingly returned without visiting them as he proposed.

"But on his coming to Caughnawaga he found there two likely young men of the tribe at Loretto,
who set out with a design to go to Sir William Johnson, with a single view to find a school
in which they might get useful knowledge. They had heard nothing of Mr. Ripley, nor of any
such design as he was upon in their favor, till they came to Caughnawaga, which is 180 miles
on their way to Sir William's, and on hearing of the proposal Mr. Ripley had made, they waited
five weeks at that place for his return, and on his coming complied with his offer of taking
them into this school with cheerfulness. The same day a council of the chiefs of that tribe
was called to consider of the proposal of sending their children to this school, which Mr.
Ripley had left to their consideration, in which they were to a man agreed in the affirmative,
and acknowledged with gratitude the benevolence and kindness of the offer. They continued united
and firm to the last in that determination against the most warm and zealous remonstrances
of their priest, both in public and private; in consequence of which determination, nine of
their boys were made ready to accompany Mr. Ripley hither; three of which were children or
descendants from captives, who had been captivated when they were young, and lived with them
till they were naturalized and married among them."

A later "Narrative" says:

"The beginning of May [1773], the Rev. Mr. Ripley and Mr. Dean sat out on a mission to visit
the Indians at Penobscott, and on the Bay of Fundy, as they should find encouragement, agreeable
to representations heretofore made of a door open for service among them."

They had a good measure of success, in some respects, in this mission.

The following tribute to Professor Ripley is from the "Memoirs of Wheelock."

"In the winter of 1786-7, the college experienced the loss of an eminent instructor, the Rev.
Sylvanus Ripley. He was suddenly called from his labors, in the vigor of life and the midst
of extensive usefulness.

"After taking his degree in 1771, in the first class which received the honors of the college,
he continued with Mr. Wheelock as a tutor in the college. In 1775, he was appointed master
of Moor's Charity School, and in 1779, upon the decease of Dr. Wheelock, he succeeded him in
the pastoral care of the church in the college, and soon after was elected professor of Divinity.
Professor Ripley was a learned man, an orthodox divine, an evangelical and popular preacher.
His eloquence had nothing artificial or studied. His sermons were seldom written; his manner
was pleasing and winning, his words flowed as promptly and readily in the pulpit as in the
social circle."

Professor Ripley died at Hanover, February 5, 1787, of injuries received in a fall from his
carriage, while returning from a religious service in a distant part of the town.

His wife was Abigail, daughter of Pres. Eleazar Wheelock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bezaleel Woodward, the first professor of mathematics in the college, was the son of Israel
and Mary (Sims) Woodward, and a descendant of Henry Woodward of Dorchester, Mass., 1638, and
Northampton, Mass., 1639, where he was one of the "seven pillars" of the church formed there
in 1661. He was born at Lebanon, Conn., July 16, 1745, and graduated at Yale College in 1764.

In 1767, Mr. Wheelock refers to him as an associate teacher, and "a dear youth, willing to
do anything in his power" to aid him. The school is said to have been put on a college basis,
in the matter of study, in 1768, with Mr. Woodward as tutor.

The following letter addressed to President Wheelock illustrates the versatile nature of his
talents:

"Lebanon Sep^r 6^th 1770.

"Rev^d & hon^d Sir,

"Bingham arrived home well last week, and proposes to set out with two teams about the 18^th
Ins^t. We have all of us been endeavouring to expedite the removal ever since he came home--but
I fear Madam will not be able to set out so soon. She with Miss Nabby propose to ride in the
Post Chaise as soon as they can possibly be ready. Hutchinson is to drive it for them. The
Scholars will likely the most of them foot it when Bingham goes. Abraham & Daniel seem to resent
it that they in particular should be sat to drive the Cows the Doctor mentioned in his to me
& the English Scholars be excused from it. I have not procured Cows as yet--we have all been
doing & shall do every thing in our power. Madam is so weak that a little croud overcomes her,
that she has her poor turns very often; tho' on the whole I hope she is on the mending hand.
I fear the fatigue of preparing & the journey will be too much for her--be sure unless she
takes both very leisurely--but God is able to support her. By the tenor of the Doctor's Letters
I apprehend he has forgot my proposed Journey to the eastward, which I would neglect, and with
vigor pursue the grand object, the removal; for I see need enough that every one who is able
to do any thing towards preparing should be doubly active now. I see eno' & more than eno'
that is important and necessary to be done, & I never had a greater disposition to exert myself
in getting things forward--but I have had such a croud of affairs on my mind, & still have,
& must have so long as I continue here, that my health is so much impaired, my constitution
become so brittle, & my nerves so weak, that I am rendered entirely unfit for application to
any business at present; & therefore that I may be fit for some kind of business the ensuing
winter I am advised and think it highly expedient & neccessary that I take my Journey soon
(before I am rendered unable to do it)--and Providence seems to point out my duty to set out
to-morrow, tho' it is with the greatest reluctance that I do it, on acco^t of the need of help
here, but I am unfit to do anything to purpose if I stay. M^r MacCluer will do all in his power,
tho' he is obliged (agreeable to the Doctor's directions) to attend Co[=m]encement next week
to collect Subscriptions--he'll do all he can before he goes, & after he returns--what is done
must be done in a hurry and confusion, & what cannot be done must remain undone. We have been
examining the Scholars this week (& find they make a pretty good appearance) besides which
we have done all we could that I might leave affairs in the best manner. My present proposal
is to go to Boston & settle affairs--thence to Salem & visit dear Doctor Whitaker--thence perhaps
to Portsmouth--then either return & accompany Madam & Family to Cohos (which I think of doing
if I can get back in season)--or go directly from Portsmouth to Cohos--in either case I hope
to be with the Doctor within a month. I want much--I long to see you. I want to do more, much
more than I am able, to assist in removing--but the wise Governor of the Universe seems to
forbid my doing much. I desire to commit the conduct of affairs to him. I shall endeavour as
far as I am able to comply with all the D^r desires in his letters--shall carry the letter
to M^r Whitefield to Boston myself. I shall write to M^r Keen a general Sketch of affairs.
I hope to be able when I see the D^r & the Trustees meet to be able to determine what to do
the ensuing winter. This Parish have M^r Potter to preach next Sabbath & expect M^r Austin
after that. M^r Austin is now asleep in your house. I expect M^r Wheelock will be at home the
last of next week or beginning of week after. Mary & Cloe I expect will ride up in the Carts.
Porter, Judson & Collins are to set out next Monday (at their desire) that they may assist
in making preparation. School must (I think) unavoidably break up till they remove. Scholars
have been much engaged in study (especially in the Art of Speaking) since the Doctor went away.
If Scholars are engaged Instructors must be so too--and if Instructors are diligent and faithful,
Scholars will make improvement. We cannot learn that the duty on tea is taken off; and I expect
difficulty in disposing of Bills; but shall do the best I can. I have tho'ts of carrying a
Set to Boston. Is it not best to desire Miss Zurviah [Sprague] not to engage herself in business
'till the Doctor's mind can be known respecting her going to Cohos--I know not where one can
be had to supply her place (omnibus consideratio)--will the D^r write his mind respecting it
in his next? I have many things to say; but it is now between 1 & 2 o'Clock in y^e morning,
and I find nature flags. I could get no other time to write. I have neither time nor strength
to copy, therefore hope the D^r will excuse the scrawl from him who is with much duty & esteem
Rev^d & hon^d Sir,

    "Your obedient and humble Serv^t.
    "Beza Woodward.

"N. B. Family are all asleep. Please give love to Ripley &c. &c.

The "Memoirs of Wheelock" contain the following paragraph relating to Professor Woodward:

"At the anniversary commencement of 1804, the Honorable Bezaleel Woodward, professor of Mathematics
and Philosophy, departed this life. He had fulfilled the duties of a professor and Tutor from
the foundation of the college. His profound knowledge of the abstruse and useful science of
Mathematics, the facility of his instructions in natural and experimental Philosophy and Ethics,
his condescending and amiable manners, will be long and gratefully remembered by those who
have received the benefit of his instructions."

The "Monthly Anthology and Massachusetts Magazine" for September, 1804, has the following notice
of Professor Woodward:

"Died at Hanover, New Hampshire, August 25, Hon. Bezaleel Woodward, Professor of Mathematics
and Philosophy in Dartmouth College. Professor Woodward was born at Lebanon, in the State of
Connecticut. In the twentieth year of his age he graduated at Yale College, 1764. After a few
years successfully employed in the ministry, he was elected a tutor in this university. Here
he soon displayed such talents and improvements, such readiness of thought and ease of communication,
that he was appointed to the office of professor in Mathematics and Philosophy. The dignity
with which he discharged the duties of his station is witnessed by all who have shared in his
instruction. In the civil department, and as a member of society, he was no less eminent than
as an instructor in college. We might also add his usefulness in the church of Christ at this
place, of which he was long a worthy member, and high in the esteem and affections of his Christian
brethren.

"His remains were interred on Tuesday, the 28th. The Rev. Doctor Smith delivered upon the occasion
a well-adapted discourse. The officers, Trustees, and members of the college joined as mourners
with the afflicted family, and the solemnities were attended by a very numerous collection
of friends and acquaintance.

"The alumni of Dartmouth will join with its present officers and members in deploring the loss
of a faithful and able instructor. Those who visited him in his late illness have had a specimen
of decaying greatness, alleviated by an approving conscience, and sustained by resignation
and hope. The friends of science will lament the departure of one of its enlightened patrons.
Society sympathizes with the bereaved family, retaining a lively sense of his public and domestic
virtues; and a numerous acquaintance will mingle their grief in bemoaning the loss of a sincere
friend, a valuable citizen, and an exemplary Christian."

The records of the public life of Professor Woodward are thoroughly interwoven with the history
of northern New England. Few pioneers in the valley of the upper Connecticut did more to promote
the general welfare of the community.

His wife was Mary, daughter of Pres. Eleazar Wheelock.

Prof. John Hubbard succeeded Professor Woodward. We quote from a published eulogy by Rev. Elijah
Parish, D.D., his college classmate.

"The Hon. John Hubbard, the son of John and Hannah (Johnson) Hubbard, late Professor of Mathematics
and Natural Philosophy in this university, was born in Townsend, Mass., August 8, 1759. Dark
and dismal was the dawn of that life, which has been so fair and luminous. Five months before
his birth his father died, and this, in his last moments, when his children stood weeping round
his dying bed, he made use of as an argument of consolation to them, entreating them not to
weep, for God had taken care of him when a fatherless infant. During his minority most of his
time was employed in the labors of agriculture. At the age of twenty-one he commenced his studies,
and the next year became a member of this institution. In the second year of his residence
at college, when many were awakened to a religious sense of divine things, our friend was one
of the happy number. His subsequent life and death have proved that his conversion was not
imaginary. While this increases our loss, it is the best reason for consolation.

"In his college life Mr. Hubbard was a youthful cedar of Lebanon. He gave visible tokens of
his approaching eminence. So tenacious was his memory, that his progress in the languages was
remarkably rapid. While he lived, the Greek and Roman writers were his amusement; and with
a taste refined, he was charmed with their classic beauties; his memory was stored with numerous
favorite passages.

"On leaving college, his love of study, his delight in religious inquiries, his devout regard
for the best interests of man, led him to the study of theology. Becoming a preacher of the
gospel, his voice, naturally small and feeble, was found to be ill adapted to such an employment.
After a fair experiment his good sense forbade him to persevere. The transition was easy to
his 'delightful task to teach the young idea how to shoot,' and form the minds of youth to
science and virtue. Of the academy in New Ipswich he was elected preceptor. Under his able
instruction that seminary rose to distinction, and became a favorite of the public. Some who
were his pupils are already eminent in the walks of literature.

"After several years, quitting this situation, he was appointed Judge of Probate for the County
of Cheshire. This office was peculiarly adapted to that gentle and tender philanthropy for
which he was remarkable. It was luxury to him to comfort the widow and the fatherless. The
blended resolution and exquisite sensibilities of his heart qualified him, in a singular manner,
impartially to weigh the claims of justice and compassion. But this situation was not congenial
with his love of study, and his delight in the instruction of youth, which was so pleasant,
that he declared he would make it the business of his life. Accordingly he accepted the invitation
of Deerfield Academy, Massachusetts, where for several years he continued with great reputation.
After the death of Professor Woodward, who had, from its origin, been an able instructor in
this university, he was elected his successor in the Professorship of Mathematics and Philosophy.
So high was his reputation, that a successor of common attainments could not have satisfied
the raised expectations of the public. To supply the place of such a man was the arduous task
assigned to Mr. Hubbard. His success equaled the fond hopes of his friends. Here you rejoiced
in his light; here he spent his last and his best days; here he had full scope for the various,
the versatile powers of his vigorous mind. His amiable virtues, his profound learning, you
cheerfully acknowledged.

"He had a happy facility in illustrating the practical advantages of every science. He not
only explained its principles, but traced its relation to other branches of knowledge. Not
satisfied by merely ascertaining facts, he explored the cause, the means, the ultimate design
of their existence.

"Though he has been my intimate friend from cheerful youth, yet neither inspired by his genius,
nor enriched with his attainments, it is not possible I should do justice to his merits. His
person, muscular and vigorous, indicated the energy of his mind. Every feature of his face
expressed the mildness of his spirit; never did I witness in him the appearance of anger. Without
that undescribable configuration which constitutes beauty, his countenance was pleasing and
commanded respect. Without formality or art, his manners were refined and delicate; his address
was conciliatory and winning. By his social and compliant temper he was calculated for general
society. Though instructed 'in the learning of Egypt,' and the civilized world, he was too
discreet and benevolent to humble others by his superior lustre. His light was mild and clear,
like that of the setting sun. He had no ambition to shine, or to court applause. More disposed
to make others pleased with themselves than to excite their admiration, it is not strange that
he was universally beloved. His heart was impressed with an exquisite sense of moral obligations.
In every passing event, in every work of nature, the formation of a lake, a river, a cataract,
a mountain, he saw God. When as a philosopher, surrounded with the apparatus of science, extending
his researches to the phenomena of the universe, amazed at the minuteness of some objects,
astonished at the magnitude and magnificence of others, his mind was transported; when he explored
the heavens, and saw worlds balancing worlds, and other suns enlightening other systems, his
senses were ravished with the wisdom, the power, the goodness of the Almighty Architect. On
these subjects he often declaimed, with the learning of an astronomer, the simplicity of an
apostle, the eloquence of a prophet. He illustrated the moral and religious improvement of
the sciences; the views of his students were enlarged; the sciences became brilliant stars
to irradiate the hemisphere of Christianity. The perfect agreement between sound learning and
true religion was a favorite theme of his heart. This remark is confirmed by his conversation,
his letters, his lectures.

"In theology his researches were not those of a polemic divine, but of a Christian, concerned
for his own salvation and the salvation of others."

Professor Hubbard published several works, one of them being entitled "Rudiments of Geography."
He died at Hanover, August 14, 1810.

His wife was Rebecca, daughter of Dr. John Preston, of New Ipswich.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Roswell Shurtleff was elected the second professor of Divinity in the college. We give
some of the more important points in a published "Discourse," by Professor Long:

"Roswell Shurtleff, the son of William and Hannah (Cady) Shurtleff, was born at Ellington,
then East Windsor, Ct., August 29, 1773. He was the youngest of nine children, two of whom
died before he was born. From his earliest years he was fond of reading, and at school he was
called a good scholar. His religious training was carefully attended to, and to this, and the
Christian example which accompanied it, he ascribed his conversion, and the views he subsequently
embraced of the Christian doctrines.

"When he was seven or eight years old he had many serious thoughts of God and duty. The requirement
that he should give up all for God, as he understood it, filled him with gloom.

"During several of the subsequent years, the subject of religion dwelt on his mind, and he
was occasionally deeply impressed. One of the difficult things was to comprehend the notion
of faith. The promise was: 'He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved.' He believed,
as he supposed, and he had been baptized, but he could not feel that he was safe. Must he believe
that he, personally, should be saved? But what if he mistook his own character, and believed
what was false; would his opinion of his safety make him safe. He was ashamed to be known as
a religious inquirer, and, therefore, remained longer in darkness. Finding that he had been
observed by his father to have become a more diligent student of the Scriptures, he left the
practice of reading them before the family. Sometimes, assuming a false appearance of indifference,
he carried his difficulties to his mother, who was able to furnish a satisfactory solution.
She seems to have been a person of unusual intelligence as well as goodness. Her memory was
ever cherished by him with the most grateful affection, as it regarded his own spiritual progress.
He believed that he suffered unspeakable loss from the concealment of his early feelings on
the subject of religion, and did not doubt that many failed of conversion from this foolish
reserve. It was not till a number of years after this that his religious life commenced.

"The only school which young Shurtleff had the opportunity of attending, before his eighteenth
or nineteenth year, was the common school of the district. He made good proficiency, but nothing
worthy of note occurred in relation to his studies till he was about fifteen years of age.
He then began to think, as he says. Before that time, he had repeated by rote whatever he had
been taught. The first impulse to reflection was a new discovery. He had been taught from childhood
that accent is a stress of voice laid on some syllable or letter of a word. But this definition
had not been illustrated by an example, and the classification of words by their accent, in
the spelling-book, he had never understood. The definition had been to him an unmeaning collection
of words. He now discovered what it meant. This was in itself a trifling event, but it led
to the further discovery that other things, which he had been accustomed, parrot-like, to repeat
memoriter, had a meaning; that the meaning of things was that which the student should be set
to learn, and that his own education had, in this view, been greatly neglected. He says that
a new world seemed to be opened to his view; that nothing now appeared so important as an opportunity
to reflect on what he had learned, and that he was greatly displeased with the instructors
by whom he had been so badly cheated. He resolved that, if ever he should be a teacher, he
would propose it to himself, as his leading object, to make his pupils understand whatever
they should study. This resolution he afterward had the opportunity of carrying into effect
in five or six winter schools; and his attempt was attended with gratifying success.

"It was the opinion of Dr. Shurtleff, grounded on his own experience as learner and teacher,
that too much importance is attached to the books used in schools; that the end to be reached
is too generally regarded as the learning of the book rather than the mastery of the subject,
and that books are too often prepared mainly with a view to abridge the labor of the teacher.
He believed that, while the pupil might, through the text-book, possess himself of the knowledge
of others, he was in danger of acquiring little which could be called his own.

"In consequence of using his eyes too soon, after his recovery from the measles, when he was
about seventeen years old, Shurtleff was almost wholly cut off from the reading of books for
two years, and he never afterward perfectly recovered from the injury resulting from this imprudence.
He made some proficiency, however, by listening to the reading of others. About two years after
this affliction he entered the academy at Chesterfield, N. H., whither his father's family
had removed a few years before. He attended first to English studies. The weakness of his eyes
continued, and he was considerably embarrassed for a time from the necessity of using the eyes
of his friends. At length he commenced the study of Latin, going through Ross' Grammar, the
only one then in use, in just two weeks, and then beginning to construe and parse in Corderius.

"He met, at the academy, one who had been his school-fellow and playmate, and with whom he
was intimately associated from that time till the end of his college course,--the late Hon.
Levi Jackson, who died at Chesterfield in 1821. They got out their lessons together, taking
turns in looking out new words; and afterward, at college, where they were classmates and room-mates,
continued the practice. Dr. Shurtleff felt under great obligations to this friend and helper,
and said that 'few friendships among men had been more ardent, confiding and permanent.'

"Shurtleff had supposed, at first, that the Greek language was beyond his reach, on account
of his infirmity of sight. But some improvement having taken place, he ventured to commence
the study. He went through the Westminster Greek Grammar, the book then in use, in one week,
and began to read the Gospel of John. Having completed the New Testament, and read several
books of Homer's Iliad, he was reputed in the school as tolerably versed in Greek. He and Jackson
studied from the love of study, and did not think of college till a year before they applied
for admission, at Commencement, in 1797, and entered the Junior class in this institution.

"The round of college duties presents few marked events. Time has left no record of most of
the occurrences which diversified and enlivened the period from 1797 to 1799. How the two friends
studied, and read, and discussed, and recreated together, has been lost, just as the facts
of our daily life will be lost sixty years hence. They made constant and good progress. They
were about equally good scholars, neither of them being a dead weight upon the other. Each
was happy in the other's proficiency. The amount of learning requisite for a degree was less
then than now. Sciences have been introduced into the course which were then in their infancy.
But it may be doubted whether the students of our day have the advantage over those of an earlier
period, in respect to thoroughness as well as extent of attainment. They read fewer books,
in the first years of the college, but they thought the more. They were as well disciplined
and able, and as competent to handle a difficult subject, I imagine, as our students, if they
were not as well informed. We know from the esteem in which Shurtleff was held by the Trustees
and Faculty, as it appeared not long after his graduation, that he was one of the best scholars
of his time.

"Peculiar interest attaches to the religious experience of Shurtleff during his college course.

"He had performed some of the duties of a Christian before he supposed himself to possess the
Christian character. The first school he taught he opened daily with prayer, persevering in
the practice as a conscientious duty, in spite of many misgivings and much timidity. And this
he did in every school he afterward taught. He kept up the habit of secret prayer, at the same
time, asking more earnestly than for anything else, that his weak eyes might be cured, and
that he might have the means of intellectual improvement.

"He seems to have supposed that during his senior winter vacation he became a true Christian.

"Soon after his return to college, he intimated a desire to a classmate, who, as he supposed,
was the only professor of religion in the class, to join with others in a private meeting for
religious conference and prayer. He had never attended, or even heard of such a meeting. After
a little delay he was surprised to learn from his friend that such a meeting as he had proposed
had been held for years, and that he was desired to attend. On the Saturday evening following,
he and five or six other persons assembled, and by the free interchange of thought and feeling,
and the apparently humble prayers that were offered, he felt himself greatly refreshed and
quickened. On leaving college he regretted the loss of nothing more than of these Saturday
evening conference meetings.

"The time had now come for choosing a profession. His success in teaching led him to seek for
a situation in an academy; but no opening of this kind presented itself, and he believed himself
thus providentially called to preach the gospel. There were at the time no theological seminaries;
the students of the distinguished clergymen who gave instruction in theology were supposed
to represent the views of their teacher; and that he might not be thought to go forth as the
advocate of some exceptionable ism, Mr. Shurtleff chose to study theology by himself. Having
pursued this course one year, he was appointed a tutor in the college, and at the same time
was licensed to preach. The pressure of a considerable debt hastened the period of obtaining
license, but we may be certain, from the opportunities subsequently enjoyed, and from the character
of the man, that any deficiency he may have felt at first, from hasty preparation, was abundantly
supplied.

"Mr. Shurtleff continued in the tutorship from 1800 to 1804, and was also engaged, for the
greater part of the time, in preaching in vacant parishes.

"After the close of the four years' tutorship, Mr. Shurtleff was appointed a professor of Divinity
in the college. It was a part of his duty to preach to the students and the people of the village.
The church was at that time Presbyterian. The predecessor of Professor Shurtleff--Professor
Sylvanus Ripley--had been the pastor of this church. Since his death, in 1787, Dr. John Smith,
professor of Languages, previously associate pastor with Professor Ripley, had been the sole
pastor of the church. Dr. Backus, of Conn., Dr. Worcester, of Salem, and Dr. Alexander, of
Princeton, had been appointed at different times to the vacant professorship, but all had declined,
in consequence, as it was supposed, of the influence of Dr. John Wheelock, the second president
of the college. Professor Shurtleff accepted the office, expecting that the same causes which
had kept it so long vacant would render it an uncomfortable post. The difficulties which he
feared, he was called to encounter. The president wished him to become the colleague of Professor
Smith in the pastoral office, but he refused,--agreeing in his decision with the views of the
largest part of the church and of the village. In consequence of this disagreement, a controversy
ensued which lasted several years, and ended in the law-suit between the college and the State,
in 1816-17. In July, 1805, twenty-two persons, professors of religion, were constituted 'The
Congregational Church at Dartmouth College.' To this church, and the religious society of which
it was a part, Professor Shurtleff was invited to preach, performing pastoral labors so far
as his other duties would permit. Professor Smith was, meanwhile, the pastor of the Presbyterian
church till the time of his death, in April, 1809. Professor Shurtleff was ordained as an evangelist,
at Lyme, N. H., in 1810. He continued in this relation until the year 1827.

"The literary labors of his office would have been quite sufficient to occupy all his time.
In addition to these, an amount of work nearly equal to that of any pastor of a church was
imposed on him--fully equal, perhaps, we shall say, if we consider the character of the congregation
to whom he ministered. He was faithful and assiduous, both as a preacher and a pastor. But
he performed the many duties of his station with acceptance and success. And he had the satisfaction
of seeing that his efforts were crowned with the special blessing of God. In 1805 God displayed
his saving power among the students and people of the village. As many as forty persons became
Christians during the revival. But the most extensive and powerful work of grace, probably,
which the church ever enjoyed was that of 1815. The revival began in the hearts of God's people.
Some of the pious students resolved that they would every day talk with some unconverted person
respecting the interests of his soul. The effect of this soon appeared in a general religious
awakening. In one week forty persons expressed hope in Christ, and in four weeks as many as
one hundred and twenty persons were supposed to be converted. There were also revivals in 1819,
1821, and 1826,--that of 1821 being the most extensive, and embracing among the converts a
greater number of citizens than of students. Public religious meetings were less numerous during
the revivals than in most of those of a later period. It was before the day of protracted meetings.
Perhaps there was less reliance then on means, and more on the Spirit of God. It was not thought
necessary that business should be suspended, and every day converted into a Sabbath. But such
means as the state of feeling seemed to require were faithfully used. Professor Shurtleff was
never happier than when engaged in conversation with inquirers, or in conducting meetings for
conference and prayer. The informality and freedom of these meetings made them attractive.
They were probably quite as useful as the more regular ministrations of the pulpit. The speaker
can say that he never visited a more solemn place than the old district school-house--which
stood where the brick school-house now stands--often was, on a Sunday evening during the progress
of a conference meeting. A distinguished professor of a neighboring college, who was here in
1815, says that 'The evidence of an increasing seriousness among the students at large, in
that revival, was first shown, so far as I can recollect, by the more crowded attendance at
these meetings.' Not that the more formal services of the Sabbath were not also impressive
and profitable. The same gentleman says of the preaching of Professor Shurtleff at this time:
'The general impression made on me by several of his sermons I remember to the present day.
I liked to hear him preach, even before I took any especial interest in religion as a personal
concern. His sermon on the text, "The harvest is past, the summer is ended," etc., produced
a deep effect at the time of its delivery which was not soon forgotten. I remember the stillness
and solemnity of the audience. This sermon must have been delivered some little time before
the revival.' The same gentleman further states, that 'During the whole of this revival, and
the gathering in of the fruits of it into the church, Professor Shurtleff was the leading instrument
of the work, so far as human agency was concerned. He went into it with his whole heart. I
have seen him and his excellent wife almost overpowered with joy when told of a new case of
conversion among the students. He did a great deal--all that one man could do, as it seemed
to me--to promote the good work by his own personal efforts.' It is in the power of the speaker
to give similar testimony respecting the revival of 1821.

"When Professor Shurtleff entered upon the duties of his professorship, and for many years
afterward, he met with much opposition. But his position was constantly growing stronger, both
as it respects the sympathy of his Christian brethren and the clergy, and his popularity as
an instructor. I have not been able to learn that there was a whisper of discontent with his
instructions during the whole of the period from 1804 to 1827. The testimony of one of the
best students of the Class of 1816 is, that 'As an instructor, particularly in Moral Philosophy,
he was much thought of; and we were careful never to miss one of his recitations on this subject.
His way of putting questions, and answering such as were proposed to himself, showed great
judgment and shrewdness.' Quite a number of persons in the classes for seven or eight years
following the time here referred to, were preëminent as scholars and as men. May not the fact
be partly accounted for by the impulse and guidance of the mind of this instructor? He constituted
a large portion of the faculty from 1815 to 1819, there being at that time only two professors,--Professor
Adams and Professor Shurtleff. The graduates of the college who had been his pupils were never
backward in acknowledging their obligations to him.

"In 1810, Professor Shurtleff was united in marriage with Miss Anna Pope, only daughter of
Rev. Joseph Pope of Spencer, Mass. Of her he said, 'She was truly an helpmeet--one who did
me good and not evil all the days of her life.' By her vivacity and cheerfulness she was eminently
fitted to comfort him in his hours of suffering and depression. But it pleased God to take
her from him in March, 1826, after having enjoyed with her, during sixteen years, a degree
of domestic happiness which rarely falls to the lot of man. He also lost two children, sons,
in 1820, after a brief illness. Respecting the oldest, he had already begun to indulge very
pleasing anticipations, although he was less than five years old at the time of his decease.
Little did the speaker then know, when helping to carry to the grave the remains of these children,
who, if they had survived, would now have been men of mature age, what hopes he was assisting
to bury! But who knows the future? It was better they should die, than that they should live
to dishonor him and themselves. The husband and father mourned incessantly, though not without
resignation, for these bereavements, till the time of his own death.

"In 1825, Professor Shurtleff was in very feeble health, from the spring till Commencement.
The Trustees adjourned at that time to reassemble in November, supposing it might be necessary
then to appoint another professor of Divinity. But by the blessing of God on medical advice
and careful nursing, he was able to resume instruction before the meeting of the Trustees.

"In January, 1827, Professor Shurtleff was transferred from the professorship of Divinity to
one newly established, of Moral Philosophy and Political Economy, which he filled till the
year 1838, when, by his own resignation, his active labors in the college ceased. It was understood,
when this appointment was made, that Professor Shurtleff should instruct in all the Senior
classes, and should also hear the recitations of other classes in particular branches. During
the last half of this period, he preached in vacant neighboring parishes. No particular account
of the literary labors of these years can be required. Any one of them may be regarded as a
fair sample of the rest. A member of the class of 1828 can testify that that class greatly
enjoyed his instructions. We never heard the summons to the recitation-room without pleasure.
We were always interested and excited, always profited. The questions were put by the professor
in the plainest Saxon. They were well adapted to develop the knowledge or the ignorance of
the student, as the case might be, but not to give him undue assistance. If there was anything
in the text-book which was obscure, the questions made it plain. A clearly wrong opinion advanced
by an author was briefly, yet thoroughly, exposed. His own opinions were lucidly stated and
sustained, and for the time being, at least, we seldom saw reason to differ from him. The recitation
was enlivened with anecdote, illustration, and wit, and never dragged heavily. If our objections
were sometimes curtly silenced, it was so effectually and handsomely done that we bore it with
perfect good-nature. He ever lent a willing ear to our real difficulties, and assisted in their
removal. Together with unusual freedom in the mode of conducting the recitations, there was
good order and earnest attention to the subject in hand. He knew how to control us, while he
had with us all the sympathy of a young man and an equal. I think it was the opinion of the
class that Professor Shurtleff, in his ripe manhood, had few equals as an instructor.

"At the time of his retirement, in 1838, Dr. Shurtleff had been in the service of the college
thirty-eight years. After what manner he has lived among us since that time, most of this audience
know. He has not been noticeably active in the affairs of the village, but when you have met
him in private intercourse, you have known that he retained the fine social qualities--the
love of story-telling, and the keen, yet harmless wit--for which he was always remarkable.
Those whose memory goes back thirty years, must have noticed, I think, that he became more
uniformly serene and cheerful in the latter part of his life. The old graduates of the college
who revisited the place know how cordially he received them, and with what hearty zest he recalled
with them the scenes of their college days. He continued to be deeply interested in the prosperity
of the college, and he was the means of eliciting in its behalf the interest and the benevolence
of his friends. He continued the habit, commenced at an early period, of assisting students
who were in needy circumstances. These were objects of benevolence toward which he was naturally
drawn. In his feelings he never grew old, but carried forward the vivacity of youth into old
age; and always enjoyed the society of the young. He loved to have young men about him; and
he has thus, by his unobtrusive charities and counsels, and his interesting and instructive
conversation, been a benefactor to a large number of students. The spiritual welfare of the
college was near his heart. He had passed through many revivals of religion, and he longed
for the return of such seasons. He devoutly observed the days set apart for prayer for colleges,
and, as you remember, often urged the students, assembled on those occasions, to give their
hearts to God.

"When he left his post as an instructor he was sixty-five years old. After this he had more
than twenty-two years of leisure, during which he retained, in a remarkable degree, the vigor
of his intellectual powers. The meaning of the last words is far from clear to me. I think Shelley may intend
to say that, in this our mortal state, death is the solid and permanent fact; it is rather a
world of death than of life. The phenomena of life are but like a transitory loan from the
great emporium, death. Shelley no doubt wanted a rhyme for 'morrow' and 'sorrow': he has made
use of 'borrow' in a compact but not perspicuous phrase.

+Stanza 22,+ 1. 2. 'Wake thou,' cried Misery, 'childless mother!' We here return to Urania, of
whom we had last heard in st. 6. See the passage translated by Shelley from Bion (p. 63), 'Sleep no
more, Venus:... 'tis Misery calls,' &c.; but here the phrase, ''Tis Misery calls,' is Shelley's
own. He more than once introduces Misery (in the sense of Unhappiness,
Tribulation) as an emblematic personage.

3, 4. 'Slake in thy hearts core A wound--more fierce than his, with tears and sighs.' Construe:
Slake with tears and sighs a wound in thy heart's core--a wound more
fierce than his.' See (p. 101) the remarks, apposite to st. 4, upon
the use of inversion by Shelley.

1. 5. All the Dreams that watched Urania's eyes. We had not hitherto heard of 'Dreams' in connexion
with Urania, but only in connexion with Adonais himself. These 'Dreams that watched Urania's
eyes' appear to be dreams in the more obvious sense of that word-visions which had haunted the
slumbers of Urania.

1. 8. Swift as a thought by the snake memory stung. The context suggests that the 'thought' here in
question is a grievous thought, and the term 'the snake memory' conveys therefore a corresponding
impression of pain. Shelley however had not the usual feeling of repulsion or abhorrence for snakes
and serpents. Various passages could be cited to prove this; more especially Canto 1 of The
Revolt of Islam, where the Spirit of Good is figured under the form of a serpent.

1. 9. Front her ambrosial rest the fading Splendour sprung. Urania. She is in her own nature
a splendour, or celestial deity: at the present moment her brightness is 'fading,' as being overcast
by sorrow and dismay.

'Her ambrosial rest' does not appear to signify anything more precise than 'her rest, proper
to an immortal being.' The forms 'sprung, sung,' &c. are constantly used by Shelley instead
of 'sprang, sang,' &c.

+Stanza 23,+ 1. 5. Had left the Earth a corpse. Shelley, in this quasi-Greek poem, takes no
count of the fact that the sun, when it ceases to illumine one part of the earth, is shining
upon another part.

He treats the unillumined part as if it were the whole earth--which has hereby become 'a corpse.'

+Stanza
24,+ 1. 2, Through camps and cities, &c. In highly figurative language, this stanza pictures
the passage of Urania from 'her secret paradise' to the death-chamber of Adonais in Rome, as if
the spiritual essence and external form of the goddess were wounded by the uncongenial atmosphere
of human malice and detraction through which she has to pass.

4,5. The invisible Palms of her tender feet. Shelley more than once uses 'palms' for 'soles' of
the feet. 8, 9. Whose sacred blood, like the young tears of May, Paved with eternal flowers
that undeserving way. The tears of May are rain-drops; young, because the year is not far advanced.
'That undeserving way' seems a very poor expression. 3. Death ...
blushed to annihilation.

This very daring hyperbole will hardly bear--nor does it want--manipulation into prose. Briefly,
the nature of Death is to be pallid: therefore Death, in blushing, abnegates his very nature,
and almost ceases to be Death.

11. 3, 4. The breath Revisited those lips, &c. As Death tended towards 'annihilation,' so Adonais
tended towards revival.

1. 7.

'Silent lightning.' This means, I suppose, lightning unaccompanied by thunder--summer lightning.

+Stanza
26,+ 1. 1. 'Stay yet awhile.' See Bion (p. 64): 'Stay, Adonis! stay, dearest one!'

1.

2, 'Kiss me, so long but as a kiss may live.' See as above:--

'That
I may kiss thee now for the last time-- But for as long as one short
kiss may live!'

1.

3.

'My heartless breast.' Urania's breast will henceforth be heartless, in the sense that, having
bestowed her whole heart upon Adonais, she will have none to bestow
upon any one else: so I understand the epithet.

1. 4. 'That word, that kiss, shall all thoughts else survive,' &c. See Bion (p. 64): 'This kiss
will I treasure,' &c.

11. 7-9. 'I would give All that I am, to be as thou now art:--But I am chained to Time, and cannot
thence depart.' Founded on Bion (p. 64): 'While wretched I yet live, being a goddess, and
may not follow thee.' The alteration of phrase is somewhat remarkable. In Bion's Elegy the
Cyprian Aphrodite is 'a goddess,' and therefore immortal. In Shelley's Elegy the Uranian Aphrodite
does not speak of herself under any designation of immortality or eternity, but as 'chained
to Time,' and incapable of departing from Time. As long as Time lives and operates, Urania
must do the same. The dead have escaped from the dominion of Time: this Urania, cannot do. There
is a somewhat similar train of thought in Prometheus Unbound,--where Prometheus the Titan, after
enduring the torture of the Furies (Act 1), says--

'Peace is in the grave: The grave holds all things beautiful and good, I am a God, and cannot find
it there.'

+Stanza 27,+ 11. 1-4. 4. 'Dare the unpastured dragon in his den.' This phrase must no doubt be interpreted,
not only in relation to the figurative Adonais. but also to the actual Keats, Keats had dared
the unpastured dragon in his den, in the sense that he made a bold adventure into the poetical
field, under conditions certain to excite the ire of adherents of the old school, whether in
literature or in politics.

1. 6. 'Wisdom the mirrored shield, or scorn the spear.' Urania arraigns Keats for having made
his inroad upon the dragon, unguarded by wisdom or by scorn. His want of wisdom was shown (we
may assume) by the grave blemishes and defects in his Endymion, the wilful faults and perverse
excesses and extravagances which mark its composition, and wantonly invited attack. His want
of scorn was (according to Shelley's view of the facts), clear enough: he had not been equal to despising
a spiteful attack, but had fretted himself to death under it. In terming these two defensive
weapons, wisdom and scorn, a mirrored shield and a spear, Shelley was, I apprehend, thinking
of the Orlando Furioso of Ariosto. In that poem we read of a magic shield which casts a supernatural
and intolerable splendour, whereby every gazer is cast into a trance;
and of a spear whose lightest touch overthrows every opponent.

A sea-monster--not a dragon, so far as I recollect--becomes one of the victims of the 'mirrored
shield.'

11. 7, 8. 'The full cycle when Thy spirit should have filled its crescent sphere.' The spirit
of Keats is here assimilated to the moon, which grows from a crescent into a spherical form.

1.
9. 'The monsters of life's waste.' The noxious creatures which infest the wilderness of human
life.

+Stanza 28,+ 1. 1. 'The herded wolves,' &c. These same 'monsters' are now pictured under three
aspects. They are herded wolves, which will venture to pursue a traveller, but will not face
him if he turns upon them boldly; and obscene ravens, which make an uproar over dead bodies,
or dead reputations; and vultures, which follow in the wake of a conqueror, and gorge upon that which
is already overthrown. In the succeeding stanza, 29, two other epithetal similes are bestowed
upon the monsters--they become 'reptiles' and 'ephemeral insects.' All these repulsive images are
of course here applied to critics of wilfully obtuse or malignant mind, such as Shelley accounted
the Quarterly reviewer of Keats to be.

1. 5, &c. 'How they fled When, like Apollo,' &c. The allusion is to perfectly well-known incidents
in the opening poetic career of Lord Byron. His lordship, in earliest youth, published a very
insignificant volume of verse named Hours of Idleness.

The Edinburgh Review--rightly in substance, but with some superfluous harshness of tone--pronounced
this volume to be poor stuff. Byron retaliated by producing his satire entitled English Bards
and Scotch Reviewers. With this book he scored a success. His next publication was the generally
and enthusiastically admired commencement of Childe Harold, 1812; after which date the critics
justly acclaimed him as a poet--although in course of time they grew lavishly severe upon
him from the point of view of morals and religion.

I reproduce from the Pisan edition the punctuation--'When like Apollo,
from his golden bow'; but I think the exact sense would be better
brought out if we read--'When, like Apollo from his golden bow, The
Pythian,' &c.

11.

7, 8. 'The Pythian of the age one arrow sped, And smiled.' Byron is here assimilated to Apollo
Pythius--Apollo the Python-slayer. The statue named Apollo Belvedere is regarded as representing
the god at the moment after he has discharged his arrow at the python (serpent), his countenance
irradiated with a half-smile of divine scorn and triumph. The terms employed by Shelley seem
to glance more particularly at that celebrated statue: this was the more appropriate as Byron
had devoted to the same figure two famous stanzas in the 4th canto
of Childe Harold--

'Or view the Lord of the unerring bow, The God
of life and poesy and light,' &c.

1.

9. 'They fawn on the proud feet that spurn them lying low.' In the Pisan edition we read 'that spurn
them as they go.' No doubt the change (introduced as in other instances named on pp. 105 and 113)
must be Shelley's own.

The picture presented to the mind is more consistent, according to the altered reading. The critics,
as we are told in this stanza, had at first 'fled' from Byron's arrow;
afterwards they 'fawned on his proud feet.' In order to do this, they
must have paused in their flight, and returned; and, in the act of
fawning on Byron's feet, they must have crouched down, or were 'lying
low.' (Mr. Forman, in his edition of Shelley, pointed this out.) With
the words 'as they go' the image was not self-consistent: for the
critics could not be 'going,' or walking away, at the same time when
they were fawning on the poet's feet.

This last remark assumes that the words 'as they go' mean 'as the critics go ': but perhaps (and
indeed I think this is more than probable) the real meaning was 'as the feet of Byron go'--as
Byron proceeds disdainfully on his way.

If this was Shelley's original meaning, he probably observed after a while that the words 'as they
go' seem to follow on with 'they fawn,' and not with 'the proud feet'; and, in order to remove
the ambiguity, he substituted the expression 'lying low.'

+Stanza 29,+ 11.

1-3.

Shelley however seems to link them together, as if this spawning were the origin of the life,
the brief life, of the insect. He appears therefore to use 'reptile,' not in the defined sense
which we commonly attach to the word, but in the general sense of 'a creeping creature,' such
for instance as a grub or caterpillar, the first form of an insect, leading on to its final metamorphosis
or development. Even so his natural history is curiously at fault: for no grub or caterpillar
can spawn--which is the function of the fully-developed insect itself,
whether 'ephemeral' or otherwise.

       Can Shelley have been ignorant of this?

1. 4. 'And the immortal stars awake again.' The imagery of this stanza (apart from the 'reptiles' and
'ephemeral insects') deserves a little consideration. The sun (says Shelley) arises, and then sets:
when it sets, the immortal stars awake again. Similarly, a godlike mind (say the mind of Keats)
appears, and its light illumines the earth, and veils the heaven: when it disappears, 'the spirit's
awful night' is left to 'its kindred lamps.' This seems as much as to say that the splendour
of a new poetic genius appears to contemporaries to throw preceding poets into obscurity; but
this is only a matter of the moment, for, when the new genius sinks in death, the others shine
forth again as stars of the intellectual zenith, to which the new genius is kindred indeed,
but not superior.

With these words concludes the speech of Urania, which began in stanza 25.

+Stanza 30,+ 1. 1. The Mountain Shepherds. These are contemporary British poets, whom Shelley represents
as mourning the death of Keats. Shepherds are such familiar figures in poetry--utilized for instance
in Milton's Lycidas, as well as by many poets of antiquity--that the introduction of them into Shelley's
Elegy is no matter for surprise. Why they should be 'mountain shepherds' is not so clear. Perhaps
Shelley meant to indicate a certain analogy between the exalted level at which the shepherds
dwelt and the exalted level at which the poets wrote. As the shepherds do not belong to the low-country,
so neither do the poets belong to the flats of verse. Shelley may have written with a certain degree
of reference to that couplet in Lycidas--

'For we were nursed upon the self-same hill, Fed the same flock, by
fountain, shade, and rill.'

1.

2. Their garlands sere, their magic mantles rent. The garlands or chaplets of the mountain shepherds
have become sere because (it may be presumed) the wearers, in their grief for the mortal illness
and death of Adonais, have for some little while left them unrenewed. Or possibly the garlands
withered at the moment when Spring 'threw down her kindling buds'
(stanza 16), I do not well understand the expression 'magic mantles.'
There seems to be no reason why the mantles of the shepherds, considered
as shepherds, should be magic.

Even when we contemplate the shepherds as poets, we may fail to discern why any magical property
should be assigned to their mantles. By the use of the epithet 'magic' Shelley must have intended
to bridge over the gap between the nominal shepherds and the real poets, viewed as inspired
singers: for this purpose he has adopted a bold verbal expedient, but not I think an efficient one.
It may be noticed that the 'uncouth swain' who is represented in Lycidas as singing the dirge
(in other words, Milton himself) is spoken of as having a mantle--it is a 'mantle blue' (see
the penultimate line of that poem).

1. 3. The Pilgrim of Eternity. This is Lord Byron. As inventor of the personage Childe Harold,
the hero and so-called 'Pilgrim' of the poem Childe Harold's Pilgrimage,
and as being himself to a great extent identical with his hero, Byron
was frequently termed 'the Pilgrim.' Shelley adopts this designation,
which he magnifies into 'the Pilgrim of Eternity,' He admired Byron
most enthusiastically as a poet, and was generally on easy--sometimes
on cordial--terms with him as a man.

He has left us a fine and discriminating portrait of Byron in the 'Count Maddalo' of his poem
Julian and Maddalo, written in 1818. At times however Shelley felt and expressed great indignation
against Byron, especially in reference to the ungenerous and cruel conduct of the latter towards
Miss Clairmont. See some brief reference to this matter at p. 9.

11. 3-5. These phrases are not very definite. When fame is spoken of as being bent over Byron's
head, we must conceive of fame as taking a form cognizable by the senses. I think Shelley means
to assimilate it to the rainbow; saying substantially--Fame is like an arc bent over Byron's head,
as the arc of the rainbow is bent over the expanse of heaven. The ensuing term 'monument' applies
rather to fame in the abstract than to any image of fame as an arc.

11. 6, 7. Came, veiling all the lightnings of his song In sorrow. No doubt it would have been
satisfactory to Shelley if he could have found that Byron entertained or expressed any serious
concern at Keats's premature death, and at the hard measure which had been meted out to him by
critics. Byron did in fact admire Hyperion; writing (in November 1821, not long after the
publication of Adonais)--'His fragment of Hyperion seems actually inspired by the Titans, and
is as sublime as Aeschylus'; and other utterances of his show that--being with difficulty
persuaded to suppose that Keats's health and life had succumbed to the attack in the Quarterly--he
fittingly censured the want of feeling or want of reflection on the
critic's part which had produced so deplorable a result.

But on the whole Byron's feeling towards Keats was one of savage contempt during the young poet's
life, and of bantering levity after his death. Here are some specimens. (From a letter to
Mr. Murray, 12 October, 1820).

'There is such a trash of Keats and the like upon my tables that I am ashamed to look at them....
No more Keats, I entreat. Flay him alive: if some of you don't, I
must skin him myself.

There is no bearing the drivelling idiotism of the manikin.'

'"Who killed John Keats?"

"I," says the Quarterly, So savage and Tartarly; "'Twas one of my
feats."'

'John Keats, who was killed off by one critique Just as
he really promised something great If not intelligible, without Greek
Contrived to talk about the gods of late, Much as they might have
been supposed to speak.

    Poor fellow, his was an untoward fate!

'Tis strange the mind, that very fiery particle, Should let itself be snuffed out by an article.'

11.
7-9. Ierne (Ireland) sent Thomas Moore, the lyrist of her wrongs--an allusion to the Irish Melodies,
and some other poems. There is not, I believe, any evidence to show that Moore took the slightest
interest in Keats, his doings or his fate: Shelley is responsible
for Moore's love, grief, and music, in this connexion.

A letter from Keats has been published showing that at one time he expected to meet Moore
personally (see p. 45). Whether he did so or not I cannot say for certain, but I apprehend not: the
published Diary of Moore, of about the same date, suggests the negative.

+Stanza 31,+ 1. 1. 'Midst others of less note. Shelley clearly means 'less note' than Byron
and Moore--not less note than the 'one frail form.'

1. 2. Came one frail form, &c. This personage represents Shelley himself. Shelley here describes
himself under a profusion of characteristics, briefly defined: it may be interesting to summarize
them, apart from the other details with which they are interspersed.

He is a frail form; a phantom among men; companionless; one who had gazed Actaeon-like on Nature's
naked loveliness, and who now fled with feeble steps, hounded by his own thoughts; a pard-like spirit
beautiful and swift; a love masked in desolation; a power begirt with weakness, scarcely capable
of lifting the weight of the hour; a breaking billow, which may even now be broken; the last of
the company, neglected and apart--a herd-abandoned deer struck by
the hunter's dart; in Keats's fate, he wept his own; his brow was
branded and ensanguined.

Most of these attributes can be summed up under one heading--that of extreme sensitiveness
and susceptibility, which meet with no response or sustainment, but rather with misjudgment, repulse,
and outrage. Some readers may think that Shelley insists upon this aspect of his character to a
degree rather excessive, and dangerously near the confines of feminine sensibility, rather
than virile fortitude.

Apart from this predominant type of character, Shelley describes
his spirit as 'beautiful and swift'--which surely it was: and he says
that, having gazed upon Nature's naked loveliness, he had suffered
the fate of a second Actseon, fleeing 'o'er the world's wilderness,'
and pursued by his own thoughts like raging hounds.

    By this expression
    Shelley apparently means that he had over-boldly tried to fathom
the depths of things and of mind, but, baffled and dismayed in the
effort, suffered, as a man living among men, by the very tension and
vividness of his thoughts, and their daring in expression.

See what he says of himself, in prose, on p. 92.

11. 4, 5. He, as I guess, Had gazed, &c. The use of the verb 'guess' in the sense of 'to surmise,
conjecture, infer,' is now mostly counted as an Americanism. This is not correct; for the verb
has often been thus used by standard English authors. Such a practice was not however common in Shelley's
time, and he may have been guided chiefly by the rhyming.

+Stanza 32,+ 1. 4. The weight of the superincumbent hour. This line is scarcely rhythmical: to
bring it within the ordinary scheme of ryhthm, one would have to
lay an exaggerated stress on two of its feet--'thé supérincumbent.'
Neither this treatment of the line, nor the line itself apart from
this treatment, can easily be justified.

+Stanza 33,+ 11. 1, 2. His head was bound with pansies overblown, And faded violets. The pansy
is the flower of thought, or memory: we commonly call it heartsease, but Shelley no doubt uses
it here with a different, or indeed contrary, meaning. The violet indicates modesty. 3. A light
spear topped with a cypress cone. The funereal cypress explains itself.

1. 4. Dark ivy tresses.

The ivy indicates constancy in friendship.

+Stanza 34,+ 1. 1. His partial moan. The epithet 'partial' is accounted for by what immediately
follows--viz. that Shelley 'in another's fate now wept his own.' He, like Keats, was the object
of critical virulence, and he was wont (but on very different grounds) to anticipate an early death.
See (on p. 34) the expression in a letter from Shelley--'a writer who, however he may differ,'
&c.

1. 4. As in the accents of an unknown land He sang new sorrow. It is not very clear why Shelley should
represent that he, as one of the Mountain Shepherds, used a language
different (as one might infer) from that of his companions.

      All those whom he particularizes were his compatriots.

Perhaps however Shelley merely means that the language (English) was that of a land unknown
to the Greek deity Aphrodite Urania. The phrase 'new sorrow' occurs in the Elegy by Moschus (p.
65). By the use of this phrase Shelley seems to mean not merely that the death of Keats was
a recent and sorrowful event, but more especially that it constituted
a new sorrow--one more sorrow--to Shelley himself.

11. 3, 5. I reproduce the punctuation of the Pisan edition, with a colon after 'his own,' and
a semicolon after 'sorrow.' It appears to me however that the sense would rather require either
a full stop after 'his own,' and a comma after 'sorrow,' or else a comma after 'his own,' and
a full stop or colon after 'sorrow.' Yet it is possible that the phrase, 'As in the accents,'
&c., forms a separate clause by itself, meaning, 'As if in the accents of an unknown land, he
sang new sorrow.'

11. 8, 9.

Made bare his branded and ensanguined brow, Which was like Cain's or Christ's. Shelley represents
his own brow as being branded like Cain's--stamped with the mark
of reprobation; and ensanguined like Christ's--bleeding from a crown
of thorns. This indicates the extreme repugnance with which he was
generally regarded, and in especial perhaps the decree of the Court
of Chancery which deprived him of his children by his first marriage--and
generally the troubles and sufferings which he had undergone. The
close coupling-together, in this line, of the names of Cain and Christ,
was not likely to conciliate antagonists; and indeed one may safely
surmise that it was done by Shelley more for the rather wanton purpose
of exasperating them than with any other object.--In this stanza Urania
appears for the last time.

+Stanza 35,+ 1, 1. What softer voice is
hushed over the dead? The personage here referred to is Leigh Hunt.
See p. 45.

1. 6. Gentlest of the wise. It is apparent that Shelley
entertained a very sincere affection and regard for Leigh Hunt. 7.
Taught, soothed, loved, honoured, the departed one. It has sometimes
been maintained that Hunt, whatever may have been the personal friendship
which he felt for Keats, did not, during the latter's lifetime, champion
his literary cause with so much zeal as might have been expected from
his professions. This is a point open to a good deal of discussion
from both sides. Mr. Buxton Forman, who, as Editor of Keats, had occasion
to investigate the matter attentively, pronounces decidedly in favour
of Hunt.

+Stanza 36,+ 1. 1. Our Adonais has drunk poison. Founded
on those lines of Moschus which appear as a motto to Shelley's Elegy. Here he
pursued the profound and difficult studies of his profession with a more than ordinary breadth
of scholarship, mingling classical and literary studies with those of theology, but entering
with zeal and a chastened enthusiasm into all the duties and requirements of the place.

"He remained at Andover about two years, when, on account of a threatened pulmonary complaint,
he made a journey to the South, going as far as Savannah, and spending the winter in various
parts of the Southern States. Having performed a considerable part of the tour on horseback,
he returned, in 1819, invigorated in health, and with a mind enlarged and liberalized by what
were then quite unusual opportunities of observation and society, and was at once appointed
to the newly established chair of Rhetoric, at the early age of twenty-three years. The college
had but just gained the victory in its desperate struggle for existence. It was poor, but hopeful,
and it moved forward with a policy of enlargement, determined to keep pace with all advancing
learning and culture.

"Before that time, the duties of the new department had been distributed among all the college
officers, and necessarily must have lacked something in fullness and method. No other New England
college, except Harvard and Yale, then possessed such an officer, and the first appointment
to the post in New Haven bears date but two years earlier."

"As an instructor, Professor Haddock was one of the best I ever knew. I never knew a better.
It is with unfeigned gratitude that I remember my obligations to him, and I know I speak for
thousands. As a critic, he was discriminating and quietly suggestive, guided by a taste that
was nearly immaculate. His scholarship was unobtrusive, and his manner without ostentation.
He made no pretense of knowledge, but it was always sufficient, always fresh, always sound.
The range of his thought was broad. His mind was versatile and active. You could hardly find
a subject with which he was not somewhat familiar, or in which he would not readily become
interested. His opinions were never fantastic, nor exaggerated, nor disproportioned. He was
not, perhaps, so exacting nor so stimulating a teacher as some, but he was careful, clear,
distinct, and encouraging. He saw the difficulty in the mind of the pupil, if there was one,
adapted himself with admirable facility to his wants, and by a lucid statement, a test question,
or a distinct suggestion, would often free a subject from its obscurity, so that the way would
all be in clear sunlight. He felt that, in education, the best results are not produced violently,
but by influences quiet and protracted, gradually, but potently, moulding the affections and
the life, 'finely touching the spirit to fine issues.'"

"In 1846, Professor Haddock published a volume of 'Addresses and Miscellaneous Writings,' gathered
from reviews, and from his speeches before the New Hampshire Legislature, and on various public
occasions. These are marked by the peculiar completeness and finish which characterized all
his productions. There is in them no superfluous word, no affectation, no straining after effect,
but much that is wise and everything that is tasteful. Yet, interesting as they are, I hardly
feel as if they give an adequate expression of his rich and varied abilities. His more recent
writings,--notes of foreign travels, lectures, and discourses,--he had begun to prepare for
the press, when he was so suddenly taken from us, and I am glad to hope that some of them may
yet see the light.

"For many years Professor Haddock acted as secretary of the New Hampshire Education Society.
In discharge of the duties of this office, sometimes little more than a sinecure, he made it
an object to bring before the society, in his annual reports, subjects of permanent interest.
In looking them over, I perceive such topics as these: 'Objections to Charitable Education,'
'The Standard of Education for the Pulpit,' 'The Influence of Educated Mind,' 'Personal Qualifications
for the Pulpit,' 'Manual Labor Institutions,' 'The Clergy the Natural Advisers of Young Men,'
'Personal Piety in Candidates for the Christian Ministry,' 'Wisdom in Clergymen,' 'The Eloquence
of the Pulpit as affected by Ministerial Character.' These addresses, somewhat brief, never
impassioned, are full of excellent suggestions, both to the laity and the clergy. They abound
in practical wisdom, and any one may read them with profit.

"In all his writings his style was unambitious, unaffected, chaste, pure, and transparent as
crystal. It was true to his subject and himself. If not fervid and vehement, it was because
of his moderation and self-restraint; if not pungent and dogmatic, it was marked by sustained
earnestness and finished beauty. If he had not predominantly that power which is called by
the older rhetoricians amplification, he eminently had another, as rarely met with in perfection,
the power of exact, unincumbered, logical statement. There was sometimes in him a reticence
as admirable as it was unique. You wondered why he did not say more, and yet if he had, it
would only have injured the effect. The word exactly fitted the sentiment. The idea was insphered
in the expression. There was no excess or extravagance in anything he did or said. His thoughts
glided softly and sweetly from his pen, as a rivulet from a silver fountain.

"I have sometimes thought that Professor Haddock's intellectual powers were nowhere displayed
to more advantage than in the mingled grave and gay, learned and mirthful intercourse of social
life. The very tones of his voice, sympathetic and attractive, the absence of dogmatism, or
superciliousness, or self-assertion,--the mingled deference and independence, the clear and
sustained thought, the ready insight, the quick apprehension of proprieties, the intelligent,
dexterous, but never caustic reply, the sure appreciation of the feelings of others, and the
power of making them, even the lowliest, feel that what they said was listened to with interest,--the
sense of the droll and ludicrous, the responsive laughter, not boisterous, but hearty, bringing
tears into the eyes,--all gave a peculiar charm to this form of intercourse. It was a ministry
of beneficence, diffusing kindness, intelligence, and gentleness, enlivening many a dull hour,
filling many a vacant mind, and inspiring many a worthy purpose.

"'Great openness and candor, good sense, the reading of a scholar, the originality of a man
who sometimes thought for himself, aspirations after excellence much higher than those of many
others,--all these traits came out in his familiar talks, in which he rather unbent than exerted
himself; at the same time he was as gentle and attentive a listener as a man could wish, a
truly sociable being, with whom you could talk all day, and then all night, and never feel
weary.'[42]

      [42] Professor Torrey.

"In 1850, he received from Mr. Fillmore the appointment of Chargé d'Affaires at the court of
Portugal, and in the spring of 1851 sailed for Lisbon, by way of England. I have the best means
of knowing that, while at Lisbon, his intercourse and influence with the Court, and with the
representatives of all the great powers, was most acceptable and most salutary. His residence
in Portugal was in many ways delightful. The delicious climate, the cultivated and refined
society of the diplomatic circle, temporary rest from labor, and change of scene and occupations,
were all sources of pleasure. Yet here he was touched by one of his deepest sorrows, for at
Lisbon, November, 1851, 'by the side of Philip Doddridge, in the English cemetery,' he buried
his youngest son, a beautiful boy of eleven years.

"He returned from Portugal early in 1856, after an absence of nearly four years; and, having
previously terminated his connection with the college, spent the remainder of his life at West
Lebanon."

Prof. N. S. Folsom says:

"Professor Haddock was the 'orator suavi loquenti ore,' and he was much more than this. Both
by precept and example he raised the standard of speaking and writing among the students, and
stimulated them to the pursuit of a manly eloquence. There also prevailed a very general conviction
of his sincerity and moral earnestness, and of his interest in our successful career in life.
The themes he gave led us to discriminate both intellectually and morally, and if he thought
the theme worthily treated, a kind note in the margin of the sheet was sure to tell us so.
The spirit in which he met the class was that of the closing paragraph in his Phi Beta Kappa
Oration of 1825: 'Young men of my country, God has given you a noble theatre, and called you
into life at the most interesting of all times. Forget not that you are descendants of men
who solemnly dedicated themselves and their posterity through all coming time to the cause
of free and enlightened reason--unrestricted divine reason--the portion inscribed on our hearts
of the universal law, 'whose seat is the bosom of God, her voice the harmony of the world.'
Occasionally he preached in the Hanover village church, where the students attended. He never
had so much as a scrap of any notes before him; and this was his habit also at White River,
where he steadily officiated. I need not add that the students always were greatly delighted
when they had the privilege to hear him. Every discourse was as complete as though it had been
carefully written and committed to memory; but evidently his was no memoriter preaching. My
recollection of the feeling of the students toward him is, that he was, on the whole, not inferior
in popularity with them to any other member of the Faculty. There is no man I could name so
absolutely faultless, as he seemed to us young men of that period. I am not sure that his prestige
and charm were not increased by the faultlessness of his dress, and by the manifestations of
the becoming in personal appearance,--a well-known trait of his great kinsman, Daniel Webster,
whom he not distantly resembled also in features, port, and step, and in distinct, measured
utterance. Not that he in the least consciously imitated him, but there was the natural growth
into the likeness of the object of his admiration; and there was, as in Mr. Webster, absolutely
no affectation, nor sign of overmuch thought about raiment, nor vestige of anything like conscious,
personal display."

A later pupil says:

"As a teacher Professor Haddock was remarkable for his dignity and refinement. His presence
among young men was always sufficient to maintain perfect order and decorum. The true gentleman
beamed forth from every feature and spoke in every tone of his voice. With apparent ease, he
chained the attention of the most thoughtless to the most abstruse and uninviting topics. The
deep things of Logic and Psychology he handled so adroitly, and presented so tastefully, as
to give them a charm, indeed, a fascination.

"In the recitation room his words were few, but his statements were so clear and so elegantly
expressed, that what the student had been able to learn only partially or obscurely from the
book was now fully comprehended and securely treasured by the memory. The students were never
willingly absent, for it was always a delight to listen to his instructions, and a failure
to be present was counted an irreparable loss, inasmuch as the teacher always seemed greater
than the text-book.

"It is hardly necessary to say that the influence of such a man was an important factor in
the last two years of our college life. His noble bearing, his handsome face, his impressive
manner, his uniform kindness and courtesy, and, especially, his manifest appreciation of young
men who were struggling against heavy obstacles in their course of study, will never be forgotten
by those who were so fortunate as to be under his tuition. Nor can it be doubted that the power
of his refined intellect and taste has been felt in many places where his name has never been
heard."

Professor Haddock married, first, Susan Saunders, daughter of Richard Lang, of Hanover; second,
Mrs. Caroline (Kimball) Young, daughter of Richard Kimball, of Lebanon, N. H. He died at West
Lebanon, N. H., January 15, 1861.

CHAPTER XXIII.

PROFESSOR WILLIAM CHAMBERLAIN.--PROFESSOR DANIEL OLIVER.--PROFESSOR JAMES FREEMAN DANA.

William Chamberlain, the successor of Professor Moore in the chair of Languages, was the son
of General William and Jane (Eastman) Chamberlain, and was born at Peacham, Vt., May 24, 1797.
From a reliable source we have the following account of him:

Perhaps there is on record no more worthy and comprehensive testimony to his character and
his work than the few lines which the late President Lord furnished for the inscription on
his tombstone. They read:

"William Chamberlain, Jr., A. M., Professor of Languages in Dartmouth College. A man of strong
intellect, distinguished literary attainments, and moral worth.

"He added respectability to the institution, by prudence, efficiency, and a well-earned reputation;
and contributed largely to promote its interests. By disinterested and unwearied labors, with
fidelity in all his relations, beloved and honored, he filled up the measure of a short but
useful life, and died with humble confidence in the Divine mercy, through the atonement of
Jesus Christ, July 11, 1830, aged 33."

He gave to the college for ten years the unremitting labor of his life, and we may say his
life itself. To his abundant and complete work as a teacher he added the labor of overseeing
the material affairs of the college,--a labor devolved upon him, perhaps, on account of his
superior executive ability.

Thus he superintended the building of Thornton and Wentworth Halls, and employed his vacations,
and particularly the long winter vacation, in travelling over what was then the wilderness
of northern New Hampshire and Vermont, in care of the wild lands belonging to the college.
Stricken with pneumonia on one of these journeys,--he would not wait for a complete convalescence
before returning to duty,--his malady assumed the chronic form, and terminated his life in
about six months after its first invasion.

The influences of his early life were such as may well have conduced to a broad and strong
character.

His mother belonged to a family long identified with the early history of southern New Hampshire.

His father, General William Chamberlain, after serving in the armies of the Revolution, became
a pioneer settler of northern Vermont, where he acquired a handsome estate and a prominent
public position. He became Lieutenant Governor of the State, and represented it in Congress
for several terms. Among his public services may be mentioned his care for the Caledonia County
Grammar School, where his sons were fitted for college. This school was at that time taught
by Ezra Carter, a man greatly respected for his attainments and dignity of character.

Thus the future professor grew up amid the versatile life of the frontier, surrounded by the
contests and traditions of public service.

Distinguished for scholarship in college, a bold but prudent leader among his classmates in
their conflicts with the University,[43] immediately after graduation he became the preceptor
of Moors Charity School, and a year later entered, as a student of law, the office of Daniel
Webster in Boston. Thence, in his twenty-fourth year he was recalled to the college as professor
of Languages, and in the ordinary and extraordinary service of the institution he was intensely
occupied for the remainder of his short life.

      [43] The Rev. Daniel Lancaster, of the Class of 1821, supplies the
           following recollections of the assault upon the college
           libraries, made by a band of towns-people, under the guidance
           of Professors Carter and Dean of the University. They had
           forced the doors only to find that the books had already been
           removed, and themselves thus inclosed, the prisoners of the
           college students, led, among others, by senior Chamberlain.
           Mr. Lancaster continues: "Having stationed three or four of
           his classmates at the door of the library to prevent ingress
           or egress, he ascended a few steps on the flight of steps
           leading to the next floor, and called the excited throng to
           order. He then spoke in substance as follows: 'Fellow
           students, we are in the midst of a desperate emergency. The
           door of our library has been demolished. The vandals have
           entered and taken possession, but we have met the enemy. They
           are our prisoners and the library is safe. I have come from
           the president, who wishes me to say to you that he is
           confident you will conduct yourselves as gentlemen--using no
           violence or insult--in all the arrangements to be adopted,
           until order and quiet are restored.'

           "He then proceeded to marshal them in two files, beginning at
           the door of the library, and extending down stairs to the
           lower floor, through which files the University professors
           were conducted, each under escort of three students, to
           their homes."

           General H. K. Oliver, of Massachusetts, a member of the then
           Senior class, gives substantially the same account. He adds:

           "Having released the roughs on condition of good behavior,
           we exacted a promise of the learned professors of Mathematics
           and Dead Languages, 'that they would do so no more.'
           Classmates Fox, Shirley, and I then escorted Professor Carter
           home. Dean was escorted by Crosby (Hon. Nathan Crosby) and
           others. He (Carter) was very polite to us, invited us in, and
           treated us with wine and cake."

A life so brief and active leaves behind it little but its example. Yet I shall venture to
extract a few paragraphs from an address delivered by him on the 4th of July, 1826, the end
of the first half century of our national life.

Remembering that they were written at a period before the great problems which have since controlled
our history were recognized or appreciated among the people at large, they will be found to
indicate a moral tone and a political prescience quite remarkable in a young man of twenty-eight
years.

... "I have already alluded to it as the first of the appropriate duties of this day, to turn
to Heaven in the exercise of devout gratitude, and render thanksgiving and praise to Him who
was the God of our fathers in the day of their trial; who gave to them and has continued to
us a fairer portion than was ever allotted to any other people. Is there one in this consecrated
temple of the Almighty who would not join in the offering? I know it is unusual to dwell long
upon such considerations at a time like this, but surely, if there ever were a call for a nation's
gratitude to God, and ever a proper occasion for expressing it, we are the people in whose
hearts that emotion should be deep and permanent, and this is a time to give it utterance."...

"We must do all in our power to promote liberal feelings among the several communities and
sections of our federal republic, so as to preserve inviolate the Union of the States. Were
this Union now in danger, it would call forth a more authoritative voice than mine; yet it
may be in danger before the close of another half century. I will only speak my own conviction,
that the States cannot be separated without the destruction of the country. They lie together
on the bosom of this vast continent, a protection and an ornament, each to the other, and all
to each, like the gems on the breast-plate of the Jewish Hierarch, indicative of the union
of the Tribes, mutually lending and receiving lustre."...

"We must root out from among ourselves the institution of domestic slavery, or, before the
close of another half century, we may have to abide the consequences of a servile war. In effecting
this all-important object, we must indeed proceed gradually, temperately, in the observance
of all good faith and good feeling toward the people of that portion of our Union on which
the curse was entailed by the colonial policy of the mother country.

"It is a work which demands the full concurrence of all the States, and, sooner or later, it
must be accomplished. Common sense will not cease to upbraid us with inconsistency, humanity
will not be satisfied, nor Heaven fully propitiated, while we hold up boastfully in one hand
this declaration, affirming that "all men are created equal," and grasp with the other the
manacles and the scourge.

"Whatever may have been inferred by reason from a difference of physical attributes, and whatever
may have been forced by criticism out of the word of God, the traffic in human flesh is contraband
by the law of Nature written in our hearts, and forbidden by the whole tenor and spirit of
the religion revealed in the Gospel.

"Even in the darker and imperfect dispensation of the ancient Jews, every fiftieth year, at
least, brought freedom to all the inhabitants of the land. It is almost needless to say, that,
if he who first procured the slave and brought him hither had no right to do so, then neither
could he who bought him acquire a rightful ownership. There is no property to a private man
in the life or the natural faculties of another; no right can accrue by purchase, or vest by
possession, and no inheritance on either side descend. A title, which by its very nature was
void from the beginning, can never be made good; a dominion which Heaven never gave, must be
perpetuated, if at all, by means which it will never sanction."...

Surely, the trumpet of this youth gave no "uncertain sound."

    "One blast upon that bugle horn.
    Were worth ten thousand men."

To the recognition of such qualities it was due, probably, that in 1829 he was called to New
York city to assume the editorship of a journal ("Journal of Commerce") founded by an association
of gentlemen, and which afterwards exerted great influence upon public opinion. He declined
the offer, unwilling to leave his Alma Mater at a critical epoch in her history. He stayed
by her to die in her service.

His widow, Mrs. Sarah L. (Gilman) Chamberlain, daughter of Dr. Joseph Gilman, of Wells, Me.,
and niece of Mrs. President Brown, survived him twenty years, residing at Hanover. My imagination
is a monastery, and I am its monk.

'I am in expectation of Prometheus every day. Could I have my own wish effected, you would have
it still in manuscript, or be but now putting an end to the second
Act.

I remember you advising me not to publish my first blights, on Hampstead
Heath[5].

I am returning advice upon your hands. Most of the poems in the volume I send you [this was
the volume containing Lamia, Hyperion, &c.] have been written above two years[6], and would never have
been published but for hope of gain: so you see I am inclined enough to take your advice now.

'I
must express once more my deep sense of your kindness, adding my sincere thanks and respects for
Mrs. Shelley. In the hope of soon seeing you I remain

'Most sincerely yours,

'JOHN KEATS.'

It may have been in the interval between writing his note Of invitation to Keats, and receiving
the reply of the latter, that Shelley penned the following letter to the Editor of the Quarterly
Review--the periodical which had taken (or had shared with Blackwood's Magazine) the lead
in depreciating Endymion.

The letter, however, was left uncompleted, and was not dispatched. (I omit such passages as
are not directly concerned with Keats):--

'SIR,

'Should you cast your eye on the signature of this letter before you read the contents, you might
imagine that they related to a slanderous paper which appeared in your Review some time since....
I am not in the habit of permitting myself to be disturbed by what
is said or written of me.... The case is different with the unfortunate
subject of this letter, the author of Endymion, to whose feelings
and situation I entreat you to allow me to call your attention.

I write considerably in the dark; but, if it is Mr. Gifford that I am addressing, I am persuaded
that, in an appeal to his humanity and justice, he will acknowledge the fas ab hoste doceri.
I am aware that the first duty of a reviewer is towards the public; and I am willing to confess
that the Endymion is a poem considerably defective, and that perhaps it deserved as much censure
as the pages of your Review record against it. But, not to mention that there is a certain contemptuousness
of phraseology, from which it Is difficult for a critic to abstain, in the review of Endymion, I
do not think that the writer has given it its due praise.

Surely the poem, with all its faults, is a very remarkable production for a man of Keats's age[7];
and the promise of ultimate excellence is such as has rarely been afforded even by such as
have afterwards attained high literary eminence. Look at book 2, line 833, &c., and book 3,
lines 113 to 120; read down that page, and then again from line 193[8]. I could cite many
other passages to convince you that it deserved milder usage. Why it should have been reviewed
at all, excepting for the purpose of bringing its excellences into notice, I cannot conceive; for
it was very little read, and there was no danger that it should become a model to the age of that false
taste with which I confess that it is replenished.

'Poor Keats was thrown into a dreadful state of mind by this review, which, I am persuaded,
was not written with any intention of producing the effect--to which it has at least greatly
contributed--of embittering his existence, and inducing a disease from which there are now
but faint hopes of his recovery. The first effects are described to me to have resembled insanity,
and it was by assiduous watching that he was restrained from effecting
purposes of suicide.

      The agony of his sufferings at length produced the rupture of
           a blood-vessel in the lungs, and the usual process of consumption
           appears to have begun. He is coming to pay me a visit in Italy;
           but I fear that, unless his mind can be kept tranquil, little
           is to be hoped from the mere influence of climate.
           
           'But let me not extort anything from your pity.
           I have just seen a second volume, published by him evidently
           in careless despair. I have desired my bookseller to send
           you a copy: and allow me to solicit your especial attention to
           the fragment of a poem entitled Hyperion, the composition of which
was checked by the review in question.

The great proportion of this piece is surely in the very highest
style of poetry.

I speak impartially, for the canons of taste to which Keats has conformed in his other compositions
are the very reverse of my own. I leave you to judge for yourself: it would be an insult to you
to suppose that, from motives however honourable, you would lend yourself to a deception of
the public.'

The question arises, How did Shelley know what he here states--that Keats was thrown, by reading
the Quarterly article, into a state resembling insanity, that he
contemplated suicide, &c.?

       Not any document has been published whereby this information could
have been imparted to Shelley: his chief informant on the subject
appears to have been Mr. Gisborne, who had now for a short while returned
to England, and some confirmation may have come from Hunt.

As to the statements themselves, they have, ever since the appearance in 1848 of Lord Houghton's
Life of Keats, been regarded as very gross exaggerations: indeed,
I think the tendency has since then been excessive in the reverse
direction, and the vexation occasioned to Keats by hostile criticism
has come to be underrated.

Shelley addressed to Keats in Naples another letter, 'anxiously enquiring about his health, offering
him advice as to the adaptation of diet to the climate, and concluding with an urgent invitation
to Pisa, where he could assure him every comfort and attention.' Shelley did not, however, re-invite
Keats to his own house on the present occasion; writing to Miss Clairmont, 'We are not rich
enough for that sort of thing.' The letter to Miss Clairmont is dated 18 February, 1821, and
appears to have been almost simultaneous with the one sent to Keats. In that case, Keats cannot
be supposed to have received the invitation; for he had towards the middle of November quitted
Naples for Rome, and by 18 February he was almost at his last gasp.

Shelley's feeling as to Keats's final volume of poems is further exhibited in the following
extracts, (To Thomas Love Peacock, November, 1820.) 'Among the modern things which have reached
me is a volume of poems by Keats; in other respects insignificant enough, but containing the
fragment of a poem called Hyperion, I dare say you have not time to read it; but it is certainly
an astonishing piece of writing, and gives me a conception of Keats which I confess I had not before.'
(To Mrs. Leigh Hunt, 11 November, 1820.) 'Keats's new volume has
arrived to us, and the fragment called Hyperion promises for him that
he is destined to become one of the first writers of the age.

His other things are imperfect enough[9], and, what is worse, written in the bad sort of style
which is becoming fashionable among those who fancy that they are imitating Hunt and Wordsworth....
Where is Keats now? I am anxiously expecting him in Italy, when I shall take care to bestow every
possible attention on him. I consider his a most valuable life, and I am deeply interested in
his safety. I intend to be the physician both of his body and his soul,--to keep the one warm,
and to teach the other Greek and Spanish.

I am aware indeed, in part, that I am nourishing a rival who will far surpass me; and this is
an additional motive, and will be an added pleasure.' (To Peacock, 15 February, 1821.) 'Among
your anathemas of the modern attempts in poetry do you include Keats's Hyperion? I think it
very fine. His other poems are worth little; but, if the Hyperion be not grand poetry, none
has been produced by our contemporaries.' There is also a phrase in a letter to Mr. Ollier,
written on 14 May, 1820, before the actual publication of the Lamia volume: 'Keats, I hope,
is going to show himself a great poet; like the sun, to burst through the clouds which, though
dyed in the finest colours of the air, obscured his rising.'

Keats died in Rome on 23 February, 1821. Soon afterwards Shelley wrote his Adonais. He has left
various written references to Adonais, and to Keats in connexion with it: these will come more
appropriately when I speak of that poem itself. But I may here at once quote from the letter
which Shelley addressed on 16 June, 1821, to Mr. Gisborne, who had sent on to him a letter from Colonel
Finch[10], giving a very painful account of the last days of Keats, and especially (perhaps
in more than due proportion) of the violence of temper which he had exhibited. Shelley wrote
thus: 'I have received the heartrending account of the closing scene of the great genius whom
envy and ingratitude[11] scourged out of the world.

I do not think that, if I had seen it before, I could have composed my poem. The enthusiasm of
the imagination would have overpowered the sentiment.

    As it is, I have finished my Elegy; and this day I send it to the
press at Pisa.

You shall have a copy the moment it is completed, I think it will please you. I have dipped my
pen in consuming fire for his destroyers: otherwise the style is calm and solemn[12].

As I have already said, the last residence of Shelley was on the Gulf of Spezzia. He had a boat
built named the Ariel (by Byron, the Don Juan), boating being his favourite recreation; and on 1 July,
1822, he and Lieut. Williams, along with a single sailor-lad, started in her for Leghorn, to
welcome there Leigh Hunt. The latter had come to Italy with his family, on the invitation
of Byron and Shelley, to join in a periodical to be called The Liberal. On 8 July Shelley, with
his two companions, embarked to return to Casa Magni.

Towards half-past six in the evening a sudden and tremendous squall sprang up. The Ariel sank,
either upset by the squall, or (as some details of evidence suggest) run down near Viareggio
by an Italian fishing-boat, the crew of which had plotted to plunder her of a sum of money. The bodies
were eventually washed ashore; and on 16 August the corpse of Shelley was burned on the beach
under the direction of Trelawny.

In the pocket of his jacket had been found two books--a Sophocles, and the Lamia volume, doubled
back as if it had at the last moment been thrust aside. His ashes were collected, and, with the
exception of the heart which was delivered to Mrs. Shelley, were buried in Rome, in the new
Protestant Cemetery. The corpse of Shelley's beloved son William had, in 1819, been interred
hard by, and in 1821 that of Keats, in the old Cemetery--a space of ground which had, by 1822, been
finally closed.

    The enthusiastic and ideal fervour which marks Shelley's poetry could
not possibly be simulated--it was a part, the most essential part,
of his character.

He was remarkably single-minded, in the sense of being constantly ready to do what he professed
as, in the abstract, the right thing to be done; impetuous, bold, uncompromising, lavishly generous,
and inspired by a general love of humankind, and a coequal detestation of all the narrowing influences
of custom and prescription. Pity, which included self-pity, was one of his dominant emotions.
If we consider what are the uses, and what the abuses, of a character of this type, we shall
have some notion of the excellences and the defects of Shelley. In person he was well-grown
and slim; more nearly beautiful than handsome; his complexion brilliant,
his dark-brown but slightly grizzling hair abundant and wavy, and
his eyes deep-blue, large, and fixed.

His voice was high-pitched--at times discordant, but capable of agreeable modulation; his general aspect
uncommonly youthful.

    
    
    The roll of Shelley's publications is a long one for a man who perished
not yet thirty years of age.

I append a list of the principal ones, according to date of publication, which was never very
distant from that of composition. Several minor productions remain unspecified.

1810. Zastrozzi, a Romance. Puerile rubbish.

" Original Poetry, by Victor and Cazire. Withdrawn, and ever since unknown.

" Posthumous Fragments of Margaret Nicholson. Balderdash, partly (it would appear) intended
as burlesque.

1811. St. Irvyne, or The Rosicrucian, a Romance. No better than Zastrozzi.

1813. Queen Mab. Didactic and subversive.

1817. Alastor, or the Spirit of Solitude, and other Poems. The earliest volume fully worthy of
its author.

1818. Laon and Cythna--reissued as The Revolt of Islam.

An epic of revolution and emancipation in the Spenserian Stanza.

1819. Rosalind and Helen, a modern Eclogue, and other Poems. The character of 'Lionel' is an
evident idealisation of Shelley himself.

1819. The Cenci, a Tragedy. Has generally been regarded as the finest English tragedy of modern
date.

" Prometheus Unbound, a Lyrical Drama, and other Poems. The Prometheus ranks as at once the greatest
and the most thoroughly characteristic work of Shelley.

1819. Oedipus Tyrannus, or Swellfoot the Tyrant. A Satirical Drama on the Trial of Queen Caroline.

1821.
Epipsychidion. A poem of ideal love under a human personation.

" Adonais.

1822. Hellas. A Drama on the Grecian War of Liberation.

1824. Posthumous Poems. Include Julian and Maddalo, written in 1818, The Witch of Atlas, 1820, The
Triumph of Life, 1822, and many other compositions and translations.

The Masque of Anarchy and Peter Bell the Third, both written by Shelley in 1819, were published later
on; also various minor poems, complete or fragmentary. Peter Bell the Third has a certain fortuitous
connexion with Keats. It was written in consequence of Shelley's having read in The Examiner
a notice of Peter Bell, a Lyrical Ballad (the production of John Hamilton Reynolds): and this
notice, as has very recently been proved, was the handiwork of Keats.

Shelley cannot have been aware of that fact. His prose Essays and Letters, including The Defence
of Poetry, appeared in 1840. The only known work of Shelley, extant but yet unpublished, is the
Philosophical View of Reform: an abstract of it, with several extracts, was printed in the
Fortnightly Review in 1886.

MEMOIR OF KEATS.

The parents of John Keats were Thomas Keats, and Frances, daughter of Mr. Jennings, who kept a
large livery-stable, the Swan and Hoop, in the Pavement, Moorfields, London. Thomas Keats was
the principal stableman or assistant in the same business. John, a seven months' child, was born
at the Swan and Hoop on 31 October, 1795. Three other children grew up--George, Thomas, and
Fanny, John is said to have been violent and ungovernable in early childhood. He was sent to
a very well-reputed school, that of the Rev. John Clarke, at Enfield: the son Charles Cowden Clarke,
whom I have previously mentioned, was an undermaster, and paid particular
attention to Keats.

The latter did not show any remarkable talent at school, but learned easily, and was 'a very
orderly scholar,' acquiring a fair amount of Latin but no Greek. He was active, pugnacious, and
popular among his school-fellows. The father died of a fall from his horse in April, 1804:
the mother, after re-marrying, succumbed to consumption in February, 1810. Before the close of
the same year John left school, and he was then apprenticed, to a surgeon at Edmonton. In July, 1815,
he passed with credit the examination at Apothecaries' Hall.

In 1812 Keats read for the first time Spenser's Faery Queen, and was fascinated with it to a
singular degree. This and other poetic reading made him flag in his surgical profession, and finally
he dropped it, and for the remainder of his life had no definite occupation save that of writing
verse. From his grandparents he inherited a certain moderate sum of money--not more than sufficient
to give him a tolerable start in life.

      He made acquaintance with Leigh Hunt, then editor of the Examiner,
           John Hunt, the publisher, Charles Wentworth Dilke who became editor
of the Athenaeum, the painter Haydon, and others.

His first volume of Poems (memorable for little else than the sonnet On Reading Chapman's Homer) was
published in 1817. It was followed by Endymion in April, 1818.

In June of the same year Keats set off with his chief intimate, Charles Armitage Brown (a retired Russia
merchant who afterwards wrote a book on Shakespeare's Sonnets), on a pedestrian tour in Scotland,
which extended into North Ireland as well. In July, in the Isle of Mull, he got a bad sore throat, of
which some symptoms had appeared also in earlier years: it may be regarded as the beginning of his
fatal malady. He cut short his tour and returned to Hampstead, where he had to nurse his younger
brother Tom, a consumptive invalid, who died in December of the same year.

At the house of the Dilkes, in the autumn of 1818, Keats made the acquaintance of Miss Fanny
Brawne, the orphan daughter of a gentleman of independent means: he was soon desperately in love
with her, having 'a swooning admiration of her beauty:' towards the spring of 1819 they engaged
to marry, with the prospect of a long engagement. On the night of 3 February, 1820, on returning
to the house at Hampstead which he shared with Mr. Brown, the poet had his first attack, a violent
one, of blood-spitting from the lungs.

He rallied somewhat, but suffered a dangerous relapse in June, just prior to the publication of his
final volume, containing all his best poems--Isabella, Hyperion,
the Eve of St. Agnes, Lamia, and the leading Odes.

His doctor ordered him off, as a last chance, to Italy; previously to this he had been staying
in the house of Mrs. and Miss Brawne, who tended him affectionately. Keats was now exceedingly
unhappy. His passionate love, his easily roused feelings of jealousy of Miss Brawne, and of
suspicious rancour against even the most amicable and attached of his male intimates, the general
indifference and the particular scorn and ridicule with which his poems had been received, his
narrow means and uncertain outlook, and the prospect of an early death closing a painful and harassing
illness--all preyed upon his mind with unrelenting tenacity. The worst of all was the sense
of approaching and probably final separation from Fanny Brawne.

On 18 September, 1820, he left England for Italy, in company with Mr. Joseph Severn, a student of
painting in the Royal Academy, who, having won the gold medal, was
entitled to spend three years abroad for advancement in his art.

They travelled by sea to Naples; reached that city late in October; and towards the middle of
November went on to Rome. Here Keats received the most constant and kind attention from Dr.
(afterwards Sir James) Clark. But all was of no avail: after continual and severe suffering, devotedly
watched by Severn, he expired on 23 February, 1821. He was buried in the old Protestant Cemetery
of Rome, under a little altar-tomb sculptured with a Greek lyre.

His name was inscribed, along with the epitaph which he himself had composed in the bitterness
of his soul, 'Here lies one whose name was writ in water.'

Keats was an undersized man, little more than five feet high. His face was handsome, ardent, and
full of expression; the hair rich, brown, and curling; the hazel
eyes 'mellow and glowing--large, dark, and sensitive.' He was framed
for enjoyment; but with that acuteness of feeling which turned even
enjoyment into suffering, and then again extracted a luxury out of
melancholy.

He had vehemence and generosity, and the frankness which belongs to these qualities, not unmingled,
however, with a strong dose of suspicion. Apart from the overmastering love of his closing
years, his one ambition was to be a poet. His mind was little concerned either with the severe
practicalities of life, or with the abstractions of religious faith.

His poems, consisting of three successive volumes, have been already
referred to here.

The first volume, the Poems of 1817, is mostly of a juvenile kind, containing only scattered
suggestions of rich endowment and eventual excellence. Endymion is lavish and profuse, nervous
and languid, the wealth of a prodigal scattered in largesse of baubles
and of gems.

The last volume--comprising the Hyperion--is the work of a noble poetic artist, powerful and
brilliant both in imagination and in expression. Of the writings published since their author's
death, the only one of first-rate excellence is the fragmentary Eve of St. Mark. There is also
the drama of Otho the Great, written in co-operation with Armitage Brown; and in Keats's letters
many admirable thoughts are admirably worded.
As to the relations between Shelley and Keats, I have to refer back
to the preceding memoir of Shelley.

ADONAIS:

ITS COMPOSITION AND
BIBLIOGRAPHY.

For nearly two months after the death of Keats, 23
February, 1821, Shelley appears to have remained in ignorance of the
event: he knew it on or before 19 April. The precise date when he
began his Elegy does not seem to be recorded: one may suppose it to
have been in the latter half of May. On 5 June he wrote to Mr. and
Mrs. Gisborne: 'I have been engaged these last days in composing a
poem on the death of Keats, which will shortly be finished; and I
anticipate the pleasure of reading it to you, as some of the very
few persons who will be interested in it and understand it. It is
a highly wrought piece of art, and perhaps better, in point of composition,
than anything I have written.'

A letter to Mr. Ollier followed immediately
afterwards.

'Pisa, June 8th, 1821,

'You may announce for publication
a poem entitled Adonais. It is a lament on the death of poor Keats,
with some interspersed stabs on the assassins of his peace and of
his fame; and will be preceded by a criticism on Hyperion, asserting
the due claims which that fragment gives him to the rank which I have
assigned him. My poem is finished, and consists of about forty Spenser
stanzas [fifty-five as published]. I shall send it to you, either
printed at Pisa, or transcribed in such a manner as it shall be difficult
for the reviser to leave such errors as assist the obscurity of the
Prometheus. But in case I send it printed, it will be merely that
mistakes may be avoided. I shall only have a few copies struck off
in the cheapest manner. If you have interest enough in the subject,
I could wish that you enquired of some of the friends and relations
of Keats respecting the circumstances of his death, and could transmit
me any information you may be able to collect; and especially as [to]
the degree in which (as I am assured) the brutal attack in the Quarterly
Review excited the disease by which he perished.'

The criticism which
Shelley intended to write on Hyperion remained, to all appearance,
unwritten. It will be seen, from the letter of Shelley to Mr. Severn
cited further on (p. 34), that, from the notion of writing a criticism
on Hyperion to precede Adonais, his intention developed into the project
of writing a criticism and biography of Keats in general, to precede
a volume of his entire works; but that, before the close of November,
the whole scheme was given up, on the ground that it would produce
no impression on an unregardful public.

In another letter to Ollier,
11 June, the poet says: 'Adonais is finished, and you will soon receive
it. It is little adapted for popularity, but is perhaps the least
imperfect of my compositions.'

Shelley on 16 June caused his Elegy
to be printed in Pisa, 'with the types of Didot': a small quarto,
and a handsome one (notwithstanding his project of cheapness); the
introductory matter filling five pages, and the poem itself going
on from p. 7 to p. 25. While in college he formed, together with
his brother and several classmates, a society for the cultivation of Natural Science and Philosophy,
named at first for two distinguished French chemists, but afterward known as the Hermetic Society.
Towards the close of his collegiate course he was appointed to assist Dr. Gorham, the professor
of Chemistry, in preparing his experiments. That eminent physician and chemist soon became
so much interested in the pupil who displayed such assiduity in scientific researches, that
finding he intended to pursue the study of medicine, he kindly invited him to do so under his
tuition.

In 1813, Mr. Dana commenced his studies with Dr. Gorham, attending lectures at the Medical
College, but though he became well acquainted with the principles and practice of the profession,
he never relinquished his preference for Chemistry and Mineralogy. He became an active member
of the Boston Linnæan Society, and the first paper read before it, entitled "An Analysis of
the Incrustation formed upon the Basket of Eggs from Derbyshire, England" (presented by Judge
Davis), was read by him. In the spring of 1813, the Corporation of Harvard College employed
Mr. Dana to visit England in order to procure suitable apparatus for its chemical department.
During his stay abroad he studied, for a time, under the instruction of the somewhat distinguished
Frederic Accum. In consequence of this absence he did not receive his degree of M.D. till 1817,
that of A. M. having been previously conferred.

In the autumn of 1817, Dr. Dana was appointed to deliver a course of chemical lectures to the
medical students of Dartmouth College. The professors in the Medical School were Dr. R. D.
Mussey and Dr. Cyrus Perkins. These lectures were so satisfactory that the appointment was
continued, and during the autumns of 1818, 1819, and 1820, he lectured at Dartmouth, residing
during the intervals at Cambridge, where, in January, 1818, he was united in marriage with
Matilda, third daughter of Samuel Webber, D.D., late president of Harvard College.

In 1821, being appointed professor at Dartmouth, Dr. Dana removed to Hanover, where, relinquishing
the practice of medicine, he devoted his whole attention to his favorite studies, to which
was now added Botany, upon which he delivered some courses of lectures.

Dr. Perkins, the Professor of Materia Medica, removed to New York after the dissolution of
the "University of New Hampshire," and the late admired and lamented Dr. Daniel Oliver, of
Salem, was appointed to the professorship. Dr. Mussey, celebrated for his surgical knowledge
and skill, remained as the head of the Medical School, and among these gentlemen, differing
widely as they did in many characteristics, the warmest friendship subsisted. During the intervals
of leisure from strictly professional duties, Dr. Dana occupied himself in continuing to write
for "Silliman's Journal," and in frequent excursions to various parts of New Hampshire, for
the purpose of analyzing the ores and waters of mines and springs. His published analysis of
the waters of a spring in Burton, N. H., was considered so scientific a production, that he
was written to as to accepting a professorship in the University of Virginia. Not wishing the
appointment, he declined becoming a candidate.

In the latter part of 1825, Professor Dana published "An Epitome of Chemical Philosophy," designed
as a text-book for his own classes, but which was afterwards adopted as such in two other institutions.
In 1826, he was appointed one of the visitors of West Point Military Academy, and soon after
his return was chosen to the chair of Chemistry, in the College of Physicians and Surgeons
in the University of New York, to which city he then removed. He was elected member of the
Linnæan Society of New York, and accepted an invitation to deliver a course of lectures before
the Athenæeum.

During his residence at Hanover, Professor Dana had been much interested in Electro-magnetism,
then a new science, and in preparing apparatus for exhibiting its wonders, freely stating his
conviction that it would produce more astonishing results than any power previously known.
When surprise was expressed at his selecting for his Athenæeum lectures this subject, so little
known even in Europe, and in which so few in this country would feel any interest, Dr. Dana
replied that he had chosen it for those reasons; that he thought it time for public attention
to be directed to it, as he was certain it would lead to most valuable results, and that he
should endeavor to render it popular. How far he succeeded, the delighted audiences that crowded
to hear him bore evidence. Of the truth of his prediction as to the results to be wrought out
by the science, the marvels of the electro-magnetic telegraph bear witness to the world.

Samuel F. B. Morse was then following his profession as a painter in New York, and lectured
upon art before the Athenæeum. An intimacy sprang up between him and Dr. Dana, whose lectures
he attended, and whom he used to visit in his laboratory, thus becoming familiar with his views
on scientific subjects. Morse's published statements as to the origin of his knowledge of electro-magnetism
are as follows:

"I learned from Professor Dana, in 1827, the rationale of the electro-magnet, which' latter
was exhibited in action. These, with many other principles of electro-magnetism were all illustrated
experimentally to his audience. These being the facts, to whom do I owe the first knowledge
which I obtained of the science of electro-magnetism bearing upon the practical development
of the telegraph? Professor Dana had publicly demonstrated in my hearing and to my sight all
the facts necessary to be known respecting the electro-magnet.... The volute modification of
the helix to show the concentration of magnetism at its centre, adapted to the electric magnet,
the modification since universally adopted in the construction of the electro-magnet, is justly
due, I think, to the inventive mind of Prof. James Freeman Dana. Death, in striking him down
at the threshold of his fame, not only extinguished a brilliant light in science--one which
gave the highest promise of future distinction--but the suddenness of the stroke put to peril
the just credit due him for discoveries he had already made. Dana had not only mastered all
of the science of electro-magnetism then given to the world, a science in which he was an enthusiast,
but, standing on the confines that separate the known from the unknown, was at the time of
his decease preparing for new explorations and new discoveries. I could not mention his name
in this connection without at least rendering this slight but inadequate homage to one of the
most liberal of men and amiable of friends, as well as promising philosophers of his age."

The delivery of these lectures was amongst Dr. Dana's last public efforts. A severe cold, resulting
in an attack of erysipelas affecting the brain, terminated his brief life of thirty-three years,
on the 15th of April, 1827.

In the various relations of private life he had won the warm attachment of all who knew him.
To the charm of a buoyant and affectionate disposition he added Christian principle and character.
During his student life at Harvard, he had become a communicant of the Episcopal Church, and
continued a devout worshipper according to her liturgy. Her Burial Service was read over his
remains, by his friend Dr. Wainwright, the funeral rites being performed at Grace Church, on
the 17th of April.

When it was proposed, in 1871, by the National Telegraph Monument Association to erect a monument
to Professor Morse, at Washington, the family of Dr. Dana furnished, at its request, a portrait
of him from which a likeness was to be cast for one of the faces at the base of the monument.
Since the death of Professor Morse, no progress seems to have been made in the effort to erect
this memorial of scientific progress.

From reliable sources we have the following account of another gentleman of distinguished worth,
who was an instructor also both in the Academical and Medical departments of the college.

Benjamin Hale was born on the 23d of November, 1797, in Newbury, Mass., now a part of the city
of Newburyport. He was the eldest son of Thomas Hale, who was the grandson of the fifth Thomas,
in that series of Hales, whose first representative came to Newbury in about 1637. His mother
was Alice Little, a daughter of the Hon. Josiah Little of Newbury, and grand-daughter of Col.
Moses Little, an officer in the Continental Army. On both sides of the house Benjamin Hale
came of a race of vigorous, industrious, and useful men, held in honor by their fellow citizens,
and invariably distinguished for their exemplary habits, their domestic virtues, their sterling
goodness, and their faithfulness in the discharge of trusts and duties. In childhood he was
studious, quiet, kind, and genial; fond of books, the favorite of his youthful companions,
and the cheerful companion of the aged.

In the autumn of 1813, he went to Atkinson Academy; and in September, 1814, entered Dartmouth
College; but his health becoming impaired, he went to Dummer Academy, Byfield, in the autumn
of 1815, to pursue his studies under the direction of its principal, the Rev. Mr. Abbott. In
February, 1816, he entered the Sophomore class at Bowdoin College, then under the presidency
of the venerable Dr. Appleton, whose grave kindness soon won his reverent love. He at once
secured an honorable position in his class, which was the largest that had then been in that
college. In September, 1818, he received the degree of B. A.; his part at Commencement being
the salutatory oration. Having been previously offered the academy at Saco, and recollecting
a remark of his old pastor, Dr. Spring, that "one who meant to be a minister would do well
to try his hand at being a schoolmaster," he took charge of the academy for one year.

In the autumn of 1819, he became a member of the Theological Seminary at Andover, Mass. Here
his college classmate, Rufus Anderson, afterwards the distinguished Secretary of the American
Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, was his class-mate and room-mate. Dr. Anderson
thus writes of him: "Our friendship was founded in mutual knowledge and esteem, and continued
during his life. The operations of his mind were effective, equally so in nearly every branch
of learning. He was quick and accurate in the Mathematics, in the Languages, and in Music.
I know not in what one branch he was best fitted to excel. While perfect in all his recitations,
he was social, always ready for conversation when I desired it. He had, and through his whole
life retained, my entire confidence as a man of God, nor was I surprised at the eminent position
he afterwards attained in the church of Christ. Pleasant is his memory, and pleasant is the
thought of meeting him in a better world." While at Andover he had leisure for reading, and
that part of it which he devoted to Ecclesiastical History had an important influence as it
turned out, in deciding his future ecclesiastical connection.

At the Commencement of Bowdoin College, in 1820, he was appointed tutor. He taught the Junior
class in Natural Philosophy, and Locke's Essay on the Human Understanding, and the Sophomore
class in Geometry and some other parts of Mathematics, and in Logic. At the same time he continued
to pursue his theological studies, and in January, 1822, was licensed to preach by the York
Association. In September, 1821, he delivered a Latin valedictory oration, and took his degree
of A. M. With regard to this period of his life, his fellow tutor, now the venerable Prof.
Packard, thus writes: "Mr. Hale gave at once the impression of a kind, generous, faithful heart,
a clear, acute, and rapid intellect, and a vigorous grasp of any subject to which he gave his
thought. He was a diligent student. He loved books. Without conceit he had sufficient self-reliance,
which was always of service to him as a teacher and governor. He always had the good-will of
his pupils, and whether with them or with his colleagues he exerted an influence above rather
than below his age and standing. He was a true man, unselfish, of a decidedly social turn,
of warm affections, of a genial humor."

In the summer of 1822, he received proposals from R. H. Gardiner, Esq., of Gardiner, Me., to
take charge of a new institution which he had determined to establish for the education of
farmers and mechanics in the principles of science. Mr. Hale accepted, and closed his connection
with Bowdoin College in 1822, and entering upon his duties January 1, 1823, opened the Lyceum,
was inaugurated as its principal, and delivered an address on the occasion. He soon after returned
his license, finding it inconvenient to meet the many calls for preaching extended to him,
and having become also so settled in his preference for the Protestant Episcopal Church that
he determined to take Orders therein, should he ever be so situated as to think it his duty
to preach again. On the 9th day of April, 1823, he was married to Mary Caroline King, the eldest
daughter of the Hon. Cyrus King, M. C.

The Lyceum soon attracted students and became a flourishing institution. Its principal gave
lectures in Chemistry and taught Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, and in winter had classes
in Architecture and in Agricultural Chemistry. For the former of these classes he prepared,
in 1827, a work on the "Elementary Principles of Carpentry."

In July, 1827, having received an invitation to succeed Professor Dana in the chair of Chemistry
at Dartmouth College, Mr. Hale accepted, and delivered his inaugural address on the day after
Commencement. His esteemed and able colleagues in the Medical College were Reuben D. Mussey,
M.D., Prof. of Anatomy and Surgery; and Daniel Oliver, M.D., Prof. of Theory and Practice of
Medicine. It should be noted that at that period the importance of physical studies was not
fully appreciated at Dartmouth. The college had not taken a scientific periodical in half a
century. There was no cabinet of minerals. "There was not," writes Dr. Oliver, "a single modern
volume in the college library upon either Mineralogy or Geology; and scarcely one, if one,
upon Chemistry, later than the days of Fourcroy or Vauquelin. The prevailing taste was decidedly
anti-physical. It was directed another way, and not only so, but there was among the college
Faculty a disposition to undervalue the physical sciences." Dr. James F. Dana, the predecessor
of Professor Hale, writing of the college in reference to physical science, used the following
remarkable expression: "It was anchored in the stream, and served only to show its velocity."
When Professor Hale was engaged, his duties comprised a course of daily lectures to the medical
class through the lecture term, to which lectures the members of the Senior and Junior classes
were to be admitted; and instruction to the Junior class in some chemical text-book by daily
recitations for five or six weeks. This was all.

Professor Hale, however, addressed himself to his work with characteristic activity and zeal.
He proceeded to give each year to the college classes a separate course of over thirty lectures,
and discharged the expenses of them himself. He substituted a larger and more scientific text-book
for that in use, and obtained an allowance of forty or more recitations instead of thirty.
He laid the foundation of the cabinet of minerals by giving five hundred specimens, classifying
and labeling all additions, leaving the collection in respectable condition with 2,300 specimens.
He gave annually about twenty lectures in Geology and Mineralogy; and for some years was the
regular instructor of the Senior class in the Philosophy of Natural History. For two years,
also, he took charge of the recitations in Hebrew, and occasionally took part in other recitations;
and, with another, served as building committee during the whole process of repairing and erecting
the college edifices.

December 11, 1827, Professor Hale wrote, in a family letter, "I have made out a plan, for the
repair of the College building, and the addition of a building for libraries, etc., for the
use of Trustees at their next session. It takes with the president mightily, and I think they
will make it go."

And in another family letter, the first after returning from a journey, under date of March
20, 1828, he wrote:

"My arrival at Hanover was very opportune. I was looked for for sometime, and letters were
about being despatched for me.... I have the honor of being one-half of the building committee,
Professor Chamberlain being the other moiety, and we are commencing operations. The prospects
of the College are now so bright, that the plan I at first proposed, and which was adopted
by the Trustees, is abandoned, and we are preparing to erect two brick buildings, three stories
in height, and fifty feet by seventy. One for students' rooms, and the other for public rooms....
And what is more comforting, our funds are improving so much that the building will not distress
us very much if the $30,000 should not be realized. A good many old debts have been collected,
and are coming in, by which one building could be erected. About $13,000 have already been
subscribed, and subscriptions are daily arriving."

All this was voluntary and gratuitous work. It is no wonder that students thus cared for should
respond, as they did, with enthusiasm and regard. Happily, in this department as well as in
all others, Dartmouth College is now in motion, and fully up with the foremost in the current
of physical study.

During his last three years, Professor Hale was President of the Phi Beta Kappa Society. His
portrait, presented, it is believed, by the members of that society, now hangs in the college
library.

While at Hanover, Professor Hale thought it his duty to resume his purpose of preaching, and
was accordingly ordained Deacon by the Rt. Rev. Dr. Griswold, Bishop of the Eastern Diocese,
September 28, 1828, at Woodstock, Vt.; and Priest by the same bishop, in St. Paul's, Newburyport,
January 6, 1831. In taking this step he violated in no respect the charter of the college,
he undertook nothing which conflicted with the duties of his professorship, he acted neither
obtrusively nor illiberally; but while he occasionally preached in neighboring churches, he
always, in Hanover, scrupulously observed the appointment at the village meeting-house. On
Sunday nights, however, he held a service in his own house, for his own family, and the family
of Dr. Oliver, and such other communicants of the Episcopal Church, and friends, as might desire
to attend. Difference in sentiment on religious subjects, between Professor Hale and the Trustees
of the college, and action on their part which can hardly be regarded as justifiable, led to
the termination of Professor Hale's connection with the college, in 1835.

In 1835, Professor Hale published two works, "A Valedictory Letter to the Trustees," and "Scriptural
Illustrations of the Liturgy." In August of that year he attended the General Convention of
the Protestant Episcopal Church as a delegate from the Diocese of New Hampshire. In October,
1836, the degree of D.D. was conferred upon him by Columbia College. In December, having had
a severe attack of bronchitis, he sailed to St. Croix to spend the winter. His published letters
under the signature of "Valetudinarius" were very pleasant to the reading public.

In the course of the next year he entered upon the laborious and high duties of an office which
occupied the remaining years of his active life. He was elected, August 2, 1836, to the Presidency
of Geneva College, N. Y., and entered upon his duties in the following October; delivering
an inaugural address on the 21st of December. It is of course impossible here to give the varied
and interesting details of his presidential life. To this institution he freely gave the wealth
of his well stored and acute mind, his tried experience, and his cheerful, patient resolution.
The trials were sometimes great, the laborers few, the support scanty, and there were times
when it seemed as if the one man only stood between the life of the college and its death.
As one of the Trustees wrote, "Life was already nearly extinct, and death would have soon followed,
had not the president given himself wholly to the work with a faith that never faltered, a
perseverance which strengthened with difficulties, and a thorough conviction that his work,
if well done, would promote the glory of God and his church through all time." And he was successful,
as much so as it was within the power of one man to be, both in correcting the evils which
he found existing, and in securing the stability of the college beyond all peradventure. Wherever
he was, in the recitation room, in the academic circle, in the Medical School of which he was
ex officio president, in the Board of Trustees, in the councils of the bishop and the Diocese,
in the conferences with the Vestry of Old Trinity Church, before the Board of Regents, before
the Legislature of the State, he was always the learned, sagacious, loyal, and inspiring president;
respected and beloved always, by all who entered the circle of his influence; and illustrating
daily in his own character, the symmetry, strength, and purity of the principle by which he
was governed.

Dr. Hale instructed easily in every department of learning. He was most fond of ethical and
metaphysical studies. His class room will never be forgotten by those who delighted to go to
it, and regretted to leave it. His courses of lectures for many years included Civil and Ecclesiastical
Architecture. He loved music, and read it as easily as the words. His diction was always remarkable
for the best English, expressed in the happiest style. His memory and power of association
were almost unerring. His temper was held in the nicest balance. In preaching he was a Chrysostom
in wisdom, truth, and sweetness.

We have not space to dwell upon this theme, nor upon the wholesome influence which Dr. Hale
exerted in the diocese in which he was placed, both towards preparing the way for a second
diocese in the State of New York, and in ministering in his place to its unity and order, when
under the Episcopal charge of the noble De Lancey. In 1858, he left Hobart (once Geneva) College,
and in 1859 he left Geneva, with this distinguished record: "The thorough and skillful teacher,
the laborious and self-sacrificing president, the sympathizing friend, the genial companion,
the judicious adviser, the courteous Christian gentleman; in all these relations so bearing
himself as to gain the profound respect and tender affection of all who knew him."

Dr. Hale retired to live in Newburyport, near his birth-place and by the graves of his forefathers,
with his children around him. Even then "his influence upon the community distilled like the
dews of heaven to gladden the earth." He departed to his rest in Paradise on the 15th of July,
1863. Dr. Hale had four sons and three daughters, of whom the sons (one has since departed)
and one daughter survived him.

His published works, beside communications to newspapers on current topics, are: "An Address
to the Public from the Trustees of Gardiner Lyceum," 1822. "An Inaugural Address at Gardiner,"
1823. "Address to the Public in regard to the Lyceum," 1824. "Introduction to the Mechanical
Principles of Carpentry," 1827. "Sermon before the Convention of New Hampshire," 1830. "Lecture
before the American Institute of Instruction, On the Best Method of Teaching Natural Philosophy,"
1830. "Sermon, On the Unity of God, preached before the Convention of the Eastern Diocese,"
1832. "Scriptural Illustrations of the Liturgy of the Protestant Episcopal Church," 1835. "Valedictory
Letter to the Trustees of Dartmouth College," 1835. "Inaugural Address, Geneva College, On
the Equalizing and Practical Tendency of Colleges," 1836. "A Lecture before the Young Men's
Association of Geneva, On Liberty and Law," 1838. "Baccalaureate: Education in its Relations
to a Free Government," 1838. "The Present State of the Question," a pamphlet, in relation to
the division of the Diocese of New York, 1838. "Baccalaureate: The Languages," 1839. "Baccalaureate:
Mathematics," 1841. "Lecture on the Sources and Means of Education," 1846. "Baccalaureate:
The Position of the College, the State, and the Church," 1847. "Historical Notices of Geneva
College," 1849. "Sermon on the Death of Major Douglass," 1849.

       *       *       *       *       *

Professor Alpheus Crosby, who was elected to the Chair of Greek and Latin in the College, in
1833, Professor Calvin E. Stowe having filled the position in the interval after the death
of Professor Chamberlain, was the son of Dr. Asa and Abigail (Russell) Crosby, and was born
at Sandwich, N. H., October 13, 1810. Although less than twenty-three years of age, his superior
scholarship fully warranted the appointment. After ably filling this chair several years, by
a division of labor he was permitted to confine himself exclusively to the Greek language and
literature. To his refined and sensitive nature the stern old Roman was less attractive than
the more polished Greek. It is quite probable that Professor Crosby was more largely indebted
than he himself was aware to the moulding influence of his amiable and excellent mother, for
that particular type of mind and heart which placed him among the foremost Grecian scholars
of his time. Professor Crosby's career as a linguist illustrated two distinct forms of success.
He excelled both as a teacher and as an author. His success as a teacher no one will question
who had the privilege of listening to his instructions, if only for a single hour. He questioned
the student with a critical eye and ear, but a womanly gentleness. His translations might well
be likened to celestial music, long pent-up in foreign caves, but now finding rich and varied
and sweet expression, in the mother tongue. His success as an author is sufficiently indicated
by the extensive use of his text-books, especially the "Greek Grammar."

His classmate, Rev. Dr. Tenney, says:

"It is very pleasant for me to bring back before me your brother as I remember him at the commencement
of our college life. He was, as you know, a boy of twelve years, dressed in a boy's jacket
with a ruffled shirt, collar coming down over his shoulders, such as boys wore in those days--playful
as a kitten, and as innocent as the purest-minded girl. He was probably the best fitted (as
the phrase is) for college, of any member of the class. He had, I believe, gone over all the
studies of the Sophomore year. Without any apparent effort he maintained his preëminence through
his entire college course, not only in the Languages, but also in Mathematics and Mental Philosophy.
My recollection is that he had committed to memory all the Greek primitives before he left
college, yet with all his preëminence as a scholar he never seemed to have the remotest consciousness
that there was anything remarkable about himself. We had ambitious men in the class and some
bitter rivalries, but no one ever thought of questioning his position. In short he was both
the pet and pride of the class; his conscientiousness as a boy was that which characterized
him as a man. I do not think he would have done a consciously wrong thing for his right hand.
I remember being with him one Sabbath, when a letter was handed him from home, and his views
of the sacredness of the Sabbath were such that he would not open it until the Sabbath was
passed. I mention this, not to illustrate the earnestness of his conscience, but simply to
show its authority over him.

"As your brother was the youngest of the class, I was one of the oldest, but from the commencement
of our class life our intimacy was constant. I could very readily tell why I was attracted
to him, but his friendship for me I could never understand; sure I was that I never loved any
other man as I did him; he visited me a number of times; as I was at his home in Salem not
long before his lamented death, he seemed to me the same at the end as he was at the beginning,
one of the most lovable and remarkable men I ever knew, and the world has seemed to be poorer
ever since he left it."

Mr. C. C. Chase, Principal of the High School in Lowell, of the class of 1839, says:

"I have had many laborious, faithful teachers, but only one genius, and that was Professor
Alpheus Crosby. He was accurate upon a point not because he appeared to have looked it up in
the books, but because he instinctively knew it. It was in the Greek that I was instructed
by him, and I clearly recall, at this day, the expression of his face, as he explained it to
us. He seemed to revel in the beautiful thoughts and splendid conceptions of the great dramatists.
He did not appear to be so anxious as most teachers, that our recitations should show our critical
grammatical knowledge, but rather that we should appreciate and enjoy the wonderful creations
of the great minds of antiquity. He loved to teach. It seemed to be his delight to tell others
what he had so much enjoyed himself. It was the study of his Greek grammar that first gave
me a love for the noble language of ancient Greece. I know of no grammar that has so few bones
and so much meat in it. One can really enjoy reading it in an idle hour! It so clearly reveals
the fact that that most beautiful of languages, with all its sweetness and euphony, is but
a transcript of the mind of the race of men that knew more of beauty, of taste, and of philosophy
than all the ancient world besides. Professor Crosby entered into the secret chambers of Greek
thought, and became himself a Greek, and seemed to feel a perpetual flow of delight, as he
told to others what seemed so charming to himself. Others might compel an indolent student
to devote more time and study to his lessons, but none could equal him in leading those who
loved to follow, into the 'green pastures' and 'sweet fields' of the domain of learning."

Hon. George Stevens, of the class of 1849, says:

"My acquaintance with Professor Crosby began upon my admission to college. My preparation in
Greek was imperfect, and my knowledge of the language was quite limited. His manner of dealing
with and instructing the class soon won my admiration, love, and respect for him, and opened
to me a new and unexpected source of pleasure in the beauties of the Greek language. The primitive
simplicity, the euphony, sweetness, and artistic perfection of the language awakened a response
and an appreciation which only those who are like him can feel. This appreciation of the beauties
of his favorite language, kindled in him an enthusiastic love for it. His manner of teaching
imparted something of this same enthusiasm in the students. The thoroughness of his instruction,
his perfect courtesy towards all the students, the extreme kindness with which he always treated
them, his constant mildness and equanimity in the presence of the class, in the face even of
rude conduct and inexcusable ignorance of the lesson, his great love and supreme devotion to
his duties, apparent to all, won the love and respect, and gave him the control of every student
under him, which no sternness or severity could ever have secured. I never knew the least disobedience
to him or the slightest disrespect shown towards him, either in his presence or absence. The
great simplicity, purity, and honesty of his character, was a perfect shield to him against
all attacks, in word or act, open or covert. I consider him, after years of reflection and
experience, the best teacher I ever had; and of all the impressions of the teachers of my boyhood
and youth, those made by him upon me I find are the deepest and most lasting, and now, after
the lapse of more than a quarter of a century, are the dearest to me."

Professor Hagar, in the "New England Journal of Education", says:

"Professor Alpheus Crosby, whose death occurred in Salem, Mass., on the 17th of April, 1874,
was so widely and favorably known as a scholar, and was so much esteemed as a man, that a notice
of his life and labors, more extended than has hitherto appeared, is justly due his memory.

"Professor Crosby very early showed remarkable power in the acquisition of knowledge. He learned
the rudimentary branches of education almost without a teacher. Mathematics, Latin, and Greek
came to him almost by intuition. When engaged in study, he was so deeply absorbed that he seemed
wholly unconscious of time, place, or surroundings. When in his tenth year he was taken to
Hanover, the seat of Dartmouth College, and was placed temporarily under Professor Adams in
Algebra and Euclid, under Tutor James Marsh in Latin, and under Tutor Rufus Choate in Greek;
and these gentlemen pronounced him fitted for college. He was then returned to Gilmanton Academy,
and, to prevent him from trespassing upon college studies, he was put to the study of Hebrew,
under the Rev. John L. Parkhurst, who was well known as a ripe scholar. He was subsequently
sent to Exeter Academy to bridge over, with various studies, the months which his friends thought
must be passed before he should enter college. At the fall term of the college, in 1823, in
his thirteenth year, he entered; and he passed through the four years' course of study without
a rival and far beyond rivalry. His power of acquisition and retention was marvelous.

"After his graduation, he was kept at Hanover four years; the first, as the preceptor of Moor's
Indian Charity School, and the following three as tutor in the college. During this period
he joined the college church, and formed his purpose to prepare for the ministry, and spent
nearly two years at the Theological Seminary, in Andover, Mass. He was appointed to a professorship
of Latin and Greek, in 1833. In 1837 he was released from the Latin and became professor of
Greek only, which office he held until 1849, when he resigned; but he remained Professor Emeritus
until his death.

"In 1834 he married Miss Abigail Grant Jones Cutler, only child of Joseph and Abigail Cheesboro
Grant (Jones) Cutler, of Newburyport, Mass. Mrs. Crosby becoming an invalid, Professor Crosby
took her to Europe and traveled with her through England, Germany, and France, until they reached
Paris, where Mrs. Crosby died. On his return he resumed the duties of his professorship. After
the death of his father-in-law, Mr. Cutler, he resigned his professorship, and removed to Newburyport
to care for Mrs. Cutler, who was an invalid. His Greek Grammar, theological disquisitions,
and the superintendency of schools in Newburyport occupied his attention until Mrs. Cutler's
death in 1854, when he entered into the employment of the Board of Education in Massachusetts
as its agent. In this capacity he rendered the State most valuable services by visiting the
public schools in various parts of the State, and by his instructive and practical lectures
on educational subjects. So efficient were his labors, that in 1857 he was appointed by the
Board of Education to the principalship of the State Normal School in Salem; this important
post he occupied eight years. To the interests of this school he zealously devoted his great
knowledge and ability, raising it to a high standard of excellence and giving to it a most
honorable reputation. He gave the school the largest part of its valuable library, and obtained
for its use the most of its considerable cabinet. By his heartfelt kindness and his faithful
instructions he secured the love and profound esteem of his pupils, who will ever hold him
in affectionate remembrance. In the Normal School and elsewhere, as he had opportunity, Professor
Crosby earnestly advocated the liberal education of women, believing that their educational
advantages ought to equal those enjoyed by men.

"While principal of the school at Salem he, for several years, was the editor-in-chief of the
'Massachusetts Teacher,' performing gratuitous labors which were highly appreciated by the
teachers of Massachusetts and of other States.

"Having traveled through the Southern States, that he might gain a better knowledge of his
own country before he went abroad, he became deeply impressed with the iniquities of slavery,
and dropped readily into the ranks of the abolitionists. He was intensely interested in all
the discussions and phases of freedom, from Adams's 'Right of Petition' crusade down to the
day of his death. His patriotism during the war was full and glowing. The political disquisitions
in his 'Right Way,' which he edited for a year, upon the question of reconstruction, were keen
and convincing. He also published a series of elementary lessons for teaching the freed-men
of the South to read.

"During all these years, after leaving his professorship, he was building other educational
books besides his Greek Grammar--'Xenophon's Anabasis,' 'Eclogæ Latinæ,' 'Lessons in Geometry,'
a 'Greek Lexicon' for his Anabasis, and, last, 'Explanatory Notes to the Anabasis,' which he
had nearly ready for the press when death closed his labors.

"The heart of Professor Crosby was full of love for everybody and every creature of God. He
drank deeply at every spring whence flowed charity, benevolence, freedom, and patriotism. He
remained to his death a member of an orthodox church, but, during the last years of his life,
he worshipped with Christians of other denominations, having softened his early faith by a
more liberal trust in the boundless love and mercy of God, his Heavenly Father.

"In his association with teachers of every class, he showed himself a friend to all. His geniality
of manner, his pleasant words, his sympathizing spirit, his overflowing desire to make others
happy, his seemingly inexhaustible knowledge, and his intelligent and ever-courteous discussion
of controverted questions in education, morals, and religion, secured for him the warm affection
and deep respect of all who were privileged to know him."

Mr. Collar, of the Roxbury Latin School, says:

"Professor Crosby belonged not to Massachusetts alone, but to all New England--to the whole
land. Our country is poorer by the loss of an eminent scholar, one of that small band of classical
scholars in America who are known and honored at foreign seats of learning. In the latest,
freshest, and most original Greek grammar that I am acquainted with, that by Professor Clyde,
of Edinburgh, the author acknowledges his obligations to four distinguished scholars, three
Europeans, and one American, and the American is Professor Crosby."

"Professor Crosby's first marriage has been referred to; his second wife was Martha, daughter
of Joseph Kingman, of West Bridgewater, Mass."

       *       *       *       *       *

The following paragraphs, from an authentic source, introduce another eminent teacher.

Ira Young was born at Lebanon, N. H., May 23, 1801. His parents were Samuel and Rebecca (Burnham)
Young.

His early years were chiefly spent in working at his father's trade, that of carpenter, though
every winter after he was sixteen, he taught in one of the district schools in the neighborhood.
He cherished a strong desire for a collegiate education, but was not at liberty to take any
steps in that direction until he became of age. Want of means would have been with many int
his circumstances an insurmountable obstacle,--not so with him. By the willing labor of his
hands, he obtained in eight months the means of fitting for college at Meriden Academy, where
he studied one year, and soon after leaving that institution, where he stood high in scholarship,
he entered Dartmouth College. Neither in this year of preparation, nor during all his college
course, did he ever receive pecuniary aid from any individual or society. He paid his way by
teaching.

While at Meriden, he became, with many of his classmates, savingly interested in religion,
and made a public profession of his faith in Christ in his native place. His religious experience,
we have reason to believe, was deep and thorough,--producing an humble, loving faith in Christ
as the only Saviour, and a sincere, benevolent goodwill to all around him--to all mankind.
His mind was calm and peaceful--not subject to the agitations felt by so many in their religious
life, and his trust and confidence in God were never shaken. He could never bear to hear any
questioning of the ways of Providence, however dark and mysterious they might appear. "God
wills it," was always enough for him.

Through his college course he passed with honor and success, taking high rank in a class which
was exceptionally good, producing a large number of men who were afterwards distinguished in
professional and public life. Though himself guided in all things by the highest Christian
principle, he yet knew how to feel for those who were in danger of falling into evil courses;
and certainly in one instance, by his tender and watchful care, he was the means of reclaiming
and saving a young friend from threatening ruin.

He graduated in 1828, and taught afterwards for a year in Berwick Academy, Maine, and subsequently
in a large public school in Boston, from which, in 1830, he was called to a tutorship in Dartmouth
College. He held that position for three years, during which he continued his theological studies,
which he had commenced with the ministry in view, and in that year he preached regularly in
some of the neighboring towns.

He gave up this purpose, however, when he received the appointment of Professor of Mathematics,
Natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, in place of Professor Adams, who resigned at that time,
August, 1833. Before the close of that month, he became Professor Adams' son-in-law by marriage
to his youngest daughter, Eliza, and seldom were father and son more closely united in affection
or more happy in mutual intercourse.

In regard to his qualifications for his department and success in the same, it may be well
to refer to some remarks contained in an obituary notice of him, written by one who for many
years was associated with him in instruction, and who is now placed at the head of a sister
institution.

"Professor Young had some qualities which fitted him eminently for this position. He was, in
the first place, thoroughly master of the science and literature of his own department. Distinguished
while in college for mathematical attainments, he never relaxed in careful and constant study
of those branches to which he particularly directed his attention. His mind was thoroughly
disciplined for truth and not for victory, and thus he was ready to test his attainments by
the most thorough methods. As he was thorough with himself, so he was with his pupils, trying
them with doubtful questions which the studious could easily answer, but which the ignorant
could not evade. Yet he was never harsh, nor captious, nor irritating, though quick and ingenious
in exposing mistakes and follies. Besides his ample knowledge, he possessed remarkably the
power of clear and distinct statement. It was the habit of his mind to reduce his facts to
principles, and to present them in their simplest forms. Few instructors have excelled him
in the facility with which he could disentangle and elucidate a complicated problem, whether
for the satisfaction of his own mind, or the instruction of another. And he was as patient
as he was acute. Of a quiet temperament, not easily roused, nor rendered impatient at the dullness
or want of perspicuity in another, unless this resulted from a moral rather than an intellectual
weakness."

In April, 1858, he went to Europe and spent five months abroad, for the purpose of procuring
books and instruments for the college, especially those which were needed for the equipment
of the Observatory, whose foundations were laid that year. He had labored successfully in obtaining
funds for this object, in which he took a deep interest, and after the completion of the building,
it afforded him much pure enjoyment, as it gave him greatly increased facilities both for observing
and instructing in his favorite field of science.

Teaching was to him a real pleasure, and he often said that he would not willingly exchange
it for any other employment that could be offered him. He felt a truly affectionate interest
in the young minds that successively came under his care, sympathizing with them in their perplexities
and troubles, grieving for their errors, and rejoicing in whatever advances they made in scientific
attainments and true excellence of character. Remembering his own early struggles, he felt
much sympathy with young men similarly situated, and often rendered them efficient aid....
Nor was his care and interest limited exclusively to the college, but he sought to do good
"as he had opportunity," and in the manifold relations he sustained to others, in the family,
the church, the neighborhood, the village, his unselfish kindness was ever manifested. He held
the office of Treasurer of Meriden Academy for several years after the resignation of his predecessor,
and at the time of his death had been a deacon of the church for twenty years.

During the summer term of 1858, he was unusually occupied with college labors, being employed
most of the day in attending his recitations and lectures, and in preparation for them. He
had obtained some new philosophical apparatus, which interested him much, and he never seemed
to find more pleasure in his work than then, though it often left him quite weary and exhausted.

At that time there was a remarkable degree of religious interest throughout the country, in
which the college and the village shared, and it resulted in numerous conversions. He often
attended the noon-day prayer meetings of the class he was then instructing, and spoke of them
with much pleasure; and his own heart was deeply moved by the heavenly influence.

Near the close of July he began to suffer much from a malady which, though hidden, must have
been long in progress. His sufferings were most acute and severe, but never did he lose that
sweet patience and serenity of spirit he had always manifested, nor that calm submission to
his Heavenly Father's will. He died September 13, 1858.

In the words of one of his most esteemed associates: "The village mourns, for it has lost an
excellent citizen; the church mourns, for it has lost an efficient officer; the college mourns,
for it has lost a revered teacher; the State mourns, for it has lost an exemplary subject,--one
who belonged to that class who are justly styled 'the light of the world!'"

Few men in America have ever been called to teach the abstruse science of Mathematics, who
combined in such desirable proportions a thorough knowledge of the science with a faculty of
presenting it in a pleasing manner in the recitation room. In the happy adjustment of Professor
Young's powers one could but observe a union of quick perception with almost perfect self-control.
Whatever the deficiencies of the student, a hasty or unguarded or inappropriate or even an
unscientific word was seldom found in Professor Young's vocabulary. His most impressive rebuke
was silence.

In a commemorative "Discourse," President Lord says:

"During his college course he was an earnest and successful student. He carried his work before
him, finished it in its time, and did it well. He studied his lessons and a few related books,
and scattered not his mind by light, promiscuous, and aimless reading. He gorged not, but thought
and digested, and never had a literary dyspepsia. Of course he grew right along. He was resolved,
prompt, exact, untiring, and true as steel. Everybody knew where to find him. He studied no
popular arts. Though never rough or crusty, he was curt and sarcastic; but no man ever took
offense who knew the kindness of his heart. His fellow-students loved him. His abilities and
knowledge commanded their respect; his moral excellence secured their confidence, and his example
gave him power over their minds and manners. He hated and reproved vice, frowned upon all disorder,
disdained artifice and trick, and stood out manfully in support of virtue. Once, in the same
entry, a few noisy and vicious young men set up to be disturbers. They particularly insulted
a worthy but timid student, who was his neighbor. He took that student to his own room, and
gave him countenance and protection. Then they committed outrage upon his room, and threatened
personal abuse. When his remonstrance availed nothing, he protested that he would not see such
evil perpetrated in college, but would report them. They knew him, believed him, desisted,
and gave him then the honor of his disinterested virtue, as virtue always receives its meed
of honor when it stands erect on its own prerogative, and is not moved by the contradictions
of unreasonable and wicked men. Yet he was no ascetic. He liked companionship, was not fastidious
or exacting, never petulant or vindictive, but gentle and forbearing. He had especial tenderness
for those 'good-hearted' young men who can never refuse to do wrong when they are invited.
A distinguished officer of one of our professional institutions once said to me,--'I was, at
one time, when in college, thoughtless, self-indulgent, fell among bad companions, and was
nearly ruined. Mr. Young pitied me, took hold of me, and saved me.' That excellent man could
not now speak of his benefactor without tears of gratitude.

"How he stood at college, that is, what rank he held, whether first, second, or a lower figure
in his class, I never inquired, and, if I ever heard, I have forgotten. Probably he was not
equally indifferent, for if there be a more excellent way of judgment, it was not quite evident
to his calculating mind. I have often admired how his professional bias led him in his measurement
of men, almost as by instinct, to arithmetic, as if figures must, of course, be true, and as
if insensible moral and physical causes did not often greatly modify or neutralize numerical
computation. But it was a generous prejudice, and I have also admired how, in his practical
judgment, he would unconsciously neutralize or modify his professional idea. He wanted nothing
but realities. He went for scholarship and not the show of it. He accepted no metal that would
not ring. He was accordingly judged by others in reference to his sterling qualities. There
might have been men about him who made a greater figure than himself. It is very likely. For,
as I remember, strangers sometimes undervalued him. Soon after he left college, I was sent
to offer him the place of tutor. I had not previously known him, and my first impressions were
not agreeable. I hesitated to do my errand. After all it was rather performed than done, more
after a Roman than a Saxon fashion. But it turned out better for his character and the public
good, than for my own discernment. So of another commission not only from the Trustees, but
the venerable Professor Adams, to assure him that he would, after a while, be wanted to take
the chair of that noble old man, one of the princes of the earth. They who knew him best had
marked him, even when he took his parchment, for that high position. How well he filled it,
and every other office he sustained, everybody who knows the college knows.

"Professor Young was a consummate teacher. During his college course he taught school every
successive winter, as he had done for years preceding, and earned nearly enough to pay the
expenses of his course, for he had high wages, and never wasted them on his clothes or pleasures.
That discipline settled in his mind the elements of knowledge. The principles of all true knowledge
were already laid; first, when he was born; and, secondly, when he was born again. He had,
of course, tools to work with, and facility to use them for the good of others, enlarging all
the while his own fabric till he became the man of science that he was for his successive trusts.
He loved, as few men ever love, to teach, and as no man can love who begins not early and makes
not teaching his profession. He went to his last recitation when he should have been upon his
bed, to find relief from the agonies he suffered, and take off his mind from the greater that
he feared. He was never more at home, or more at ease, than with his class. He loved to enrich
them out of his own stores, and thereby draw out and sharpen their independent faculties. He
was not disconcerted when he sometimes drew to little purpose; though sure, by set remonstrance,
or by his peculiar, quaint, dry and caustic humor, to rebuke indifference and neglect, or expose
the artifice of a bold, shrewd, or sly pretender. He was sure of what he knew, and never gave
way without a reason. I have sometimes thought him too sure before he scanned a question. Yet
he would never persist when he saw no foothold. He was set but not dogmatic, or no more so
than a sincere man must be when he believes what he teaches and is in earnest. He would never
defend before his class a theory because it was new, or because it was learned, or because
it was his own, or because it was popular, or because he would otherwise be ruled out of the
synagogue, till he had made it sure by calculus, or probable by analogy. When convinced that
an hypothesis could not be verified in the present state of knowledge, or never in logical
consistency with established facts, or moral certainties, he abandoned it like an honest man.
But where he had his ground he stood, and would have it understood. Of course his teaching
was effectual. Those who would be made scholars he made sound and good ones. He gave a strong
character to his departments, and his departments were an honor to the college.

"Professor Young was a ripe scholar in general. He was conversant with the accredited branches
of knowledge, and held an honorable place among learned men. He was modest and retiring, content
to know, and unconcerned about the appearance of it. He liked not to open his mouth in the
gate, but he had wisdom to deliver the city. Nothing crude, partial, superficial, or one-sided,
ever came from him. His judgments were clear, comprehensive, and decisive. He was slow, critical,
and cautious in forming his opinions, and where he settled there he stayed. No man could cajole
or browbeat him out of his convictions.

"When our professor lay dead before us, the thought arose that, now, no longer plodding his
way to yonder dome, with steps restrained and painful from an unknown disease, no longer weary
with watching, through his telescope, the distant orbs, nor with numbers and diagrams to find
their measure, he could survey, without a glass, infinitely greater wonders from a higher sphere;
for he had profited by his earthly discipline: the heavens had declared to him the glory of
God, and the firmament had showed his handiwork. The day had uttered to him speech, and the
night had showed to him knowledge.

CHAPTER XXV.

PROFESSOR STEPHEN CHASE.--PROFESSOR DAVID PEABODY.--PROFESSOR WILLIAM COGSWELL.

Professor Stephen Chase, who succeeded Professor Young in the chair of Mathematics, the latter
retaining the department of Natural Philosophy and Astronomy, was the son of Benjamin Pike
and Mary (Chase) Chase, and was born at Chester, N. H., August 30, 1813.

The following notice of this distinguished mathematician is from a commemorative "Discourse"
by President Lord:--

"In the first class that entered the college, after my connection with it, nearly twenty-three
years ago, a young man, spare, tall, as yet unformed in manner, soon engaged the attention
of his teachers. We marked his mild, serene, yet quick and penetrating eye, his independent,
unaffected, yet modest and regulated movement, his lively, versatile, earnest, and comprehensive
mind, his cheerful and honest diligence, his punctual attendance upon the exercises of the
college, his respectful, but unstudied and confiding deportment towards his superiors, his
frank and generous, but reserved intercourse with his fellow students, his care in selecting
his most intimate associates, and his quiet, unpretending, yet exact and intelligent performance
of all the studies of the course. An indifferent stranger would not have noticed him, except,
perhaps, to criticize his unique exterior; and his fellow students, as is natural to young
persons who are most impressed by æsthetical manner and accomplishment, did not dignify him
as a leader or an oracle. But a deeper insight convinced his teachers that, whatever partial
observers might think wanting in respect to artistic excellence, was well supplied by more
substantial and enduring qualities. Their eye followed him, while here, as a sound-minded,
true-hearted young man, and a thorough scholar; and, after he had graduated, as a teacher at
the South, and in two of the oldest academies of New England. In these different relations
he fully justified the good name which he had left behind him at the college, till, the proper
occasions serving, he was called back to be first a tutor, and then professor of the Mathematics.
The subsequent course of Mr. Chase proved that his instructors had not miscalculated his powers,
nor over-estimated his qualifications for one of the most difficult and trying positions in
a learned institution.

"Professor Chase performed the duties of his office without interruption till the close of
the last term, during a period of about thirteen years; and died, after a short illness, in
vacation, while yet a young man. He was scarcely thirty-eight years of age. Yet he was old,
if we measure time, as scholars should, not by the motion of the heavenly bodies, but the succession
of ideas. He had made great proficiency in knowledge. Well he might; for he had great susceptibilities.
His temperament was ardent, his instincts were lively, his perceptions keen, his thoughts rapid,
his reasoning faculties sharp, his imagination fiery, and his will determined. No man has all
his active powers proportioned; for that would constitute perfection, which exists not in this
world any more in physical than in moral natures. But his balance was less disturbed than most,
and, consequently, he was capable of various and large attainments. What he could he did, for
his spirit was earnest, and his industry untiring. He had become well founded and extensively
versed in most departments of liberal study, and it would be difficult to say in what branch
of knowledge he would have been most competent to excel. He was not a genius; that is, no one
power of the mind absorbed the others, and his culture was not unequal. Therefore he would
not have glared for a while, like a meteor, and then exploded, but he would have stood one
of the pillars of learning, and a true conservator of society.

"A man of excellent constitutional faculties, like Mr. Chase, must use them, if Providence
gives him opportunity. He has a self-moving power. He cannot be still. Use of the faculties
increases their facility and productiveness; and the increase of products increases the love
of acquisition. His gains, and his consequent love of gain, will be according to the Providential
direction which he takes, whether to a trade, an art, a profession, to the pursuit of wealth,
or power, or general knowledge. Mr. Chase's direction was to knowledge. He acquired it easily,
his stores rapidly increased, and the love of it became a passion. He loved knowledge as some
men love pleasure, and others gold, for its own sake. Yet not exclusively, for he was genial,
warm-hearted, and humane. He appreciated the enjoyments of personal, domestic, and social life.
No man could be more affectionate, kind, generous, or public-spirited. He was never a recluse
or an ascetic. He was ready to take anything in hand, and liked to have his hands full. He
desired an estate, he studied a profession, he amused himself with useful arts, he loved a
farm, a garden, an orchard, a fruitery, an apiary; and occasionally, to do the work proper
to them all himself; and he did it well. But knowledge, science, in the largest sense, was
his beau ideal.

"Professor Chase, as might be expected, had great excellence as a teacher and governor of college.
His ideal of education may be inferred from his personal culture. It was the coyotes' evening call.
To the silent men the weird sound seemed the triumphant cry of the Desert itself and they started
in horror.

Then from the dusky shadow of the high bank farther up the wash came another cry that broke the spell
that was upon them and drew an answering shout from their lips as they ran forward.

"Mamma! Mamma! Barba wants drink. Please bring drink, mamma. Barba's 'fraid!"

Jefferson Worth reached her first. Close under the bank, where she had wandered after "mamma" lay
down to sleep, and evidently just awakened from a tired nap by the coyotes' cry, sat a little
girl of not more than four years. Her brown hair was all tumbled and tossed, and her big brown eyes
were wide with wondering fear at the four strange men and the boy who stood over her.

"Mamma! Mamma!" she whimpered, "Barba wants mamma."

Jefferson Worth knelt before her, holding out his hands, and his voice, as he spoke to the baby, made
his companions look at him in wonder, it was so full of tenderness.

The little girl fixed her big eyes questioningly upon the kneeling man. The others waited, breathless.
Then suddenly, as if at something she saw in the gray face of the financier, the little one
drew back with fear upon her baby features and in her baby voice. "Go 'way! Go 'way!" she
cried. Then again, "Mamma! Barba wants mamma." Jefferson Worth turned sadly away, his head bowed
as though with disappointment or shame.

The others, now, in turn tried to win her confidence. The plainsman and the Irishman she regarded
gravely, as she had looked at the banker, but without fear. The boy won a little smile, but
she still held back--hesitating--reluctant. Then with a pitiful little
gesture of confidence and trust, she stretched forth her arms to the
big brown-eyed engineer. "Barba wants drink," she said, and the Seer
took her in his arms.

At the wagon it was Jefferson Worth who offered
her a tin cup of water, but again she shrank from him, throwing her
arms about the neck of the Seer. The engineer, taking the cup from
the banker's hands, gave her a drink.

While Mr. Worth and the boy
prepared a hasty meal, Texas fed his team and the Irishman, going
back a short distance, made still another grave beside the road already
marked by so many. The child-- still in the engineer's arms--ate hungrily,
and when the meal was over he took her to the wagon, while the others,
with a lantern, returned to the still form by the dry water hole. That he was a complete master of it is out of question. Of this he has
left enduring monuments; and not the least, I am happy to say, in minds which he had trained.

"His own perception of relations was like intuition, and hence he was sometimes uneasy at the
embarrassments of students, even when involuntary, and much more, when the result of indifference
or neglect, even though they might at times be increased by the rapidity of his own illustrations.
I should have dreaded to be taken by Professor Chase to the blackboard, unless I had a good
lesson, or a good conscience; and I could not have been sure that the latter would avail me
without the former. But though I should have shrunk from the criticism, I should have respected
the man. If I feared him in the lecture-room, I should honor him in his study; for there his
warm heart would open to the story of my mental trials, and he would lead me, and help me to
bear my burdens, with the kindness of an elder brother. He was exacting, but he was humane;
he was impatient, but full of generous sympathies. These qualities might not always be tempered
in the hurry of an occasion, but found their balance in the leisure and quiet intercourse of
retirement. He was just and faithful. 3, 4. That benediction which the eclipsing curse Of birth
can quench not. The curse of birth is, I think, simply the calamitous condition of mundane life--so
often referred to in this Elegy as a condition of abjection and unhappiness.
 As with the judgment, so with the sensibilities; they were led by conscience.
As with the love of knowledge, so with the passions; they were subject to the love of truth.
Whatever the occasional excitement of the intellect or the feelings, there was that in his
mind which made it impossible for him to be an enemy of God or man. The soul had been harmonized
by grace.

