FOUR WEEKS IN THE TRENCHES

by Fritz Kreisler

To My Dear Wife Harriet

The Best Friend Add Stanchest Comrade In All Circumstances Of Life I Dedicate This Little Book

In Humble Token Of Everlasting Gratitude And Devotion

Preface

This brief record of the fighting on the Eastern front in the great war is the outcome of a
fortunate meeting.

The writer chanced to be dining with Mr. Kreisler soon after his arrival in this country, after
his dismissal from the hospital where he recovered from his wound.  For nearly two hours he
listened, thrilled and moved, to the great violinist's modest, vivid narrative of his experiences
and adventures.  It seemed in the highest degree desirable that the American public should
have an opportunity of reading this narrative from the pen of one in whose art so many of us
take a profound interest.  It also was apparent that since so little of an authentic nature
had been heard from the Russo-Austrian field of warfare, this story would prove an important
contribution to the contemporary history of the war.

After much persuasion, Mr.  Kreisler reluctantly acceded to the suggestion that he write out
his personal memories of the war for publication.  He has completed his narrative in the midst
of grave difficulties, writing it piecemeal in hotels and railway trains in the course of a
concert tour through the country.  It is offered by the publishers to the public with confidence
that it will be found one of the most absorbing and informing narratives of the war that has
yet appeared.

F.  G.

Four Weeks In The Trenches

I

In trying to recall my impressions during my short war duty as an officer in the Austrian Army,
I find that my recollections of this period are very uneven and confused.  Some of the experiences
stand out with absolute clearness; others, however, are blurred.  Two or three events which
took place in different localities seem merged into one, while in other instances recollection
of the chronological order of things is missing.  This curious indifference of the memory to
values of time and space may be due to the extraordinary physical and mental stress under which
the impressions I am trying to chronicle were received.  The same state of mind I find is rather
characteristic of most people I have met who were in the war.  It should not be forgotten,
too, that the gigantic upheaval which changed the fundamental condition of life overnight and
threatened the very existence of nations naturally dwarfed the individual into nothingness,
and the existing interest in the common welfare left practically no room for personal considerations. And
this is Fate.

The Path of Dreams

Beside the stream that silverly steals on To swell the song of that far-sounding sea Which breaks
upon the utmost shore of Thought, They who have drunk at Song's immortal spring Walk with glad
feet the upland path of dreams That whitely winds thro' long low-lying lands-- By one, yclept
the Way of Fools--a plain Of dust and ashes and of Dead Sea fruit; But by another called the Path of Hope
That leads far up the slope of heart's desire;-- And haply both speak truth--for oft the way Is
set with stones that tear the climbing feet, And oft for roses there is bitter rue, And oft
for singing there is idle scorn, And sneers full oft for smiles.

Yet well we know The upland Path of Dreams that whitely winds (Yclept or Way of Fools or Path
of Hope) Leads upward ever to the Hills of Song!

Beside the silent stream whose soundless tide Sets ever to the unknown tideless sea They who have drunk
of Slumber's poppied draught Walk with unsandalled feet the path of dreams That winds thro' gray,
low-lying fields of sleep To dim dream shores girt with dim spectre-trees,
Swayed ever by the sweep of unseen wings, Slow-stirring palms and
arabesques of ferns And fields of sombre bloom and scentless flowers
Not of their wonted hue, but dimly gray, Where songless birds like
shades of shadows flit, And silent winds from poppied meadows blow--
And here dear presences to us denied By sterner Day, approach to cry
us hail; And here a little do we taste the joy Of kisses dreamed on
lips forever mute, A little know the bliss of Hope fulfilled, And
dreams that seem as true as very Truth ... Yet well we know that with
the stir of dawn, Waking, we must return from Sleep's far fields!

Beside the Lethean stream whose soundless tide Sets ever to the unknown tideless Sea That breaks upon
the farthest unknown shore-- They who have quaffed dark Asrael's mystic draught Walk with still
feet the viewless Path of Dreams That winds thro' long, low-lying fields of Sleep To fields Elysian
or Tartarian glooms; And haply, longed-for presences denied By sterner Life shall come to cry us
hail,-- Bright radiances from realms of light eterne, Or shadows from the shades of awful Dis--
But whether here we taste of Hope fulfilled, Or find our dreams are
but as drifted dust-- From dark of Dis or realms of Light eterne,
Full well we know we shall return no more!

An Autumn Song

The dim sun slips adown the sky That dies from gold to gray; The homing birds that Southward fly
To my heart's hailing make reply, Piping "Good-bye, good-bye!"

Southward I turn my wistful eyes, Southward, where all my treasure lies, Whither the homing sparrow
flies, Piping, "Good-bye, good-bye!"

The chill blast sweeps the steely sky That glooms a sullen gray; Soft summer winds that Southward
fly To my soul's sighing make reply Breathing "Good-bye, good-bye!"

Southward I turn my longing eyes, Southward my yearning spirit hies, Whither or bird or zephyr
flies Sighing "Good-bye, good-bye!"
Vain

Wreath of laurel and crown of bay And the noisy trump of Fame,
Praise for the singer's deathless lay, And a listening world's acclaim.

But
the singer sits with his grief alone Where love lies cold and dead.
The plaudits fall on a heart of stone; The Soul of the song has fled.

Sartor
Resartus

Ah, God be merciful to him who sees Thro' ermined pomp and
pageantry of kings, Thro' regal mien and beauty's witcheries The poor,
weak, shrivelled soul that crouches hid Within the body's hold!
Up went their hands to their caps in military salute, whereupon the old general threw his arms
wide open and embraced them both, saying: "Go on, my boys, do your duty bravely and stand firm
for your emperor and your country.  God willing, you will come back to your old mother." The
old lady smiled through her tears.  A shout went up, and the crowds surrounding the general
cheered him.  Long after I had left I could hear them shouting.

A few streets farther on I saw in an open cafe a young couple, a reservist in field uniform
and a young girl, his bride or sweetheart. They sat there, hands linked, utterly oblivious
of their surroundings and of the world at large.  When somebody in the crowd espied them, a
great shout went up, the public rushing to the table and surrounding them, then breaking into
applause and waving hats and handkerchiefs.  At first the young couple seemed to be utterly
taken aback and only slowly did they realize that the ovation was meant for them.  They seemed
confused, the young girl blushing and hiding her face in her hands, the young man rising to
his feet, saluting and bowing.  More cheers and applause.  He opened his mouth as if wanting
to speak.  There was a sudden silence.  He was vainly struggling for expression, but then his
face lit up as if by inspiration.  Standing erect, hand at his cap, in a pose of military salute,
he intoned the Austrian national hymn.  In a second every head in that throng was bared.  All
traffic suddenly stopped, everybody, passengers as well as conductors of the cars, joining
in the anthem.  The neighboring windows soon filled with people, and soon it was a chorus of
thousands of voices.  The volume of tone and the intensity of feeling seemed to raise the inspiring
anthem to the uttermost heights of sublime majesty.  We were then on our way to the station,
and long afterwards we could hear the singing, swelling like a human organ.

What impressed me particularly in Vienna was the strict order everywhere.  No mob disturbances
of any kind, in spite of the greatly increased liberty and relaxation of police regulations.
Nor was there any runaway chauvinism noticeable, aside from the occasional singing of patriotic
songs and demonstrations like the one I just described.  The keynote of popular feeling was
quiet dignity, joined to determination, with an undercurrent of solemn gravity and responsibility.

I had stopped in Vienna only long enough to bid good-bye to my father, and left for the headquarters
of my regiment in Graz.  I reported there for duty and then went to join the Fourth Battalion,
which was stationed at Leoben, one hour away from Graz, my orders being to take command of
the first platoon in the sixteenth company.  My platoon consisted of fifty-five men, two buglers,
and an ambulance patrol of four.

In Leoben my wife and I remained a week, which was spent in organizing, equipping, requisitioning,
recruiting, and preliminary drilling.  These were happy days, as we officers met for the first
time, friendships and bonds being sealed which subsequently were tested in common danger and
amidst privation and stress.  Many of the officers had brought their wives and soon delightful
intercourse, utterly free from formality, developed, without any regard or reference to rank,
wealth, or station in private life.  Among the reserve officers of my battalion were a famous
sculptor, a well-known philologist, two university professors (one of mathematics, the other
of natural science), a prince, and a civil engineer at the head of one of the largest Austrian
steel corporations.  The surgeon of our battalion was the head of a great medical institution
and a man of international fame.  Among my men in the platoon were a painter, two college professors,
a singer of repute, a banker, and a post official of high rank.  But nobody cared and in fact
I myself did not know until much later what distinguished men were in my platoon.  A great
cloak of brotherhood seemed to have enveloped everybody and everything, even differences in
military rank not being so obvious at this time, for the officers made friends of their men,
and in turn were worshipped by them.

My wife volunteered her services as Red Cross nurse, insisting upon being sent to the front,
in order to be as near me as could be, but it developed later that no nurse was allowed to
go farther than the large troop hospitals far in the rear of the actual operations. Upon my
urgent appeal she desisted and remained in Vienna after I had left, nursing in the barracks,
which are now used for hospital work.  In fact, almost every third or fourth house, both private
and public, as well as schools, were given to the use of the government and converted into
Red Cross stations.

The happy days in Leoben came to an abrupt end, my regiment receiving orders to start immediately
for the front.

We proceeded to Graz, where we joined the other three battalions and were entrained for an
unknown destination.  We traveled via Budapest to Galicia, and left the train at Strij, a very
important railroad center south of Lemberg.  It must be understood that the only reports reaching
us from the fighting line at that time were to the effect that the Russians had been driven
back from our border, and that the Austrian armies actually stood on the enemy's soil.  Strij
being hundreds of miles away from the Russian frontier, we could not but surmise that we were
going to be stationed there some time for the purpose of training and maneuvering.  This belief
was strengthened by the fact that our regiment belonged to the Landsturm, or second line of
reserves, originally intended for home service.  We were, however, alarmed that very same night
and marched out of Strij for a distance of about twenty miles, in conjunction with the entire
Third Army Corps.  After a short pause for the purpose of eating and feeding the horses, we
marched another twenty-two miles.  This first day's march constituted a very strong test of
endurance in consequence of our comparative softness and lack of training, especially as, in
addition to his heavy rifle, bayonet, ammunition, and spade, each soldier was burdened with
a knapsack containing emergency provisions in the form of tinned meats, coffee extract, sugar,
salt, rice, and biscuits, together with various tin cooking and eating utensils; furthermore
a second pair of shoes, extra blouse, changes of underwear, etc.  On top of this heavy pack
a winter overcoat and part of a tent were strapped, the entire weight of the equipment being
in the neighborhood of fifty pounds.  The day wore on.  Signs of fatigue soon manifested themselves
more and more strongly, and slowly the men dropped out one by one, from sheer exhaustion. 
No murmur of complaint, however, would be heard.  Most of those who fell out of line, after
taking a breathing space for a few minutes, staggered on again. The few that remained behind
joined the regiment later on when camp was established.  We wondered then at the necessity
of such a forced march, being unable to see a reason for it, unless it was to put us in training.

Night had fallen when we reached a small monastery in the midst of a forest, where the peaceful
surroundings and the monastic life, entirely untouched by the war fever, seemed strange indeed.
Camp was established, tents erected, fires were lighted, and coffee made. Soon a life of bustling
activity sprang up in the wilderness, in the midst of the forest which only a few hours before
had been deserted.

It made a weird and impressive picture in the wonderful starlight night, these soldiers sitting
around the camp fires softly singing in chorus; the fantastic outlines of the monastery half
hidden in the woods; the dark figures of the monks moving silently back and forth amongst the
shadows of the trees as they brought refreshments to the troops; the red glow of the camp fires
illuminating the eager and enthusiastic faces of the young officers grouped around the colonel;
the snorting and stamping of the horses nearby; an occasional melodic outcry of a sentinel
out in the night; all these things merging into an unforgettable scene of great romanticism
and beauty.  That night I lay for a long while stretched near the smoldering ashes of the camp
fire, with my cape as a blanket, in a state of lassitude and somnolence, my soul filled with
exaltation and happiness over the beauty around me.

The rest, however, was of very short duration, for at six o'clock in the morning we were aroused,
camp was broken up and soon afterwards we started on a forced march of twenty-two miles without
a halt, during which we twice had to wade knee-deep through rivers. By midday most of the men
were so exhausted that they could hardly crawl along.  It was remarkable that the comparatively
weaker and more refined city-bred people who had done little physical work in their lives,
most of them being professional men, withstood hardships better than the sturdy and, to all
appearances, stronger peasants; the only explanation for it being perhaps that the. city-bred
people, in consequence of their better surroundings and by reason of their education, had more
will power and nervous strength than the peasants.

At half-past two we reached a clearing in the midst of a wood through which a river flowed.
Here camp was again established and a half hour later all the hardships of the march were once
more forgotten in the bustle of camp life.  This time we had a full rest until the next morning
at four o'clock, when suddenly orders for marching were given.  After we had been under way
for about three hours we heard far-away, repeated rumbling which sounded like distant thunder.
Not for a moment did we associate it with cannonading, being, as we supposed, hundreds of miles
away from the nearest place where Russians could possibly be.  Suddenly a mounted ordnance
officer came rushing with a message to our colonel.  We came to a halt and all officers were
summoned to the colonel who, addressing us in his usual quiet, almost businesslike way, said:
"Gentlemen, accept my congratulations, I have good news for you, we may meet the enemy to-day
and I sincerely hope to lead you to the fight before evening." We were thunderstruck at the
sudden realization that the Russians had penetrated so deeply into Galicia. The despondency
which followed this startling revelation, however, was quickly replaced by the intense excitement
of meeting the enemy so soon.  We hurried back to our companies, imparting the news to the
men, who broke forth into shouts of enthusiasm.  All the fatigue so plainly noticeable only
a few minutes before, suddenly vanished as if by magic, and every one seemed alert, springy,
and full of spirit.  We energetically resumed the march in the direction of the distant rumbling,
which indicated that the artillery of our advance guard had engaged the enemy.  My regiment
then was part of the main body of a division.  A second division advanced on the road parallel
to ours, about a mile and a quarter to our left.  Both columns belonged to the Third Army Corps
and kept up constant communication with each other through mounted dispatch bearers and motor
cycles.

The cannonading had meanwhile come perceptibly nearer, and in the midst of the dense forest
we again came to a short halt.  Orders were given to load rifles, and upon emerging from the
woods we fell into open formation, the men marching abreast, the companies at a distance of
three hundred yards, with the battalions at a distance of about a thousand yards.  We were
slowly entering the range of the Russian artillery.  About a mile ahead we could see numbers
of harmless looking round clouds, looking like ringlets of smoke from a huge cigar, indicating
the places where shrapnel had exploded in mid-air.  Our men, not being familiar with the spectacle,
took no notice of it, but we officers knew its significance, and I daresay many a heart beat
as wildly as mine did.

We marched on until the command was given for us to deploy, and soon afterwards the first shrapnel
whizzed over our heads.  It did no harm, nor did the second and third, but the fourth hit three
men in the battalion in the rear of us.  Our forward movement, however, was not interrupted,
and we did not see or hear anything beyond two or three startled cries.  The next shell burst
right ahead of us, sending a shower of bullets and steel fragments around.  A man about twenty
yards to the right of my company, but not of my platoon, leaped into the air with an agonizing
cry and fell in a heap, mortally wounded.  As we were advancing very swiftly, I only saw it
as in a dream, while running by.  Then came in rapid succession four or five terrific explosions
right over our heads, and I felt a sudden gust of cold wind strike my cheek as a big shell
fragment came howling through the air, ploughing the ground viciously as it struck and sending
a spray of sand around.

We ran on perhaps a quarter of a mile, when from the rear came the sharp command, "Down," and
the next second we lay on the ground, panting and exhausted, my heart almost bursting with
the exertion.  Simultaneously the whizzing of a motor above our heads could be heard and we
knew why the enemy's shrapnel had so suddenly found us. Bright passion-flower of the South; Soft Southern
languors enfold her, Scarlet the bloom of her mouth; Passionate, sensuous, cruel, Raying warm laughter
and light, A ruby--a scintillant jewel-- Set on the brow of the Night!

Ah, the wild rhythm of her dancing! Lithe with the jaguar's grace, Ah, the sweet fire of her
glancing, The love-litten lure of her face! And ah, in my fierce arms to hold her This strange
scarlet flower of the South. Close to my heart-beat to fold her Drinking the wine of her mouth!

Sweet,
thou art weary with dancing, Sick of the music and light Praises and overbold glancing-- Steal
with me into the night; Out of the riot of laughter, Out of the torment
of tune-- Love and close kisses thereafter Under the sensuous moon!

Carmen, my fierce arms enfold thee, Bright passion-flower of the South, Close to my hot heart
I hold thee, Crushing the flower of thy mouth. Love--for the loving that swayed me, Passion--for
passion long past-- Hate--for the hate that betrayed me ... My dirk in your side at the last!

To
R. D. MacLean

If words were wingèd arrows tipped with flame, Far-flying thro' the vast of time and space, If Erato
should lend me some rare grace, Then might I dare to breathe in song your name. Ah, Player-king,
unmoved by all renown, Acclaim and praise that wait upon your name, You pluck a laurel from
the wreath of fame, Then, careless of the guerdon, cast it down.

Love and Death

Ever athwart Life's sunlit, upland ways Falleth the shadow of impending Death, And still Life's
flowers beneath his blighting breath To ashes wither, and to dust, her bays. What were the worth
of hard-won power or praise? Awaits us all the grave-cell dark and deep, The greedy grave-worm's
maw, the awful sleep When Death his cold hand on our pulses lays. What then the end of action
or of strife? The sphinxèd riddle of the Universe, Nature's unsolved enigma, who may prove?
Life's Passion Play all blindly men rehearse.... But yet our recompense for birth, for life, For death
itself, meseems, is deathless Love!

A Winter Landscape

A mystic world mantled in white simarre Arachne-spun with argent woof; her wede Starred with
strange crystals wrought from frozen spar, Sprent with pearl frost-flowers; girt with diamond
brede, Rubied with berries red as drops of blood, Befringed with gelid, many-irised gems; Broidered
with lace weft of an elfin brood-- Hoar filagree to deck her garment hems.

Sheer slanting down the sky an opal light Pierces the snow-blur's veil of wannish gray, In iridescent
sheen, tingeing the dazzling white With amethystine, gold or beryl ray. Along the West the
transient sunset gleam-- An ardor brief! Crimson on crimson grows Till all the waning sky, incarnadine,
Glows like blown petals of a shattered rose.

Roses and Rue

I.

A swift thought flashed to my mind that day When I first saw you, regally tall 'Mid a throng
of pigmies--a very Saul-- How some woman's heart must admit your sway, Some woman's soul to
your soul be thrall; (And though not for me were the rapture to prove you, I thrilled as I thought
how a woman might love you!)

Then--strange that our eyes for a moment
should meet And hold each other a breathless space, That a light as
of dawn should leap into your face, That the lips that were stern
should an instant grow sweet-- Ere you turned, at a word, with a courtier's
grace. (And I knew that tho' many a woman had loved you, Till that
moment, the glance of no woman had moved you!)

Then you stood at
my side and one murmured your name, The proud old name that you worthily
wore, And I drank the soul-chalice Fate's mandate upbore To my lips,
as the fire of your glance leapt to flame; What need were of words?
heart speaks heart evermore-- (And I knew that were mine but the rapture
to prove you, How deeply, how dearly one woman might love you!)

II.

Do
I idly dream, as the village maid, Who thinks, as she spins, of a
princekin gay On a prancing steed, who shall come her way To woo her
and win her and bear her away Thro' the vasty depths of the forest
shade To a palace set in a sylvan glade,-- To love her for aye and
a day?

Is it like that he with his princely pride-- The son of a
proud old race, Shall stoop with Cophetua's kingly grace To lift me
up to the vacant place, To reign like a queen at his side? Can the
world afford him no worthier bride-- No bride with a queenlier grace?  A short observation revealed the fact that the passing of a dull-sounding
shell was invariably preceded by a flash from one of our own cannon in the rear on the hill,
which conclusively proved it to be an Austrian shell.  It must be understood that as we were
advancing between the positions of the Austrian and Russian artillery, both kinds of shells
were passing over our heads.  As we advanced the difference between shrill and dull shell grew
less and less perceptible, until I could hardly tell them apart.  Upon nearing the hill the
difference increased again more and more until on the hill itself it was very marked.  After
our trench was finished I crawled to the top of the hill until I could make out the flash of
the Russian guns on the opposite heights and by timing flash and actual passing of the shell,
found to my astonishment that now the Russian missiles had become dull, while on the other
hand, the shrill shell was invariably heralded by a flash from one of our guns, now far in
the rear.  What had happened was this: Every shell describes in its course a parabolic line,
with the first half of the curve ascending and the second one descending.  Apparently in the
first half of its curve, that is, its course while ascending, the shell produced a dull whine
accompanied by a falling cadence, which changes to a rising shrill as soon as the acme has
been reached and the curve points downward again.  The acme for both kinds of shells naturally
was exactly the half distance between the Russian and Austrian artillery and this was the point
where I had noticed that the difference was the least marked.  A few days later, in talking
over my observation with an artillery officer, I was told the fact was known that the shells
sounded different going up than when coming down, but this knowledge was not used for practical
purposes.  When I told him that I could actually determine by the sound the exact place where
a shell coming from the opposing batteries was reaching its acme, he thought that this would
be of great value in a case where the position of the opposing battery was hidden and thus
could be located.  He apparently spoke to his commander about me, for a few days later I was
sent on a reconnoitering tour, with the object of marking on the map the exact spot where I
thought the hostile shells were reaching their acme, and it was later on reported to me that
I had succeeded in giving to our batteries the almost exact range of the Russian guns.  I have
gone into this matter at some length, because it is the only instance where my musical ear
was of value during my service.

To return to my narrative, the losses which my battalion suffered that day seemed extraordinarily
small when compared with the accuracy of the Russian artillery's aim and the number of missiles
they fired.  I counted seventy-four shrapnel that burst in a circle of half a mile around us
in about two hours, and yet we had no more than about eighteen casualties.  The most difficult
part was to lie still and motionless while death was being dealt all about us and it was then
and there that I had my first experience of seeing death next to me.  A soldier of my platoon,
while digging in the trench, suddenly leaned back, began to cough like an old man, a little
blood broke from his lips, and he crumpled together in a heap and lay quite still. I could
not realize that this was the end, for his eyes were wide open and his face wore the stamp
of complete serenity.  Apparently he had not suffered at all.  The man had been a favorite
with all his fellows by reason of his good humor, and that he was now stretched out dead seemed
unbelievable.  I saw a great many men die afterwards, some suffering horribly, but I do not
recall any death that affected me quite so much as that of this first victim in my platoon.

II

The artillery duel died out with the coming of darkness and we settled down to rest, half of
the men taking watch while the others slept.  At five o'clock in the morning our regiment suddenly
received the order to fall in, and, together with two other regiments, was drawn out of the
fighting line.  Our commanding general had received news that an isolated detachment on the
extreme right wing of our army, about fifteen miles east of us, had been entirely surrounded
by a strong Russian body, and we were ordered to relieve them.  It must not be forgotten that
our men had been under a most incredible strain for the last three days with barely any rest
during the nights and not more than one meal a day.  They had actually welcomed entering the
firing line, as a relief from the fatigues of marching with their heavy burdens.  It is curious
how indifferent one becomes to danger if one's organism is worn down and brain and faculty
of perception numbed by physical exertion.  It was, therefore, with badly broken-down strength
that we started on this relief expedition, and it was good to see how unflinchingly the soldiers
undertook their unexpected new task.  All we had to say to our men was: "Boys, your brothers
are needing you.  They are cut off from all possible relief unless you bring it.  Their lives
are at stake, and as they are defending one of the most strategically important points--the
right wing of our army--you can turn the tide of the whole battle in our favor; so go on."
And on they went, staggering and stumbling, and at the end of a few hours almost crawling,
but ever forward.

Suddenly we came up with another regiment which had been called to the same task, and the colonel
of the new regiment, being older in rank than our colonel, took command of the newly formed
brigade of two regiments.  My company happened to march at the head of the regiment and the
new brigadier rode for some time alongside of me.  I was deeply impressed by his firm military
and yet unassuming bearing and his deep glowing enthusiasm for his army and his men. He told
me with pride that two of his sons were serving in the army, too, one as an artillery officer
and the other one as an officer with the sappers.  We were then approaching the point where
we could hear distinctly the fire of our own batteries and the answer from the Russians, and
here and there a volley of rifle fire.  Our colonel urged us on to renewed energy, and knowledge
that we were nearing our goal, seemed to give new strength to our men.  Already we were witnessing
evidences of the first fight that had passed here, for wounded men constantly passed us on
stretchers.  Suddenly I saw the face of the colonel riding next to me, light up with excitement
as a wounded man was borne past.  He addressed a few words to the stretcher-bearers and then
turned to me, saying: "The regiment of my son is fighting on the hill.  It is one of their
men they have brought by." He urged us on again, and it seemed to me as if I noticed--or was
it my imagination--a new note of appeal in his face. Suddenly another stretcher was brought
past.  The colonel at my side jumped from his horse, crying out, "My boy," and a feeble voice
answered, "Father." We all stopped as if a command had been given, to look at the young officer
who lay on the stretcher, his eyes all aglow with enthusiasm and joy, unmindful of his own
wound as he cried out, "Father, how splendid that the relief should just come from you! Goon.
We held out splendidly.  All we need is ammunition and a little moral support.  Go on, don't
stop for me, I am all right." The old colonel stood like a statue of bronze.  His face had
become suddenly ashen gray.  He looked at the doctor and tried to catch his expression.  The
doctor seemed grave.  But the young man urged us on, saying, "Go on, go on, I'll be all right
to-morrow." The whole incident had not lasted more than five minutes, barely longer than it
takes to write it.  The colonel mounted his horse, sternly commanding us to march forward,
but the light had died out of his eyes.

Within the next ten minutes a hail of shrapnel was greeting us, but hardly any one of us was
conscious of it, so terribly and deeply were we affected by the scene of tragedy that had just
been enacted before us.  I remember foolishly mumbling something to the silent man riding next
to me, something about the power of recuperation of youth, about the comparative harmlessness
of the pointed, steelmantled rifle bullets which on account of their terrific percussion make
small clean wounds and rarely cause splintering of the bone or blood poisoning.  I remember
saying that I had quite a medical knowledge and that it seemed to me that his son was not mortally
wounded.  But he knew better.  He never said a word, only, a few minutes later, "He was my
only hope"; and I can't express how ominous that word "was" sounded to me.  But just then the
command to deploy was given and the excitement that followed drowned for the time being all
melancholy thoughts.  We quickly ascended the hill where the isolated detachment of Austrians
had kept the Russians at bay for fully twenty-four hours and opened fire on the enemy, while
the second regiment tried to turn his left flank. The Russians slowly fell back but we followed
them, and a sort of running fight ensued, during which my regiment lost about fifty-- dead
and wounded.  The Russians temporarily resisted again, but soon the pressure from our other
regiment on their flank began to be felt and they fled rather disorderly, leaving two machine
guns, some ammunition, and four carriages full of provisions in our hands, while the regiment
which had executed the flanking movement took two hundred and forty prisoners.

Around eight o'clock at night the fight was stopped for want of light, and we took up our newly
acquired positions, entrenched them well, and began to make ready for the night.  Orders for
outpost duty were given and the officers were again called to the brigadier- colonel, who in
a few words outlined the situation to us, thanking us for the pertinacity and bravery shown
by the troops, and adding that the success of the expedition lay in the fact that we had arrived
in time to save the situation.

Then the question of transporting prisoners to the rear came up, and while the brigadier's
eyes were searching us I felt that he was going to entrust me with that mission.  He looked
at me, gave me the order in a short, measured way, but his eyes gazed searchingly and deeply
into mine, and I thought I understood the unspoken message.  So, tired as I was, I immediately
set out with a guard of twenty men to transport the two hundred and forty Russian prisoners,
among whom were two officers, back behind the fighting line.  They seemed not unhappy over
their lot--in fact, were smoking and chatting freely while we marched back.  One of the Russian
officers had a wound in his leg and was carried on a stretcher, but he, too, seemed quite at
ease, conversing with me in French and congratulating me upon the bravery our isolated detachment
had shown against the terrific onslaught.  As soon as I had delivered them safely into the
hands of the commander of our reserves, I inquired the way to the nearest field hospital in
search of the young officer, the son of our brigadier-colonel.  It was then about nine o'clock
at night, and on entering the peasant's hut where the field hospital was established, I saw
at a glance that I had come too late. He lay there still, hands folded over his breast with
as serene and happy an expression as if asleep.  His faithful orderly sat weeping next to him,
and some kind hand had laid a small bunch of field flowers on his breast.

From the doctor I got the full information.  He had received a shot in the abdomen and a rifle
bullet had grazed his cheek.  His last words had been a fervent expression of joy over the
relief brought by his father and the knowledge that the position would not be taken by the
Russians.  He had died as simply as a child, without regret, and utterly happy.  I took the
orderly with me, asking him to carry all the belongings of the young officer with him in order
to transmit them to his father.

When I returned with the orderly, the brigadier was issuing orders to his officers and conferring
with them about the military situation.  He saw me come, yet not a muscle moved in his face,
nor did he interrupt his conversation.  I was overwhelmed by the power this man showed at that
minute, and admit I had not the courage to break the news to him, but it was unnecessary, for
he understood. The faithful orderly stepped forward, as I had bidden him, presenting to the
old man the pocketbook and small articles that belonged to his son.  While he did so he broke
forth into sobs, lamenting aloud the loss of his beloved lieutenant, yet not a muscle moved
in the face of the father.  He took my report, nodded curtly, dismissed me without a word,
and turned back to his ordnance officers, resuming the conversation.

I assumed the command of my platoon which in the mean time had been assigned to do some outpost
duty under the command of the sergeant.  I inquired about their position and went out to join
them. About midnight we were relieved, and when marching back, passed the place where the tent
of the brigadier had been erected.  I saw a dark figure lying on the floor, seemingly in deep
sleep, and ordering my men to march on I crept silently forward.  Then I saw that his shoulders
were convulsively shaking and I knew that the mask of iron had fallen at last.  The night was
chilly so I entered his tent in search of his overcoat and laid it around his shoulders. To have
lived! To have felt in my veins the surge of the rich, red tide of life, The quickening stir
of the strong man's heart that thrills to the sound of strife; To
have wrested success from defeat, to have striven, and struggled,
and won-- Shall this seem a small thing, think you, when the Battle
of Ages is done?

To have loved! To have known of all raptures, the rapture supernal, divine, To have felt the
throb of your heart on my heart and the bloom of your lips pressed to mine; To have ranked
with the gods on Olympus--myths tell us immortal Jove Cleft with his swan-wings the blue of the
sky for boon of a mortal's love.... I have lived, I have loved, I
have triumphed!

Let Death come, or early or late! I hurl my challenging gauntlet full in the face of Fate! Fate may
make wreck of a future--how can she alter the past? I have tasted the sweets of life's chalice--why
shrink from the lees at the last? How should I cavil at aught that shall come--I stand with your
head on my breast-- I have fought as I might--I have gained you, beloved ... to God's mercy
the rest! Tho' the heavens darken above me and the sky be shrunk as a scroll, In the wreck
and ruin of riven worlds, should I falter, O Soul of my soul? Tho' the demon Despair, where he
vanquished lies, still utter his shibboleth-- I fling my glove in the face of Fate and smile
in the eyes of Death!

And Yet ...

Upon the meads where we were wont to stray, 'Guiling with springtime hopes the winter hours, The
Spring has smiled; yon slope that late gloomed gray And sternly sad, 'neath April's tender showers
Grows green and glad again.

The rippled grass, A soundless sea o'er which white cloud-sails pass, Breaks at my feet in
billows foamed with flowers; And blue-eyed myrtle blooms with lashes wet Smile to me thro' their
tears. The skies are blue, And life is sweet to-day and hope seems true; My heart is barren of
its long regret-- And yet...

The willow wears a wistful green. A dream Of Summer warmth the wine-sweet breezes hold, Fair
wildings blow--bright buttercups agleam Like shining sequins scattered
on the wold, And daffodills--a wealth of faery gold.

The building birds their coming bliss presage With lilt and lyric brimming o'er the page Of
Nature's volume bound in green and gold. Here 'mid the birds and blossoms 'neath the blue-- My heart
unburthened of the old regret-- Let me forget long striving to forget; For life is sweet to-day
and hope seems true-- And yet...

The Master-Player

Mute was the mighty organ. None might break The silence that had thralled it since was stilled
The master-hand beneath whose touch it thrilled To music such as choiring seraphs make-- Until a mightier
Master came to wake Th' elusive chords and subtle harmonies That
lay imprisoned in the cold white keys And once again the soul of Music
spake.

Methought my soul's most perfect melodies No hand again to sonance could evoke-- A silent harp
whose potence none might prove-- But, lo! one came who swept its chords and woke Celestial strains,
divinest harmonies, Responsive to the master-touch of Love.

Afterbloom

Gay was her garden as some gorgeous fabric Weft on an Orient loom, Star-set upon the sward quaint,
old-time blossoms Wrought broidery of bloom.

Verbenas, dahlias, asters, scarlet cannas Like torches flaming tall;
(Methought the fair, old face, enframed in silver, The sweetest flower
of all!)

And one rare rose she watched each year with hoping Till
the dear eyes grew dim-- But ere a single blossom burst in beauty
God took her home to Him.

Yet when the Spring next woke the earth to laughter And boon of blossom gave, Starred was the rose
with white, unearthly flowers-- We laid them on her grave.

* * * * *

And so, meseems, the buds we woo most fondly Nor light nor perfume shed; And Love's gold-hearted
rose and Hope's star-flower Oft bloom when we are dead.
To Bliss Carman

Great hearted brother to the wilderness, Comrade
of Wind and Sea! Interpreter Of nomad Nature! Ere the quick'ning stir
Of Spring-sap thrills the wood from sullen stress Of Winter's spell--away
from throngèd press Of urban ways thy wild feet wander far Tracking
the steps of some white Northern star Whose rays are beacon to thy
restlessness. Weird mystic of the Northland's mystery, Thou 'front'st
the Unseen Shadow, nor dost fear To meet the Scarlet Hunter on the
trail; Pagan as Pan; to all things sylvan dear, Nature's own vagrant,
buoyant, driftless, free-- All winds and woods and waters cry thee
hail!

When Love Passed By

I dreamt of love in the golden glory Of
youth unshadowed by cloud or care; Steeped in the love-lore of song
and story, I said, "My Love shall be wondrous fair."  A second shell followed, exploding almost at the same place.  At
the same time, we noticed a faint spinning noise above us.  Soaring high above our position,
looking like a speck in the firmament, flew a Russian aeroplane, watching the effect of the
shells and presumably directing the fire of the Russian artillery.  This explained its sudden
accuracy.  One of our aeroplanes rose, giving chase to the enemy, and simultaneously our batteries
got into action.  The Russians kept up a sharply concentrated, well-directed fire against our
center, our gunners responding gallantly, and the spirited artillery duel which ensued grew
in intensity until the entrails of the earth seemed fairly to shake with the thunder.

By one o'clock the incessant roaring, crashing, and splintering of bursting shells had become
almost unendurable to our nerves, which were already strained to the snapping-point by the
lack of action and the expectancy.  Suddenly there appeared a thin dark line on the horizon
which moved rapidly towards us, looking not unlike a huge running bird with immense outstretched
wings.  We looked through our field glasses; there could be no doubt,--it was Russian cavalry,
swooping down upon us with incredible impetus and swiftness.  I quickly glanced at our colonel.
He stared open-mouthed.  This was, indeed, good fortune for us,--too good to believe.  No cavalry
attack could stand before well-disciplined infantry, providing the latter keep cool and well
composed, calmly waiting until the riders come sufficiently close to take sure aim.

There was action for us at last.  At a sharp word of command, our men scrambled out of the
trenches for better view and aim, shouting with joy as they did so.  What a change had come
over us all! My heart beat with wild exultation.  I glanced at my men.  They were all eagerness
and determination, hand at the trigger, eyes on the approaching enemy, every muscle strained,
yet calm, their bronzed faces hardened into immobility, waiting for the command to fire. Every
subaltern officer's eye hung on our colonel, who stood about thirty yards ahead of us on a
little hill, his figure well defined in the sunlight, motionless, the very picture of calm
assurance and proud bearing.  He scanned the horizon with his glasses.  Shrapnel was hailing
around him, but he seemed utterly unaware of it; for that matter we had all forgotten it, though
it kept up its terrible uproar, spitting here and there destruction into our midst.

By this time the avalanche of tramping horses had come perceptibly nearer.  Soon they would
sweep by the bundle of hay which marked the carefully measured range within which our fire
was terribly effective.  Suddenly the mad stampede came to an abrupt standstill, and then the
Cossacks scattered precipitately to the right and left, only to disclose in their rear the
advancing Russian infantry, the movements of which it had been their endeavor to veil.

The infantry moved forward in loose lines, endlessly rolling on like shallow waves overtaking
each other, one line running forward, then suddenly disappearing by throwing itself down and
opening fire on us to cover the advance of the other line, and so on, while their artillery
kept up a hellish uproar spreading destruction through our lines.  Simultaneously a Russian
aeroplane swept down upon us with a noise like an angered bird of prey and pelted us with bombs,
the effects of which, however, were more moral than actual, for we had regained the security
of the trenches and opened fire on the approaching enemy, who in spite of heavy losses advanced
steadily until he reached our wire entanglements.  There he was greeted by a deadly fire from
our machine guns.  The first Russian lines were mowed down as if by a gigantic scythe, and
so were the reserves as they tried to advance.  The first attack had collapsed.  After a short
time, however, they came on again, this time more cautiously, armed with nippers to cut the
barbed wire and using the bodies of their own fallen comrades as a rampart.  Again they were
repulsed. Once more their cavalry executed a feigned attack under cover of which the Russian
infantry rallied, strongly reinforced by reserves, and more determined than ever.

Supported by heavy artillery fire their lines rolled endlessly on and hurled themselves against
the barbed-wire fences.  For a short time it almost seemed, as if they would break through
by sheer weight of numbers.  At that critical moment, however, our reserves succeeded in executing
a flanking movement.  Surprised and caught in a deadly cross-fire, the Russian line wavered
and finally they fled in disorder.

All these combined artillery, infantry, cavalry, and aeroplane attacks had utterly failed in
their object of dislodging our center or shaking its position, each one being frustrated by
the resourceful, cool alertness of our commanding general and the splendid heroism and stoicism
of our troops.  But the strain of the continuous fighting for nearly the whole day without
respite of any kind, or chance for food or rest, in the end told on the power of endurance
of our men, and when the last attack had been successfully repulsed they lay mostly prostrated
on the ground, panting and exhausted.  Our losses had been very considerable too, stretcher-bearers
being busy administering first aid and carrying the wounded back to the nearest field hospital,
while many a brave man lay stark and still.

By eight o'clock it had grown perceptibly cooler.  We now had time to collect our impressions
and look about us.  The Russians had left many dead on the field, and at the barbed-wire entanglements
which our sappers had constructed as an obstacle to their advance, their bodies lay heaped
upon each other, looking not unlike the more innocent bundles of hay lying in the field.  We
could see the small Red Cross parties in the field climbing over the horribly grotesque tumuli
of bodies, trying to disentangle the wounded from the dead and administer first aid to them.

Enthusiasm seemed suddenly to disappear before this terrible spectacle.  Life that only a few
hours before had glowed with enthusiasm and exultation, suddenly paled and sickened.  The silence
of the night was interrupted only by the low moaning of the wounded that came regularly to
us.  It was hideous in its terrible monotony.  The moon had risen, throwing fantastic lights
and shadows over the desolate landscape and the heaped-up dead. These grotesque piles of human
bodies seemed like a monstrous sacrificial offering immolated on the altar of some fiendishly
cruel, antique deity.  I felt faint and sick at heart and near swooning away. I lay on the
floor for some time unconscious of what was going on around me, in a sort of stupor, utterly
crushed over the horrors about me.  I do not know how long I had lain there, perhaps ten minutes,
perhaps half an hour, when suddenly I heard a gruff, deep voice behind me--the brigadier, who
had come around to inspect and to give orders about the outposts.  His calm, quiet voice brought
me to my senses and I reported to him.  His self-assurance, kindness, and determination dominated
the situation.  Within five minutes he had restored confidence, giving definite orders for
the welfare of every one, man and beast alike, showing his solicitude for the wounded, for
the sick and weak ones, and mingling praise and admonition in just measure.  As by magic I
felt fortified.  Here was a real man undaunted by nervous qualms or by over-sensitiveness.
The horrors of the war were distasteful to him, but he bore them with equanimity.  It was,
perhaps, the first time in my life that I regretted that my artistic education had over-sharpened
and overstrung my nervous system, when I saw how manfully and bravely that man bore what seemed
to me almost unbearable.  His whole machinery of thinking was not complicated and not for a
moment did qualms of "Weltschmerz" or exaggerated altruism burden his conscience and interfere
with his straight line of conduct which was wholly determined by duty and code of honor.  In
his private life he was an unusually kind man.  His solicitude for his subordinates, for prisoners,
and for the wounded was touching, yet he saw the horrors of the war unflinchingly and without
weakening, for were they not the consequences of the devotion of men to their cause? The whole
thing seemed quite natural to him.  The man was clearly in his element and dominated it.

After having inspected the outposts, I went back, bedded myself in a soft sand-heap, covered
myself up, and was soon fast and peacefully asleep.  During the night the dew moistened the
sand, and when I awoke in the morning I found myself encased in a plastering which could not
be removed for days.

III

Our hopes of getting a little rest and respite from the fighting were soon shattered, for a
scouting aeroplane brought news that the Russians were again advancing in overwhelming strength.
Our commanding general, coming to the conclusion that with the reduced and weakened forces
at his command he could not possibly offer any effective resistance to a renewed onslaught,
had determined to fall back slowly before their pressure.  The consequence was a series of
retreating battles for us, which lasted about ten days and which constituted what is now called
the battle of Lemberg.

We were then terribly outnumbered by the Russians, and in order to extricate our army and prevent
it from being surrounded and cut off, we constantly had to retreat, one detachment taking up
positions to resist the advancing Russians, trying to hold them at all costs in order to give
the rest of the army sufficient time to retire to safety. This maneuvering could not, of course,
be carried out without the forces guarding the rear and covering the retreat suffering sometimes
terrible losses.

These were depressing days, with rain and storm adding to the gloom.  The men tramped wearily,
hanging their heads, ashamed and humiliated by the retreat, the necessity of which they could
not grasp, having, as they thought, successfully repulsed the enemy.  It was difficult to make
them understand that our regiment was only a cog in the huge wheel of the Austrian fighting
machine and that, with a battle line extending over many miles, it was quite natural that partial
successes could take place and yet the consideration of general strategy necessitate a retreat.
Our arguing made little impression on the men; for they only shook their heads and said, "We
were victorious, we should have gone on."

The spirit of retreating troops is vastly different from that shown by  an advancing army,
and it was probably in recognition of this well-known psychological state that our general
staff had in the beginning attacked the Russians wherever they could, in spite of the overwhelming
superiority of the foe, but the reinforcements the Russians were able to draw upon had swelled
their ranks so enormously that any attack would have been little short of madness.

The real hardships and privations for us began only now.  The few roads of Galicia, which at
best are in bad condition, through the constant passing of heavy artillery and wagons of all
kinds following each other in endless procession through constant rains, had become well-nigh
impassable, the heavy mud constituting an additional impediment to the marching of troops.
In order to get all of the train carrying provisions out of the possible reach of a sudden
raid by the Russian cavalry, it had to be sent miles back of us, so as not to interfere with
the movement of the troops.  This caused somewhat of an interruption in the organization of
the commissary department and very little food reached the troops, and that only at very long
intervals.

The distribution of food to an army, even in peace and under the best conditions, is a very
complicated and difficult undertaking. Provisions are shipped from the interior to the important
railway centers, which serve as huge army depots and form the basis from which the different
army corps draw their provisions and from which they are constantly replenished.  They in turn
supply the divisions and brigades wherefrom the regiments and battalions draw their provisions.
So it is seen that the great aorta which leads from the interior to the big depots slowly subdivides
itself into smaller arteries and feeders until they reach the ultimate destination, the extreme
front.

This distribution of food had now become a formidable task, in consequence of the unforeseen
movements and diversions which were forced upon us by the unexpected developments of the battle;
and it often happened that food supplies intended for a certain detachment would reach their
destination only after the departure of that detachment.

My platoon had by this time shrunk from fifty-five men to about thirty-four, but those remaining
had become very hardened, efficient, and fit.  It is astonishing how quickly the human organism
adjusts itself, if need be, to the most difficult circumstances.  So far as I was concerned,
for instance, I adapted myself to the new life without any trouble at all, responding to the
unusual demands upon me automatically, as it were.  My rather impaired eyesight improved in
the open, with only wide distances to look at.  I found that my muscles served me better than
ever before.  I leaped and ran and supported fatigue that would have appalled me under other
circumstances.  In the field all neurotic symptoms seem to disappear as by magic, and one's
whole system is charged with energy and vitality.  Perhaps this is due to the open-air life
with its simplified standards, freed from all the complex exigencies of society's laws, and
unhampered by conventionalities, as well as to the constant throb of excitement, caused by
the activity, the adventure, and the uncertainty of fate.

The very massing together of so many individuals, with every will merged into one that strives
with gigantic effort toward a common end, and the consequent simplicity and directness of all
purpose, seem to release and unhinge all the primitive, aboriginal forces stored in the human
soul, and tend to create the indescribable atmosphere of exultation which envelopes everything
and everybody as with a magic cloak.

It is extraordinary how quickly suggestions of luxury, culture, refinement, in fact all the
gentler aspects of life, which one had considered to be an integral part of one's life are
quickly forgotten, and, more than that, not even missed.  Centuries drop from one, and one
becomes a primeval man, nearing the cave-dweller in an incredibly short time.  For twenty-one
days I went without taking off my clothes, sleeping on wet grass or in mud, or in the swamps,
wherever need be, and with nothing but my cape to cover me. Nothing disturbs one.  One night,
while sleeping, we were drenched to the skin by torrential rains.  We never stirred, but waited
for the sun to dry us out again.  Many things considered necessities of civilization simply
drop out of existence.  A toothbrush was not imaginable.  We ate instinctively, when we had
food, with our hands. If we had stopped to think of it at all, we should have thought it ludicrous
to use knife and fork.

We were all looking like shaggy, lean wolves, from the necessity of subsisting on next to nothing.
I remember having gone for more than three days at a time without any food whatsoever, and
many a time we had to lick the dew from the grass for want of water.  A certain fierceness
arises in you, an absolute indifference to anything the world holds except your duty of fighting.
You are eating a crust of bread, and a man is shot dead in the trench next to you.  You look
calmly at him for a moment, and then go on eating your bread. Why not? There is nothing to
be done.  In the end you talk of your own death with as little excitement as you would of a
luncheon engagement.  There is nothing left in your mind but the fact that hordes of men to
whom you belong are fighting against other hordes, and your side must win.

My memory of these days is very much blurred, every day being pretty nearly the same as the
preceding one,--fatiguing marches, little rest and comparatively little fighting.

It is quite possible that our commander tried to divide the work of the troops in a just manner,
and that in consequence of my regiment having borne the brunt of two terrible attacks, and
having suffered considerable loss, we were now temporarily withdrawn from the fighting line,
and not once during these days were assigned to the duty of a rear guard.  Consequently we
had only few and unimportant skirmishes in these days, twice while guarding the flank through
having to repulse attacks of Cossacks, and once being harassed by an armored automobile.  But
the movements of an automobile being confined to the road, we had no difficulty in avoiding
its fire, and as for the Cossacks with their eternal feigned attacks, we had reached the point
where we almost ignored them.

We were in the first days of September, and upon reaching the swamps near Grodeck, south of
Lemberg, a determined stand was decided upon by our commanding general.  It seemed the most
propitious place for a formidable defense, there being only few roads through otherwise impassable
swamps.  On September sixth my battalion was ordered to take up a position commanding a defile
which formed one of the possible approaches for the enemy.  Here we awaited the Russians, and
they were not long in coming.  First they violently shelled our position and silenced one of
our batteries. To prove your skill as a lover--yet--"I am your Rosalind!"

I merge in the player, the woman! The actress good at her art Must needs look well to each glance
and tone, must needs play still her part--

Tho' the woman's soul that must else be mute; aye soul and spirit and mind! Cry to your soul in
another's words--"And I am your Rosalind!"

To E. P. B.

Imperial as that famed Elizabeth Before whose feet a knight his cloak cast down-- A sovereign--altho'
thine only crown Love's roses 'twine for thee, Elizabeth.

Ah, maiden sweeter than morn's nectared breath, Across thy path no regal robe I fling-- Only a
living, loving heart I bring To lay at thy dear feet, Elizabeth.

Through the Dark

Last night they laid me in my winding sheet, Set burning tapers at my feet and head, Decked me
with wan white blossoms faint and sweet, And told each other softly, "She is dead."

Ay, dumb and dead! Enshrouded, cold and stark I lay where waned the tawny tapers dim, Pulseless and
pale; yet thro' the dreadful dark I lived in thoughts of him.

The morning came. One who had loved me bent Above my face with tears and bated breath; Laid on
my heart the roses he had sent-- And I--was glad of death!

Preluding

Frail fronds of ferns uncurling, Blue iris flags unfurling, Pale showers of blossoms swirling
Like clouds of wind-blown snow; With fragile wildings playing, Like two blithe children maying,
Across the glad meads straying, Together, dear, we go.

The silver clouds far-drifting, Vague lights and shadows shifting, The sungleams gold-dust
sifting Down thro' the latticed leaves; Gray brooks the meadows lacing, Young flow'rs the uplands
gracing, Her faery 'broidery tracing The skillful spider weaves.

From long, long day-dreams shaken, The vivid violets waken; His Southern haunts forsaken, The bluebird
flecks the sky; Ah, breath of bloom-bright heather, Ah, golden Maytime
weather, We drift in dreams together-- Together, you and I.

The Heights
of Silence

(Transcribed from "The Choir Invisible.")

Above the valleys,
peopled, fair and warm, Rise the bleak, silent uplands where abide
Wraiths of lost loves, love's recompense denied, Unspoken, unconfessed,
unsatisfied.... Cold, silent heights, engirt with zones of storm,
Where Love for aye unmated must abide.

The broad, sweet downward vistas of the flesh Stretch fair and far;
the calm white spirit-height Is lone and chill; there dimly shines
the light Of sun and star that burns and beacons bright Where Sin
spreads still her guiling, glitt'ring mesh. Ah, warm the valley! Lone
and chill the height!

Yet he who wins the height's sublimity-- The
silent height where loves unlived abide, Loves stainless, sublimated,
purified-- Shall glimpse that land, to grosser view denied, Where
love and longing infinite shall be Or ever stilled--or ever satisfied.

Andromeda

Bound
ever to a great grey rock of Doom, Striving with futile hands to rive
the chain Of woven fear, distrust and subtle pain, While gaunt wolf-waves
that leap from out the gloom Of doubt's cold sea are snarling at my
feet, As nearer writhes the dragon of Despair Foul with dank horrors
of his caverned lair, And like a clock of doom the dark tides beat....
I lift my eyes; Lo! sudden sweeps along Thought's empyrean and the
vast of dreams One star-browed, Jove-like, human-orbed; meseems His
feet are winged with music, shod with song; Ah, Perseus, should'st
thou, pitying, leave the sky To loose my bonds--then all the fear
were gone, Soul touching soul, trust from distrust were won, Like
god and goddess 'fronted, thou and I; Despair were slain, closed the
unequal strife, Thy great soul's strength should make weak purpose
strong, Thy hand should lead me up the slopes of Song, Thy winged
feet guide me to the peaks of Life! This unofficial truce
had lasted about twenty minutes, and succeeded more in restoring good humor and joy of life
among our soldiers than a trainload of provisions would have done.  It was one of the incidents
that helped to relieve the monotony of trench life and was heartily welcomed by all of us.
The fighting, however, soon was resumed with all its earnestness and fierceness, but from this
moment on a certain camaraderie was established between the two opposing trenches.  Between
skirmishes an unofficial truce would frequently be called for the purpose of removing the wounded.
During these times when the stretcher-bearers were busy, no shot would be fired on either side.

Nor was this an isolated case, for similar intermittent truces, sometimes accompanied by actual
intercourse between the opposing forces, were quite common all along the battle line.  That
very night I was hurriedly summoned to the trenches of the 13th Company, about half a mile
east of us, in order to act as an interpreter between the major commanding that battalion and
two singular guests he had just received, a Russian officer and his orderly.  The pair, carrying
a white flag, had hailed one of the numerous Austrian outposts placed during the night, in
front of the trenches, and had been sent blindfolded back to the major.  The Russian officer
spoke only broken French.  He commanded one of the opposing trenches, and from his narrative
it appeared that his men had not received any food supplies for some days and were actually
on the point of starvation.  Not being able to stand their misery any longer, he had taken
the bull by the horns and, with the utter confidence and straightforwardness of a fearless
nature, had simply come over to us, the enemy, for help, offering a little barrel of water
which his companion carried on his head and a little tobacco, in exchange for some provisions.
The major seemed at first, perhaps, a little perplexed and undecided about this singular request,
but his generous nature and chivalry soon asserted itself. One single look at the emaciated
and worn faces of our guests sufficiently substantiated the truth of their story, for both
men were utterly exhausted and on the verge of collapse.  The next minute messengers were flying
to the different trenches of the battalion to solicit and collect contributions, and the officers
scrambled over each other in their noble contest to deplete their own last and cherished reserves
for the supper of the guests.  Soon the latter were seated as comfortably as circumstances
permitted before a feast of canned beef, cheese, biscuits, and a slice of salami, my own proud
contribution consisting of two tablets of chocolate, part of a precious reserve for extreme
cases.  It was a strange sight to see these two Russians in an Austrian trench, surrounded
by cordiality and tender solicitude.  The big brotherhood of humanity had for the time enveloped
friend and foe, stamping out all hatred and racial differences.  It is wonderful how the most
tender flowers of civilization can go hand in hand with the most brutal atrocities of grim
modern warfare.

In the mean while the messengers had returned almost staggering under the weight of a sack
filled with the gifts of our soldiers to the enemy,--pieces of bread and biscuits with here
and there a slice of bacon or a lump of cheese, all thrown pele-mele together.  Many a man
must have parted with his last piece of bread in order not to be outdone by the others in generosity,
for our own provisions were running very low.  It is true that the bread and biscuits were
mildewed, the cheese stale, and the bacon as hard as stone, but the boys gave the best they
could, the very poverty and humbleness of the gifts attesting their own desperate plight, and
bearing proud witness to the extent of their sacrifice.  With tears in their eyes and reiterated
protestations of thanks, our guests staggered back through the night to their lines, undoubtedly
carrying with them tender memories of Austrian generosity and hospitality.

On the morning of the next day a Russian detachment succeeded in storming a hill on our flank,
commanding the strip of space between ourselves and our reserves in the rear, thus cutting
us off from our main body.  They established there a machine-gun battery, and, although we
were under cover in our trench, we were now in a very precarious position, for no more provisions
or ammunition could reach us, all attempts to do so breaking down under a terrific machine-gun
fire, but we had orders to hold our position at all cost and to the last man. God bless you, dear."

Dear
patient face and furrowed brow, Dear lips that smile thro' all life's pain, Brave toil-worn hands,
so weary now, Sweet soul unmarred by earthly stain. Within the doorway Mother stands, The
while a man oppressed with care, Across the waning Autumn lands, Goes toil-ward, fain to strive
and bear; And where the pathway breasts the hill, I stay my steps and turn to hear Her trembling
voice, as ling'ring still, She calls, "Good-bye! God bless you, dear."

Dear peaceful face and placid brow, Dear lips that smile secure from pain, Brave toil-worn hands,
soft-folded now, Sweet spirit freed from earthly stain. Within God's portal Mother stands, The while
a man forspent with care Seeketh the far-off meadow-lands, By faith made strong to strive and
bear. And as I breast life's weary hill, I ofttimes pause--meseems I hear The well-loved accents
breathing still The old fond prayer, "God bless you, dear."

Roses

"Where leaves the Rose of Yesterday?"--Rubàiyat.

A red rose burns upon his breast Where erst a white rose lay; Above
his fervent heart-throb pressed-- The red rose of To-day.

What recks
he of the flower that dies-- (For roses bloom alway!) Low in the dust,
forgotten, lies The rose of Yesterday.

But yet, To-day's red rose
must die, (For roses fade alway!) To-morrow crushed, forgot, 'twill
lie-- A rose of Yesterday.

The Poet

One fluting on sad wolds Pan's
flight left drear, One crying down the wayward wind of Chance, One
piping unto feet that will not dance And mourning unto ears that will
not hear.
We all wrote what we considered our parting and last farewell, each one pledging himself to
deliver and take care of the letters of the others if he survived.  It was a grave, sad, deeply
touching moment, when we resigned ourselves to the inevitable, and yet somehow we all felt
relieved and satisfied that the end might come and grimly resolved to sell our lives dearly.

Never before had I as much reason to admire the wonderful power of endurance and stoicism of
our soldiers as on that night.  Once resigned to the worst, all the old-time spirit returned,
as if by magic. They sat together playing cards in as much moonlight as would fall into the
deep trench, relating jokes and bolstering up one another's courage.

The fourth day broke gloomy, with a drizzling rain.  At ten o'clock one of our men became suddenly
insane, jumped out of the trench, danced wildly and divested himself of every stitch of clothing
while doing so.  Strange to say, the Russians must have realized that the man was insane, for
they never fired at him, neither did they at the two men who jumped out to draw him back. 
We succeeded in comforting and subduing him, and he soon fell into a stupor and remained motionless
for some time.  As soon as darkness fell we succeeded in conveying him back to the reserves
and I understand that he got quite well again in a few days.

At five o'clock that afternoon we suddenly received orders through a running messenger, who
was braving the incessant machine-gun fire, that our positions were about to be abandoned and
that we were to evacuate our trench under the cover of darkness, at eleven o'clock.  I cannot
but confess that we all breathed more freely on the receipt of that information, but unfortunately
the purpose could not be carried out.  The Russians by this time evidently had realized our
comparatively defenseless condition and utter lack of ammunition, for that same night we heard
two shots ring out, being a signal from our sentinels that they were surprised and that danger
was near.  I hardly had time to draw my sword, to grasp my revolver with my left hand and issue
a command to my men to hold their bayonets in readiness, when we heard a tramping of horses
and saw dark figures swooping down upon us.  For once the Cossacks actually carried out their
attack, undoubtedly owing to their intimate knowledge of our lack of ammunition.  My next sensation
was a crushing pain in my shoulder, struck by the hoof of a horse, and a sharp knife pain in
my right thigh.  I fired with my revolver at the hazy figure above me, saw it topple over and
then lost consciousness.

This happened, to the best of my recollection, at about half past ten at night.  Upon coming
to my senses I found my faithful orderly, kneeling in the trench by my side.  He fairly shouted
with delight as I opened my eyes.  According to his story the Austrians, falling back under
the cavalry charge, had evacuated the trench without noticing, in the darkness, that I was
missing.  But soon discovering my absence he started back to the trench in search of me.  It
was a perilous undertaking for him, for the Cossacks were still riding about, and he showed
me with pride the place where a stray bullet had perforated his knapsack during the search.
He revived me, gave me first aid, and succeeded with great difficulty in helping me out of
the trench.  For more than three hours we stumbled on in the night, trying to find our lines
again.  Twice we encountered a small troop of Cossacks, but upon hearing the tramping we quietly
lay down on the wayside without a motion until they had passed.  Happily we were not noticed
by them, and from then we stumbled on without any further incident until we were hailed by
an Austrian outpost and in safety.

By this time I was utterly exhausted and again lost consciousness. When I opened my eyes, I
was in a little hut where our ambulance gave first aid.  Therefrom I was transported to the
nearest field hospital.  This, however, had to be broken up and the wounded removed because
of the Russian advance.  We were hastily put on big ambulance wagons without springs, the jolting
of which over the bad road caused us such suffering that we should have almost preferred to
walk or crawl.  We tried to reach the railway station at Komarno but found a Russian detachment
had intercepted us. Yet this the solace of these long sad hours While we who loved him weep, We breathe
an answering message in our flowers To him who lies asleep.

To him whom soon the deep, cold earth must cover, To him whose dying breath Left to our hearts a
message bridging over The dark abyss of Death.
Hagar

To have known Heaven and then to walk in Hell! Is it not hell
to know his face no more, Supplanted, spurned and thrust without his
door.  The same crowded conditions prevailed here as in Sambor, and after a night's rest
I again was put on board a Red Cross train en route to Vienna.  We were met at the station
by a number of Red Cross nurses and assistant doctors.

To my great joy my wife was among the former, having been assigned to that particular duty.
A short official telegram to the effect that I was being sent home wounded on hospital train
Number 16 was the first news she had received about me for fully four weeks.  None of my field
postcards had arrived and she was suffering extreme nervous strain from the long anxiety and
suspense, which she had tried in vain to numb by feverish work in her hospital.  I remained
two weeks in Vienna and then was transferred to the sulphur bath of Baden near-by, where large
hospitals had been established to relieve the overcrowding of Vienna.  There I remained until
the first of November when I was ordered to appear before a mixed commission of army surgeons
and senior officers, for a medical examination. So, lonely at Love's outer gate I stand And glimpse
the brightness and the bliss within, Where love-lit smiles transmute the dark to day-- I wait
without--I may not enter in; Long, wistfully, I gaze--then void of
hand And starved of spirit, sadly turn away.  My military experience ended there, and
with deep regret I bade good-bye to my loyal brother officers, comrades, and faithful orderly,
and discarded my well-beloved uniform for the nondescript garb of the civilian, grateful that
I had been permitted to be of any, if ever so little, service to my Fatherland.

The End

