I remember that one of the numerous reasons urged in favor of General Fremont's election to
the Presidency in 1856 was his finding the path across the Rocky Mountains.  I wrung my frostbitten
hands on that dreadful night, and declared that for me to deliberately go over that path in
mid-winter was a sufficient reason for my election to any lunatic asylum, by an overwhelming
vote.  Dr. Hingston made a similar remark, and wondered if he should ever clink glasses with
his friend Lord Palmerston again.

Another sensation.  Not comic this time.  One of our passengers, a fair-haired German boy,
whose sweet ways had quite won us all, sank on the snow, and said--Let me sleep.  We knew only
too well what that meant, and tried hard to rouse him.  It was in vain.  Let me sleep, he said.
And so in the cold starlight he died.  We took him up tenderly from the snow, and bore him
to the sleigh that awaited us by the roadside, some two miles away.  The new moon was shining
now, and the smile on the sweet white face told how painlessly the poor boy had died.  No one
knew him.  He was from the Bannock mines, was ill-clad, had no baggage or money, and his fare
was paid to Denver.  He had said that he was going back to Germany.  That was all we knew.
So at sunrise the next morning we buried him at the foot of the grand mountains that are snow-covered
and icy all the year round, far away from the Faderland, where it may be, some poor mother
is crying for her darling who will not come.

                   .     .      .      .

We strike the North Platte on the 18th.  The fare at the stations is daily improving, and we
often have antelope steaks now.  They tell us of eggs not far off, and we encourage (by a process
not wholly unconnected with bottles) the drivers to keep their mules in motion.

Antelopes by the thousand can be seen racing the plains from the coach windows.

At Elk Mountain we encounter a religious driver named Edward Whitney, who never swears at the
mules.  This has made him distinguished all over the plains.  This pious driver tried to convert
the Doctor, but I am mortified to say that his efforts were not crowned with success,  Fort
Halleck is a mile from Elk, and here are some troops of the Ohio 11th regiment, under the command
of Major Thomas L. Mackey. 

So deep was the popular anger in Massachusetts Bay that the collection of arms and powder and
the organization of militia were rapidly begun. Clearly, the Massachusetts leaders were preparing
to persist to the verge of civil war. Mr. Thomas is a Baltimore
"slosher," he informed me.  I don't know what that is, but he is a good fellow, and gave us
a breakfast fir for a lord, emperor, czar, count, &c.  A better couldn't be found at Delmonicp's
or Parker's.  He pressed me to linger with him for a few days and shoot bears.  It was with
several pangs that I declined the generous Baltimorean's invitation.

To Virginia Dale.  Weather clear and bright.  Virginia Dale is a pretty spot, as it ought to
be with such a pretty name; but I treated with no little scorn the advice of a hunter I met
there, who told me to give up "literatoor," form a matrimonial alliance with some squaws, and
"settle down thar."

Bannock on the brain!  That is what is the matter now.  Wagon-load after wagon-load of emigrants,
bound to the new Idaho gold regions, meet us every hour.  Canvas-covered and drawn for the
most part by fine large mules, they make a pleasant panorama, as they stretch slowly over the
plains and uplands.  We strike the South Platte Sunday, 21st, and breakfast at Latham, a station
of one-horse proportions.  We are now in Colorado ("Pike's Peak"), and we diverge from the
main route here and visit the flourishing and beautiful city of Denver.  Messrs, Langrish &
Dougherty, who have so long and so admirably catered to the amusement lovers of the Far West,
kindly withdrew their dramatic corps for a night, and allow me to use their pretty little theatre.

We go to the mountains from Denver, visiting the celebrated gold-mining towns of Black Hawk
and Central City.  I leave this queen of all the territories, quite firmly believing that its
future is to be no less brilliant than its past has been.

I had almost forgotten to mention that on the way from Latham to Denver Dr. Hingston and Dr.
Seaton (late a highly admired physician and surgeon in Kentucky, and now a prosperous gold
miner) had a learned discussion as to the formation of the membranes of the human stomach,
in which they used words that were over a foot long by actual measurement.  I have never heard
such splendid words in my life; but such were their grandiloquent profundity, and their far-reaching
lucidity, that I understood rather less about it when they had finished than I did when they
commenced.

                   .     .      .      .

Back to Latham again over a marshy road, and on to Nebraska by the main stage-line.

I meet Col. Chivington, commander of the district of Colorado, at Latham.

Col. Chivington is a Methodist clergyman, and was once a presiding elder.  A thoughtful, earnest
man, an eloquent preacher, a sincere believer in the war, he, of course brings to his new position
a great deal of enthusiasm.  This, with his natural military tact, makes him an officer of
rare ability; and on more occasions than one he has led his troops against the enemy with resistless
skill and gallantry.  I take the liberty of calling the President's attention to the fact that
this brave man ought to have long ago been a brigadier-general.

Col. Chivington vanquished the rebels with his brave Colorado troops, in New Mexico last year,
as most people know.  At the commencement of the action, which was hotly contested, a shell
from the enemy exploded near him, tearing up the ground, and causing Captain Rogers to swear
in an awful manner.

"Captain Rogers," said the Colonel, " gentlemen do not swear on a solemn occasion like this.
We may fall, but falling in a glorious cause, let us die as Christians, not as rowdies, with
oaths upon our lips.  Captain Rogers, let us -"

Another shell, a sprightlier one than its predecessor, tears the earth fearfully in the immediate
vicinity of Col. Chivington, filling his eyes with dirt and knocking off his hat.

"Why, G-   d-       Their souls to h-   ," he roared, "they've put my eyes out- AS CAPTAIN
ROGERS WOULD SAY!"

But the Colonel's eyes were not seriously damaged, and he went in. Went in, and came out victorious.

                   .     .      .      .

We reach Julesberg, Colorado, the 1st of March.  We are in the country of the Sioux Indians
now, and encounter them by the hundred.  A Chief offers to sell me his daughter (a fair young
Indian maiden) for six dollars and two quarts of whisky.  I decline to trade.

Meals which have hitherto been 1 dol. Are now 75 cents.  Eggs appear on the table occasionally,
and we hear of chickens farther on.  Nine miles from here we enter Nebraska territory.  Here
is an occasionally fenced farm, and the ranches have bar-rooms.  Buffalo skins and buffalo
tongues are on sale at most of the stations.  We reach South Platte on the 2d, and Fort Kearney
on the 3d.  The 7th Iowa Calvary are here, under the command of Captain Wood.  At Cottonwood,
a days ride back, we had taken aboard Major O'Brien, commanding the troops there, and a jovial
warrior he is, too.

Meals are now down to 50 cents, and a good deal better than when they were 1 dol.

KANSAS, 105 miles from Atchison.  Atchison!  No traveller by sea ever longed to set his foot
on shore as we longed to reach the end of our dreary coach-ride over the wildest part of the
whole continent.  How we talked Atchison, and dreamed Atchison, for the next fifty hours! 
Atchison, I shall always love you.  You were evidently mistaken, Atchison, when you told me
that in case I "lectured" there, immense crowds would throng to the hall; but you are very
dear to me.  Let me kiss you for your maternal parent!

We are passing through the reservation of the Otoe Indians, who long ago washed the war-paint
from their faces, buried the tomahawk, and settled down into quiet, prosperous farmers.

                   .     .      .      .

We rattle leisurely into Atchison on a Sunday evening.  Lights gleam in the windows of milk-white
churches, and they tell us, far better than anything else could, that we are back to civilization
again.

An overland journey in winter is a better thing to have done than to do.  In the spring, however,
when the grass is green on the great prairies, I fancy one might make the journey a pleasant
one, with his own outfit and a few choice friends.

4.17.  VERY MUCH MARRIED.

Are the Mormon women happy?

I give it up.  I don't know.

It is at Great Salt Lake City as it is at Boston.  If I go out to tea at the Wilkinses in Boston,
I'm pretty sure to find Mr. Wilkins all smiles and Sunshine, or Mrs. Wilkins all gentleness
and politeness.  I am entertained delightfully, and after tea little Miss Wilkins shows me
her photograph album, and plays the march from "Faust" on the piano for me.  I go away highly
pleased with my visit; and yet the Wilkinses may fight like cats and dogs in private.  I may
no sooner have struck the sidewalk than Mr. W. will be reaching for Mrs. W's throat.

This is the City of Saints.  Apparently, the Mormon women are happy.  I saw them at their best,
of course--at balls, tea-parties and the like.  They were like other women as far as my observation
extended.  They were hooped, and furbelowed, and shod, and white- collard, and bejewelled;
and like women all over the world, they were softer-eyed and kinder-hearted than men can ever
hope to be.

The Mormon girl is reared to believe that the plurality-wife system as it is delicately called
here is strictly right; and in linking her destiny with a man who has twelve wives, she undoubtedly
considers she is doing her duty.  She loves the man, probably, for I think it is not true,
as so many writers have stated, that girls are forced to marry whomsoever "the Church" may
dictate.  Some parents no doubt advise, connive, threaten, and in aggravated cases incarcerate
here, as some parents have always done elsewhere, and always will do as long as petticoats
continue to be an institution.

How these dozen or twenty wives get along without heart-burnings and hairpullings I can't see.

There are instances on record, you know, where a man don't live in a state of uninterrupted
bliss with ONE wife.  And to say that a man can possess twenty wives without having his special
favorite, or favorites, is to say that he is an angel in boots--which is something I have never
been introduced to.  You never saw an angel with a Beard, although you may have seen the Bearded
Woman.

The Mormon woman is early taught that man, being created in the image of the Saviour, is far
more godly than she can ever be, and that for her to seek to monopolize his affections is a
species of rank sin.  So she shares his affections with five or six or twenty other women,
as the case may be.

A man must be amply able to support a number of wives before he can take them.  Hence, perhaps,
it is that so many old chaps in Utah have young and blooming wives in their seraglios, and
so many young men have only one.

