By this time all the boat's load was ashore, consisting of the little barrels; and the boat's
crew, standing to their arms, ranged themselves in front, waiting the advance of the horses
which came clattering along the beach. A man, overgrown with corpulence, who might be distinguished
in the moonlight panting with his own exertions, appeared at the head of the cavalcade, which
consisted of horses linked together, and accommodated with packsaddles, and chains for securing
the kegs which made a dreadful clattering.

'How now, Father Crackenthorp?' said Ewart--'Why this hurry with your horses? We mean to stay
a night with you, and taste your old brandy, and my dame's homebrewed. The signal is up, man,
and all is right.'

'All is wrong, Captain Nanty,' cried the man to whom he spoke; 'and you are the lad that is
like to find it so, unless you bundle off--there are new brooms bought at Carlisle yesterday
to sweep the country of you and the like of you--so you were better be jogging inland.

'How many rogues are the officers? If not more than ten, I will make fight.'

'The devil you will!' answered Crackenthorp. 'You were better not, for they have the bloody-backed
dragoons from Carlisle with them.'

'Nay, then,' said Nanty, 'we must make sail. Come, Master Fairlord, you must mount and ride.
He does not hear me--he has fainted, I believe--What the devil shall I do? Father Crackenthorp,
I must leave this young fellow with you till the gale blows out--hark ye--goes between the
laird and the t'other old one; he can neither ride nor walk--I must send him up to you.'

'Send him up to the gallows!' said Crackenthorp; 'there is Quartermaster Thwacker, with twenty
men, up yonder; an he had not some kindness for Doll, I had never got hither for a start--but
you must get off, or they will be here to seek us, for his orders are woundy particular; and
these kegs contain worse than whisky--a hanging matter, I take it.'

'I wish they were at the bottom of Wampool river, with them they belong to,' said Nanty Ewart.
'But they are part of cargo; and what to do with the poor young fellow--'

'Why, many a better fellow has roughed it on the grass with a cloak o'er him,' said Crackenthorp.
'If he hath a fever, nothing is so cooling as the night air.'

'Yes, he would be cold enough in the morning, no doubt; but it's a kind heart and shall not
cool so soon if I can help it,' answered the captain of the JUMPING JENNY.

'Well, captain, an ye will risk your own neck for another man's, why not take him to the old
girls at Fairladies?'

'What, the Miss Arthurets! The Papist jades! But never mind; it will do--I have known them
take in a whole sloop's crew that were stranded on the sands.'

'You may run some risk, though, by turning up to Fairladies; for I tell you they are all up
through the country.'

'Never mind--I may chance to put some of them down again,' said Nanty, cheerfully. 'Come, lads,
bustle to your tackle. Are you all loaded?'

'Aye, aye, captain; we will be ready in a jiffy,' answered the gang.

'D--n your captains! Have you a mind to have me hanged if I am taken? All's hail-fellow, here.'

'A sup at parting,' said Father Crackenthorp, extending a flask to Nanty Ewart.

'Not the twentieth part of a drop,' said Nanty. 'No Dutch courage for me--my heart is always
high enough when there's a chance of fighting; besides, if I live drunk, I should like to die
sober. Here, old Jephson--you are the best-natured brute amongst them--get the lad between
us on a quiet horse, and we will keep him upright, I warrant.'

As they raised Fairford from the ground, he groaned heavily, and asked faintly where they were
taking him to.

'To a place where you will be as snug and quiet as a mouse in his hole,' said Nanty, 'if so
be that we can get you there safely. Good-bye, Father Crackenthorp--poison the quartermaster,
if you can.'

The loaded horses then sprang forward at a hard trot, following each other in a line, and every
second horse being mounted by a stout fellow in a smock frock, which served to conceal the
arms with which most of these desperate men were provided. Ewart followed in the rear of the
line, and, with the occasional assistance of old Jephson, kept his young charge erect in the
saddle. He groaned heavily from time to time; and Ewart, more moved with compassion for his
situation than might have been expected from his own habits, endeavoured to amuse him and comfort
him, by some account of the place to which they were conveying him--his words of consolation
being, however, frequently interrupted by the necessity of calling to his people, and many
of them being lost amongst the rattling of the barrels, and clinking of the tackle and small
chains by which they are secured on such occasions.

'And you see, brother, you will be in safe quarters at Fairladies--good old scrambling house--good
old maids enough, if they were not Papists,--Hollo, you Jack Lowther; keep the line, can't
ye, and shut your rattle-trap, you broth of a--? And so, being of a good family, and having
enough, the old lasses have turned a kind of saints, and nuns, and so forth. The place they
live in was some sort of nun-shop long ago, as they have them still in Flanders; so folk call
them the Vestals of Fairladies--that may be, or may not be; and I care not whether it be or
no.--Blinkinsop, hold your tongue, and be d--d!--And so, betwixt great alms and good dinners,
they are well thought of by rich and poor, and their trucking with Papists is looked over.
There are plenty of priests, and stout young scholars, and such-like, about the house it's
a hive of them. More shame that government send dragoons out after-a few honest fellows that
bring the old women of England a drop of brandy, and let these ragamuffins smuggle in as much
papistry and--Hark!--was that a whistle? No, it's only a plover. You, Jem Collier, keep a look-out
ahead--we'll meet them at the High Whins, or Brotthole bottom, or nowhere. Go a furlong ahead,
I say, and look sharp.--These Misses Arthurets feed the hungry, and clothe the naked, and such-like
acts--which my poor father used to say were filthy rags, but he dressed himself out with as
many of them as most folk.--D--n that stumbling horse! Father Crackenthorp should be d--d himself
for putting an honest fellow's neck in such jeopardy.'

Thus, and with much more to the same purpose, Nanty ran on, increasing, by his well-intended
annoyance, the agony of Alan Fairford, who, tormented by a racking pain along the back and
loins, which made the rough trot of the horse torture to him, had his aching head still further
rended and split by the hoarse voice of the sailor, close to his ear. Perfectly passive, however,
he did not even essay to give any answer; and indeed his own bodily distress was now so great
and engrossing, that to think of his situation was impossible, even if he could have mended
it by doing so.

Their course was inland; but in what direction, Alan had no means of ascertaining. They passed
at first over heaths and sandy downs; they crossed more than one brook, or beck, as they are
called in that country--some of them of considerable depth--and at length reached a cultivated
country, divided, according to the English fashion of agriculture, into very small fields or
closes, by high banks, overgrown with underwood, and surmounted by hedge-row trees, amongst
which winded a number of impracticable and complicated lanes, where the boughs projecting from
the embankments on each side, intercepted the light of the moon, and endangered the safety
of the horsemen. But through this labyrinth the experience of the guides conducted them without
a blunder, and without even the slackening of their pace. In many places, however, it was impossible
for three men to ride abreast; and therefore the burden of supporting Alan Fairford fell alternately
to old Jephson and to Nanty; and it was with much difficulty that they could keep him upright
in his saddle.

At length, when his powers of sufferance were quite worn out, and he was about to implore them
to leave him to his fate in the first cottage or shed--or under a haystack or a hedge--or anywhere,
so he was left at ease, Collier, who rode ahead, passed back the word that they were at the
avenue to Fairladies--'Was he to turn up?'

Committing the charge of Fairford to Jephson, Nanty dashed up to the head of the troop, and
gave his orders.--'Who knows the house best?'

'Sam Skelton's a Catholic,' said Lowther.

'A d--d bad religion,' said Nanty, of whose Presbyterian education a hatred of Popery seemed
to be the only remnant. 'But I am glad there is one amongst us, anyhow. You, Sam, being a Papist,
know Fairladies and the old maidens I dare say; so do you fall out of the line, and wait here
with me; and do you, Collier, carry on to Walinford bottom, then turn down the beck till you
come to the old mill, and Goodman Grist the Miller, or old Peel-the-Causeway, will tell you
where to stow; but I will be up with you before that.'

The string of loaded horses then struck forward at their former pace, while Nanty, with Sam
Skelton, waited by the roadside till the rear came up, when Jephson and Fairford joined them,
and, to the great relief of the latter, they began to proceed at an easier pace than formerly,
suffering the gang to precede them, till the clatter and clang attending their progress began
to die away in the distance. They had not proceeded a pistol-shot from the place where they
parted, when a short turning brought them in front of an old mouldering gateway, whose heavy
pinnacles were decorated in the style of the seventeenth century, with clumsy architectural
ornaments; several of which had fallen down from decay, and lay scattered about, no further
care having been taken than just to remove them out of the direct approach to the avenue. The
great stone pillars, glimmering white in the moonlight, had some fanciful resemblance to supernatural
apparitions, and the air of neglect all around, gave an uncomfortable idea of the habitation
to those who passed its avenue.

'There used to be no gate here,' said Skelton, finding their way unexpectedly stopped.

'But there is a gate now, and a porter too,' said a rough voice from within. 'Who be you, and
what do you want at this time of night?'

'We want to come to speech of the ladies--of the Misses Arthuret,' said Nanty; 'and to ask
lodging for a sick man.'

'There is no speech to be had of the Miss Arthurets at this time of night, and you may carry
your sick man to the doctor,' answered the fellow from within, gruffly; 'for as sure as there
is savour in salt, and scent in rosemary, you will get no entrance--put your pipes up and be
jogging on.'

'Why, Dick Gardener,' said Skelton, 'be thou then turned porter?'

'What, do you know who I am?' said the domestic sharply.

'I know you, by your by-word,' answered the other; 'What, have you forgot little Sam Skelton,
and the brock in the barrel?'

'No, I have not forgotten you,' answered the acquaintance of Sam Skelton; 'but my orders are
peremptory to let no one up the avenue this night, and therefore'--

'But we are armed, and will not be kept back,' said Nanty. 'Hark ye, fellow, were it not better
for you to take a guinea and let us in, than to have us break the door first, and thy pate
afterwards? for I won't see my comrade die at your door be assured of that.'

'Why, I dunna know,' said the fellow; 'but what cattle were those that rode by in such hurry?'

'Why, some of our folk from Bowness, Stoniecultrum, and thereby,' answered Skelton; 'Jack Lowther,
and old Jephson, and broad Will Lamplugh, and such like.'

'Well,' said Dick Gardener, 'as sure as there is savour in salt, and scent in rosemary, I thought
it had been the troopers from Carlisle and Wigton, and the sound brought my heart to my mouth.'

'Had thought thou wouldst have known the clatter of a cask from the clash of a broadsword,
as well as e'er a quaffer in Cumberland,' said Skelton.

'Come, brother, less of your jaw and more of your legs, if you please,' said Nanty; 'every
moment we stay is a moment lost. Go to the ladies, and tell them that Nanty Ewart, of the JUMPING
JENNY, has brought a young gentleman, charged with letters from Scotland to a certain gentleman
of consequence in Cumberland--that the soldiers are out, and the gentleman is very ill and
if he is not received at Fairladies he must be left either to die at the gate, or to be taken,
with all his papers about him, by the redcoats.'

Away ran Dick Gardener with this message; and, in a few minutes, lights were seen to flit about,
which convinced Fairford, who was now, in consequence of the halt, a little restored to self-possession,
that they were traversing the front of a tolerably large mansion-house.

'What if thy friend, Dick Gardener, comes not back again?' said Jephson to Skelton.

'Why, then,' said the person addressed, 'I shall owe him just such a licking as thou, old Jephson,
had from Dan Cooke, and will pay as duly and truly as he did.'

The old man was about to make an angry reply, when his doubts were silenced by the return of
Dick Gardener, who announced that Miss Arthuret was coming herself as far as the gateway to
speak with them.

Nanty Ewart cursed in a low tone the suspicions of old maids and the churlish scruples of Catholics,
that made so many obstacles to helping a fellow creature, and wished Miss Arthuret a hearty
rheumatism or toothache as the reward of her excursion; but the lady presently appeared, to
cut short further grumbling. She was attended by a waiting-maid with a lantern, by means of
which she examined the party on the outside, as closely as the imperfect light, and the spars
of the newly-erected gate, would permit.

'I am sorry we have disturbed you so late, Madam Arthuret,' said Nanty; 'but the case is this'--

'Holy Virgin,' said she, 'why do you speak so loud? Pray, are you not the captain of the SAINTE
GENEVIEVE?'

'Why, aye, ma'am,' answered Ewart, 'they call the brig so at Dunkirk, sure enough; but along
shore here, they call her the JUMPING JENNY.'

'You brought over the holy Father Buonaventure, did you not?'

'Aye, aye, madam, I have brought over enough of them black cattle,' answered Nanty. 'Fie! fie!
friend,' said Miss Arthuret; 'it is a pity that the saints should commit these good men to
a heretic's care.'

'Why, no more they would, ma'am,' answered Nanty, 'could they find a Papist lubber that knew
the coast as I do; then I am trusty as steel to owners, and always look after cargo--live lumber,
or dead flesh, or spirits, all is one to me; and your Catholics have such d--d large hoods,
with pardon, ma'am, that they can sometimes hide two faces under them. But here is a gentleman
dying, with letters about him from the Laird of Summertrees to the Laird of the Lochs, as they
call him, along Solway, and every minute he lies here is a nail in his coffin.'

'Saint Mary! what shall we do?' said Miss Arthuret; 'we must admit him, I think, at all risks.
You, Richard Gardener, help one of these men to carry the gentleman up to the Place; and you,
Selby, see him lodged at the end of the long gallery. You are a heretic, captain, but I think
you are trusty, and I know you have been trusted--but if you are imposing on me'--

'Not I, madam--never attempt to impose on ladies of your experience--my practice that way has
been all among the young ones. Come, cheerly, Mr. Fairford--you will be taken good care of--try
to walk.'

Alan did so; and, refreshed by his halt, declared himself able to walk to the house with the
sole assistance of the gardener.

'Why, that's hearty. Thank thee, Dick, for lending him thine arm'--and Nanty slipped into his
hand the guinea he had promised.--'Farewell, then, Mr. Fairford, and farewell, Madam Arthuret,
for I have been too long here.'

So saying, he and his two companions threw themselves on horseback, and went off at a gallop.
Yet, even above the clatter of their hoofs did the incorrigible Nanty hollo out the old ballad--

  A lovely lass to a friar came,
  To confession a-morning early;--
  'In what, my dear, are you to blame?
  Come tell me most sincerely?'
  'Alas!  my fault I dare not name--
  But my lad he loved me dearly.'

'Holy Virgin!' exclaimed Miss Seraphina, as the unhallowed sounds reached her ears; 'what profane
heathens be these men, and what frights and pinches we be put to among them! The saints be
good to us, what a night has this been!--the like never seen at Fairladies. Help me to make
fast the gate, Richard, and thou shalt come down again to wait on it, lest there come more
unwelcome visitors--Not that you are unwelcome, young gentleman, for it is sufficient that
you need such assistance as we can give you, to make you welcome to Fairladies--only, another
time would have done as well--but, hem! I dare say it is all for the best. The avenue is none
of the smoothest, sir, look to your feet. Richard Gardener should have had it mown and levelled,
but he was obliged to go on a pilgrimage to Saint Winifred's Well, in Wales.' (Here Dick gave
a short dry cough, which, as if he had found it betrayed some internal feeling a little at
variance with what the lady said, he converted into a muttered SANCTA WINIFREDA, ORA PRO NOBIS.
Miss Arthuret, meantime, proceeded) 'We never interfere with our servants' vows or penances,
Master Fairford--I know a very worthy father of your name, perhaps a relation--I say, we never
interfere with our servants vows. Our Lady forbid they should not know some difference between
our service and a heretic's.--Take care, sir, you will fall if you have not a care. Alas! by
night and day there are many stumbling-blocks in our paths!'

With more talk to the same purpose, all of which tended to show a charitable and somewhat silly
woman with a strong inclination to her superstitious devotion, Miss Arthuret entertained her
new guest, as, stumbling at every obstacle which the devotion of his guide, Richard, had left
in the path, he at last, by ascending some stone steps decorated on the side with griffins,
or some such heraldic anomalies, attained a terrace extending in front of the Place of Fairladies;
an old-fashioned gentleman's house of some consequence, with its range of notched gable-ends
and narrow windows, relieved by here and there an old turret about the size of a pepper-box.
The door was locked during the brief absence of the mistress; a dim light glimmered through
the sashed door of the hall, which opened beneath a huge stone porch, loaded with jessamine
and other creepers. All the windows were dark as pitch.

Miss Arthuret tapped at the door. 'Sister, sister Angelica.' 'Who is there?' was answered from
within; 'is it you, sister Seraphina?'

'Yes, yes, undo the door; do you not know my voice?'

'No doubt, sister,' said Angelica, undoing bolt and bar; 'but you know our charge, and the
enemy is watchful to surprise us--INCEDIT SICUT LEO VORANS, saith the breviary. Whom have you
brought here? Oh, sister, what have you done?'

'It is a young man,' said Seraphina, hastening to interrupt her sister's remonstrance, 'a relation,
I believe, of our worthy Father Fairford; left at the gate by the captain of that blessed vessel
the SAINTE GENEVIEVE--almost dead--and charged with dispatches to '--

She lowered her voice as she mumbled over the last words.

'Nay, then, there is no help,' said Angelica; 'but it is unlucky.'

During this dialogue between the vestals of Fairladies, Dick Gardener deposited his burden
in a chair, where the young lady, after a moment of hesitation, expressing a becoming reluctance
to touch the hand of a stranger, put her finger and thumb upon Fairford's wrist, and counted
his pulse.

'There is fever here, sister,' she said; 'Richard must call Ambrose, and we must send some
of the febrifuge.'

Ambrose arrived presently, a plausible and respectable-looking old servant, bred in the family,
and who had risen from rank to rank in the Arthuret service till he was become half-physician,
half-almoner, half-butler, and entire governor; that is, when the Father Confessor, who frequently
eased him of the toils of government, chanced to be abroad. Under the direction, and with the
assistance of this venerable personage, the unlucky Alan Fairford was conveyed to a decent
apartment at the end of a long gallery, and, to his inexpressible relief, consigned to a comfortable
bed. He did not attempt to resist the prescription of Mr. Ambrose, who not only presented him
with the proposed draught, but proceeded so far as to take a considerable quantity of blood
from him, by which last operation he probably did his patient much service.

CHAPTER XVI

NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD, CONTINUED

On the next morning, when Fairford awoke, after no very refreshing slumbers, in which were
mingled many wild dreams of his father and of Darsie Latimer,--of the damsel in the green mantle
and the vestals of Fairladies,--of drinking small beer with Nanty Ewart and being immersed
in the Solway with the JUMPING JENNY,--he found himself in no condition to dispute the order
of Mr. Ambrose, that he should keep his bed, from which, indeed, he could not have raised himself
without assistance. He became sensible that his anxiety, and his constant efforts for some
days past, had been too much for his health, and that, whatever might be his impatience, he
could not proceed in his undertaking until his strength was re-established.

In the meanwhile, no better quarters could have been found for an invalid. The attendants spoke
under their breath, and moved only on tiptoe--nothing was done unless PAR ORDONNANCE DU MEDECIN.
Aesculapius reigned paramount in the premises at Fairladies. Once a day, the ladies came in
great state to wait upon him and inquire after his health, and it was then that; Alan's natural
civility, and the thankfulness which he expressed for their timely and charitable assistance,
raised him considerably in their esteem. He was on the third day removed to a better apartment
than that in which he had been at first accommodated. When he was permitted to drink a glass
of wine, it was of the first quality; one of those curious old-fashioned cobwebbed bottles
being produced on the occasion, which are only to be found in the crypts of old country-seats,
where they may have lurked undisturbed for more than half a century.

But however delightful a residence for an invalid, Fairladies, as its present inmate became
soon aware, was not so agreeable to a convalescent. When he dragged himself to the window so
soon as he could crawl from bed, behold it was closely grated, and commanded no view except
of a little paved court. This was nothing remarkable, most old Border houses having their windows
so secured. But then Fairford observed, that whosoever entered or left the room always locked
the door with great care and circumspection; and some proposals which he made to take a walk
in the gallery, or even in the garden, were so coldly received, both by the ladies and their
prime minister, Mr. Ambrose, that he saw plainly such an extension of his privileges as a guest
would not be permitted.

Anxious to ascertain whether this excessive hospitality would permit him his proper privilege
of free agency, he announced to this important functionary, with grateful thanks for the care
with which he had been attended, his purpose to leave Fairladies next morning, requesting only,
as a continuance of the favours with which he had been loaded, the loan of a horse to the next
town; and, assuring Mr. Ambrose that his gratitude would not be limited by such, a trifle,
he slipped three guineas into his hand, by way of seconding his proposal. The fingers of that
worthy domestic closed as naturally upon the honorarium, as if a degree in the learned faculty
had given him a right to clutch it; but his answer concerning Alan's proposed departure was
at first evasive, and when he was pushed, it amounted to a peremptory assurance that he could
not be permitted to depart to-morrow; it was as much as his life was worth, and his ladies
would not authorize it.

'I know best what my own life is worth,' said Alan; 'and I do not value it in comparison to
the business which requires my instant attention.'

Receiving still no satisfactory answer from Mr. Ambrose, Fairford thought it best to state
his resolution to the ladies themselves, in the most measured, respectful, and grateful terms;
but still such as expressed a firm determination to depart on the morrow, or next day at farthest.
After some attempts to induce him to stay, on the alleged score of health, which were so expressed
that he was convinced they were only used to delay his departure, Fairford plainly told them
that he was entrusted with dispatches of consequence to the gentleman known by the name of
Herries, Redgauntlet, and the Laird of the Lochs; and that it was matter of life and death
to deliver them early.

'I dare say, Sister Angelica,' said the elder Miss Arthuret, that the gentleman is honest;
and if he is really a relation of Father Fairford, we can run no risk.'

'Jesu Maria!' exclaimed the younger. 'Oh, fie, Sister Seraphina! Fie, fie!--'VADE RETRO--get
thee behind me!'

'Well, well; but, sister--Sister Angelica--let me speak with you in the gallery.'

So out the ladies rustled in their silks and tissues, and it was a good half-hour ere they
rustled in again, with importance and awe on their countenances.

'To tell you the truth, Mr. Fairford, the cause of our desire to delay you is--there is a religious
gentleman in this house at present'--

'A most excellent person indeed'--said the sister Angelica.

'An anointed of his Master!' echoed Seraphina,--'and we should be glad that, for conscience'
sake, you would hold some discourse with him before your departure.'

'Oho!' thought Fairford, 'the murder is out--here is a design of conversion! I must not affront
the good ladies, but I shall soon send off the priest, I think.' He then answered aloud, 'that
he should be happy to converse with any friend of theirs--that in religious matters he had
the greatest respect for every modification of Christianity, though, he must say, his belief
was made up to that in which he had been educated; nevertheless, if his seeing the religious
person they recommended could in the least show his respect'--

'It is not quite that,' said Sister Seraphina, 'although I am sure the day is too short to
hear him--Father Buonaventure, I mean--speak upon the concerns of our souls; but'--

'Come, come, Sister Seraphina,' said the younger, 'it is needless to talk so much about it.
His--his Eminence--I mean Father Buonaventure--will himself explain what he wants this gentleman
to know.'

'His Eminence!' said Fairford, surprised--'is this gentleman so high in the Catholic Church?
The title is given only to Cardinals, I think.'

'He is not a Cardinal as yet,' answered Seraphina; 'but I assure you, Mr. Fairford, he is as
high in rank as he is eminently endowed with good gifts, and'--

'Come away,' said Sister Angelica. 'Holy Virgin, how you do talk! What has Mr. Fairford to
do with Father Buonaventure's rank? Only, sir, you will remember that the Father has been always
accustomed to be treated with the most profound deference; indeed'--

'Come away, sister,' said Sister Seraphina, in her turn; 'who talks now, I pray you? Mr. Fairford
will know how to comport himself.'

'And we had best both leave the room,' said the younger lady, 'for here his Eminence comes.'

She lowered her voice to a whisper as she pronounced the last words; and as Fairford was about
to reply, by assuring her that any friend of hers should be treated by him with all the ceremony
he could expect, she imposed silence on him, by holding up her finger.

A solemn and stately step was now heard in the gallery; it might have proclaimed the approach
not merely of a bishop or cardinal, but of the Sovereign Pontiff himself. Nor could the sound
have been more respectfully listened to by the two ladies, had it announced that the Head of
the Church was approaching in person. They drew themselves, like sentinels on duty, one on
each side of the door by which the long gallery communicated with Fairford's apartment, and
stood there immovable, and with countenances expressive of the deepest reverence.

The approach of Father Buonaventure was so slow, that Fairford had time to notice all this,
and to marvel in his mind what wily and ambitious priest could have contrived to subject his
worthy but simple-minded hostesses to such superstitious trammels. Father Buonaventure's entrance
and appearance in some degree accounted for the whole.

He was a man of middle life, about forty or upwards; but either care, or fatigue, or indulgence,
had brought on the appearance of premature old age, and given to his fine features a cast of
seriousness or even sadness. A noble countenance, however, still remained; and though his complexion
was altered, and wrinkles stamped upon his brow in many a melancholy fold, still the lofty
forehead, the full and well-opened eye, and the well-formed nose, showed how handsome in better
days he must have been. He was tall, but lost the advantage of his height by stooping; and
the cane which he wore always in his hand, and occasionally used, as well as his slow though
majestic gait, seemed to intimate that his form and limbs felt already some touch of infirmity.
The colour of his hair could not be discovered, as, according to the fashion, he wore a periwig.
He was handsomely, though gravely dressed in a secular habit, and had a cockade in his hat;
circumstances which did not surprise Fairford, who knew that a military disguise was very often
assumed by the seminary priests, whose visits to England, or residence there, subjected them
to legal penalties.

As this stately person entered the apartment, the two ladies facing inward, like soldiers on
their post when about to salute a superior officer, dropped on either hand of the father a
curtsy so profound that the hoop petticoats which performed the feat seemed to sink down to
the very floor, nay, through it, as if a trap-door had opened for the descent of the dames
who performed this act of reverence.

The father seemed accustomed to such homage, profound as it was; he turned his person a little
way first towards one sister, and then towards the other, while, with a gracious inclination
of his person, which certainly did not amount to a bow, he acknowledged their curtsy. But he
passed forward without addressing them, and seemed by doing so to intimate that their presence
in the apartment was unnecessary.

They accordingly glided out of the room, retreating backwards, with hands clasped and eyes
cast upwards, as if imploring blessings on the religious man whom they venerated so highly.
The door of the apartment was shut after them, but not before Fairford had perceived that there
were one or two men in the gallery, and that, contrary to what he had before observed, the
door, though shut, was not locked on the outside.

'Can the good souls apprehend danger from me to this god of their idolatry?' thought Fairford.
But he had no time to make further observations, for the stranger had already reached the middle
of his apartment.

Fairford rose to receive him respectfully, but as he fixed his eyes on the visitor, he thought
that the father avoided his looks. His reasons for remaining incognito were cogent enough to
account for this, and Fairford hastened to relieve him, by looking downwards in his turn; but
when again he raised his face, he found the broad light eye of the stranger so fixed on him
that he was almost put out of countenance by the steadiness of his gaze. During this time they
remained standing.

'Take your seat, sir,' said the father; 'you have been an invalid.'

He spoke with the tone of one who desires an inferior to be seated in his presence, and his
voice was full and melodious.

Fairford, somewhat surprised to find himself overawed by the airs of superiority, which could
be only properly exercised towards one over whom religion gave the speaker influence, sat down
at his bidding, as if moved by springs, and was at a loss how to assert the footing of equality
on which he felt that they ought to stand. The stranger kept the advantage which he had obtained.

'Your name, sir, I am informed, is Fairford?' said the father.

Alan answered by a bow.

'Called to the Scottish bar,' continued his visitor, 'There is, I believe, in the West, a family
of birth and rank called Fairford of Fairford.'

Alan thought this a strange observation from a foreign ecclesiastic, as his name intimated
Father Buonaventure to be; but only answered he believed there was such, a family.

'Do you count kindred with them, Mr. Fairford?' continued the inquirer.

'I have not the honour to lay such a claim,' said Fairford.

'My father's industry has raised his family from a low and obscure situation--I have no hereditary
claim to distinction of any kind. May I ask the cause of these inquiries?'

'You will learn it presently,' said Father Buonaventure, who had given a dry and dissatisfied
HEM at the young man's acknowledging a plebeian descent. He then motioned to him to be silent,
and proceeded with his queries.

'Although not of condition, you are, doubtless, by sentiments and education, a man of honour
and a gentleman?'

'I hope so, sir,' said Alan, colouring with displeasure. 'I have not been accustomed to have
it questioned.'

'Patience, young man,' said the unperturbed querist--'we are on serious business, and no idle
etiquette must prevent its being discussed seriously. You are probably aware that you speak
to a person proscribed by the severe and unjust laws of the present government?'

'I am aware of the statute 1700, chapter 3,' said Alan, 'banishing from the realm priests and
trafficking Papists, and punishing by death, on summary conviction, any such person who being
so banished may return. But I have no means of knowing you, sir, to be one of those persons;
and I think your prudence may recommend to you to keep your own counsel.'

'It is sufficient, sir; and I have no apprehensions of disagreeable consequences from your
having seen me in this house,' said the priest.

'Assuredly no,' said Alan. 'I consider myself as indebted for my life to the mistresses of
Fairladies; and it would be a vile requital on my part to pry into or make known what I may
have seen or heard under this hospitable roof. If I were to meet the Pretender himself in such
a situation, he should, even at the risk of a little stretch to my loyalty, be free from any
danger from my indiscretion.'

