It is probable that the tone and firmness assumed by the Bailie in his last speech was better
suited to make an impression on the hard heart of his kinswoman than the tone of supplication
he had hitherto assumed, as gems can be cut with steel, though they resist softer metals. She
commanded us both to be placed before her. "Your name," she said to me, "is Osbaldistone?--the
dead dog, whose death you have witnessed, called you so."

"My name is Osbaldistone," was my answer.

"Rashleigh, then, I suppose, is your Christian name?" she pursued.

"No,--my name is Francis."

"But you know Rashleigh Osbaldistone," she continued. "He is your brother, if I mistake not,--at
least your kinsman and near friend."

"He is my kinsman," I replied, "but not my friend. We were lately engaged together in a rencontre,
when we were separated by a person whom I understand to be your husband. My blood is hardly
yet dried on his sword, and the wound on my side is yet green. I have little reason to acknowledge
him as a friend."

"Then," she replied, "if a stranger to his intrigues, you can go in safety to Garschattachin
and his party without fear of being detained, and carry them a message from the wife of the
MacGregor?"

I answered that I knew no reasonable cause why the militia gentlemen should detain me; that
I had no reason, on my own account, to fear being in their hands; and that if my going on her
embassy would act as a protection to my friend and servant, who were here prisoners, "I was
ready to set out directly." I took the opportunity to say, "That I had come into this country
on her husband's invitation, and his assurance that he would aid me in some important matters
in which I was interested; that my companion, Mr. Jarvie, had accompanied me on the same errand."

"And I wish Mr. Jarvie's boots had been fu' o' boiling water when he drew them on for sic a
purpose," interrupted the Bailie.

"You may read your father," said Helen MacGregor, turning to her sons, "in what this young
Saxon tells us--Wise only when the bonnet is on his head, and the sword is in his hand, he
never exchanges the tartan for the broad-cloth, but he runs himself into the miserable intrigues
of the Lowlanders, and becomes again, after all he has suffered, their agent--their tool--their
slave."

"Add, madam," said I, "and their benefactor."

"Be it so," she said; "for it is the most empty title of them all, since he has uniformly sown
benefits to reap a harvest of the most foul ingratitude.--But enough of this. I shall cause
you to be guided to the enemy's outposts. Observing his fears, the little fellow endeavoured to quiet
him by telling him they were talking about bad sailors.

"I think it is me they are talking about. If they sell me for slave in Charleston, I'll kill
myself before a week," said he in his broken English.

"What's that you say, Manuel?" inquired the first mate as he came along, clearing up the decks
with the men.
"Pilot tell Captain they sell me for slave in South Carolina. I'd
jump overboard 'fore I suffer him," said he.

"Oh, poh! don't be a
fool; you a'n't among Patagonians, Manuel; you won't have to give
'em leg for your life. They don't sell foreigners and outlandish men
like you for slaves in Carolina--it's only black folks what can't
clothe the'r words in plain English.

As she paused in her denunciation, Captain Thornton, who was within hearing, added, with great
coolness, "Present my compliments--Captain Thornton's of the Royals, compliments--to the commanding
officer, and tell him to do his duty and secure his prisoner, and not waste a thought upon
me. If I have been fool enough to have been led into an ambuscade by these artful savages,
I am wise enough to know how to die for it without disgracing the service. I am only sorry
for my poor fellows," he said, "that have fallen into such butcherly hands."

"Whist! whist!" exclaimed the Bailie; "are ye weary o' your life?--Ye'll gie my service to
the commanding officer, Mr. Osbaldistone--Bailie Nicol Jarvie's service, a magistrate o' Glasgow,
as his father the deacon was before him--and tell him, here are a wheen honest men in great
trouble, and like to come to mair; and the best thing he can do for the common good, will be
just to let Rob come his wa's up the glen, and nae mair about it. There's been some ill dune
here already; but as it has lighted chiefly on the gauger, it winna be muckle worth making
a stir about."

With these very opposite injunctions from the parties chiefly interested in the success of
my embassy, and with the reiterated charge of the wife of MacGregor to remember and detail
every word of her injunctions, I was at length suffered to depart; and Andrew Fairservice,
chiefly, I believe, to get rid of his clamorous supplications, was permitted to attend me.
Doubtful, however, that I might use my horse as a means of escape from my guides, or desirous
to retain a prize of some value, I was given to understand that I was to perform my journey
on foot, escorted by Hamish MacGregor, the elder brother, who, with two followers, attended,
as well to show me the way, as to reconnoitre the strength and position of the enemy. Dougal
had been at first ordered on this party, but he contrived to elude the service, with the purpose,
as we afterwards understood, of watching over Mr. Jarvie, whom, according to his wild principles
of fidelity, he considered as entitled to his good offices, from having once acted in some
measure as his patron or master.

After walking with great rapidity about an hour, we arrived at an eminence covered with brushwood,
which gave us a commanding prospect down the valley, and a full view of the post which the
militia occupied. Being chiefly cavalry, they had judiciously avoided any attempt to penetrate
the pass which had been so unsuccessfully essayed by Captain Thornton. They had taken up their
situation with some military skill, on a rising ground in the centre of the little valley of
Aberfoil, through which the river Forth winds its earliest course, and which is formed by two
ridges of hills, faced with barricades of limestone rock, intermixed with huge masses of breecia,
or pebbles imbedded in some softer substance which has hardened around them like mortar; and
surrounded by the more lofty mountains in the distance. These ridges, however, left the valley
of breadth enough to secure the cavalry from any sudden surprise by the mountaineers and they
had stationed sentinels and outposts at proper distances from this main body, in every direction,
so that they might secure full time to mount and get under arms upon the least alarm. It was
not, indeed, expected at that time, that Highlanders would attack cavalry in an open plain,
though late events have shown that they may do so with success.*

* The affairs of Prestonpans and Falkirk are probably alluded to, which * marks the time of
writing the Memoirs as subsequent to 1745.

When I first knew the Highlanders, they had almost a superstitious dread of a mounted trooper,
the horse being so much more fierce and imposing in his appearance than the little shelties
of their own hills, and moreover being trained, as the more ignorant mountaineers believed,
to fight with his feet and his teeth. The appearance of the piequeted horses, feeding in this
little vale--the forms of the soldiers, as they sate, stood, or walked, in various groups in
the vicinity of the beautiful river, and of the bare yet romantic ranges of rock which hedge
in the landscape on either side,--formed a noble foreground; while far to the eastward the
eye caught a glance of the lake of Menteith; and Stirling Castle, dimly seen along with the
blue and distant line of the Ochil Mountains, closed the scene.

After gazing on this landscape with great earnestness, young MacGregor intimated to me that
I was to descend to the station of the militia and execute my errand to their commander,--enjoining
me at the same time, with a menacing gesture, neither to inform them who had guided me to that
place, nor where I had parted from my escort. Thus tutored, I descended towards the military
post, followed by Andrew, who, only retaining his breeches and stockings of the English costume,
without a hat, bare-legged, with brogues on his feet, which Dougal had given him out of compassion,
and having a tattered plaid to supply the want of all upper garments, looked as if he had been
playing the part of a Highland Tom-of-Bedlam. We had not proceeded far before we became visible
to one of the videttes, who, riding towards us, presented his carabine and commanded me to
stand. I obeyed, and when the soldier came up, desired to be conducted to his commanding-officer.
I was immediately brought where a circle of officers, sitting upon the grass, seemed in attendance
upon one of superior rank. He wore a cuirass of polished steel, over which were drawn the insignia
of the ancient Order of the Thistle. My friend Garschattachin, and many other gentlemen, some
in uniform, others in their ordinary dress, but all armed and well attended, seemed to receive
their orders from this person of distinction. Many servants in rich liveries, apparently a
part of his household, were also in waiting.

Having paid to this nobleman the respect which his rank appeared to demand, I acquainted him
that I had been an involuntary witness to the king's soldiers having suffered a defeat from
the Highlanders at the pass of Loch-Ard (such I had learned was the name of the place where
Mr. Thornton was made prisoner), and that the victors threatened every species of extremity
to those who had fallen into their power, as well as to the Low Country in general, unless
their Chief, who had that morning been made prisoner, were returned to them uninjured. The
Duke (for he whom I addressed was of no lower rank) listened to me with great composure, and
then replied, that he should be extremely sorry to expose the unfortunate gentlemen who had
been made prisoners to the cruelty of the barbarians into whose hands they had fallen, but
that it was folly to suppose that he would deliver up the very author of all these disorders
and offences, and so encourage his followers in their license. "You may return to those who
sent you," he proceeded, "and inform them, that I shall certainly cause Rob Roy Campbell, whom
they call MacGregor, to be executed, by break of day, as an outlaw taken in arms, and deserving
death by a thousand acts of violence; that I should be most justly held unworthy of my situation
and commission did I act otherwise; that I shall know how to protect the country against their
insolent threats of violence; and that if they injure a hair of the head of any of the unfortunate
gentlemen whom an unlucky accident has thrown into their power, I will take such ample vengeance,
that the very stones of their glens shall sing woe for it this hundred years to come!"

I humbly begged leave to remonstrate respecting the honourable mission imposed on me, and touched
upon the obvious danger attending it, when the noble commander replied, "that such being the
case, I might send my servant."

"The deil be in my feet," said Andrew, without either having respect to the presence in which
he stood, or waiting till I replied--"the deil be in my feet, if I gang my tae's length. Do
the folk think I hae another thrapple in my pouch after John Highlandman's sneeked this ane
wi' his joctaleg? or that I can dive doun at the tae side of a Highland loch and rise at the
tother, like a shell-drake? Na, na--ilk ane for himsell, and God for us a'. Folk may just make
a page o' their ain age, and serve themsells till their bairns grow up, and gang their ain
errands for Andrew. Rob Roy never came near the parish of Dreepdaily, to steal either pippin
or pear frae me or mine."

Silencing my follower with some difficulty, I represented to the Duke the great danger Captain
Thornton and Mr. Jarvie would certainly be exposed to, and entreated he would make me the bearer
of such modified terms as might be the means of saving their lives. I assured him I should
decline no danger if I could be of service; but from what I had heard and seen, I had little
doubt they would be instantly murdered should the chief of the outlaws suffer death.

The Duke was obviously much affected. "It was a hard case," he said, "and he felt it as such;
but he had a paramount duty to perform to the country--Rob Roy must die!"

I own it was not without emotion that I heard this threat of instant death to my acquaintance
Campbell, who had so often testified his good-will towards me. Nor was I singular in the feeling,
for many of those around the Duke ventured to express themselves in his favour. "It would be
more advisable," they said, "to send him to Stirling Castle, and there detain him a close prisoner,
as a pledge for the submission and dispersion of his gang. It were a great pity to expose the
country to be plundered, which, now that the long nights approached, it would be found very
difficult to prevent, since it was impossible to guard every point, and the Highlanders were
sure to select those that were left exposed." They added, that there was great hardship in
leaving the unfortunate prisoners to the almost certain doom of massacre denounced against
them, which no one doubted would be executed in the first burst of revenge.

Garschattachin ventured yet farther, confiding in the honour of the nobleman whom he addressed,
although he knew he had particular reasons for disliking their prisoner. "Rob Roy," he said,
"though a kittle neighbour to the Low Country, and particularly obnoxious to his Grace, and
though he maybe carried the catheran trade farther than ony man o' his day, was an auld-farrand
carle, and there might be some means of making him hear reason; whereas his wife and sons were
reckless fiends, without either fear or mercy about them, and, at the head of a' his limmer
loons, would be a worse plague to the country than ever he had been."

"Pooh! pooh!" replied his Grace, "it is the very sense and cunning of this fellow which has
so long maintained his reign--a mere Highland robber would have been put down in as many weeks
as he has flourished years. His gang, without him, is no more to be dreaded as a permanent
annoyance--it will no longer exist--than a wasp without its head, which may sting once perhaps,
but is instantly crushed into annihilation."

Garschattachin was not so easily silenced. "I am sure, my Lord Duke," he replied, "I have no
favour for Rob, and he as little for me, seeing he has twice cleaned out my ain byres, beside
skaith amang my tenants; but, however"--

"But, however, Garschattachin," said the Duke, with a smile of peculiar expression, "I fancy
you think such a freedom may be pardoned in a friend's friend, and Rob's supposed to be no
enemy to Major Galbraith's friends over the water."

"If it be so, my lord," said Garschattachin, in the same tone of jocularity, "it's no the warst
thing I have heard of him. But I wish we heard some news from the clans, that we have waited
for sae lang. I vow to God they'll keep a Hielandman's word wi' us--I never ken'd them better--it's
ill drawing boots upon trews."

"I cannot believe it," said the Duke. "These gentlemen are known to be men of honour, and I
must necessarily suppose they are to keep their appointment. Send out two more horse-men to
look for our friends. We cannot, till their arrival, pretend to attack the pass where Captain
Thornton has suffered himself to be surprised, and which, to my knowledge, ten men on foot
might make good against a regiment of the best horse in Europe--Meanwhile let refreshments
be given to the men."

I had the benefit of this last order, the more necessary and acceptable, as I had tasted nothing
since our hasty meal at Aberfoil the evening before. The videttes who had been despatched returned
without tidings of the expected auxiliaries, and sunset was approaching, when a Highlander
belonging to the clans whose co-operation was expected, appeared as the bearer of a letter,
which he delivered to the Duke with a most profound conge'.

"Now will I wad a hogshead of claret," said Garschattachin, "that this is a message to tell
us that these cursed Highlandmen, whom we have fetched here at the expense of so much plague
and vexation, are going to draw off, and leave us to do our own business if we can."

"It is even so, gentlemen," said the Duke, reddening with indignation, after having perused
the letter, which was written upon a very dirty scrap of paper, but most punctiliously addressed,
"For the much-honoured hands of Ane High and Mighty Prince, the Duke," &c. &c. &c. "Our allies,"
continued the Duke, "have deserted us, gentlemen, and have made a separate peace with the enemy."

"It's just the fate of all alliances," said Garschattachin, "the Dutch were gaun to serve us
the same gate, if we had not got the start of them at Utrecht."

"You are facetious, air," said the Duke, with a frown which showed how little he liked the
pleasantry; "but our business is rather of a grave cut just now.--I suppose no gentleman would
advise our attempting to penetrate farther into the country, unsupported either by friendly
Highlanders, or by infantry from Inversnaid?"

A general answer announced that the attempt would be perfect madness.

"Nor would there be great wisdom," the Duke added, "in remaining exposed to a night-attack
in this place. I therefore propose that we should retreat to the house of Duchray and that
of Gartartan, and keep safe and sure watch and ward until morning. But before we separate,
I will examine Rob Roy before you all, and make you sensible, by your own eyes and ears, of
the extreme unfitness of leaving him space for farther outrage." He gave orders accordingly,
and the prisoner was brought before him, his arms belted down above the elbow, and secured
to his body by a horse-girth buckled tight behind him. Two non-commissioned officers had hold
of him, one on each side, and two file of men with carabines and fixed bayonets attended for
additional security.

I had never seen this man in the dress of his country, which set in a striking point of view
the peculiarities of his form. A shock-head of red hair, which the hat and periwig of the Lowland
costume had in a great measure concealed, was seen beneath the Highland bonnet, and verified
the epithet of Roy, or Red, by which he was much better known in the Low Country than by any
other, and is still, I suppose, best remembered. The justice of the appellation was also vindicated
by the appearance of that part of his limbs, from the bottom of his kilt to the top of his
short hose, which the fashion of his country dress left bare, and which was covered with a
fell of thick, short, red hair, especially around his knees, which resembled in this respect,
as well as from their sinewy appearance of extreme strength, the limbs of a red-coloured Highland
bull. Upon the whole, betwixt the effect produced by the change of dress, and by my having
become acquainted with his real and formidable character, his appearance had acquired to my
eyes something so much wilder and more striking than it before presented, that I could scarce
recognise him to be the same person.

His manner was bold, unconstrained unless by the actual bonds, haughty, and even dignified.
He bowed to the Duke, nodded to Garschattachin and others, and showed some surprise at seeing
me among the party.

"It is long since we have met, Mr. Campbell," said the Duke.

"It is so, my Lord Duke; I could have wished it had been" (looking at the fastening on his
arms) "when I could have better paid the compliments I owe to your Grace;--but there's a gude
time coming."

"No time like the time present, Mr. Campbell," answered the Duke, "for the hours are fast flying
that must settle your last account with all mortal affairs. I do not say this to insult your
distress; but you must be aware yourself that you draw near the end of your career. I do not
deny that you may sometimes have done less harm than others of your unhappy trade, and that
you may occasionally have exhibited marks of talent, and even of a disposition which promised
better things. But you are aware how long you have been the terror and the oppressor of a peaceful
neighbourhood, and by what acts of violence you have maintained and extended your usurped authority.
You know, in short, that you have deserved death, and that you must prepare for it."

"My Lord," said Rob Roy, "although I may well lay my misfortunes at your Grace's door, yet
I will never say that you yourself have been the wilful and witting author of them. If we don't
eat it, we can give it to some of the poor prisoners up-stairs."

"While I have good ship-owners, and a good Captain, I never will eat such stuff as that; oh! no,"
returned Manuel.

The meat was laid in a corner for the benefit of the flies; and when
dinner time arrived, the same hard extreme arrived with it-bread and
water. And nobody seemed to have any anxieties on their behalf; for
two of them had written notes to their Captains, on the day previous,
but they remained in the office for want of a messenger to carry them.

"I know," said the Duke, in rising anger, "that you are a determined and impudent villain,
who will keep his oath if he swears to mischief; but it shall be my care to prevent you. You
have no enemies but your own wicked actions."

"Had I called myself Grahame, instead of Campbell, I might have heard less about them," answered
Rob Roy, with dogged resolution.

"You will do well, sir," said the Duke, "to warn your wife and family and followers, to beware
how they use the gentlemen now in their hands, as I will requite tenfold on them, and their
kin and allies, the slightest injury done to any of his Majesty's liege subjects."

"My Lord," said Roy in answer, "none of my enemies will allege that I have been a bloodthirsty
man, and were I now wi' my folk, I could rule four or five hundred wild Hielanders as easy
as your Grace those eight or ten lackeys and foot-boys--But if your Grace is bent to take the
head away from a house, ye may lay your account there will be misrule amang the members.--However,
come o't what like, there's an honest man, a kinsman o' my ain, maun come by nae skaith. Is
there ony body here wad do a gude deed for MacGregor?--he may repay it, though his hands be
now tied."

The Highlander who had delivered the letter to the Duke replied, "I'll do your will for you,
MacGregor; and I'll gang back up the glen on purpose."

He advanced, and received from the prisoner a message to his wife, which, being in Gaelic,
I did not understand, but I had little doubt it related to some measures to be taken for the
safety of Mr. Jarvie.

"Do you hear the fellow's impudence?" said the Duke; "he confides in his character of a messenger.
His conduct is of a piece with his master's, who invited us to make common cause against these
freebooters, and have deserted us so soon as the MacGregors have agreed to surrender the Balquhidder
lands they were squabbling about.

             No truth in plaids, no faith in tartan trews!
             Chameleon-like, they change a thousand hues."

"Your great ancestor never said so, my Lord," answered Major Galbraith;--"and, with submission,
neither would your Grace have occasion to say it, wad ye but be for beginning justice at the
well-head--Gie the honest man his mear again--Let every head wear it's ane bannet, and the
distractions o' the Lennox wad be mended wi' them o'the land."

"Hush! hush! Garschattachin," said the Duke; "this is language dangerous for you to talk to
any one, and especially to me; but I presume you reckon yourself a privileged person. Please
to draw off your party towards Gartartan; I shall myself see the prisoner escorted to Duchray,
and send you orders tomorrow. You will please grant no leave of absence to any of your troopers."

"Here's auld ordering and counter-ordering," muttered Garschattachin between his teeth. "But
patience! patience!--we may ae day play at change seats, the king's coming."

The two troops of cavalry now formed, and prepared to march off the ground, that they might
avail themselves of the remainder of daylight to get to their evening quarters. I received
an intimation, rather than an invitation, to attend the party; and I perceived, that, though
no longer considered as a prisoner, I was yet under some sort of suspicion. The times were
indeed so dangerous,--the great party questions of Jacobite and Hanoverian divided the country
so effectually,--and the constant disputes and jealousies between the Highlanders and Lowlanders,
besides a number of inexplicable causes of feud which separated the great leading families
in Scotland from each other, occasioned such general suspicion, that a solitary and unprotected
stranger was almost sure to meet with something disagreeable in the course of his travels.

I acquiesced, however, in my destination with the best grace I could, consoling myself with
the hope that I might obtain from the captive freebooter some information concerning Rashleigh
and his machinations. I should do myself injustice did I not add, that my views were not merely
selfish. I was too much interested in my singular acquaintance not to be desirous of rendering
him such services as his unfortunate situation might demand, or admit of his receiving.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

                   And when he came to broken brigg,
                       He bent his bow and swam;
                   And when he came to grass growing,
                       Set down his feet and ran.
                                     Gil Morrice.

The echoes of the rocks and ravines, on either side, now rang to the trumpets of the cavalry,
which, forming themselves into two distinct bodies, began to move down the valley at a slow
trot. That commanded by Major Galbraith soon took to the right hand, and crossed the Forth,
for the purpose of taking up the quarters assigned them for the night, when they were to occupy,
as I understood, an old castle in the vicinity. They formed a lively object while crossing
the stream, but were soon lost in winding up the bank on the opposite side, which was clothed
with wood.

We continued our march with considerable good order. To ensure the safe custody of the prisoner,
the Duke had caused him to be placed on horseback behind one of his retainers, called, as I
was informed, Ewan of Brigglands, one of the largest and strongest men who were present. A
horse-belt, passed round the bodies of both, and buckled before the yeoman's breast, rendered
it impossible for Rob Roy to free himself from his keeper. I was directed to keep close beside
them, and accommodated for the purpose with a troop-horse. We were as closely surrounded by
the soldiers as the width of the road would permit, and had always at least one, if not two,
on each side, with pistol in hand. Andrew Fairservice, furnished with a Highland pony, of which
they had made prey somewhere or other, was permitted to ride among the other domestics, of
whom a great number attended the line of march, though without falling into the ranks of the
more regularly trained troopers.

In this manner we travelled for a certain distance, until we arrived at a place where we also
were to cross the river. The Forth, as being the outlet of a lake, is of considerable depth,
even where less important in point of width, and the descent to the ford was by a broken precipitous
ravine, which only permitted one horseman to descend at once. The rear and centre of our small
body halting on the bank while the front files passed down in succession, produced a considerable
delay, as is usual on such occasions, and even some confusion; for a number of those riders,
who made no proper part of the squadron, crowded to the ford without regularity, and made the
militia cavalry, although tolerably well drilled, partake in some degree of their own disorder.

It was while we were thus huddled together on the bank that I heard Rob Roy whisper to the
man behind whom he was placed on horseback, "Your father, Ewan, wadna hae carried an auld friend
to the shambles, like a calf, for a' the Dukes in Christendom."

Ewan returned no answer, but shrugged, as one who would express by that sign that what he was
doing was none of his own choice.

"And when the MacGregors come down the glen, and ye see toom faulds, a bluidy hearthstone,
and the fire flashing out between the rafters o' your house, ye may be thinking then, Ewan,
that were your friend Rob to the fore, you would have had that safe which it will make your
heart sair to lose."

Ewan of Brigglands again shrugged and groaned, but remained silent.

"It's a sair thing," continued Rob, sliding his insinuations so gently into Ewan's ear that
they reached no other but mine, who certainly saw myself in no shape called upon to destroy
his prospects of escape--"It's a sair thing, that Ewan of Brigglands, whom Roy MacGregor has
helped with hand, sword, and purse, suld mind a gloom from a great man mair than a friend's life."

Ewan seemed sorely agitated, but was silent.--We heard the Duke's voice from the opposite bank
call, "Bring over the prisoner."

Ewan put his horse in motion, and just as I heard Roy say, "Never weigh a MacGregor's bluid
against a broken whang o' leather, for there will be another accounting to gie for it baith
here and hereafter," they passed me hastily, and dashing forward rather precipitately, entered
the water.

"Not yet, sir--not yet," said some of the troopers to me, as I was about to follow, while others
pressed forward into the stream.

I saw the Duke on the other side, by the waning light, engaged in commanding his people to
get into order, as they landed dispersedly, some higher, some lower. Many had crossed, some
were in the water, and the rest were preparing to follow, when a sudden splash warned me that
MacGregor's eloquence had prevailed on Ewan to give him freedom and a chance for life. He is
self-conceited, and don't want to be advised;--he thinks there is no law like the law of England,
and that the old union-jack is a pass-book of nations;--and he thinks everybody's bound to obey his
notions of humanity and the dictates of his positive opinions. But what's worse than all, they've
never seen the sovereignty of South Carolina carried out, and according to Consul Mathew's silly
notions, they think we could be licked by a gun-boat.

All became an instant scene of the most lively confusion. Rob Roy, disengaged from his bonds,
doubtless by Ewan's slipping the buckle of his belt, had dropped off at the horse's tail, and
instantly dived, passing under the belly of the troop-horse which was on his left hand. But
as he was obliged to come to the surface an instant for air, the glimpse of his tartan plaid
drew the attention of the troopers, some of whom plunged into the river, with a total disregard
to their own safety, rushing, according to the expression of their country, through pool and
stream, sometimes swimming their horses, sometimes losing them and struggling for their own
lives. Others, less zealous or more prudent, broke off in different directions, and galloped
up and down the banks, to watch the places at which the fugitive might possibly land. The hollowing,
the whooping, the calls for aid at different points, where they saw, or conceived they saw,
some vestige of him they were seeking,--the frequent report of pistols and carabines, fired
at every object which excited the least suspicion,--the sight of so many horsemen riding about,
in and out of the river, and striking with their long broadswords at whatever excited their
attention, joined to the vain exertions used by their officers to restore order and regularity,--and
all this in so wild a scene, and visible only by the imperfect twilight of an autumn evening,
made the most extraordinary hubbub I had hitherto witnessed. I was indeed left alone to observe
it, for our whole cavalcade had dispersed in pursuit, or at least to see the event of the search.
Indeed, as I partly suspected at the time, and afterwards learned with certainty, many of those
who seemed most active in their attempts to waylay and recover the fugitive, were, in actual
truth, least desirous that he should be taken, and only joined in the cry to increase the general
confusion, and to give Rob Roy a better opportunity of escaping.

Escape, indeed, was not difficult for a swimmer so expert as the freebooter, as soon as he
had eluded the first burst of pursuit. At one time he was closely pressed, and several blows
were made which flashed in the water around him; the scene much resembling one of the otter-hunts
which I had seen at Osbaldistone Hall, where the animal is detected by the hounds from his
being necessitated to put his nose above the stream to vent or breathe, while he is enabled
to elude them by getting under water again so soon as he has refreshed himself by respiration. This
floor is appropriated for such crimes as assault and battery; assault and battery, with intent
to kill; refractory seamen; deserters; violating the statutes; suspicion of arson and murder;
witnesses; all sorts of crimes, varying from the debtor to the positive murderer, burglar,
and felon. We should have enumerated, among the rest, all stewards, (colored,) whether foreign
or domestic, who are committed on that singular charge, "contrary
to law." And it should have been added, even though cast away upon
our "hospitable shores."

Once fairly out of view, the recovery of the prisoner became almost impossible, since, in so
many places, the river was rendered inaccessible by the steepness of its banks, or the thickets
of alders, poplars, and birch, which, overhanging its banks, prevented the approach of horsemen.
Errors and accidents had also happened among the pursuers, whose task the approaching night
rendered every moment more hopeless. Some got themselves involved in the eddies of the stream,
and required the assistance of their companions to save them from drowning. Others, hurt by
shots or blows in the confused mele'e, implored help or threatened vengeance, and in one or
two instances such accidents led to actual strife. The trumpets, therefore, sounded the retreat,
announcing that the commanding officer, with whatsoever unwillingness, had for the present
relinquished hopes of the important prize which had thus unexpectedly escaped his grasp, and
the troopers began slowly, reluctantly, and brawling with each other as they returned, again
to assume their ranks. I could see them darkening, as they formed on the southern bank of the
river,--whose murmurs, long drowned by the louder cries of vengeful pursuit, were now heard
hoarsely mingling with the deep, discontented, and reproachful voices of the disappointed horsemen.

Hitherto I had been as it were a mere spectator, though far from an uninterested one, of the
singular scene which had passed. But now I heard a voice suddenly exclaim, "Where is the English
stranger?--It was he gave Rob Roy the knife to cut the belt."

"Cleeve the pock-pudding to the chafts!" cried one voice.

"Weize a brace of balls through his harn-pan!" said a second.

"Drive three inches of cauld airn into his brisket!" shouted a third.

And I heard several horses galloping to and fro, with the kind purpose, doubtless, of executing
these denunciations. I was immediately awakened to the sense of my situation, and to the certainty
that armed men, having no restraint whatever on their irritated and inflamed passions, would
probably begin by shooting or cutting me down, and afterwards investigate the justice of the
action. Impressed by this belief, I leaped from my horse, and turning him loose, plunged into
a bush of alder-trees, where, considering the advancing obscurity of the night, I thought there
was little chance of my being discovered. Had I been near enough to the Duke to have invoked
his personal protection, I would have done so; but he had already commenced his retreat, and
I saw no officer on the left bank of the river, of authority sufficient to have afforded protection,
in case of my surrendering myself. I thought there was no point of honour which could require,
in such circumstances, an unnecessary exposure of my life. My first idea, when the tumult began
to be appeased, and the clatter of the horses' feet was heard less frequently in the immediate
vicinity of my hiding-place, was to seek out the Duke's quarters when all should be quiet,
and give myself up to him, as a liege subject, who had nothing to fear from his justice, and
a stranger, who had every right to expect protection and hospitality. With this purpose I crept
out of my hiding-place, and looked around me.

The twilight had now melted nearly into darkness; a few or none of the troopers were left on
my side of the Forth, and of those who were already across it, I only heard the distant trample
of the horses' feet, and the wailing and prolonged sound of their trumpets, which rung through
the woods to recall stragglers, Here, therefore, I was left in a situation of considerable
difficulty. I had no horse, and the deep and wheeling stream of the river, rendered turbid
by the late tumult of which its channel had been the scene, and seeming yet more so under the
doubtful influence of an imperfect moonlight, had no inviting influence for a pedestrian by
no means accustomed to wade rivers, and who had lately seen horsemen weltering, in this dangerous
passage, up to the very saddle-laps. At the same time, my prospect, if I remained on the side
of the river on which I then stood, could be no other than of concluding the various fatigues
of this day and the preceding night, by passing that which was now closing in, al fresco on
the side of a Highland hill.

