"Cheerful!" she said--"in a village like this--with all the young men drifting off to London,
and all the well-to-do people dissenters--no one to stand by him--no money and no helpers--the
people always ill--wages eleven and twelve shillings a week--and only the old wrecks of men
left to do the work! He might, I think, expect the people in this house to back him up a little.
All he asks is that papa should go and satisfy himself with his own eyes as to the difference
between our property and Lord Maxwell's--"

"Lord Maxwell's!" cried Mr. Boyce, rousing himself from a state of half-melancholy, half-sleepy
reverie by the fire, and throwing away his cigarette--"Lord Maxwell! Difference! I should think
so. Thirty thousand a year, if he has a penny. By the way, I wish he would just have the civility
to answer my note about those coverts over by Willow Scrubs!"

He had hardly said the words when the door opened to admit William the footman, in his usual
tremor of nervousness, carrying a salver and a note.

"The man says, please sir, is there any answer, sir?"

"Well, that's odd!" said Mr. Boyce, his look brightening. "Here is Lord Maxwell's answer, just
as I was talking of it."

His wife turned sharply and watched him take it; her lips parted, a strange expectancy in her
whole attitude. He tore it open, read it, and then threw it angrily under the grate.

"No answer. Shut the door." The lad retreated. Mr. Boyce sat down and began carefully to put
the fire together. His thin left hand shook upon his knee.

There was a moment's pause of complete silence. Mrs. Boyce's face might have been seen by a
close observer to quiver and then stiffen as she stood in the light of the window, a tall and
queenly figure in her sweeping black. But she said not a word, and presently left the room.

Marcella watched her father.

"Papa--was that a note from Lord Maxwell?"

Mr. Boyce looked round with a start, as though surprised that any one was still there. It struck
Marcella that he looked yellow and shrunken--years older than her mother. An impulse of tenderness,
joined with anger and a sudden sick depression--she was conscious of them all as she got up
and went across to him, determined to speak out. Her parents were not her friends, and did
not possess her confidence; but her constant separation from them since her childhood had now
sometimes the result of giving her the boldness with them that a stranger might have had. She
had no habitual deference to break through, and the hindering restraints of memory, though
strong, were still less strong than they would have been if she had lived with them day by
day and year by year, and had known their lives in close detail instead of guessing at them,
as was now so often the case with her.

"Papa, is Lord Maxwell's note an uncivil one?"

Mr. Boyce stooped forward and began to rub his chilly hand over the blaze.

"Why, that man's only son and I used to loaf and shoot and play cricket together from morning
till night when we were boys. Henry Raeburn was a bit older than I, and he lent me the gun
with which I shot my first rabbit. It was in one of the fields over by Soleyhurst, just where
the two estates join. After that we were always companions--we used to go out at night with
the keepers after poachers; we spent hours in the snow watching for wood-pigeons; we shot that
pair of kestrels over the inner hall door, in the Windmill Hill fields--at least I did--I was
a better shot than he by that time. He didn't like Robert--he always wanted me."

"Well, papa, but what does he say?" asked Marcella, impatiently. She laid her hand, however,
as she spoke, on her father's shoulder.

