CHAPTER LXI

Let me here relate an incident which should have found a place earlier, but which has been
omitted in order that what has gone before might be uninterrupted.  On the 16th of the previous
July the King made a journey to Fontainebleau, where he remained until the 14th of September. If
then the second or middle part refers to the wings, we could read it:

"And the creatures went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was to go, the wings went;
and the creatures turned not when the wings went."

Again we have a picture of four men walking with their inoperative helicopters moving in several
different ways as the breeze and the men's motions cause them to
move slightly.

Notice that Ezekiel seems to be more impressed with
the wings and their motion than with any other feature of what he
witnessed.  Madame la Duchesse d'Orleans more timid still, addressed herself to
Madame, and to Madame de Maintenon, who, indifferent as they might be respecting Madame la
Duchesse de Berry, thought her departure so hazardous that, supported by Fagon, they spoke
of it to the King.  It was useless.  They were not daunted, however, and this dispute lasted
three or four days.  The end of it was, that the King grew thoroughly angry and agreed, by
way of capitulation, that the journey should be performed in a boat instead of a coach.

It was arranged that Madame la Duchesse de Berry should leave Marly, where the King then was,
on the 13th, sleep at the Palais Royal that night and repose herself there all the next day
and night, that on the 15th she should set out for Petit-Bourg, where the King was to halt
for the night, and arrive like him, on the 16th, at Fontainebleau, the whole journey to be
by the river.  M. le Duc de Berry had permission to accompany his wife; but during the two
nights they were to rest in Paris the King angrily forbade them to go anywhere, even to the
Opera, although that building joined the Palais Royal, and M. d'Orleans' box could be reached
without going out of the palace.

On the 14th the King, under pretence of inquiry after them, repeated this prohibition to M.
le Duc de Berry and Madame his wife, and also to M. d'Orleans and Madame d'Orleans, who had
been included in it. He would be quite visible against the blackness of space.

14.

This might mean that they moved swiftly, but more than likely
it means that they sparkled and shined on all sides, and this was
visible as they moved about.

This ends the description for a while.  Madame de Saint-Simon could not refuse to remain and sleep
in the Palais Royal, where the apartment of the queen-mother was given to her.  All the while
the party was shut up there was a good deal of gaming in order to console M. le Duc de Berry
for his confinement.

The provost of the merchants had orders to prepare boats for the trip to Fontainebleau.  He
had so little time that they were ill chosen.  Madame la Duchesse de Berry embarked, however,
on the 15th, and arrived, with fever, at ten o'clock at night at Petit-Bourg, where the King
appeared rejoiced by an obedience so exact.

On the morrow the journey recommenced.  In passing Melun, the boat of Madame la Duchesse de
Berry struck against the bridge, was nearly capsized, and almost swamped, so that they were
all in great danger. They got off, however, with fear and a delay.  Disembarking in great disorder
at Valvin, where their equipages were waiting for there, they arrived at Fontainebleau two
hours after midnight.  The King, pleased beyond measure, went the next morning to see Madame
la Duchesse de Berry in the beautiful apartment of the queen-mother that had been given to
her.  From the moment of her arrival she had been forced to keep her bed, and at six o'clock
in the morning of the 21st of July she miscarried and was delivered of a daughter, still-born.
Madame de Saint-Simon ran to tell the King; he did not appear much moved; he had been obeyed!
The Duchesse de Beauvilliers and the Marquise de Chatillon were named by the King to carry
the embryo to Saint-Denis.  As it was only a girl, and as the miscarriage had no ill effect,
consolation soon came.

It was some little time after this occurrence, that we heard of the defeat of the Czar by the
Grand Vizier upon the Pruth.  The Czar, annoyed by the protection the Porte had accorded to
the King of Sweden (in retirement at Bender), made an appeal to arms, and fell into the same
error as that which had occasioned the defeat of the King of Sweden by him. It remains "living"
because we are able to find new meaning to fit our daily lives. Although it is not the usual kind
of new meaning, I believe that I have found something of the sort in the very old prophesies
of Ezekiel.

Bible scholars have long recognized the first chapter of Ezekiel as a strange and nearly unfathomable
account of a vision. I suggest that it is strange only because it is written by a man far removed
from us in time and experience, about a subject totally unfamiliar to men of his time. I do
not think that this was a vision in the usual sense, nor was it meant to be mystical. This
particular chapter has been called "Science fiction in the Bible" and many attempts have been
made to unravel the meaning of the original author, along both spiritual and mundane lines. I
am convinced that this chapter is the account of an actual happening; the landing of extraterrestial
beings, reported by a careful, truthful and self-possessed observer.

I am not a student of theology and therefore you may feel that I am being presumptive in attempting
to throw light on a mystery as old and well-studied as Ezekiel's first chapter. I feel that
any success that I may have in doing so will be due to the accident
of my birth at the very beginning of an era when the events I have
to describe are fact, or are about to become fact.

If, as I believe, this is an account of an actual encounter with men from space, I may be better
able to interpret the meaning than a student of theology, who by training and interest, is looking
for a theological meaning. I have worked with mechanical things, and as an instructor of aircraft
mechanics for most of my adult life. During this time I have had to untangle a lot of mechanical
misconceptions and misunderstandings. I think that this gives me some insight into this problem.

If
you are not too familiar with the Old Testament, I suggest that you read through the first chapter
of Ezekiel to get the feeling of the flow of words, and a general
idea of what sort of material we will be covering. If you have done
a considerable amount of reading in the Bible, I am sure you will
notice at once how different and "un-Bible-like" this chapter sounds.
It isn't long. The first chapter covers little more than one page.  He braved it then with authority and menaces, and hastened the Czar's departure
and his own. The Swedish minister, charged with protests from the principal Turkish chiefs,
hurried to Constantinople, where the Grand Vizier was strangled upon arriving.

The Czar never forgot this service of his wife, by whose courage and presence of mind he had
been saved.  The esteem he conceived for her, joined to his friendship, induced him to crown
her Czarina, and to consult her upon all his affairs and all his schemes.  Escaped from danger,
he was a long time without giving up Azof, or demolishing his forts on the Black Sea.  As for
his vessels, he kept them nearly all, and would not allow the King of Sweden to return into
Germany, as he had agreed, thus almost lighting up a fresh war with the Turk.

On the 6th of November, 1711, at about eight o'clock in the evening, the shock of an earthquake
was felt in Paris and at Versailles; but it was so slight that few people perceived it.  In
several places towards Touraine and Poitou, in Saxony, and in some of the German towns near,
it was very perceptible at the same day and hour.  At this date a new tontine was established
in Paris.

I have so often spoken of Marshal Catinat, of his virtue, wisdom, modesty, and disinterestedness;
of the rare superiority of his sentiments, and of his great qualities as captain, that nothing
remains for me to say except that he died at this time very advanced in years, at his little
house of Saint-Gratien, near Saint-Denis, where he had retired, and which he seldom quitted,
although receiving there but few friends.  By his simplicity and frugality, his contempt for
worldly distinction, and his uniformity of conduct, he recalled the memory of those great men
who, after the best-merited triumphs, peacefully returned to the plough, still loving their
country and but little offended by the ingratitude of the Rome they had so well served.  Catinat
placed his philosophy at the service of his piety.  He had intelligence, good sense, ripe reflection;
and he never forgot his origin; his dress, his equipages, his furniture, all were of the greatest
simplicity.  His air and his deportment were so also.  He was tall, dark, and thin; had an
aspect pensive, slow, and somewhat mean; with very fine and expressive eyes.  He deplored the
signal faults that he saw succeed each other unceasingly; the gradual extinction of all emulation;
the luxury, the emptiness, the ignorance, the confusion of ranks; the inquisition in the place
of the police: he saw all the signs of destruction, and he used to say it was only a climax
of dangerous disorder that could restore order to the realm.

Vendome was one of the few to whom the death of the Dauphin and the Dauphine brought hope and
joy.  He had deemed himself expatriated for the rest of his life.  He saw, now, good chances
before him of returning to our Court, and of playing a part there again.  He had obtained some
honour in Spain; he aimed at others even higher, and hoped to return to France with all the
honours of a Prince of the Blood.  His idleness, his free living, his debauchery, had prolonged
his stay upon the frontier, where he had more facilities for gratifying his tastes than at
Madrid. In that city, it is true, he did not much constrain himself, but he was forced to do
so to some extent by courtly usages.  He was, then, quite at home on the frontier; there was
nothing to do; for the Austrians, weakened by the departure of the English, were quite unable
to attack; and Vendome, floating upon the delights of his new dignities, thought only of enjoying
himself in the midst of profound idleness, under pretext that operations could not at once
be commenced.

