These arguments, as we have already hinted, found something responsive in Montrose's own bosom,
not quite consonant with the general heroism of his character. The houses of Argyle and Montrose
had been in former times, repeatedly opposed to each other in war and in politics, and the
superior advantages acquired by the former, had made them the subject of envy and dislike to
the neighbouring family, who, conscious of equal desert, had not been so richly rewarded. This
was not all. The existing heads of these rival families had stood in the most marked opposition
to each other since the commencement of the present troubles.

Montrose, conscious of the superiority of his talents, and of having rendered great service
to the Covenanters at the beginning of the war, had expected from that party the supereminence
of council and command, which they judged it safer to intrust to the more limited faculties,
and more extensive power, of his rival Argyle. The having awarded this preference, was an injury
which Montrose never forgave the Covenanters; and he was still less likely to extend his pardon
to Argyle, to whom he had been postponed. He was therefore stimulated by every feeling of hatred
which could animate a fiery temper in a fierce age, to seek for revenge upon the enemy of his
house and person; and it is probable that these private motives operated not a little upon
his mind, when he found the principal part of his followers determined rather to undertake
an expedition against the territories of Argyle, than to take the far more decisive step of
descending at once into the Lowlands.

Yet whatever temptation Montrose found to carry into effect his attack upon Argyleshire, he
could not easily bring himself to renounce the splendid achievement of a descent upon the Lowlands.
He held more than one council with the principal Chiefs, combating, perhaps, his own secret
inclination as well as theirs. He laid before them the extreme difficulty of marching even
a Highland army from the eastward into Argyleshire, through passes scarcely practicable for
shepherds and deer-stalkers, and over mountains, with which even the clans lying nearest to
them did not pretend to be thoroughly acquainted. These difficulties were greatly enhanced
by the season of the year, which was now advancing towards December, when the mountain-passes,
in themselves so difficult, might be expected to be rendered utterly impassable by snowstorms.
These objections neither satisfied nor silenced the Chiefs, who insisted upon their ancient
mode of making war, by driving the cattle, which, according to the Gaelic phrase, "fed upon
the grass of their enemy." The council was dismissed late at night, and without coming to any
decision, excepting that the Chiefs, who supported the opinion that Argyle should be invaded,
promised to seek out among their followers those who might be most capable of undertaking the
office of guides upon the expedition.

Montrose had retired to the cabin which served him for a tent, and stretched himself upon a
bed of dry fern, the only place of repose which it afforded. But he courted sleep in vain,
for the visions of ambition excluded those of Morpheus. In one moment he imagined himself displaying
the royal banner from the reconquered Castle of Edinburgh, detaching assistance to a monarch
whose crown depended upon his success, and receiving in requital all the advantages and preferments
which could be heaped upon him whom a king delighteth to honour. At another time this dream,
splendid as it was, faded before the vision of gratified vengeance, and personal triumph over
a personal enemy. To surprise Argyle in his stronghold of Inverary--to crush in him at once
the rival of his own house and the chief support of the Presbyterians--to show the Covenanters
the difference between the preferred Argyle and the postponed Montrose, was a picture too flattering
to feudal vengeance to be easily relinquished.

While he lay thus busied with contradictory thoughts and feelings, the soldier who stood sentinel
upon his quarters announced to the Marquis that two persons desired to speak with his Excellency.

"Their names?" answered Montrose, "and the cause of their urgency at such a late hour?"

On these points, the sentinel, who was one of Colkitto's Irishmen, could afford his General
little information; so that Montrose, who at such a period durst refuse access to no one, lest
he might have been neglecting some important intelligence, gave directions, as a necessary
precaution, to put the guard under arms, and then prepared to receive his untimely visitors.
His groom of the chambers had scarce lighted a pair of torches, and Montrose himself had scarce
risen from his couch, when two men entered, one wearing a Lowland dress, of shamoy leather
worn almost to tatters; the other a tall upright old Highlander, of a complexion which might
be termed iron-grey, wasted and worn by frost and tempest.

"What may be your commands with me, my friends?" said the Marquis, his hand almost unconsciously
seeking the but of one of his pistols; for the period, as well as the time of night, warranted
suspicions which the good mien of his visitors was not by any means calculated to remove.

"I pray leave to congratulate you," said the Lowlander, "my most noble General, and right honourable
lord, upon the great battles which you have achieved since I had the fortune to be detached
from you, It was a pretty affair that tuilzie at Tippermuir; nevertheless, if I might be permitted
to counsel--"

"Before doing so," said the Marquis, "will you be pleased to let me know who is so kind as
to favour me with his opinion?"

"Truly, my lord," replied the man, "I should have hoped that was unnecessary, seeing it is
not so long since I took on in your service, under promise of a commission as Major, with half
a dollar of daily pay and half a dollar of arrears; and I am to trust your lordship has nut
forgotten my pay as well as my person?"

"My good friend, Major Dalgetty," said Montrose, who by this time perfectly recollected his
man, "you must consider what important things have happened to put my friends' faces out of
my memory, besides this imperfect light; but all conditions shall be kept.--And what news from
Argyleshire, my good Major? We have long given you up for lost, and I was now preparing to
take the most signal vengeance upon the old fox who infringed the law of arms in your person."

"Truly, my noble lord," said Dalgetty, "I have no desire that my return should put any stop
to so proper and becoming an intention; verily it is in no shape in the Earl of Argyle's favour
or mercy that I now stand before you, and I shall be no intercessor for him. But my escape
is, under Heaven, and the excellent dexterity which, as an old and accomplished cavalier, I
displayed in effecting the same,--I say, under these, it is owing to the assistance of this
old Highlander, whom I venture to recommend to your lordship's special favour, as the instrument
of saving your lordship's to command, Dugald Dalgetty of Drumthwacket."

"A thankworthy service," said the Marquis, gravely, "which shall certainly be requited in the
manner it deserves."

"Kneel down, Ranald," said Major Dalgetty (as we must now call him), "kneel down, and kiss
his Excellency's hand."

The prescribed form of acknowledgment not being according to the custom of Ranald's country,
he contented himself with folding his arms on his bosom, and making a low inclination of his head.

"This poor man, my lord," said Major Dalgetty, continuing his speech with a dignified air of
protection towards Ranald M'Eagh, "has strained all his slender means to defend my person from
mine enemies, although having no better weapons of a missile sort than bows and arrows, whilk
your lordship will hardly believe."

"You will see a great many such weapons in my camp," said Montrose, "and we find them serviceable."
But besides defending me, this honest Highlander also was at the pains of curing me, in respect
that I had got a touch of the wars in my retreat, which merits my best requital in this special
introduction of him to your lordship's notice and protection."

"What is your name, my friend?" said Montrose, turning to the Highlander.

"It may not be spoken," answered the mountaineer.

"That is to say," interpreted Major Dalgetty, "he desires to have his name concealed, in respect
he hath in former days taken a castle, slain certain children, and done other things, whilk,
as your good lordship knows, are often practised in war time, but excite no benevolence towards
the perpetrator in the friends of those who sustain injury. I have known, in my military experience,
many brave cavaliers put to death by the boors, simply for having used military license upon
the country."

"I understand," said Montrose: "This person is at feud with some of our followers. Let him
retire to the court of guard, and we will think of the best mode of protecting him."

"You hear, Ranald," said Major Dalgetty, with an air of superiority, "his Excellency wishes
to hold privy council with me, you must go to the court of guard.--He does not know where that
is, poor fellow!--he is a young soldier for so old a man; I will put him under the charge of
a sentinel, and return to your lordship incontinent." He did so, and returned accordingly.

Montrose's first enquiry respected the embassy to Inverary; and he listened with attention
to Dalgetty's reply, notwithstanding the prolixity of the Major's narrative. It required an
effort from the Marquis to maintain his attention; but no one better knew, that where information
is to be derived from the report of such agents as Dalgetty, it can only be obtained by suffering
them to tell their story in their own way. Accordingly the Marquis's patience was at length
rewarded. Among other spoils which the Captain thought himself at liberty to take, was a packet
of Argyle's private papers. These he consigned to the hands of his General; a humour of accounting,
however, which went no farther, for I do not understand that he made any mention of the purse
of gold which he had appropriated at the same time that he made seizure of the papers aforesaid.
Snatching a torch from the wall, Montrose was in an instant deeply engaged in the perusal of
these documents, in which it is probable he found something to animate his personal resentment
against his rival Argyle.

"Does he not fear me?" said he; "then he shall feel me. Will he fire my castle of Murdoch?--Inverary
shall raise the first smoke.--O for a guide through the skirts of Strath-Fillan!"

Whatever might be Dalgetty's personal conceit, he understood his business sufficiently to guess
at Montrose's meaning. He instantly interrupted his own prolix narration of the skirmish which
had taken place, and the wound he had received in his retreat, and began to speak to the point
which he saw interested his General.

"If," said he, "your Excellency wishes to make an infall into Argyleshire, this poor man, Ranald,
of whom I told you, together with his children and companions, know every pass into that land,
both leading from the east and from the north."

"Indeed!" said Montrose; "what reason have you to believe their knowledge so extensive?"

"So please your Excellency," answered Dalgetty, "during the weeks that I remained with them
for cure of my wound, they were repeatedly obliged to shift their quarters, in respect of Argyle's
repeated attempts to repossess himself of the person of an officer who was honoured with Your
Excellency's confidence; so that I had occasion to admire the singular dexterity and knowledge
of the face of the country with which they alternately achieved their retreat and their advance;
and when, at length, I was able to repair to your Excellency's standard, this honest simple
creature, Ranald MacEagh, guided me by paths which my steed Gustavus (which your lordship may
remember) trode with perfect safety, so that I said to myself, that where guides, spies, or
intelligencers, were required in a Highland campaign in that western country, more expert persons
than he and his attendants could not possibly be desired."

"And can you answer for this man's fidelity?" said Montrose; "what is his name and condition?"

"He is an outlaw and robber by profession, something also of a homicide or murderer," answered
Dalgetty; "and by name, called Ranald MacEagh; whilk signifies, Ranald, the Son of the Mist."

"I should remember something of that name," said Montrose, pausing: "Did not these Children
of the Mist perpetrate some act of cruelty upon the M'Aulays?"

Major Dalgetty mentioned the circumstance of the murder of the forester, and Montrose's active
memory at once recalled all the circumstances of the feud.

"It is most unlucky," said Montrose, "this inexpiable quarrel between these men and the M'Aulays.
Allan has borne himself bravely in these wars, and possesses, by the wild mystery of his behaviour
and language, so much influence over the minds of his countrymen, that the consequences of
disobliging him might be serious. At the same time, these men being so capable of rendering
useful service, and being as you say, Major Dalgetty, perfectly trustworthy--"

"I will pledge my pay and arrears, my horse and arms, my head and neck, upon their fidelity,"
said the Major; "and your Excellency knows, that a soldado could say no more for his own father."

"True," said Montrose; "but as this is a matter of particular moment, I would willingly know
the grounds of so positive an assurance."

"Concisely then, my lord," said the Major, "not only did they disdain to profit by a handsome
reward which Argyle did me the honour to place upon this poor head of mine, and not only did
they abstain from pillaging my personal property, whilk was to an amount that would have tempted
regular soldiers in any service of Europe; and not only did they restore me my horse, whilk
your Excellency knows to be of value, but I could not prevail on them to accept one stiver,
doit, or maravedi, for the trouble and expenses of my sick bed. They actually refused my coined
money when freely offered,--a tale seldom to be told in a Christian land."

"I admit," said Montrose, after a moment's reflection, "that their conduct towards you is good
evidence of their fidelity; but how to secure against the breaking out of this feud?" He paused,
and then suddenly added, "I had forgot I have supped, while you, Major, have been travelling
by moonlight."

He called to his attendants to fetch a stoup of wine and some refreshments. Major Dalgetty,
who had the appetite of a convalescent returned from Highland quarters, needed not any pressing
to partake of what was set before him, but proceeded to dispatch his food with such alacrity,
that the Marquis, filling a cup of wine, and drinking to his health, could not help remarking,
that coarse as the provisions of his camp were, he was afraid Major Dalgetty had fared much
worse during his excursion into Argyleshire.

"Your Excellency may take your corporal oath upon that," said the worthy Major, speaking with
his mouth full; "for Argyle's bread and water are yet stale and mouldy in my recollection,
and though they did their best, yet the viands that the Children of the Mist procured for me,
poor helpless creatures as they were, were so unrefreshful to my body, that when enclosed in
my armour, whilk I was fain to leave behind me for expedition's sake, I rattled therein like
the shrivelled kernel in a nut that hath been kept on to a second Hallowe'en."

"You must take the due means to repair these losses, Major Dalgetty."

"In troth," answered the soldier, "I shall hardly be able to compass that, unless my arrears
are to be exchanged for present pay; for I protest to your Excellency, that the three stone
weight which I have lost were simply raised upon the regular accountings of the States of Holland."

"In that case," said the Marquis, "you are only reduced to good marching order. As for the
pay, let us once have victory--victory, Major, and your wishes, and all our wishes, shall be
amply fulfilled. Meantime, help yourself to another cup of wine."

"To your Excellency's health," said the Major, filling a cup to the brim, to show the zeal
with which he drank the toast, "and victory over all our enemies, and particularly over Argyle!
I hope to twitch another handful from his board myself--I have had one pluck at it already."

"Very true," answered Montrose; "but to return to those men of the Mist. You understand, Dalgetty,
that their presence here, and the purpose for which we employ them, is a secret between you
and me?"

Delighted, as Montrose had anticipated, with this mark of his General's confidence, the Major
laid his hand upon his nose, and nodded intelligence.

"How many may there be of Ranald's followers?" continued the Marquis.

"They are reduced, so far as I know, to some eight or ten men," answered Major Dalgetty, "and
a few women and children."

"Where are they now?" demanded Montrose.

"In a valley, at three miles' distance," answered the soldier, "awaiting your Excellency's
command; I judged it not fit to bring them to your leaguer without your Excellency's orders."

"You judged very well," said Montrose; "it would be proper that they remain where they are,
or seek some more distant place of refuge. I will send them money, though it is a scarce article
with me at present."

"It is quite unnecessary," said Major Dalgetty; "your Excellency has only to hint that the
M'Aulays are going in that direction, and my friends of the Mist will instantly make volte-face,
and go to the right about."

"That were scarce courteous," said the Marquis. "Better send them a few dollars to purchase
them some cattle for the support of the women and children."

"They know how to come by their cattle at a far cheaper rate," said the Major; "but let it
be as your Excellency wills."

"Let Ranald MacEagh," said Montrose, "select one or two of his followers, men whom he can trust,
and who are capable of keeping their own secret and ours; these, with their chief for scout-master-general,
shall serve for our guides. Let them be at my tent to-morrow at daybreak, and see, if possible,
that they neither guess my purpose, nor hold any communication with each other in private.--This
old man, has he any children?"

"They have been killed or hanged," answered the Major, "to the number of a round dozen, as
I believe--but he hath left one grand-child, a smart and hopeful youth, whom I have noted to
be never without a pebble in his plaid-nook, to fling at whatsoever might come in his way;
being a symbol, that, like David, who was accustomed to sling smooth stones taken from the
brook, he may afterwards prove an adventurous warrior."

"That boy, Major Dalgetty," said the Marquis, "I will have to attend upon my own person. I
presume he will have sense enough to keep his name secret?"

"Your Excellency need not fear that," answered Dalgetty; "these Highland imps, from the moment
they chip the shell--"

