For a moment it had seemed as though the fatal boundary line would be crossed.  Stonehouse
had stared at his son, his eyes brightening to an electric glare as they picked out the patches
of the shabby sailor-suit and the frantic, mollifying smile on Robert's face had grown stiff
as he had turned himself obediently about.

"Disgraceful.  I wonder you women are not ashamed, the way you neglect the child--I shall take
him to Shoolbred's first thing to-morrow and have him fitted out from top to toe----"  The
gathering storm receded miraculously.  "However, he can't appear like that.  For God's sake,
get the house tidy, at any rate----"

So Robert had been bustled up stairs and the bailiff lured into the kitchen, where fortunately
he had become so drunk that he had had no opportunity to explain to the French chef and the
two waiters the real reason for his presence and his whole-hearted participation in the feast.

From the top of the stairs Robert had watched Christine go into dinner on his father's arm,
and Edith Stonehouse follow with a black-coated stranger who had known his mother.  He had
listened to the talk and his father's laughter--jovial and threatening--and once he had dived
downstairs and, peering through the banisters like a small blond monkey, had snatched a cream
meringue from a passing tray.  Then for a moment he had almost believed that they were all
going to be happy together.

That had been last night.  Now there was nothing left but the bailiff, still slightly befuddled,
an incredible pile of unwashed dishes and an atmosphere of stale tobacco.  James Stonehouse
had gone off early in a black and awful temper.  It seemed that at the last moment the multi-millionaire
had explained that owing to a hitch in his affairs he was short of ready cash and would be
glad of a small loan.  Only temporary, of course.  Wouldn't have dreamed of asking, but meeting
such an old friend in such affluent circumstances----

So the eighth birthday had been forgotten.  Robert himself could not have explained why grief
should have driven him to his father's cigars-box.  Perhaps it was just a beau geste of defiance,
or a reminder that one day he too would be grown up and free.  At any rate, it was still a
very large cigar.  Though he puffed at it painstakingly, blowing the smoke far out of the window
so as to escape detection, the result was not encouraging.  The exquisite mauve-grey ash was
indeed less than a quarter of an inch long when his sense of wrong and injustice deepened to
an overwhelming despair.  It was not only that even Christine had failed him--everything was
failing him.  The shabby plot of rising ground opposite, which justified Dr. Stonehouse's contention
that he looked out over open country, had become immersed in a loathsome mist, greenish in
hue, in which it heaved and rolled and undulated like an uneasy reptile.  The house likewise
heaved, and Robert had to lean hard against the lintel of the window to prevent himself from
falling out.  A strange sensation of uncertainty--of internal disintegration--obsessed him,
and there was a cold moisture gathering on his face.  He felt that at any moment anything might
happen.  He didn't care.  He wanted to die, anyhow.  They had forgotten him, but when he was
dead they would be sorry.  His father would give him a beautiful funeral, and Christine would
say, "We can't afford it, Jim," and there would be another awful scene.

In the next room Edith and Christine were talking as they rolled up the Axminster carpet which,
since the bailiff had no claim on it, was to go to the pawnbroker's to appease the butcher.
The door stood open, and he could hear Edith's bitter, resentful voice raised in denunciation.

"I don't know why I stand it.  If my poor dear father, Sir Godfrey, knew what I was enduring,
he would rise from the grave.  Never did I think I should have to go through such humiliation.
My sisters say I ought to leave him--that I am wanting in right feeling, but I can't help it.
I am faithful by nature.  I remember my promises at the altar--even if Jim forgets his----"

"He didn't promise to keep his temper or out of debt," Christine said.

Edith sniffed loudly.

"Or away from other women.  Oh, it's no good, Christine, I know what I know.  There's always
some other woman in the background.  Only yesterday I found a letter from Mrs. Saxburn--that
red-haired vixen he brought home to tea when there wasn't money in the house to buy bread.
I tell you he doesn't know what faithfulness means."

Robert, rising for a moment above his own personal anguish, clenched his fist.  It was all
very well--he might hate his father, Christine might hate him, though he knew she didn't, but
Edith had no right.  She was an outsider--a bounder----

"He is faithful to his ideal," Christine answered.  "He is always looking for it and thinking
he has found it.  And except for Constance he has always been mistaken."

"Thank you."

"I wasn't thinking of you," Christine explained.  "There have been so many of them--and all
so terribly expensive--never cheap or common----"

They were dragging the carpet out into the landing.  Their voices sounded louder and more distinct.

"I could bear almost everything but his temper," Edith persisted breathlessly.  "He's like
a madman----"

"He's ill--sometimes I think he's very ill----"

"Oh, you've always got an excuse for him, Christine.  You never see him as he really is.  I
can't think why you didn't marry him yourself.  I'm sure he asked you.  Jim couldn't be alone
with a woman ten minutes without proposing.  And everyone knows how fond you are of him and
of that tiresome child----"

Robert Stonehouse gasped.  The earth reeled under his feet.  The stump of the cigar rolled
off the windowsill, and he himself tumbled from his chair and was sick--convulsively, hideously
sick.  For a moment he remained huddled on the floor, half unconscious, and then very slowly
the green, soul-destroying mist receded and he found Christine bending over him, wiping his
face, with her pocket-Handkerchief.

"Robert, darling, why didn't you call out?"

"He's been smoking," Edith's voice declared viciously from somewhere in the background.  "I
can smell it.  The horrid little boy----"

"I didn't--I didn't----"  He kept his feet with an enormous effort, scowling at her.  He lied
shamelessly, as a matter of course and without the faintest sense of guilt.  Everyone lied.
They had to. Christine knew that as well as anyone.  Not that lying was of the slightest use.
His father's temper fed on itself and was independent alike of fact or fiction.  But you could
no more help lying to him than you could help flinching from a red-hot poker.  "I didn't,"
he repeated stubbornly, and all the while repeating to himself, "It's my birthday--and they've
forgotten.  They don't care."  But he would rather have died then and there than have reminded
them.  He would not even let them see how miserable he was, and to stop himself from crying
he kept his eyes fixed on Edith Stonehouse, who in turn measured him with that exaggerated
and artificial horror which she considered appropriate to naughty children.

"Oh, how can you, Robert?  Don't you know what happens to wicked little boys who tell lies?"

He hated her.  He hated the red, coarse-skinned face, the tight mouth and opaque brown eyes
and the low, stupid forehead with its old-fashioned narrow fringe of dingy hair.  He knew that
in spite of Sir Godfrey and the family estate of which she was always talking, she was common
to the heart--not a lady like Christine and his mother--and her occasionally adopted pose of
authority convulsed him with a blind, ungovernable fury.  He was too young to understand that
she meant well--was indeed good-natured and kindly enough in her natural environment--and as
she advanced upon him now, in reality to smooth his disordered hair, he drew back, an absurd
miniature replica of James Stonehouse in his worst rages, his fists clenched, his teeth set
on a horrible recurring nausea.

"If you touch me, Edith--I'll--I'll bite you----"

"Hush, darling--you mustn't speak like that----"

"Oh, don't mind me, Christine.  I'm not accustomed to respect in this house.  I don't expect
it.  'Edith,' indeed!  Did you ever hear such a thing!  I can't think what Jim was thinking
about to allow it.  He ought to call me 'Mother'----"

Robert tore himself free from Christine's soothing embrace.  He had a moment's blinding, heart-breaking
vision of his real mother.  She stood close to him, looking at him with her grave eyes, demanding
of him that he should avenge this insult.  And in a moment he would be sick again.

"I wouldn't--wouldn't call you mother--not if you killed me.  I wouldn't if you put me in the
fire----"

"Robert, dear."

"You see, Christine--but of course you won't see.  You're blind where he's concerned.  What
a wicked temper.  Deceitful, too.  I'm sure I'm glad he's not my child.  He's going to be like
his father."

"I want to be like my father.  I wouldn't be like you for anything."

"Robert, be quiet at once or I shall punish you."

She was angry now.  She had been greatly tried during the last twenty-four hours, and to her
he was just an alien, hateful little boy who made her feel like an interloper in her own house,
bought with her own money.  She seized him by the arm, shaking him viciously, and he flew at
her, biting and kicking with all his strength.

It was an ugly, wretched scene.  It ended abruptly on the landing, where she let go her hold
with a cry of pain and Robert Stonehouse rolled down the stairs, bumping his head and catching
his arm cruelly in the banisters.  He was on his feet instantly.  He heard Christine coming
and he ran on, down into the hall, where he caught up his little boots, which she had been
cleaning for him, and after a desperate struggle with the latch, out into the road--sobbing
and blood-stained, heart-broken with shame and loneliness and despair.

2

His relationship with the Brothers Banditti across the hill was peculiar.  It was one of Dr.
Stonehouse's many theories of life that children should be independent, untrammelled alike
by parental restrictions and education, and except on the very frequent occasions when this
particular theory collided with his comfort and his conviction that his son was being disgracefully
neglected, Robert lived the life of a lonely and illiterate guttersnipe.  He did not know he
was lonely.  He did not want to play with the other children in the Terrace.  But he did know
that for some mysterious reason or other they did not want to play with him.  The trim nursemaids
drew their starched and shining darlings to one side when he passed, and he in turn scowled
at them with a fierce contempt to which, all unknown, was added two drops of shame and bitterness.
But even among the real guttersnipes of the neighbourhood he was an outcast.  He did not know
how to play with other children.  He was ignorant alike of their ways and their games, and,
stiff with an agonizing shyness, he bore himself before them arrogantly.  It was natural that
they in turn hated him.  Like young wolves they flaired a member of a strange and alien pack--a
creature who broke their unwritten laws--and at first they had hunted him pitilessly, throwing
mud and stones at him, pushing him from the pavement, jeering at him.  But they had not reckoned
with the Stonehouse rages.  He had flung himself on them.  He had fought them singly, by twos
and threes--the whole pack.  In single combat he had thrashed the grocer's boy who was several
inches taller and two years older than himself.  But even against a dozen his white-hot fury,
which ignored alike pain and discretion, made him dangerous and utterly unbeatable.  From all
encounters he had come out battered, blood-stained, literally in shreds, but clothed in lonely
victory.

Now they only jeered at him from a safe distance.  They made cruel and biting references to
the Stonehouse menage, flying with mock shrieks of terror when he was unwise enough to attempt
pursuit.  Usually he went his way, his head up, swallowing his tears.

But the Brothers Banditti belonged to him.

On the other side of the hill was a large waste plot of ground.  A builder with more enterprise
than capital had begun the erection of up-to-date villas but had gone bankrupt in the process,
and now nothing remained of his ambition but a heap of somewhat squalid ruins.  Here, after
school hours, the Brothers met and played and plotted.

They had not always been Banditti.  Before Robert's advent they had been the nice children
of the nicest people of the neighbourhood. Their games had been harmless, if apathetic, and
they had always gone home punctually and clean.  The parents considered the waste land as a
great blessing.  Robert had come upon them in the course of his lonely prowlings, and from
a distance had watched them play hide and seek.  He had despised them and their silly game,
but, on the other hand, they did not know who he was and would not make fun of him and taunt
him with unpaid bills, and it had been rather nice to listen to their cheerful voices.  The
ruins, too, had fired his imagination.  He had viewed them much as a general views the scene
of a prospective battle. And then--strangest attraction of all--there had been Frances Wilmot.
She was different from any other little girl he had ever seen.  She was clean and had worn
a neat green serge dress with neat brown shoes and stockings which toned with her short curly
brown hair, but she did not shine or look superior or disdainful.  Nor had she been playing
with her companions, though they ran back to her from time to time as though in some secret
way she had led their game.  When Robert had come upon her she was sitting on the foundations
of what was to have been a magnificent portico, her arms clasped about her knees, and a curious
intent look on her pointed delicate face.  That intent look, as he was to discover, was very
constant with her.  It was as though she were always watching something of absorbing interest
which no one else could see.  Sometimes it amused her, and and then a flicker of laughter ran
up from her mouth to her grey eyes and danced there.  At other times she was sorry.  Her face
was like still water, ruffled by invisible winds and mirroring distant clouds and sunshine.

Robert had watched her, motionless and unobserved, for several minutes. It had been a very
unhappy day.  Christine had gone off in a great hurry on some dark errand in the city connected
with "raising money" on a reversion and had forgotten to wash him, and though he did not like
being washed, the process did at least make him feel that someone cared about him.  Now at
sight of this strange little girl an almost overpowering desire to cry had come over him--to
fling himself into someone's arms and cry his heart out.

She had not sat there for long.  She had got up and moved about--flitted rather--so that Robert,
who had never heard of a metaphor, thought of a brown leaf dancing in little gusts of wind.
And then suddenly she had seen him and stood still.  His heart had begun to pound against his
ribs.  For it was just like that that in his dreams his mother stood, looking at him.  She,
too, had grey eyes, serene and grave, penetrating into one's very heart.

And after a moment she had smiled.

"Hallo!"

Robert's voice, half choked with tears had croaked back "Hallo!" and she had come a little
nearer to him.

