CHAPTER I.

The green screen slowly rose, covering the lower portion of the broad studio window where Heron,
the gem-cutter, was at work.  It was Melissa, the artist's daughter, who had pulled it up,
with bended knees and outstretched arms, panting for breath.

"That is enough!" cried her father's impatient voice.  He glanced up at the flood of light
which the blinding sun of Alexandria was pouring into the room, as it did every autumn afternoon;
but as soon as the shadow fell on his work-table the old man's busy fingers were at work again,
and he heeded his daughter no more.

An hour later Melissa again, and without any bidding, pulled up the screen as before, but it
was so much too heavy for her that the effort brought the blood into her calm, fair face, as
the deep, rough "That is enough" was again heard from the work-table.

Then silence reigned once more.  Only the artist's low whistling as he worked, or the patter
and pipe of the birds in their cages by the window, broke the stillness of the spacious room,
till the voice and step of a man were presently heard in the anteroom.

Heron laid by his graver and Melissa her gold embroidery, and the eyes of father and daughter
met for the first time for some hours.  The very birds seemed excited, and a starling, which
had sat moping since the screen had shut the sun out, now cried out, "Olympias!" Melissa rose,
and after a swift glance round the room she went to the door, come who might.

Ay, even if the brother she was expecting should bring a companion, or a patron of art who
desired her father's work, the room need not fear a critical eye; and she was so well assured
of the faultless neatness of her own person, that she only passed a hand over her brown hair,
and with an involuntary movement pulled her simple white robe more tightly through her girdle.

Heron's studio was as clean and as simple as his daughter's attire, though it seemed larger
than enough for the purpose it served, for only a very small part of it was occupied by the
artist, who sat as if in exile behind the work-table on which his belongings were laid out:
a set of small instruments in a case, a tray filled with shells and bits of onyx and other
agates, a yellow ball of Cyrenian modeling-wax, pumice-stone, bottles, boxes, and bowls.

Melissa had no sooner crossed the threshold, than the sculptor drew up his broad shoulders
and brawny person, and raised his hand to fling away the slender stylus he had been using;
however, he thought better of it, and laid it carefully aside with the other tools.  But this
act of self- control must have cost the hot-headed, powerful man a great effort; for he shot
a fierce look at the instrument which had had so narrow an escape, and gave it a push of vexation
with the back of his hand.

Then he turned towards the door, his sunburnt face looking surly enough, in its frame of tangled
gray hair and beard; and, as he waited for the visitor whom Melissa was greeting outside, he
tossed back his big head, and threw out his broad, deep chest, as though preparing to wrestle. 

If, however, a person will stop studying when he begins to lose interest and work seems a drudgery,
he will come back a little later with renewed interest. Again, when we study a play minutely as
we have been doing, and view it from many sides, we may lose sight for a time of the unity and beauty
of the whole composition. This is peculiarly unfortunate, for the poet intends us to view his
work as a whole, and to produce his effect with the whole. It is The Tempest that we will remember
as a work of art, and, if our studies are fruitful, that will draw us back to it at intervals
for many years to come.

Before we leave it, we must take it and read it through in a leisurely manner, pausing merely
to enjoy its beauty, to smile at its playfulness and to feel our hearts expand under the benign
influence of the grand old man Prospero. Now Miranda, Ferdinand and Ariel have passed the line
of mere acquaintances, and have become to us fast friends, who, though they may be forever silent,
have yet given us a fragment of their lives to cheer us on our way.

OTHER PLAYS OF SHAKESPEARE.

Shakespeare wrote a great many plays, and all are not equally good; a few seem so inferior
that many who study them think they were not written by the same hand that penned The Tempest.
Some of the plays are more difficult than others, and some cannot be comprehended until the reader
has had some experience in life. There are several, on the other hand, that may be read with great
interest and profit by almost any one, while those who have read
The Tempest as we have recommended, should find some measure of enjoyment
in all.

A Midsummer Night's Dream is a charming fairy story; The Merchant of Venice is a good story,
contains fine characters and shows some of Shakespeare's most beautiful
thoughts, although some people are inclined to believe he has dealt
too severely with the Jew.

Much Ado About Nothing is a jolly comedy to match with The Comedy
of Errors.

  But that those mighty fists on human arms should have evoked the bewitching
smile on the sweet lips of this Psyche, if it is not a miracle of art, is--"

"The degradation of art," the old man put in; but Alexander hastily added:

"The victory of the exquisite over the coarse."

"A victory!" exclaimed Heron, with a scornful flourish of his hand. "I know, boy, why you are
trying to garland the oppressive yoke with flowers of flattery.  So long as your surly old
father sits over the vice, he only whistles a song and spares you his complaints.  And then,
there is the money his work brings in!"

He laughed bitterly, and as Melissa looked anxiously up at him, her brother exclaimed:

"If I did not know you well, master, and if it would not be too great a pity, I would throw
that lovely Psyche to the ostrich in Scopas's court- yard; for, by Herakles! he would swallow
your gem more easily than we can swallow such cruel taunts.  We do indeed bless the Muses that
work brings you some surcease of gloomy thoughts.  But for the rest--I hate to speak the word
gold.  We want it no more than you, who, when the coffer is full, bury it or hide it with the
rest.  Apollodorus forced a whole talent of the yellow curse upon me for painting his men's
room.  The sailor's cap, into which I tossed it with the rest, will burst when Seleukus pays
me for the portrait of his daughter; and if a thief robs you, and me too, we need not fret
over it.  My brush and your stylus will earn us more in no time.  And what are our needs? 
We do not bet on quail-fights; we do not run races; I always had a loathing for purchased love;
we do not want to wear a heap of garments bought merely because they take our fancy--indeed,
I am too hot as it is under this scorching sun.  The house is your own.  The rent paid by Glaukias,
for the work- room and garden you inherited from your father, pays for half at least of what
we and the birds and the slaves eat.  As for Philip, he lives on air and philosophy; and, besides,
he is fed out of the great breadbasket of the Museum."

At this point the starling interrupted the youth's vehement speech with the appropriate cry,
"My strength!  my strength!"  The brother and sister looked at each other, and Alexander went
on with genuine enthusiasm:

"But it is not in you to believe us capable of such meanness.  Dedicate your next finished
work to Isis or Serapis.  Let your masterpiece grace the goddess's head-gear, or the god's
robe.  We shall be quite content, and perhaps the immortals may restore your joy in life as
a reward."

The  bird  repeated  its lamentable cry, "My strength!" and the youth proceeded with increased
vehemence:

"It would really be better that you should throw your vice and your graver and your burnisher,
and all that heap of dainty tools, into the sea, and carve an Atlas such as we have heard you
talk about ever since we could first speak Greek.  Come, set to work on a colossus!  You have
but to speak the word, and the finest clay shall be ready on your modeling-table by to-morrow,
either here or in Glaukias's work-room, which is indeed your own.  I know where the best is
to be found, and can bring it to you in any quantity.  Scopas will lend me his wagon.  I can
see it now, and you valiantly struggling with it till your mighty arms ache.  You will not
whistle and hum over that, but sing out with all your might, as you used when my mother was
alive, when you and your apprentices joined Dionysus's drunken rout.  Then your brow will grow
smooth again; and if the model is a success, and you want to buy marble, or pay the founder,
then out with your gold, out of the coffer and its hiding-place!  Then you can make use of
all your strength, and your dream of producing an Atlas such as the world has not seen--your
beautiful dream-will become a reality!"

Heron had listened eagerly to his son's rhapsody, but he now cast a timid glance at the table
where the wax and tools lay, pushed the rough hair from his brow, and broke in with a bitter
laugh: "My dream, do you say-- my dream?  As if I did not know too well that I am no longer
the man to create an Atlas!  As if I did not feel, without your words, that my strength for
it is a thing of the past!"

"Nay, father," exclaimed the painter.  "Is it right to cast away the sword before the battle?
And even if you did not succeed--"

"You would be all the better pleased," the sculptor put in.  "What surer way could  there be
to teach the old simpleton, once for all, that the time when he could do great work is over
and gone?"

"That is unjust, father; that is unworthy of you," the young man interrupted in great excitement;
but his father went on, raising his voice; "Silence, boy!  One thing at any rate is left to
me, as you know-- my keen eyes; and they did not fail me when you two looked at each other
as the starling cried, 'My strength!'  Ay, the bird is in the right when he bewails what was
once so great and is now a mere laughing-stock.  But you--you ought to reverence the man to
whom you owe your existence and all you know; you allow yourself to shrug your shoulders over
your own father's humbler art, since your first pictures were fairly successful. --How puffed
up he is, since, by my devoted care, he has been a painter! How he looks down on the poor wretch
who, by the pinch of necessity, has come down from being a sculptor of the highest promise
to being a mere gem-cutter!  In the depths of your soul--and I know it--you regard my laborious
art as half a handicraft.  Well, perhaps it deserves no better name; but that you--both of
you--should make common cause with a bird, and mock the sacred fire which still burns in an
old man, and moves him to serve true and noble art and to mold something great--an Atlas such
as the world has never seen on a heroic scale; that--"

He covered his face with his hands and sobbed aloud.  And the strong man's passionate grief
cut his children to the heart, though, since their mother's death, their father's rage and
discontent had many a time ere now broken down into childish lamentation.

To-day no doubt the old man was in worse spirits than usual, for it was the day of the Nekysia--the
feast of the dead kept every autumn; and he had that morning visited his wife's grave, accompanied
by his daughter, and had anointed the tombstone and decked it with flowers.  The young people
tried to comfort him; and when at last he was more composed and had dried his tears, he said,
in so melancholy and subdued a tone that the angry blusterer was scarcely recognizable: "There--leave
me alone; it will soon be over.  I will finish this gem to-morrow, and then I must do the Serapis
I promised Theophilus, the high-priest.  Nothing can come of the Atlas.  Perhaps you meant
it in all sincerity, Alexander; but since your mother left me, children, since then--my arms
are no weaker than they were; but in here--what it was that shriveled, broke, leaked away--I
can not find words for it.  If you care for me--and I know you do--you must not be vexed with
me if my gall rises now and then; there is too much bitterness in my soul.  I can not reach
the goal I strive after and was meant to win; I have lost what I loved best, and where am I
to find comfort or compensation?"

His children tenderly assured him of their affection, and he allowed Melissa to kiss him, and
stroked Alexander's hair.

Then he inquired for Philip, his eldest son and his favorite; and on learning that he, the
only person who, as he believed, could understand him, would not come to see him this day above
all others, he again broke out in wrath, abusing the degeneracy of the age and the ingratitude
of the young.

"Is it a visit which detains him again?" he inquired, and when Alexander thought not, he exclaimed
contemptuously: "Then it is some war of words at the Museum.  And for such poor stuff as that
a son can forget his duty to his father and mother!"

"But you, too, used to enjoy these conflicts of intellect," his daughter humbly remarked; but
the old man broke in:

"Only because they help a miserable world to forget the torments of existence, and the hideous
certainty of having been born only to die some horrible death.  But what can you know of this?"

"By my mother's death-bed," replied the girl, "we, too, had a glimpse into the terrible mystery."
And Alexander gravely added, "And since we last met, father, I may certainly account myself
as one of the initiated."

"You have painted a dead body?"  asked his father.

"Yes, father," replied the lad with a deep breath.  "I warned you," said Heron, in a tone of
superior experience.

And then, as Melissa rearranged the folds of his blue robe, he said he should go for a walk.
He sighed as he spoke, and his children knew whither he would go.  It was to the grave to which
Melissa had accompanied him that morning; and he would visit it alone, to meditate undisturbed
on the wife he had lost.

CHAPTER II.

The brother and sister were left together.  Melissa sighed deeply; but her brother went up
to her, laid his arm round her shoulder, and said: "Poor child!  you have indeed a hard time
of it.  Eighteen years old, and as pretty as you are, to be kept locked up as if in prison!
No one would envy you, even if your fellow-captive and keeper were younger and less gloomy
than your father is!  But we know what it all means.  His grief eats into his soul, and it
does him as much good to storm and scold, as it does us to laugh."

"If only the world could know how kind his heart really is!" said the girl.

"He is not the same to his friends as to us," said Alexander; but Melissa shook her head, and
said sadly: "He broke out yesterday against Apion, the dealer, and it was dreadful.  For the
fiftieth time he had waited supper for you two in vain, and in the twilight, when he had done
work, his grief overcame him, and to see him weep is quite heartbreaking!  The Syrian dealer
came in and found him all tearful, and being so bold as to jest about it in his flippant way--"

"The old man would give him his answer, I know!"  cried her brother with a hearty laugh.  "He
will not again be in a hurry to stir up a wounded lion."

"That is the very word," said Melissa, and her large eyes sparkled.  "At the fight in the Circus,
I could not help thinking of my father, when the huge king of the desert lay with a broken
spear in his loins, whining loudly, and burying his maned head between his great paws.  The
gods are pitiless!"

"Indeed they are," replied the youth, with deep conviction; but his sister looked up at him
in surprise.

"Do you say so, Alexander?  Yes, indeed--you looked just now as I never saw you before.  Has
misfortune overtaken you too?"

"Misfortune?"  he repeated, and he gently stroked her hair.  "No, not exactly; and you know
my woes sit lightly enough on me.  The immortals have indeed shown me very plainly that it
is their will sometimes to spoil the feast of life with a right bitter draught.  But, like
the moon itself, all it shines on is doomed to change--happily!  Many things here below seem
strangely ordered.  Like ears and eyes, hands and feet, many things are by nature double, and
misfortunes, as they say, commonly come in couples yoked like oxen."

"Then you have had some twofold blow?"  asked Melissa, clasping her hands over her anxiously
throbbing bosom.

"I, child!  No, indeed.  Nothing has befallen your father's younger son; and if I were a philosopher,
like Philip, I should be moved to wonder why a man can only be wet when the rain falls on him,
and yet can be so wretched when disaster falls on another.  But do not look at me with such
terror in your great eyes. What does Prospero say of him? Do you place confidence in the opinion
of such a man as Prospero, and do you feel that he is not unnecessarily severe? Does Caliban
do anything to justify the bad character Prospero gives him early in the play? Why do you suppose
Shakespeare introduces into the play such a character? Does such a character heighten the effect of
the others?

6. Other Characters. Classify the other characters as good or bad. Where did you place Alonso?
Is there any doubt at all as to where Gonzalo should be placed?

Are there any redeeming traits in Stephano? Do you think Trinculo's jesting is really funny? Would
you like the play better if Stephano and Trinculo were left out of it? What can you find in the
boatswain's words to justify the opinion Gonzalo holds of him? Which is the greater scoundrel,
Sebastian or Antonio?

THE STORY or PLOT. A certain duke has been by treachery driven from his principality with his infant
daughter, and has found refuge on an uninhabited island.

After many years those who plotted against him are thrown into his power, he recovers his
dukedom and marries his daughter to the son of his king. Such, in brief, is the plot of The
Tempest, but how wonderfully it is expanded, and how many characters
have been created, how many incidents created to give interest and
truthfulness to the narrative.

Let us follow the play through, and by studying the relation of the
incidents, one to another, learn to appreciate more fully the art
of the great magician who wrote the play.

ACT I--SCENE I. Purpose: To introduce the enemies of Prospero. Do we know at the time of such
a person as Prospero?

Do we know why the persons are on the ship, where they intended to go or where they are now?
When do we find out these things? What idea do you get of Gonzalo in the first scene? Why
is his conversation with the boatswain put into the play?

ACT I--SCENE II.

Purpose: To bring before us all the leading characters in the play, and to tell us enough about
them to secure our interest; also to give us the history necessary to an understanding of the
plot. When do we first learn that there are miracles and magic in the play? How do we learn what has
happened to Prospero before the time of the storm?

How do we learn Ariel's history?

How are we made acquainted with Caliban? How do we learn that Prospero raised the storm? How
were the mariners confused, and by whom were all saved? What did Prospero whisper in the ear
of Ariel when the latter came in after Prospero has called Caliban? What incident followed as a
result of this command?

How did Ariel lead Ferdinand? Are there other places in the play where Ariel leads people in the
same way?

What do you call the three most important incidents in this scene? What incidents could be
left out of this scene without interfering with the development of the plot?

ACT II--SCENE I. Purpose: To account for the presence of the plotters, and to show the character
of the men. Is it necessary to the development of the main plot that Sebastian and Antonio
should scheme to kill the king? Do any of the incidents of this scene have any direct bearing
on the main plot?

Could any of the incidents of this scene be omitted without injury to the play?

ACT II--SCENE II. Purpose: To create amusement, lighten the play and by contrast make the fine
parts more beautiful. Is any character in the scene absolutely essential to the completion of the
story? Would you understand the story as well if the entire scene were omitted?

ACT III--SCENE I. Purpose: To disclose Prospero's purpose more fully,
and to secure our interest in Ferdinand and Miranda.

ACT III--SCENE II. What is the purpose of this scene? What bearing do the incidents of this scene
have upon the main plot?

ACT III--SCENE III. What effect is the magic banquet to have on the persons who saw it? What
was Prospero's purpose in showing it? Did it contribute in any way to the success of his general
plan?

ACT IV--SCENE I. What incidents in this scene are necessary, and what
are introduced to give light and beauty to the play? What is the effect
of introducing Caliban and his companions right after Ariel and the
spirits have been entertaining Ferdinand and Miranda? What are Mountain,
Silver, Fury and Tyrant, mentioned in this scene?

ACT V--SCENE I.
What is the purpose of this scene? Is the plot brought to a satisfactory
conclusion? Are there any characters left unaccounted for? Does every
character in the play appear in this scene? Are they all on the stage
when the curtain falls?

Make a list of the incidents which to you
seem unnecessary, which could be left out without injury to the real
story. Make another list of incidents that could not be omitted without
spoiling the story. Find two little plots that make complete stories
in themselves, but that help only in a moderate degree to make the
main story clearer.

POETRY AND PROSE. Do any of the characters speak
always in prose? Do any speak always in poetry?

He had heard marvels of the magnificence of the house that he now entered; and the lofty vestibule
into which he was admitted, the mosaic floor that he trod; the marble statues and high reliefs
round the upper hart of the walls, were well worth careful observation; yet he, whose eyes
usually carried away so vivid an impression of what he had once seen that he could draw it
from memory, gave no attention to any particular thing among the various objects worthy of
admiration.  For already in the anteroom a peculiar sensation had come over him.  The large
halls, which were filled with odors of ambergris and incense, were as still as the grave. 
And it seemed to him that even the sun, which had been shining brilliantly a few minutes before
in a cloudless sky, had disappeared behind clouds, for a strange twilight, unlike anything
he had ever seen, surrounded him.  Then he perceived that it came in through the black velarium
with which they had closed the open roof of the room through which he was passing.

In the anteroom a young freedman had hurried silently past him--had vanished like a shadow
through the dusky rooms.  His duty must have been to announce the artist's arrival to the mother
of the dead girl; for, before Alexander had found time to feast his gaze on the luxurious mass
of flowering plants that surrounded the fountain in the middle of the impluvium, a tall matron,
in flowing mourning garments, came towards him --Korinna's mother.

Without lifting the black veil which enveloped her from head to foot, she speechlessly signed
him to follow her.  Till this moment not even a whisper had met his ear from any human lips
in this house of death and mourning; and the stillness was so oppressive to the light-hearted
young painter, that, merely to hear the sound of his own voice, he ex-plained to the lady who
he was and wherefore he had come.  But the only answer was a dumb assenting bow of the head.

He had not far to go with his stately guide; their walk ended in a spacious room.  It had been
made a perfect flower-garden with hundreds of magnificent plants; piles of garlands strewed
the floor, and in the midst stood the couch on which lay the dead girl.  In this hall, too,
reigned the same gloomy twilight which had startled him in the vestibule.

The dim, shrouded form lying motionless on the couch before him, with a heavy wreath of lotus-flowers
and white roses encircling it from head to foot, was the subject for his brush.  He was to
paint here, where he could scarcely distinguish one plant from another, or make out the form
of the vases which stood round the bed of death.  The white blossoms alone gleamed like pale
lights in the gloom, and with a sister radiance something smooth and round which lay on the
couch--the bare arm of the dead maiden.

His heart began to throb; the artist's love of his art had awaked within him; he had collected
his wits, and explained to the matron that to paint in the darkness was impossible.

Again she bowed in reply, but at a signal two waiting women, who were squatting on the floor
behind the couch, started up in the twilight, as if they had sprung from the earth, and approached
their mistress.

A fresh shock chilled the painter's blood, for at the same moment the lady's voice was suddenly
audible close to his ear, almost as deep as a man's but not unmelodious, ordering the girls
to draw back the curtain as far as the painter should desire.

Now, he felt, the spell was broken; curiosity and eagerness took the place of reverence for
death.  He quietly gave his orders for the necessary arrangements, lent the women the help
of his stronger arm, took out his painting implements, and then requested the matron to unveil
the dead girl, that he might see from which side it would be best to take the portrait.  But
then again he was near losing his composure, for the lady raised her veil, and measured him
with a glance as though he had asked something strange and audacious indeed.

Never had he met so piercing a glance from any woman's eyes; and yet they were red with weeping
and full of tears.  Bitter grief spoke in every line of her still youthful features, and their
stern, majestic beauty was in keeping with the deep tones of her speech.  Oh that he had been
so happy as to see this woman in the bloom of youthful loveliness!  She did not heed his admiring
surprise; before acceding to his demand, her regal form trembled from head to foot, and she
sighed as she lifted the shroud from her daughter's face.  Then, with a groan, she dropped
on her knees by the couch and laid her cheek against that of the dead maiden.  At last she
rose, and murmured to the painter that if he were successful in his task her gratitude would
be beyond expression.

"What more she said," Alexander went on, "I could but half understand, for she wept all the
time, and I could not collect my thoughts.  It was not till afterward that I learned from her
waiting-woman--a Christian-- that she meant to tell me that the relations and wailing women
were to come to-morrow morning.  I could paint on till nightfall, but no longer. I had been
chosen for the task because Seleukus had heard from my old teacher, Bion, that I should get
a faithful likeness of the original more quickly than any one else.  She may have said more,
but I heard nothing; I only saw.  For when the veil no longer hid that face from my gaze, I
felt as though the gods had revealed a mystery to me which till now only the immortals had
been permitted to know.  Never was my soul so steeped in devotion, never had my heart beat
in such solemn uplifting as at that moment.  What I was gazing at and had to represent was
a thing neither human nor divine; it was beauty itself--that beauty of which I have often dreamed
in blissful rapture.

"And yet--do not misapprehend me--I never thought of bewailing the maiden, or grieving over
her early death.  She was but sleeping--I could fancy: I watched one I loved in her slumbers.
My heart beat high!  Ay, child, and the work I did was pure joy, such joy as only the gods
on Olympus know at their golden board.  Every feature, every line was of such perfection as
only the artist's soul can conceive of, nay, even dream of.  The ecstasy remained, but my unrest
gave way to an indescribable and wordless bliss.  I drew with the red chalk, and mixed the
colors with the grinder, and all the while I could not feel the painful sense of painting a
corpse.  If she were slumbering, she had fallen asleep with bright images in her memory.  I
even fancied again and again that her lips moved her exquisitely chiseled mouth, and that a
faint breath played with her abundant, waving, shining brown hair, as it does with yours.

"The Muse sped my hand and the portrait--Bion and the rest will praise it, I think, though
it is no more like the unapproachable original than that lamp is like the evening star yonder."

"And shall we be allowed to see it?" asked Melissa, who had been listening breathlessly to
her brother's narrative.

The words seemed to have snatched the artist from a dream.  He had to pause and consider where
he was and to whom he was speaking.  He hastily pushed the curling hair off his damp brow,
and said:

"I do not understand.  What is it you ask?"

"I only asked whether we should be allowed to see the portrait," she answered timidly.  "I
was wrong to interrupt you.  But how hot your head is!  Drink again before you go on.  Had
you really finished by sundown?"

Alexander shook his head, drank, and then went on more calmly: "No, no! It is a pity you spoke.
In fancy I was painting her still.  There is the moon rising already.  I must make haste. 
I have told you all this for Philip's sake, not for my own."

"I will not interrupt you again, I assure you," said Melissa. "Well, well," said her brother.
"There is not much that is pleasant left to tell.  Where was I?"

"Painting, so long as it was light--"

"To be sure--I remember.  It began to grow dark.  Then lamps were brought in, large ones, and
as many as I wished for.      Just before sunset Seleukus, Korinna's father, came in to look
upon his daughter once more. He bore his grief with dignified composure; yet by his child's
bier he found it hard to be calm. But you can imagine all that.  He invited me to eat, and
the food they brought might have tempted a full man to excess, but I could only swallow a few
mouthfuls.  Berenike--the mother--did not even moisten her lips, but Seleukus did duty for
us both, and this I could see displeased his wife.  During supper the merchant made many inquiries
about me and my father; for he had heard Philip's praises from his brother Theophilus, the
high-priest.  I learned from him that Korinna had caught her sickness from a slave girl she
had nursed, and had died of the fever in three days.  But while I sat listening to him, as
he talked and ate, I could not keep my eyes off his wife who reclined opposite to me silent
and motionless, for the gods had created Korinna in her very image.  The lady Berenike's eyes
indeed sparkle with a lurid, I might almost say an alarming, fire, but they are shaped like
Korinna's.  I said so, and asked whether they were of the same color; I wanted to know for
my portrait.  On this Seleukus referred me to a picture painted by old Sosibius, who has lately
gone to Rome to work in Caesar's new baths.  He last year painted the wall of a room in the
mer chant's country house at Kanopus.  In the center of the picture stands Galatea, and I know
it now to be a good and true likeness.

"The picture I finished that evening is to be placed at the head of the young girl's sarcophagus;
but I am to keep it two days longer, to reproduce a second likeness more at my leisure, with
the help of the Galatea, which is to remain in Seleukus's town house.

"Then he left me alone with his wife.

"What a delightful commission!  I set to work with renewed pleasure, and more composure than
at first.  I had no need to hurry, for the first picture is to be hidden in the tomb, and I
could give all my care to the second.  Besides, Korinna's features were indelibly impressed
on my eye.

"I generally can not paint at all by lamp-light; but this time I found no difficulty, and I
soon recovered that blissful, solemn mood which I had felt in the presence of the dead.  Only
now and then it was clouded by a sigh, or a faint moan from Berenike: 'Gone, gone!  There is
no comfort-- none, none!'

"And what could I answer?  When did Death ever give back what he has snatched away?

"' I can not even picture her as she was,' she murmured sadly to herself --but this I might
remedy by the help of my art, so I painted on with increasing zeal; and at last her lamentations
ceased to trouble me, for she fell asleep, and her handsome head sank on her breast.  The watchers,
too, had dropped asleep, and only their deep breathing broke the stillness.

"Suddenly it flashed upon me that I was alone with Korinna, and the feeling grew stronger and
stronger; I fancied her lovely lips had moved, that a smile gently parted them, inviting me
to kiss them.  As often as I looked at them--and they bewitched me--I saw and felt the same,
and at last every impulse within me drove me toward her, and I could no longer resist: my lips
pressed hers in a kiss!"

Melissa softly sighed, but the artist did not hear; he went on: "And in that kiss I became
hers; she took the heart and soul of me.  I can no longer escape from her; awake or asleep,
her image is before my eyes, and my spirit is in her power."

Again he drank, emptying the cup at one deep gulp.  Then he went on: "So be it!  Who sees a
god, they say, must die.  And it is well, for he has known something more glorious than other
men.  Our brother Philip, too, lives with his heart in bonds to that one alone, unless a demon
has cheated his senses.  I am troubled about him, and you must help me."

He sprang up, pacing the room again with long strides, but his sister clung to his arm and
besought him to shake off the bewitching vision. How earnest was her prayer, what eager tenderness
rang in her every word, as she entreated him to tell her when and where her elder brother,
too, had met the daughter of Seleukus!

The artist's soft heart was easily moved.  Stroking the hair of the loving creature at his
side--so helpful as a rule, but now bewildered --he tried to calm her by affecting a lighter
mood than he really felt, assuring her that he should soon recover his usual good spirits.
She knew full well, he said, that his living loves changed in frequent succession, and it would
be strange indeed if a dead one could bind him any longer.  And his adventure, so far as it
concerned the house of Seleukus, ended with that kiss; for the lady Berenike had presently
waked, and urged him to finish the portrait at his own house.

Next morning he had completed it with the help of the Galatea in the villa at Kanopus, and
he had heard a great deal about the dead maiden. A young woman who was left in charge of the
villa had supplied him with whatever he needed.  Her pretty face was swollen with weeping,
and it was in a voice choked with tears that she had told him that her husband, who was a centurion
in Caesar's pretorian guard, would arrive to-morrow or next day at Alexandria, with his imperial
master.  She had not seen him for a long time, and had an infant to show him which he had not
yet seen; and yet she could not be glad, for her young mistress's death had extinguished all
her joy.

"The affection which breathed in every word of the centurion's wife," Alexander said, "helped
me in my work.  I could be satisfied with the result.

"The picture is so successful that I finished that for Seleukus in all confidence, and for
the sarcophagus I will copy it as well or as ill as time will allow.  It will hardly be seen
in the half-dark tomb, and how few will ever go to see it!  None but a Seleukus can afford
to employ so costly a brush as your brother's is--thank the Muses!  But the second portrait
is quite another thing, for that may chance to be hung next a picture by Apelles; and it must
restore to the parents so much of their lost child as it lies in my power to give them.  So,
on my way, I made up my mind to begin the copy at once by lamp-light, for it must be ready
by to-morrow night at latest.

"I hurried to my work-room,  and my slave placed the picture on an easel, while I welcomed
my brother Philip who had come to see me, and who had lighted a lamp, and of course had brought
a book.  He was so absorbed in it that he did not observe that I had come in till I addressed
him.  Then I told him whence I came and what had happened, and he thought it all very strange
and interesting.

"He was as usual rather hurried and hesitating, not quite clear, but understanding it all.
Then he began telling me something about a philosopher who has just come to the front, a porter
by trade, from whom he had heard sundry wonders, and it was not till Syrus brought me in a
supper of oysters--for I could still eat nothing more solid--that he asked to see the portrait.

"I pointed to the easel, and watched him; for the harder he is to please, the more I value
his opinion.  This time I felt confident of praise, or even of some admiration, if only for
the beauty of the model.

"He threw off the veil from the picture with a hasty movement, but, instead of gazing at it
calmly, as he is wont, and snapping out his sharp criticisms, he staggered backward, as though
the noonday sun had dazzled his sight.  Then, bending forward, he stared at the painting, panting
as he might after racing for a wager.  He stood in perfect silence, for I know not how long,
as though it were Medusa he was gazing on, and when at last he clasped his hand to his brow,
I called him by name.  He made no reply, but an impatient 'Leave me alone!' and then he still
gazed at the face as though to devour it with his eyes, and without a sound. 

Milton describes them as dying forsaken:

Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies:

and Mayne calls this flower

Lorn tenant of the peaceful glade, Emblem of virtue in the shade.

Dr. Weatherhead describes the prospect from this terrace with more minuteness than the hazy
state of the atmosphere enabled us to trace its several beauties. The ancient archiepiscopal
town of Croydon lies at your feet; more remote, Banstead Downs spread a carpet of blooming verdure
to the sight; in the extreme distance Windsor Castle peers its majestic
towers above the mist; while elsewhere the utmost verge of the horizon
is bounded by the bold range of the Surrey and Hampshire hills.

Turning to the left you enjoy a view of Addiscombe Place, the seminary for cadets of the East
India Company; of Shirley, the sporting seat of John Maberly, Esq. M.P.; of the Addington hills
clothed with heaths; and of the park, the seat of his Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury; when
the prospect, deepening in extent, stretches as far as Knockholt Beeches, near Seven Oaks, and,
winding round, comprehends the tall spire of Beckenham Church, piercing
through the dense woods which surround it; Shooter's Hill, Blackheath,
and the villages that intervene.

Immediately beneath you are the grounds of the Spa, every portion of which can be distinctly
traced from this spot: the lodge, lawn, refreshment-room, spring, and orchestra, as we have described
them, and the paths winding among the woods till they disappear as it were in trackless solitude.

Dr.
Weatherhead's pamphlet treats copiously, but in a popular style, of the medicinal properties of
the Spa. The terms for drinking the waters are furnished at the lodge, where the visiter may
smile at the remedy being set to music, in the melodies of the Beulah Spring Quadrilles. It may
prevent some disappointment by stating that the Grounds are not opened to the public on Sundays.

[1]
By accurate observation the height of the fog, relatively with the higher edifices, whose elevation
is known, it has been ascertained that the fogs of London never rise more than from two hundred
to two hundred and forty feet above the same level.

[2] Who does not remember the traditionary notoriety of Margaret Finch?

[3] The private property of the estate, and attached to the Spa.

[4] We drank a half-pint tumbler of the water, which, as Dr. Weatherhead
observes, is bitter without being disagreeable. Its flavour is that
of Sulphate of Magnesia, or Epsom Salts; and we should say that our
modicum might be imitated by dissolving a dram of the above ingredient
in half-a-pint of pure water.

* * * * *

RETROSPECTIVE GLEANINGS.

ANCIENT
LAWS.

The following quaint observations possess peculiar interest
at the present moment:

"Among the ancient Druids," says Mr. Owen
Feltham, "it was absolutely forbidden to register their laws in writing.


"Then it was my turn to doubt his word; but he maintained that his story was true in every
detail; he would hear nothing said about some one resembling her, or anything of the kind,
and spoke of daimons showing him false visions, to cheat him and hinder him from working out
his investigations of the real nature of things to a successful issue.  But this is in direct
antagonism to his views of daimons; and when at last he rushed out of the house, he looked
like one possessed of evil spirits.

"I hurried after him, but he disappeared down a dark alley.  Then I had enough to do to finish
my copy, and yesterday I carried it home to Seleukus.

"Then I had time to look for Philip, but I could hear nothing of him, either in his own lodgings
or at the Museum.  To-day I have been hunting for him since early in the morning.  I even forgot
to lay any flowers on my mother's grave, as usual on the day of the Nekysia, because I was
thinking only of him.  But he no doubt is gone to the city of the dead; for, on my way hither,
as I was ordering a garland in the flower-market, pretty little Doxion showed me two beauties
which she had woven for him, and which he is presently to fetch.  So he must now be in the
Nekropolis; and I know for whom he intends the second; for the door-keeper at Seleukus's house
told me that a man, who said he was my brother, had twice called, and had eagerly inquired
whether my picture had yet been attached to Korinna's sarcophagus.  The old man told him it
had not, because, of course, the embalming could not be complete as yet.  But the picture was
to be displayed to-day, as being the feast of the dead, in the hall of the embalmers.  That
was the plan, I know.  So, now, child, set your wise little woman's head to work, and devise
something by which he may be brought to his senses, and released from these crazy imaginings."

"The first thing to be done," Melissa exclaimed, "is to follow him and talk to him.-Wait a
moment; I must speak a word to the slaves.  My father's night-draught can be mixed in a minute.
He might perhaps return home before us, and I must leave his couch--I will be with you in a
minute."

CHAPTER III.

The brother and sister had walked some distance.  The roads were full of people, and the nearer
they came to the Nekropolis the denser was the throng.

As they skirted the town walls they took counsel together.

Being perfectly agreed that the girl who had touched Philip's hand could certainly be no daimon
who had assumed Korinna's form, they were inclined to accept the view that a strong resemblance
had deceived their brother. They finally decided that Alexander should try to discover the
maiden who so strangely resembled the dead; and the artist was ready for the task, for he could
only work when his heart was light, and had never felt such a weight on it before.  The hope
of meeting with a living creature who resembled that fair dead maiden, combined with his wish
to rescue his brother from the disorder of mind which threatened him; and Melissa perceived
with glad surprise how quickly this new object in life restored the youth's happy temper.

It was she who spoke most, and Alexander, whom nothing escaped that had any form of beauty,
feasted his ear on the pearly ring of her voice.

"And her face is to match," thought he as they went on in the darkness; "and may the Charites
who have endowed her with every charm, forgive my father for burying her as he does his gold."

It was not in his nature to keep anything that stirred him deeply to himself, when he was in
the society of another, so he murmured to his sister: "It is just as well that the Macedonian
youths of this city should not be able to see what a jewel our old man's house contains. --Look
how brightly Selene shines on us, and how gloriously the stars burn!  Nowhere do the heavens
blaze more brilliantly than here.  As soon as we come out of the shadow that the great walls
cast on the road we shall be in broad light.  There is the Serapeum rising out of the darkness.
They are rehearsing the great illumination which is to dazzle the eyes of Caesar when he comes.
But they must show too, that to-night, at least, the gods of the nether world and death are
all awake.  You can never have been in the Nekropolis at so late an hour before."

"How should I?" replied the girl.  And he expressed the pleasure that it gave him to be able
to show her for the first time the wonderful night scene of such a festival.  And when he heard
the deep-drawn "Ah!" with which she hailed the sight of the greatest temple of all, blazing
in the midst of the darkness with tar-pans, torches, and lamps innumerable, he replied with
as much pride and satisfaction as though she owed the display to him, "Ay, what do you think
of that?"

Above the huge stone edifice which was thus lighted up, the dome of the Serapeum rose high
into the air, its summit appearing to touch the sky. Never had the gigantic structure seemed
so beautiful to the girl, who had only seen it by daylight; for under the illumination, arranged
by a master-hand, every line stood out more clearly than in the sunlight; and in the presence
of this wonderful sight Melissa's impressionable young soul forgot the trouble that had weighed
on it, and her heart beat higher.

Her lonely life with her father had hitherto fully satisfied her, and she had, never yet dreamed
of anything better in the future than a quiet and modest existence, caring for him and her
brothers; but now she thankfully experienced the pleasure of seeing for once something really
grand and fine, and rejoiced at having escaped for a while from the monotony of each day and hour.

Once, too, she had been with her brothers and Diodoros, Alexander's greatest friend, to see
a wild-beast fight, followed by a combat of gladiators; but she had come home frightened and
sorrowful, for what she had seen had horrified more than it had interested her.  Some of the
killed and tortured beings haunted her mind; and, besides, sitting in the lowest and best seats
belonging to Diodoros's wealthy father, she had been stared at so boldly and defiantly whenever
she raised her eyes, by a young gallant opposite, that she had felt vexed and insulted; nay,
had wished above all things to get home as soon as possible.  And yet she had loved Diodoros
from her childhood, and she would have enjoyed sitting quietly by his side more than looking
on at the show.

But on this occasion her curiosity was gratified, and the hope of being able to help one who
was dear to her filled her with quiet gladness. It was a comfort to her, too, to find herself
once more by her mother's grave with Alexander, who was her especial friend.  She could never
come here often enough, and the blessing which emanated from it--of that she was convinced--must
surely fall on her brother also, and avert from him all that grieved his heart.

As they walked on between the Serapeum on one hand, towering high above all else, and the Stadium
on the other, the throng was dense; on the bridge over the canal it was difficult to make any
progress.  Now, as the full moon rose, the sacrifices and games in honor of the gods of the
under world were beginning, and now the workshops and factories had emptied themselves into
the streets already astir for the festival of the dead, so every moment the road became more
crowded.

Such a tumult was generally odious to her retiring nature; but to-night she felt herself merely
one drop in the great, flowing river, of which every other drop felt the same impulse which
was carrying her forward to her destination.  The desire to show the dead that they were not
forgotten, that their favor was courted and hoped for, animated men and women, old and young alike.

There were few indeed who had not a wreath or a posy in their hands, or carried behind them
by a slave.  In front of the brother and sister was a large family of children.  A black nurse
carried the youngest on her shoulder, and an ass bore a basket in which were flowers for the
tomb, with a wineflask and eatables.  A memorial banquet was to be held at the grave of their
ancestors; and the little one, whose golden head rose above the black, woolly poll of the negress,
nodded gayly in response to Melissa's smiles.  The children were enchanted at the prospect
of a meal at such an unusual hour, and their parents rejoiced in them and in the solemn pleasure
they anticipated.

Many a one in this night of remembrance only cared to recall the happy hours spent in the society
of the beloved dead; others hoped to leave their grief and pain behind them, and find fresh
courage and contentment in the City of the Dead; for tonight the gates of the nether world
stood open, and now, if ever, the gods that reigned there would accept the offerings and hear
the prayers of the devout.

Those lean Egyptians, who pushed past in silence and haranging their heads, were no doubt bent
on carrying offerings to Osiris and Anubis--for the festival of the gods of death and resurrection
coincided with the Nekysia--and on winning their favors by magical formulas and spells. 

I was glad when the journey was ended, and I turned into a dug-out in the village to rest for
the night.

Next morning a misty, drizzly pall still hung over everything. I wondered how in the world our
men were going to attack under such conditions, and to-morrow was "The Day." I pitied them
with all my heart and soul.

And then I thought of myself, and my own particular job. I couldn't possibly "take" in such
disgusting weather. The result would be an absolute failure. I controlled my feelings, and
hoped for the best.

The time arrived for the General's speech. Reaching the field, I found all the men mustered
up. The General had just arrived. I started to film the scenes as they presented themselves to me.
Jove! The speech was the most impressive that I had ever heard. I will give it as it was spoken,
as near as I can. I do not think that it has been published before:

"Officers and men of the West Riding Field Company, R.E., and -- Battalion, Royal Fusiliers:

"I hoped yesterday to be able to come and wish you good luck, on the first anniversary of the
engagement in Gully Ravine, there the Royal Fusiliers took the Turkish fifth line of trenches.
Owing to the rain, however, and to the discomfort to which you would have been placed, I postponed
my visit until to-day.

"I want to tell you something of the situation as it now stands. You are probably aware that we are
now taking part in the greatest battle ever fought by British troops. Not only is it of far
more importance than any fight since Waterloo, but the numbers engaged far exceed any assembly
of troops in former days.

The strength of this army,--the Fourth Army--under General Sir H. S. Rawlinson, is ---- times
as large as the force of British troops at Mons, when we first came out a year and a half ago.

"The
importance of winning a great victory is so great that nothing has
been left undone to ensure success. But the higher Commanders know--and
I know--that all the best arrangements in the world cannot win battles.
Battles are won by infantry, and it is to the battalions like yourself
that we look to gain a great victory, equal to the great victory which
the Russians have obtained this month.

"The Germans are shut in all
round.

All she had seen and heard on the way had excited her greatly; but she had scarcely for a moment
forgotten what it was that had brought her out so late, who it was that she sought, or that
it would need her utmost endeavor to free him from the delusion that had fooled him.  In this
dense throng and deafening tumult it was scarcely possible to recover that collected calm which
she had found in the morning at her mother's tomb.  In that, doubt had had no part, and the
delightful feeling of freedom which had shone on her soul, now shrank deep into the shade before
a growing curiosity and the longing for her usual repose.

If her father were to find her here!  When she saw a tall figure resembling his cross the torchlight,
all clouded as it was by the dust, she drew her brother away behind the stall of a seller of
drinks and other refreshments.  The father, at any rate, must be spared the distress she felt
about Philip, who was his favorite.  Besides, she knew full well that, if he met her here,
he would at once take her home.

The question now was where Philip might be found.

They were standing close to the booths where itinerant dealers sold food and liquors of every
description, flowers and wreaths, amulets and papyrus-leaves, with strange charms written on
them to secure health for the living and salvation for the souls of the dead.  An astrologer,
who foretold the course of a man's life from the position of the planets, had erected a high
platform with large tables displayed to view, and the instrument wherewith he aimed at the
stars as it were with a bow; and his Syrian slave, accompanying himself on a gayly-painted
drum, proclaimed his master's powers.  There were closed tents in which magical remedies were
to be obtained, though their open sale was forbidden by the authorities, from love-philters
to the wondrous fluid which, if rightly applied, would turn lead, copper, or silver to gold.
Here, old women invited the passer-by to try Thracian and other spells; there, magicians stalked
to and fro in painted caps and flowing, gaudy robes, most of them calling themselves priests
of some god of the abyss.  Men of every race and tongue that dwelt in the north of Africa,
or on the shores of the Mediterranean, were packed in a noisy throng.

The greatest press was behind the houses of the men who buried the dead. Here sacrifices were
offered on the altars of Serapis, Isis, and Anubis; here the sacred sistrum of Isis might be
kissed; here hundreds of priests performed solemn ceremonies, and half of those who came hither
for the festival of the dead collected about them.  The mysteries were also performed here,
beginning before midnight; and a dramatic representation might be seen of the woes of Isis,
and the resurrection of her husband Osiris.  But neither here, nor at the stalls, nor among
the graves, where many families were feasting by torchlight and pouring libations in the sand
for the souls of the dead, did Alexander expect to find his brother. Nor would Philip be attending
the mysterious solemnities of any of the fraternities.  He had witnessed them often enough
with his friend Diodoros, who never missed the procession to Eleusis, because, as he declared,
the mysteries of Demeter alone could assure a man of the immortality of the soul.  The wild
ceremonies of the Syrians, who maimed themselves in their mad ecstasy, repelled him as being
coarse and barbarous.

As she made her way through this medley of cults, this worship of gods so different that they
were in some cases hostile, but more often merged into each other, Melissa wondered to which
she ought to turn in her present need.  Her mother had best loved to sacrifice to Serapis and
Isis.  But since, in her last sickness, Melissa had offered everything she possessed to these
divinities of healing, and all in vain, and since she had heard things in the Serapeum itself
which even now brought a blush to her cheek, she had turned away from the great god of the
Alexandrians.  Though he who had offended her by such base proposals was but a priest of the
lower grade--and indeed, though she knew it not, was since dead--she feared meeting him again,
and had avoided the sanctuary where he officiated.

She was a thorough Alexandrian, and had been accustomed from childhood to listen to the philosophical
disputations of the men about her.  So she perfectly understood her brother Philip, the skeptic,
when he said that he by no means denied the existence of the immortals, but that, on the other
hand, he could not believe in it; that thought brought him no conviction; that man, in short,
could be sure of nothing, and so could know nothing whatever of the divinity.  He had even
denied, on logical grounds, the goodness and omnipotence of the gods, the wisdom and fitness
of the ordering of the universe, and Melissa was proud of her brother's acumen; but what appeals
to the brain only, and not to the heart, can not move a woman to anything great--least of all
to a decisive change of life or feeling.  So the girl had remained constant to her mother's
faith in some mighty powers outside herself, which guided the life of Nature and of human beings.
Only she did not feel that she had found the true god, either in Serapis or Isis, and so she
had sought others.  Thus she had formulated a worship of ancestors, which, as she had learned
from the slave-woman of her friend Ino, was not unfamiliar to the Egyptians.

In Alexandria there were altars to every god, and worship in every form. Hers, however, was
not among them, for the genius of her creed was the enfranchised soul of her mother, who had
cast off the burden of this perishable body.  Nothing had ever come from her that was not good
and lovely; and she knew that if her mother were permitted, even in some other than human form,
she would never cease to watch over her with tender care.

And those initiated into the Eleusinian mysteries, as Diodoros had told her, desired the immortality
of the soul, to the end that they might continue to participate in the life of those whom they
had left behind. What was it that brought such multitudes at this time out to the Nekropolis,
with their hands full of offerings, but the consciousness of their nearness to the dead, and
of being cared for by them so long as they were not forgotten?  And even if the glorified spirit
of her mother were not permitted to hear her prayers, she need not therefore cease to turn
to her; for it comforted her unspeakably to be with her in spirit, and to confide to her all
that moved her soul.  And so her mother's tomb had become her favorite place of rest.  Here,
if anywhere, she now hoped once more to find comfort, some happy suggestion, and perhaps some
definite assistance.

She begged Alexander to take her thither, and he consented, though he was of opinion that Philip
would be found in the mortuary chamber, in the presence of Korinna's portrait.

It was not easy to force their way through the thousands who had come out to the great show
this night; however, most of the visitors were attracted by the mysteries far away from the
Macedonian burial-ground, and there was little to disturb the silence near the fine marble
monument which Alexander, to gratify his father, had erected with his first large earnings. At
last I reached the outpost safely, but during the last few yards I must have raised myself a little
too high, for the next minute several bullets splashed into the water
where I had been.

The outpost was very surprised when I made my appearance, and expressed astonishment that I had
not been shot. "A miss is as good as a mile," I laughingly replied, and then I told them I
had come to film them at work. This I proceeded to do, and got an excellent scene of the mitrailleuse
in action, and the other section loading up. The frightful slaughter done by these guns is
indescribable.

Nothing can possibly live under the concentrated fire of these weapons, as the Germans found
to their cost that day.

After getting my scenes, I thanked the officer, and was about to make my way back; but he forbade
me to risk it, telling me to wait until night and return under cover
of the darkness.

To this I agreed, and that night left the outpost with the others when the relief party came
up.

Shortly after news was received that we were to be relieved from duty in the trenches for the
next forty-eight hours; the relief column was on its way to take
our places.

I was delighted, for I had been wet through during the days and nights I had been there, but
was fully satisfied that I had got some real live films. Hastily packing up my equipment,
I stood waiting the signal to move off. At last the relief came up. Holding each other's hands,
we carefully made our way in Indian file along the trench, on to the road, and into Ramscapelle.

What
a terrible sight it was!

The skeletons of houses stood grim and gaunt, and the sound of the wind rushing through the
ruins was like the moaning of the spirits of the dead inhabitants
crying aloud for vengeance.

The sounds increased in volume as we neared this scene of awful desolation,
and the groans became a crescendo of shrieks which, combined with
the crash of shell-fire, made one's blood run cold.

Leaving the ruins behind we gained the main road, and on arriving
at the bridge where we had stopped on our journey out, I parted with
the company, thinking to make my way to a café by a short cut over
some fields. I wished to heaven afterwards that I had not done so.  For who can tell here--unless
he follows the herd and worships Serapis--who can tell to which god of them all he shall turn
when he happens to be at his wits' end?  While my mother lived, I, like you, could gladly worship
and sacrifice to the immortals; but Philip has spoiled me for all that. As to the divine Caesars,
every one thinks as I do.  My mother would sooner have entered a pesthouse than the banqueting-hall
where they feast, on Olympus.  Caracalla among the gods!  Why, Father Zeus cast his son Hephaistos
on earth from the height of Olympus, and only broke his leg; but our Caesar accomplished a
more powerful throw, for he cast his brother through the earth into the nether world--an imperial
thrust--and not merely lamed him but killed him."

"Well done!"  said a deep voice, interrupting the young artist.  "Is that you, Alexander? 
Hear what new titles to fame Heron's son can find for the imperial guest who is to arrive to-morrow."

"Pray hush!" Melissa besought him, looking up at the bearded man who had laid his arm on Alexander's
shoulder.  It was Glaukias the sculptor, her father's tenant; for his work-room stood on the
plot of ground by the garden of Hermes, which the gem-cutter had inherited from his father-in- law.

The man's bold, manly features were flushed with wine and revelry; his twinkling eyes sparkled,
and the ivy-leaves still clinging to his curly hair showed that he had been one in the Dionysiac
revellers; but the Greek blood which ran in his veins preserved his grace even in drunkenness.
He bowed gayly to the young girl, and exclaimed to his companions:

"The youngest pearl in Alexandria's crown of beauties!" while Bion, Alexander's now gray-haired
master, clapped the youth on the arm, and added: "Yes, indeed, see what the little thing has
grown!  Do you remember, pretty one, how you once--how many years ago, I wonder?-- spotted
your little white garments all over with red dots!  I can see you now, your tiny finger plunged
into the pot of paint, and then carefully printing off the round pattern all over the white
linen.  Why, the little painter has become a Hebe, a Charis, or, better still, a sweetly dreaming
Psyche."

"Ay, ay!" said Glaukias again.  "My worthy landlord has a charming model. He has not far to
seek for a head for his best gems.  His son, a Helios, or the great Macedonian whose name he
bears; his daughter--you are right, Bion--the maid beloved of Eros.  Now, if you can make verses,
my young friend of the Muses, give us an epigram in a line or two which we may bear in mind
as a compliment to our imperial visitor."

"But not here--not in the burial-ground," Melissa urged once more.

Among Glaukias's companions was Argeios, a vain and handsome young poet, with scented locks
betraying him from afar, who was fain to display the promptness of his poetical powers; and,
even while the elder artist was speaking, he had run Alexander's satirical remarks into the
mold of rhythm.  Not to save his life could he have suppressed the hastily conceived distich,
or have let slip such a justifiable claim to applause. So, without heeding Melissa's remonstrance,
he flung his sky-blue mantle about him in fresh folds, and declaimed with comical emphasis:

    "Down to earth did the god cast his son: but with mightier hand
     Through it, to Hades, Caesar flung his brother the dwarf."

The versifier was rewarded by a shout of laughter, and, spurred by the approval of his friends,
he declared he had hit on the mode to which to sing his lines, as he did in a fine, full voice.

But there was another poet, Mentor, also of the party, and as he could not be happy under his
rival's triumph, he exclaimed: "The great dyer-- for you know he uses blood instead of the
Tyrian shell--has nothing of Father Zeus about him that I can see, but far more of the great
Alexander, whose mausoleum he is to visit to-morrow.  And if you would like to know wherein
the son of Severus resembles the giant of Macedon, you shall hear."

He thrummed his thyrsus as though he struck the strings of a lyre, and, having ended the dumb
prelude, he sang:

         "Wherein hath the knave Caracalla outdone Alexander?
          He killed a brother, the hero a friend, in his rage."

These lines, however, met with no applause; for they were not so lightly improvised as the
former distich, and it was clumsy and tasteless, as well as dangerous thus to name, in connection
with such a jest, the potentate at whom it was aimed.  And the fears of the jovial party were
only too well founded, for a tall, lean Egyptian suddenly stood among the Greeks as if he had
sprung from the earth.  They were sobered at once, and, like a swarm of pigeons on which a
hawk swoops down, they dispersed in all directions.

Melissa beckoned to her brother to follow her; but the Egyptian intruder snatched the mantle,
quick as lightning, from Alexander's shoulders, and ran off with it to the nearest pine-torch.
The young man hurried after the thief, as he supposed him to be, but there the spy flung the
cloak back to him, saying, in a tone of command, though not loud, for there were still many
persons among the graves:

"Hands off, son of Heron, unless you want me to call the watch!  I have seen your face by the
light, and that is enough for this time.  Now we know each other, and we shall meet again in
another place!"

With these words he vanished in the darkness, and Melissa asked, in great alarm:

"In the name of all the gods, who was that?"

"Some rascally carpenter, or scribe, probably, who is in the service of the night-watch as
a spy.  At least those sort of folks are often built askew, as that scoundrel was," replied
Alexander, lightly.  But he knew the man only too well.  It was Zminis, the chief of the spies
to the night patrol; a man who was particularly inimical to Heron, and whose hatred included
the son, by whom he had been befooled and misled in more than one wild ploy with his boon companions.
This spy, whose cruelty and cunning were universally feared, might do him a serious mischief,
and he therefore did not tell his sister, to whom the name of Zminis was well known, who the
listener was.

He cut short all further questioning by desiring her to come at once to the mortuary hall.

"And if we do not find him there," she said, "let us go home at once; I am so frightened."

"Yes, yes," said her brother, vaguely.  "If only we could meet some one you could join."

"No, we will keep together," replied Melissa, decisively; and simply assenting, with a brief
"All right," the painter drew her arm through his, and they made their way through the now
thinning crowd.

CHAPTER IV.

The houses of the embalmers, which earlier in the evening had shone brightly out of the darkness,
now made a less splendid display.  The dust kicked up by the crowd dimmed the few lamps and
torches which had not by this time burned out or been extinguished, and an oppressive atmosphere
of balsamic resin and spices met the brother and sister on the very threshold.  The vast hall
which they now entered was one of a long row of buildings of unburned bricks; but the Greeks
insisted on some ornamentation of the simplest structure, if it served a public purpose, and
the embalming-houses had a colonnade along their front, and their walls were covered with stucco,
painted in gaudy colors, here in the Egyptian and there in the Greek taste.  There were scenes
from the Egyptian realm of the dead, and others from the Hellenic myths; for the painters had
been enjoined to satisfy the requirements and views of visitors of every race.  The chief attraction,
however, this night was within; for the men whose duties were exercised on the dead had displayed
the finest and best of what they had to offer to their customers.

The ancient Greek practice of burning the dead had died out under the Antonines.  Of old, the
objects used to deck the pyre had also been on show here; now there was nothing to be seen
but what related to interment or entombment.

Side by side with the marble sarcophagus, or those of coarser stone, were wooden coffins and
mummy-cases, with a place at the head for the portrait of the deceased.  Vases and jars of
every kind, amulets of various forms, spices and balsams in vials and boxes, little images
in burned clay of the gods and of men, of which none but the Egyptians knew the allegorical
meaning, stood in long rows on low wooden shelves.  On the higher shelves were mummy bands
and shrouds, some coarse, others of the very finest texture, wigs for the bald heads of shaven
corpses, or woolen fillets, and simply or elaborately embroidered ribbons for the Greek dead.

Nothing was lacking of the various things in use for decking the corpse of an Alexandrian,
whatever his race or faith.

Some mummy-cases, too, were there, ready to be packed off to other towns. Mr. Tank meanwhile was
not a bit disconcerted by their attentions, and continued to breathe forth flames of fire,
which did great havoc in the ranks of the sightseers. But once their curiosity was satisfied the
Huns did their level best to damage the brute. They fired at it; they bombarded it; they shelled
it; they clambered over it. All to no purpose. Presently that ominous humming, snorting sound
reached us again, and the monster began to move away. Where it had stood the ground was strewn
with the dead bodies of German soldiers, and I was told afterwards
that over three hundred corpses were counted to the credit of the
first Tank that ever crossed "No Man's Land."

Meanwhile our boys had been busy. Following in the wake of the Tank, they had cleaned up quite
a lot of ground, and all the time, with my camera on them, I had secured a series of fine pictures.

I
don't think I ever laughed so heartily at anything as I did on the first day that I saw the
Tanks in action, and officers and men all agree that they never saw a funnier sight in all their
lives. But whilst they amused us they put the fear of the devil into Fritz, and whole parties
of men ran forward, hands up, waving their handkerchiefs, and shouting "Kamerad," and gave
themselves up as willing prisoners in our hands.

The Tanks have been one of the big surprises and big successes of the war.

After the battle of Martinpuich the nature of my work brought me in
contact with many stirring incidents, which, if put on record here,
would be merely repeating to a certain degree many of my previous
experiences, therefore I do not intend to bore my readers by doing so.

From one section of our front to the other I was kept continually on the move. On the 25th September
an attack was timed for twelve o'clock noon for Morval and Lesboeufs, and the Guards, London Scottish,
Norfolks, Suffolks and many other regiments were to take part. The day before I visited our
front in that section to obtain preliminary scenes.

The London Scottish were preparing to leave to take up their battle positions. From one front
to the other I hurried, obtaining scenes of the other regiments on the way up. I stayed during
the night with an officer of an 18-pounder battling on the left of Guillemont. The Bosche was
"strafing" the place pretty badly.

I will not say I slept comfortably, for shells came crashing over much too closely to do so; in
fact, I was up all night.

On several occasions I really thought my last minute had come. The noise was deafening, the glare
and flash although beautiful was sickening.

Our guns were pouring out a withering fire, and the ground quivered and shook, threatening to
tumble the temporary shelter about my ears. One shell, which came very near, burst and the concussion
slightly blew in the side of the shelter; it also seemed to momentarily stun me; I crouched
down as close to earth as possible.

I will admit that I felt a bit "windy," my body was shaking as if with ague; a horrible buzzing
sensation was in my head, dizziness was coming over me. I dare not lose control of myself, I
thought; with an effort I staggered up and out of the shelter, clutching
my head as the pain was terrible. I dropped down into an old German
trench and sat in the bottom. In a few minutes my head pains eased
down slightly, but my nerves were still shaky. At that moment one
of the battery officers came along.

"Hullo! you got clear then?"
he said.

"Yes, only just, by the appearance of things."  She soon tore herself away, to look about for Philip once more and then to be taken home.

Alexander, too, was seeking Philip; but, sharp as the artist's eyes were, Melissa's seemed
to be keener, for, just as they were giving it up and turning to go, she pointed to a dark
corner and said softly, "There he is."

And there, in fact, her brother was, sitting with two men, one very tall and the other a little
man, his brow resting on his hand in the deep shadow of a sarcophagus, between the wall and
a mummy-case set on end, which till now had hidden him from Alexander and Melissa.

Who could the man be who had kept the young philosopher, somewhat inaccessible in his pride
of learning, so long in talk in that half-dark corner?  He was not one of the learned society
at the Museum; Alexander knew them all.  Besides, he was not dressed like them, in the Greek
fashion, but in the flowing robe of a Magian.  And the stranger was a man of consequence, for
he wore his splendid garment with a superior air, and as Alexander approached him he remembered
having somewhere seen this tall, bearded figure, with the powerful head garnished with flowing
and carefully oiled black curls.  Such handsome and well-chiseled features, such fine eyes,
and such a lordly, waving beard were not easily forgotten; his memory suddenly awoke and threw
a light on the man as he sat in the gloom, and on the surroundings in which he had met him
for the first time.

It was at the feast of Dionysus.  Among a drunken crowd, which was rushing wildly along the
streets, and which Alexander had joined, himself one of the wildest, this man had marched,
sober and dignified as he was at this moment, in the same flowing raiment.  This had provoked
the feasters, who, being full of wine and of the god, would have nothing that could remind
them of the serious side of life.  Such sullen reserve on a day of rejoicing was an insult
to the jolly giver of the fruits of the earth, and to wine itself, the care-killer; and the
mad troop of artists, disguised as Silenus, satyrs, and fauns, had crowded round the stranger
to compel him to join their rout and empty the wine-jar which a burly Silenus was carrying
before him on his ass.

At first the man had paid no heed to the youths' light mockery; but as they grew bolder, he
suddenly stood still, seized the tall faun, who was trying to force the wine-jar on him, by
both arms, and, holding him firmly, fixed his grave, dark eyes on those of the youth.  Alexander
had not forgotten the half-comical, half-threatening incident, but what he remembered most
clearly was the strange scene that followed: for, after the Magian had released his enemy,
he bade him take the jar back to Silenus, and proceed on his way, like the ass, on all-fours.
And the tall faun, a headstrong, irascible Lesbian, had actually obeyed the stately despot,
and crept along on his hands and feet by the side of the donkey.  No threats nor mockery of
his companions could persuade him to rise.  The high spirits of the boisterous crew were quite
broken, and before they could turn on the magician he had vanished.

Alexander had afterward learned that he was Serapion, the star-gazer and thaumaturgist, whom
all the spirits of heaven and earth obeyed.

When, at the time, the painter had told the story to Philip, the philosopher had laughed at
him, though Alexander had reminded him that Plato even had spoken of the daimons as being the
guardian spirits of men; that in Alexandria, great and small alike believed in them as a fact
to be reckoned with; and that he--Philip himself--had told him that they played a prominent
part in the newest systems of philosophy.

But to the skeptic nothing was sure: and if he would deny the existence of the Divinity, he
naturally must disbelieve that of any beings in a sphere between the supersensual immortals
and sentient human creatures. That a man, the weaker nature, could have any power over daimons,
who, as having a nearer affinity to the gods, must, if they existed, be the stronger, he could
refute with convincing arguments; and when he saw others nibbling whitethorn-leaves, or daubing
their thresholds with pitch to preserve themselves and the house from evil spirits, he shrugged
his shoulders contemptuously, though his father often did such things.

Here was Philip, deep in conversation with the man he had mocked at, and Alexander was flattered
by seeing that wise and famous Serapion, in whose powers he himself believed, was talking almost
humbly to his brother, as though to a superior.  The magician was standing, while the philosopher,
as though it were his right, remained seated.

Of what could they be conversing?

Alexander himself was anxious to be going, and only his desire to hear at any rate a few sentences
of the talk of two such men detained him longer.

As he expected, it bore on Serapion's magical powers; but the bearded man spoke in a very low
tone, and if the painter ventured any nearer he would be seen.  He could only catch a few incoherent
words, till Philip exclaimed in a louder voice: "All that is well-reasoned.  But you will be
able to write an enduring inscription on the shifting wave sooner than you will shake my conviction
that for our spirit, such as Nature has made it, there is nothing infallible or certain."

The painter was familiar with this postulate, and was curious to hear the Magian's reply; but
he could not follow his argument till he ended by saying, rather more emphatically: "You, even,
do not deny the physical connection of things; but I know the power that causes it.  It is
the magical sympathy which displays itself more powerfully in the universe, and among human
beings, than any other force."

"That is just what remains to be proved," was the reply.  But as the other declared in all
confidence, "And I can prove it," and was proceeding to do so, Serapion's companion, a stunted,
sharp-featured little Syrian, caught sight of Alexander.  The discourse was interrupted, and
Alexander, pointing to Melissa, begged his brother to grant them a few minutes' speech with
him.  Philip, however, scarcely spared a moment for greeting his brother and sister; and when,
in answer to his request that they be brief in what they had to say, they replied that a few
words would not suffice, Philip was for putting them off till the morrow, as he did not choose
to be disturbed just now.

At this Melissa took courage; she turned to Serapion and modestly addressed him:

"You, sir, look like a grave, kind man, and seem to have a regard for my brother.  You, then,
will help us, no doubt, to cure him of an illusion which troubles us.  A dead girl, he says,
met him, and he touched her hand."

"And do you, sweet child,  think  that impossible?"  the  Magian  asked with  gentle  gravity.
"Have the thousands who bring not merely fruit and wine and money for their dead, but who even
burn a black sheep for them--you, perhaps, have done the same--have they, I ask, done this
so long in vain?  I can not believe it.  Nay, I know from the ghosts themselves that this gives
them pleasure; so they must have the organs of sense."

"That we may rejoice departed souls by food and drink," said Melissa, eagerly, "and that daimons
at times mingle with the living, every one of course, believes; but who ever heard that warm
blood stirred in them? And how can it be possible that they should remunerate a service with
money, which certainly was not coined in their airy realm, but in the mint here?"

"Not too fast, fair maid," replied the Magian, raising a warning hand. "There is no form which
these intermediate beings can not assume.  They have the control of all and everything which
mortals may use, so the soul of Korinna revisiting these scenes may quite well have paid the
ferryman with an obolus."

"Then you know of it?" asked Melissa in surprise; but the Magian broke in, saying:

"Few such things remain hidden from him who knows, not even the smallest, if he strives after
such knowledge."

As he spoke he gave the girl such a look as made her eyelids fall, and he went on with greater
warmth: "There would be fewer tears shed by death- beds, my child, if we could but show the
world the means by which the initiated hold converse with the souls of the dead."

Melissa shook her pretty head sadly, and the Magian kindly stroked her waving hair; then, looking
her straight in the eyes, he said: "The dead live.  What once has been can never cease to be,
any more than out of nothing can anything come.  It is so simple; and so, too, are the workings
of magic, which amaze you so much.  What you call magic, when I practice it, Eros, the great
god of love, has wrought a thousand times in your breast.  When your heart leaps at your brother's
caress, when the god's arrow pierces you, and the glance of a lover fills you with gladness,
when the sweet harmonies of fine music wrap your soul above this earth, or the wail of a child
moves you to compassion, you have felt the magic power stirring in your own soul.  You feel
it when some mysterious power, without any will of your own, prompts you to some act, be it
what it may. While I was filming the scene brother Fritz replied with whizz-bangs thick and fast.
They are perfect devils, and it is practically impossible to hear them coming until they burst.
I turned my machine round upon the spot near which they were dropping. Several times they got
within the range of my camera, and I continued to turn upon them until two came much too close,
so thinking discretion the better part of valour, I hastily disappeared into the doubtful shelter
of a broken-down Hun trench. Then they came over, several smothering me in dust as they exploded
close by. Having obtained all the pictures I required I thanked the C.O. and went on my way.
My clothes were absolutely saturated with perspiration as I shambled
away towards the top end of Bernafay Wood.  Your noble brother, in whom the claims of the spirit have
long since triumphed over those of sense, has found this key without seeking it, since he has
been permitted to see Korinna's soul.  And if he follows a competent guide he will see her again."

"But why?  What good will it do him?"  asked Melissa, with a reproachful and anxious look at
the man whose influence, as she divined would be pernicious to her brother, in spite of his
knowledge.  The Magian gave a compassionate shrug, and in the look he cast at the philosopher,
the question was legible, "What have such as these to do with the highest things?"

Philip nodded in impatient assent, and, without paying any further heed to his brother and
sister, besought his friend to give him the proofs of the theory that the physical causation
of things is weaker than the sympathy which connects them.  Melissa knew full well that any
attempt now to separate Philip from Serapion would be futile; however, she would not leave
the last chance untried, and asked him gravely whether he had forgotten his mother's tomb.

He hastily assured her that he fully intended to visit it presently. Fruit and fragrant oil
could be had here at any hour of the night.

"And your two wreaths?"  she said, in mild reproach, for she had observed them both below the
portrait of Korinna.

"I had another use for them," he said, evasively; and then he added, apologetically: "You have
brought flowers enough, I know.  If I can find time, I will go to-morrow to see my father."
He nodded to them both, turned to the Magian, and went on eagerly:

"Then that magical sympathy--"

They did not wait to hear the discussion; Alexander signed to his sister to follow him.

He, too, knew that his brother's ear was deaf now to anything he could say.  What Serapion
had said had riveted even his attention, and the question whether it might indeed be vouchsafed
to living mortals to see the souls of the departed, and hear their voices, exercised his mind
so greatly that he could not forbear asking his sister's opinion on such matters. 

"Ah, monsieur, it is the first white bread and good French sausage we have seen since the Bosches
came. They took everything from us, everything, and if it had not been for the American relief
we should have starved. They are brutes, pig-brutes, monsieur, they kill everything." And, with
tears in her eyes, she told me how the Huns shot her beautiful dog
because, in its joyfulness, it used to play with and bark at the children.
"They did not like being disturbed, monsieur, so they shot him--poor
Jacques!

This the artist admitted; but when he jested of the danger of a jealous quarrel between him
and his brother, for the sake of a dead girl, there was something hard in his tone, and very
unlike him, which Melissa did not like. 

Does he love warmth and light, or cold and darkness? Is he sympathetic? Does he lessen the
grief of any one? Does he lead any one to remorse for evil deeds? Does he assist love in the
hearts of Ferdinand and Miranda? Do you think Prospero always treats him fairly? Does he seem so
light and inconstant that he needs some discipline? What will he
do when he is released from Prospero's control? Finally, does Ariel
seem lovable to you, would you like him as a friend and companion
as well as a powerful servant?
The mania had not taken such deep hold of the light-hearted young painter as of Philip, the
poring and gloomy philosopher; and she was glad as she heard her friend Ino call Alexander
a faithless butterfly, while her sister Helena declared that he was a godless scoffer.

