The Giant was then about to leave them; but as the citizens would not hear of this, and as
he was a rare good fellow, and did not object to festivities, he was persuaded to go with them.
As they had no horse big enough for him, he walked.

The procession was then formed for the return march. First of all rode the Head-man, with a
sword in one hand and a golden horn in the other. Then marched the professors of music. After
them came all those of the army who could play on the trumpet; then the guard of honor, with
the Prince and Princess; then Trumkard and the Giant, and after them the immense host that
could carry their weapons in one hand, and play upon the drum with the other. When they started,
the drums were all beaten, the trumpets all blown, the horses neighed, the spears glittered,
the banners flapped and fluttered, and there was never so brave an army in the world.

From all the hills, and plains, and valleys, the people came flocking to see them as they passed.
The enthusiasm was so great, that when night came on again, enormous bonfires were lighted
on both sides of their road, and kept up with such hearty good-will, that they travelled all
night in a light as bright as day; and when the wood gave out, the peasants tore down their
cottages, and threw them on the flames.

As they proceeded, the professors of music composed marches, and when one was finished, they
gave the manuscript to the Head-man, who, commanding silence, blew the tune on his horn, and
then the whole army struck up and played it grandly. Of these, the "Giant's Grand March" was
the best. It was what might be called good, loud music. If it had thundered, it is not likely
that it would have been heard in the grand final burst, when all the drums and trumpets beat
and blew their very loudest.

The Giant himself played in this march; for some of those who marched near him, seeing that
he had no instrument, asked him if he would not like to play upon something. It was monstrous--it
was unthinkable! He wanted no such life--he had no right to it! Let there be an end of it! No
life that ever was could be worth such a price as this! It was a cheat, a horror--there could
be no justice in such a thing! There could be no God in it--it was oppression, it was wrong!
He thought of the millions that swarmed on the earth--they had all come from this! And it was
happening every hour--every second! He saw it, the whole of it--the age-long agony, the universal
birth-pang of being. And he hated it, hated it with a wild, raging hatred--he would have annihilated
it with one sweep of his arm.
And yet--there was no way to annihilate it! It was here--it was inevitable.
And it was everlasting--it was an everlasting delusion, an everlasting
madness.
Bells were rung, and all kinds of music played, and the people shouted, so that the oldest
inhabitant never knew such a noise and excitement before. They entered the city, and the procession
halted at the palace. Here the Princess, after embracing the Prince, was conducted to the ladies'
apartments, where her friends were so overjoyed at seeing her again, that one would have thought
that they would never have got over it. The Prince, Trumkard, and the Giant were each shown
to sumptuous apartments, and that night everybody in the palace had as much of everything good
as they could eat.

Twelve o'clock of the next day was the time appointed for the Princess to make trial of the
magical music. The great hall of the palace was fitted up most magnificently, and with the
utmost rapidity, for this great occasion. The chairs of the judges were covered with new velvet,
and nothing was omitted that could add to the regal splendor of the hall. At half-past ten
the doors were opened, and the hall was immediately filled in every part, but the small portion
reserved for the principal actors in the ceremony. There were nine galleries, one above the
other, around this truly immense room; and when it was all packed full of people from floor
to dome, it was a wonderful spectacle indeed.

At ten minutes of twelve, the procession entered the great hall. First came, along the centre
passage, which was covered with cloth of gold, a number of beautiful boys, who strewed the
way with hyacinths, and jasmines, and the costly blossoms of the century plant. After them
were others, with golden water-pots, who sprinkled attar of roses before the Princess, who,
dressed in the purest white silk, cut bias, and trimmed with pink fur, was escorted by the
Prince. After them came the Prime Minister (released for the occasion), the nobles, etc., and
the procession was closed by the guards of the palace, all dressed in blue and covered with
diamonds. There was no music, nor scarcely any sound whatever, as they moved toward the judges,
who were already sitting solemnly in their chairs. When the procession reached them, it halted,
and the Princess was conducted to a chair in front of the music. Then the youngest judge arose,
and uncovered the magical music.

In all that hall, filled with such a multitude, there was breathless silence. It was so still
that the little mice came out of their holes, thinking there was no one there.

Then the Princess, timidly raising her eyes, ran them over the music, and began. It commenced
softly and somewhat sadly, but soon, becoming louder and richer, the tones swelled high and
clear, until the pure voice of the Princess thrilled through all the perfumed air. Then it
became more and more glorious, until its beatific beauty caused many of the older hearers to
die, and go straight to paradise. The close was inconceivably sweet; and when the last notes
died away, the people bowed their heads in tearful peace, and all evil left their hearts, and
to many of them it never returned.

As they raised their heads, they saw the oldest judge arise and point with his golden wand
to the marble tablet. The characters of the music had disappeared, and the vellum on which
they had been written was as white as snow. There was no need of any further decision. The
judges descended from their chairs in profound silence, and the oldest and the youngest, each
taking the Princess by the hand, led her up the steps to the throne, and seated her upon it.
Then the Prime Minister took the crown from its velvet cushion, and placed it on her head,
and, turning to the people, said in a voice which sounded in the stillness to all parts of
the vast building, "Behold your Queen!" 

"What is it?" she asked.

"Nothing," he said--"I just happened to think of something.

Something that frightened me."
"What was it?"

"I was thinking, dear--suppose I should become domestic!"

BOOK
VI

THE CORDS ARE TIGHTENED

She had been reading in the little cabin,
and a hush had fallen upon them.

"Yes, thou art gone! And round me
too the night In ever-nearing circle weaves her shade."

"Gone!" she
said, and smiled sadly. "Where is he gone?"

The dense crowd outside took them up, and shook the very foundations of the city with their
shouts; and the country people, and those at a great distance, heard the joyful sounds, and
before many minutes the whole country, for miles around, reverberated with cheers for the new-made
Queen.

As for the palace, it shook and trembled with the thunders of applause, still led by the Giant,
who couldn't be stopped. The people about him were all struck deaf in the ear nearest him,
but the ear-doctors cured them all for nothing, when they got outside, so full of charity was
every one. At last, when every one, the Giant and all, were hoarse with shouting, the Prime
Minister offered his hand to the Queen, and led her down from the throne. Then she motioned
to the Prince to give her his arm; and at the head of the procession, he led her to the royal
apartments, at the door of which he left her. The multitude then dispersed, and they spent
the rest of that day in putting right the wrongs they had committed, and in making provision
for future virtue. When the Queen had taken some refreshment, she put on an every-day crown,
and repaired to the audience chamber to receive the visits of the various dignitaries of the
kingdom, who came before her, and brought her their keys, and papers, and account-books. Giving
each one back his keys, and ordering the papers and accounts to be deposited in a great pile
on one side, where she might look over them at her leisure, she reappointed every man to the
office he held before, and sent them away rejoicing. Then she called for writing materials
and slaves, and commenced writing notes to the Prince. She would write one on gilded vellum,
and, folding it, would hand it to the slave next to her, who dipped it in frankincense, and
handed it to the next one, who sprinkled it with attar of roses, and passed it to the next,
who ran with it as hard as ever he could to the Prince. For in that kingdom it was not considered
proper for lovers to visit much.

This performance the Queen kept up all the afternoon, writing as fast as she could, and only
stopping long enough to read the answers which the slaves brought her as they returned. At
last, they came back, bringing with them her last notes unopened, saying that the Prince had
gone to sleep. At which intelligence she shed some tears, but then, like a sensible Queen,
had her supper, and went to bed.

The next day the marriage of the Queen and the Prince took place, and it was a glorious affair
indeed. Twenty-four historians were appointed by the Crown to write the history of it; they
were paid by the quarter, and it took them a long time, I can assure you.

The whole of the wedding-day, the festivities were kept up, and all the eating, and drinking,
and merry-making, was at the royal expense. During the day and night everybody spent, and gave
away to the poor, all the wealth they possessed, and in the morning it was all paid back to
them by the royal Treasurer. In the country, the people feasted grandly on their own herds,
and drank up their own wines, and they were also reimbursed by the Crown.

But the great feature of the royal marriage was the decree, proclaimed at noon of the wedding-day,
that all persons married on that day should be set up in housekeeping, free of expense!

Never, in the history of that or any other kingdom, were priests kept so busy as those in this
city. They worked as hard as they could, but at three o'clock they were obliged to commence
marrying the folks by squads; and so, before suppertime, there was not a bachelor or maid in
the whole city,--excepting an old bobstay spinner,--one of the crossest of old maids, who hated
men so much that she had not spoken to one for forty years; and a crabbed bachelor, who despised
women so completely that he never had his clothes washed, because it would have to be done
by females. 

"I'll have to look into it some day. You know you have to endow me with all your worldly goods!"

They
went on down the avenue, and came to a Jewish temple with a gilded dome. "I wonder how that
would do," said Corydon.

"I don't think it would do at all," said
Thyrsis.

