
Newman, in his Chemistry, says, when fresh gathered, teas are said to be narcotic, and to disorder
the senses; the Chinese, therefore, cautiously abstain from their use until they have been
kept twelve months. The reason attributed for bohea tea being less injurious than green is,
being more hastily dried, the pernicious qualities more copiously evaporate.

"Tea," says Dr. Hugh Smith, in his Dissertation upon the Nerves, "is very hurtful both to the
stomach and nerves. Phrensies, deliriums, vigilation, idiotism, apoplexies, and other disorders
of the brain, are all produced by the nerves being thus disarranged and debilitated. If the
digestive faculty of the stomach be weakened, the body, failing of recruiting juices, must
tend to emaciation, and the whole frame be rendered one system of distress and infirmity. The
nerves, being thus deprived of a sufficiency of their animal spirits, must become languid,
and leave every sense void of the first means of conveying to the mind the only enjoyments
of our temporal existence.

"But if there be any class of persons to whom India tea is more particularly hurtful than to
any other, it is that which includes the studious and sedentary, and especially those who are
enfeebled with gout, stone, and rheumatism; age, accident, or avocation, cause many persons
to be unfortunately ranked amongst those of the latter description. These, from their intensity
of thought, want of exercise, injurious position of body, respiration of unwholesome air, and
a variety of other causes, have not only their animal spirits exhausted, but their liquids
corrupted from the loss of a necessary circulation. With these evils India tea operates as
an absolute poison. Indeed, it frequently renders those incurable, who might, by other means,
have been relieved.

"When a view is taken of the dismal effects produced by India teas, the mind seems to be bewildered
in searching for the cause of using so generally a drug that is so universally destructive.
It chiefly originated in a fundamental mistake of physical principles. About the time that
India tea was introduced to Europe, a grievous error crept into the practice of medical professors;
they falsely imagined that health could not be more promoted than by increasing the fluidity
of the blood. This opinion once established, it is no wonder that mankind, with one accord,
adopted the infusion of India tea, which was then a novelty to Europe, as the best means of
obtaining the above effect. By the advice of Bentikoe chiefly was the pernicious custom of
drinking warm liquors, night and day, established. To this man, and the introduction of India
tea, may be ascribed that revolution in the health of Europeans which has happened since the
last century. The present age, therefore, have great cause to lament, in what they suffer in
nervous complaints, that their forefathers did not attend more to the scientific and judicious
advice of the illustrious Duncan, Boerhaave, and the whole school of Leyden, who proscribed
this error. Although they could not entirely prevent this physical abuse, yet their zealous
endeavours did, in some degree, at first impede its progress; but, however, so powerful did
novelty plead in favour of India teas, that, at last, general custom and prejudice bore away
every barrier that had been erected by these learned and experienced physicians. This error,
instead of diminishing, has increased: most valetudinarians are now of opinion that a thick
blood is the sole cause of their complaints; with this impression they adopt what they call
the diluent beverage of India teas. It can scarcely be imagined how many disorders this practice
produces; it may be justly termed the box of Pandora, without even hope remaining at the bottom."
Tissot says, "They are the prolific sources of hypochondriac melancholy, which both adds strength
to and is one of the worst of disorders." He adds, "with regard to studious men, who are naturally
weak and feeble, such warm beverages are more hurtful to them than to others; for they are
not troubled with an over thick, but, on the contrary, too thin a blood. You are all aware,"
continues he, "respectable auditors, that the density of the blood is as the motion of the
solids; the fibres of the learned are relaxed, their motions are slow, and their blood, of
consequence, thin. Bleed a ploughman and a doctor at the same time; from the first there will
flow a thick blood, resembling inflammatory blood, almost solid, and of a deep red; the blood
of the latter will be either of a faint red, or without any colour, soft, gelatinous, and will
almost entirely turn them to water. Your blood, therefore, men of learning, should not be dissolved,
but brought to a consistence; and you should in general be moderate in the article of drinking,
and cautiously avoid warm spirituous liquors.

"Amongst the favorite beverages of the learned," the same Tissot observes, "is the infusion
of that famous leaf, so well known by the name of India tea, which, to our great detriment,
has every year, for these two centuries past, been constantly imported from China and Japan.
This most pernicious gift first destroys the strength of the stomach, and if it be not soon
laid aside, equally destroys that of the viscera, the blood, the nerves, and of the whole body;
so that malignant and all chronical disorders will appear to increase, especially nervous disorders,
in proportion as the use of India tea becomes common; and you may easily form a judgment, from
the diseases that prevail in every country, whether the inhabitants are lovers of tea or the
contrary. How happy would it be for Europe, if, by unanimous consent, the importation of this
infamous leaf was prohibited, which is endued only with a corrosive force derived from the
acrimony of a gum with which it is pregnant."

Having thus considered the dismal and too frequently fatal consequences of the nerves being
affected, it is presumed this part of the Essay cannot be more interestingly concluded than
by a summary of the distinct symptomatic effects attending, more or less, complaints of the
nerves; and although the following symptoms are alarming with regard to their number and variety,
yet the reader may be assured there is not one specified but what is either the immediate or
ultimate effect of a nervous affection, and which is too frequently the consequence of the
violent astringency of foreign tea taken injudiciously as a constant aliment:--A faintness,
succeeded with a delusive vision of motes, mists, and clouds, falling backwards and forwards
before the distempered sight--A yawning, gaping, stretching out of the arms, twitching of the
nerves, sneezing, drowsiness, and contraction of the breast--Dulness, debility, distress, and
dismay, with a great sense of weariness--A wan complexion, a languid eye, a loathing stomach,
and an uncertain appetite, which, if not immediately satisfied, is irremediably lost--Heartburning,
bilious vomitings, belchings, pains in the pit of the stomach, and shortness of breath--Dizziness,
inveterate pains in the temples and other parts of the head, a tingling noise in the ear, a
throbbing of the brain, especially of the temporal arteries--Symptoms of asthma, tickling coughs,
visible inflations, and unusual scents affecting the olfactory nerves--Sometimes costive and
sometimes relaxed--Sudden flushings of heat, and suffusions of countenance--In the night, alternate
sweats and shiverings, especially down the back, which seems to feel as if water was poured
down that part of the body--A ptyalism, or discharge of phlegm from the glands of the throat,
which generally attends all the symptoms--Troublesome pains between the shoulders, pains attended
with hot sensations, cramps and convulsive motions of the muscles, or a few of their fibres--Sudden
startings of the tendons of the legs and arms--Copious and frequent discharges of pale and
limpid urine--Vertigoes, long faintings, and cold, moist, clammy sweat about the temples and
forehead--Wandering pains in the sides, back, knees, ancles, arms, wrists, and somewhat resembling
rheumatic pains--The head generally warm, while the rest of the body is cold or chilly--Obstinate
watchinqs, disturbed sleep, frightful dreams, the night mare, startings when awake, and the
mind filled with the most terrific apprehensions--Tremors of the limbs, and palpitations of
the heart--A very variable and irregular pulse--Periodical pains in the head--A sense of suffocation,
frequent sighings, and shedding of tears--Convulsive spasms of the muscles, tendons, nerves
of the back, loins, arms, hands, and a general convulsion of the stomach, bowels, throat, legs,
and indeed almost every other part of the body--A quick apprehension, forgetful, unsettled,
and constant to nothing but inconstancy--A wandering and delirious imagination, groundless
fears, and an exquisite sense of his sufferings--A gradually sinking into a nervous atrophy
or consumption--A perpetual alarm of approaching death--Sometimes cheerful, and sometimes melancholy--Without
present enjoyment or future expectation of any thing but increasing misery and debility.--If
these symptoms are inconsiderately suffered to continue, they soon terminate in palsy, hip,
madness, epilepsy, apoplexy, or in some mortal disease, as the black jaundice, dropsy, consumption,
&c.

Having ascertained, from this enquiry, the injurious properties of India tea, it may naturally
be expected that I should propose some article that might prove more beneficial. With this
requisition I shall most readily comply, although I may expose myself to the invidious censure
of having directed all my efforts to establish the celebrity of whatever article I may recommend.
But being convinced, that, by publishing the virtue of a tea that I have investigated from
physical analysis and particular observation, I may essentially serve the public, I am content
to suffer the obloquy, provided it is productive of a general benefit. Having, as before observed,
examined, with the greatest attention, the nature of most articles that have been offered as
morning and afternoon beverage, there are two which claim most particularly the preference
of all others that are sold under the denomination of Tea: these are, 1st, that which was discovered
by that eminent botanist Sir Hans Sloane; and the other, by a botanist and physician equally
celebrated, Dr. Solander. I therefore, without considering in what manner the interest of the
proprietors of these teas may be individually affected, propose two articles, in order to shew
that my partiality or opinion of the virtues of the one could not prejudice me so far as to
prevent my allowing due praise to any other possessing qualities deserving approbation. I am
happy to state that, from my analysis of that invented by Sir Hans Sloane, called British Tea,
I found it possesses most singular virtues for relieving many nervous complaints; but, from
the same trials and experiments made on that invented by Dr. Solander, I have been convinced
that, although the qualities of the former are exceedingly salutary, they are not so general
in their restoration and nutritious effects as the latter. Being thus convinced of the extraordinary
properties of Dr. Solander's Tea, I have been induced to state, in a Treatise upon their Nature,
Preparation, and Effects, reasons founded on chemical analysis, physical efficiency, and experimental
observation, in support of their most eminent virtues. After every trial I have made of coffee,
chocolate[1], and most other preparations that have been, and are at present, offered to the
public as a substitute for tea, none seem to claim the preference so eminently as that invented
by Dr. Solander. From their analysis, I find their virtues are of the most corrective and balsamic
kind; they strengthen the tone of the stomach, not by astringing the solids, but by lubricating
the vessels, sheathing the acrids, and attenuating the liquids.

      [1] "Coffee.--In bilious habits it is very hurtful." Dr.
      Carr's Med. Epist. p. 25.

      "Coffee.--I cannot advise it to those of hardness of
      breathing." Ibid. p. 29.

      "Coffee, according to Paule, a Danish physician, enervates men
      and renders them incapable of generation, which injurious
      tendency is certainly attributed to it by the Turks. From its
      immoderate use they account for the decrease of population in
      their provinces, that were so numerously peopled before this
      berry was introduced among them. Mr. Boyle mentions an instance
      of a person to whom Coffee always proved an emetic. He also says
      that he has known great drinking of it produce the palsy.

      "Chocolate is too gross for many weak stomachs, and
      exceedingly injurious to those liable to phlegm and viscid
      humours." Saunders's Nat. & Art. Direct. for Health.

      "Chocolate overloads the stomach, and renders the juices too
      slow in their circulation." Smith on the Nerves.

In this manner they restore the equilibrium of the oscillatory motions, which establish the
tone of the nervous system. This being strengthened, the animal spirits are enabled to dispense
their reviving influence to the sensitive, digestive, and intellectual powers. And these being
thus restored to their vigour of operation, a simple and moderate portion of food is rendered
the most nutritious, and the body is consequently established in the enjoyment of health and
happiness.

The above virtues of the sanative tea are not here asserted as a declamatory panegyric, but
as the result of a physical analysis of their nature, and a serious examination into their
mode of operating as a restorative and constant aliment. Without presuming their qualities
to be an unlimited remedy for all complaints, the nature of the preparation of this tea is
compared with the causes and effects of nervous disorders: from this comparison their relative
virtue to such diseases are most clearly evinced: and thus is this invaluable discovery proved
to be the most effectual remedy for all those complaints caused by drinking foreign teas, that
was ever yet or may be hereafter invented.

In proposing to the public any simple or compound, for the preserving, increasing, or restoring
health, the first object should be to explain its nature. This is the principal test by which
its merits can be known, or mankind rationally induced to try its virtues. And as this sanative
tea is offered as a substitute for what is generally used as two fourths of our aliment, and
which, from the preceding enquiry, has been found the principal cause of our present infirmities,
the greater necessity there is for a candid investigation of its nature.

Impressed with the above conviction, it is fairly stated that the nature of this sanative tea
is not from any combination of the animal or mineral kingdom, but a collection of the most
salutary native and exotic herbs that are produced in the vegetable empire of nature. These
have not been collected by the fanatic devotees of occult qualities, but by the scientific
researches and personal experience of a character that is equally and justly admired for his
philosophical, medical, and botanical knowledge. The discoverer, Dr. Solander, of this tea,
inquired into the virtues of each native and exotic herb of which it is composed, not only
by abstract reasoning upon its relative qualities, but by the more immediate evidence of his
senses: by submitting each vegetable to his taste and smell, he derived the most certain physical
proof of its qualities. Thus he knew the particular virtues of each, and what salutary effects
they must, from their preparation as a compound, produce when applied as a relief for the innumerable
diseases caused by drinking foreign teas. Not confining himself to English Plants, he studied
and examined the virtues of Exotics, among which he discovered some that possess virtues he
had not found in those of his own country: by adopting these, he has increased the salutary
effects of his invaluable tea. From reading Hippocrates, Discorides, and Galen, he found the
ancients derived all their knowledge of plants by their taste and smell. With these examples
before him, and his own propensity to study, joined to his penetrating judgement, it is no
wonder he should have so well succeeded. Thus he recurred to the original mode of inquiry,
which first established and raised the eminence of physic; neglecting that delusive principle
of Aristotle's philosophy, which has since taught too many physicians to express the virtue
of medicines by hot, cold, moist, and dry, without deriving the least information from their
senses Dr. Solander, aided by chemical analysis, distinguished the virtue by the taste or odour
of every plant. By this means their specific juices he found tasted either earthy, mucilaginous,
sweet, bitter, aromatic, fetid, acrid, or corrosive. From this experience he found the observation
of some botanists to be true, "That there is no virtue yet known in plants but what depends
on the taste or smell, and may be known by them."[2] With this infallible means of pursuing
his enquiry, he formed a tea composed of herbs that are in their nature astringent, balsamic,
aromatic, cephalic, and diaphoretic. These virtues combined may be said to form one of the
most incomparable specifics, as a nutritive and restoring aliment, that has been discovered.

      [2] Floyer, Malpighus, Epew, Harvey, Willis, Lower, Needham,
      Glisson, &c.

In the astringent, the acid fixing upon the more earthly parts, the nutritious oil is more
easily separated, which renders them also pectoral, cleaning, and diuretic. This part of the
tea is in its nature particularly serviceable in all cases where vulnerary medicines are requisite.
They particularly amend the acid in the nervous juice, and thus restore the equal motion of
the spirits, which were obstructed or retarded by spasms or convulsions. By the volatile oil
and volatile pungent salt, obstructions are opened, and the motions of the languid blood increased
to a healthy degree of circulation. They resolve coagulated phlegm in the stomach, preserve
the fluidity of the juices, and promote digestion, by assisting the bile in its operation.

And with regard to their balsamic and aromatic nature, these qualities warm the stomach and
expel wind, by rarefying the flatuous exhalations from chyle in the prima viæ. These, by their
sweetness, allay the sharpness of rheums, and lenify their acrimony. Being filled with an oily
salt, they open the passage of the lungs and kidnies. By opening the pores, they extraordinarily
discuss outward tumours, and attenuate the internal coagulation. All these virtues may be said
to be derived from the union of their balsamic oil and volatile salt.

By a second class of aromatics, with which Dr. Solander composed this sanative tea, is such
as have a bitter astringency joined to their volatile oil and salt. These united qualities
correct acids in the stomach, cleanse the lungs, and open obstructions in the glands caused
by coagulated serum; and the saline pungent oil altering the acids in the glands of the brain,
by correcting and attenuating its lympha and succus nervosus, produces the same effect; for
the lympha and nervous juice are, like other glandulous humours, liable to acidity and stagnation;
therefore these aromatics, by exciting their motion and correcting their acidities, render
the liquids of the nerves more volatile, and are therefore justly termed cephalics. And as
it is the property of volatiles to ascend, the reason is evident of the brain being assisted
by their salutary qualities. These aromatics likewise evacuate serum from the blood, promote
its circulation, and attenuate the coagulations of chyle, lympha, and succus nervosus. And
here, it is proper to add, that all aromatics, by rarefying the blood, are cordial. There being
aromatic astringents in this tea, its infusion strengthens the fibres and membranes of the
stomach, and all the nervous system, in such a manner as not to destroy their tensity by that
too great contraction caused by the foreign teas; and, having no acid in their astringency,
the blood is preserved from too great a rarefaction, which would otherwise happen from the
pungency of their oily qualities. These also excite the appetite, by stimulating the natural
progress of the chyle, and thus prevent its too rapid fermentation of its spirituous parts
into windy flatulencies. For the same reason vinegar is taken with hot meats and herbs. Having
mentioned vinegar, it may not be improper to state this vegetable acid is the best antidote
against the poison of any acrid herbs. That part of the tea which has a mucilaginous taste
is inwardly cooler than oil, although it be different in nature. Such herbs defend the throat
from the sharpness of rheums, the stomach from corrosive humours of disease or acrimonious
medicines; the ureters from sharp, choleric, or acid urine, and lubricate the passage for the
stony gravel. Their crude parts cool the heat of scorbutic blood, lessen its violent motion,
and sheathe its acrid saline particles.

By their different mucilaginous principles they produce the following various salutary effects:

The earthy repel and cool outward inflammations.

The watery, which is thick and gummose, stop fluxes and correct sharp humours.

Those of an oily odour alleviate pains.

Those of a pungent acrid dissolve tartareous concretions in the kidnies.

From these and a variety of other salutary properties, it is evident the general nature of
Dr. Solander's tea is such as to correct acrid humours, promote the secretions, restore the
equilibrium between the fluids and solids, and finally to brace every part of the relaxed nervous
system. The body being thus relieved from obstructions, its circulations restored, the digestive
faculties invigorated, and the spirits re-animated, the debilitated constitution is reinstated
in all its enjoyments of health and hilarity. It may be therefore observed, that the principle
of this tea is to nourish as a general aliment, while it renovates the human constitution,
without having recourse to the nauseous portions of galenical preparation, or the hazardous
trial of chalybeate waters. As this tea is particularly salutary in all cases where mineral
waters are generally recommended, it is very proper the Public should be cautioned against
the danger which too frequently attends the constant drinking of them.

Chalybeate waters, it must be acknowledged, have effected very extraordinary cures in certain
cases. But when so great an author as Helmont says, that such waters are fatal to all those
who are afflicted with peripneumonic complaints, it is surely necessary they should be resorted
to with the greatest caution; and even in complaints where they may be serviceable, it is necessary
to observe whether they really possess those chalybeate qualities for which they are commended.
Those who have written upon their virtues assert, and with seeming propriety, that where they
deposit an ochreous sediment, they are certainly dispossessed of their steely virtues; for
ochre being no other than the calx of iron, such a residue evinces the evaporation of the more
eminent properties of the chalybeate, by the phlogiston of the mineral escaping by its extreme
volatility. Every metal deprived of this igneous principle is immediately reduced to a calx,
and thus deprived of its splendour, fusibility, and other properties, until restored again
by the readmission of its phlogiston. Calcined lead having lost this inflammable quality, is
reduced to a red calx or mineral earth, which, if fluxed with any igneous body, such as oil,
pitch, wax, fat, wood, bone, or mineral oil or bitumen, the fiery principle is resorbed, and
the lead restored to its essential qualities; from these physical observations the reader may
be convinced of those mineral waters as afford such a sediment being in a state of decomposition.
They are thus deprived of one of the four elements or principles of which they are all more
or less composed. Every analysis of mineral waters in their perfect state has demonstrated
that they possess a fixed air, a volatile alkali, a volatile vitriolic acid, and the phlogiston.
If, therefore, either of these essential qualities is evaporated or corrupted, the water, being
in a state of decomposition, must lose the virtues of a medicinal chalybeate.

It is only necessary to add a few further remarks, in order to shew in what particular complaints
chalybeates, even in their most perfect state, are pernicious. By this means many of the diseased
will be guarded against a fatal error: and as the prejudice in favour of such applications
is so universally prevalent, it is hoped a few pages allotted to this subject will be deemed
a most essential service to a deluded community. By removing such a pernicious partiality,
the health, if not the lives of thousands, may be saved, to the great enjoyment of themselves
and their relatives. Dr. Knight says very justly, "that the explication of the manner of the
operation of chalybeate medicines in human bodies is grounded upon false principles, and not
matters of fact; to wit, that all chalybeate preparations, in a liquid form, owe their medicinal
efficacy to the metal dissolved, whether in an aqueous or spirituous menstruum, retaining its
metallic texture." To avoid entering into the whole detail of this interesting argument, it
is only here stated in support of the above assertion, that as mineral waters are impregnated
with a combination of sulphurs, salts, and earth, their virtues cannot be properly ascribed,
as they have been, to the metals which they contain. It might be further proved, that iron
cannot possibly enter the blood, retaining its essential qualities; for metals in general,
except mercury, are suspended in liquids in solutis principiis, or principles disengaged, which
are thus deprived of their metallic properties. Iron, entering the body as a volatile vitriolic
acid, cannot act by its specific gravity as mercury does; it therefore acts per accidens, and
not per se. But admitting that waters, however impregnated with iron, are efficacious in checking
all diarrhoea and other profuse evacuations, by closing the relaxed vessels, and incrassating
the fluids, yet as they prove sometimes so astringent as to stop the natural secretions, the
consequences are frequently cramps, dangerous convulsions, which often end in fevers, inflammations,
and mortifications, their indiscriminate use should be most cautiously avoided. Chalybeates,
thus contracting the least pervious glands, should not be taken in acute inflammations, or
in any complaints that are attended with a quick and strong pulse, a plethora, or extravasation
of humours. They are equally dangerous in all nervous contractions, or where the blood is got
into the arteriolæ, or capillary vessels. Thus, instead of acting like the sanative tea, which
softens, smoothes, and unbends the two constringed fibres, the vitriolic salts of this mineral
water but more contract the fibrillæ, by operating like so many wedges, which ultimately tear,
rend, or divide the tender filaments. It must, however, be admitted that mineral waters are
very beneficial in cachexies, scurvies, jaundice, hypochondriacal and hysterical affections.
Having paid this tribute to their virtues, it is evident that what is above stated respecting
their pernicious effects has been dictated by candour, and with no illiberal disposition to
deny their absolute virtues[3]. These few remarks have only been made in order to warn the
community against a prevailing and indiscriminate use which might otherwise, in many complaints,
prove at least fatal to their health, if not to their existence. And as the tea discovered
by Dr. Solander possesses all the virtues of the chalybeate, without its dangerous principles,
it was an immediate duty not only to warn but direct the Public in their adoption of an aliment
so essential to their health, and consequently temporal happiness.

      [3] Waters drank at their source are efficacious in many
      complaints that are not accompanied with inflammatory symptoms;
      but if they are drank after a long or short conveyance, their
      effects must be proportionably injurious instead of beneficial.

PREPARATION.

