'I'm sure I did not say anything wrong,' said Jane, 'and I suppose it is like that. A gentleman
has to find out whom he likes best. And as he liked Miss Bolton best, I think it's a thousand
pities they should be parted.'

'Ten thousand pities!' said Maria enthusiastically.

'Particularly as there is a baby,' said Jane,--upon which Mrs. Rewble was again very angry.

'If Dick were to come home, he'd clear it all up at once,' said Mrs. Posttlethwaite.

'Dick will never come home,' said Matilda mournfully.

'Never!' said Mrs. Rewble. 'I am afraid that he has expiated all his indiscretions. It should
make us who were born girls thankful that we have not been subjected to the same temptations.'

'I should like to be a man all the same,' said Jane.

'You do not at all know what you are saying,' replied the monitor. 'How little have you realized
what poor Dick must have suffered! I wonder when they are going to let us have tea. I'm almost
famished.' Mrs. Rewble was known in the family for having a good appetite. They were sitting
at this moment round a table on the lawn, at which they intended to partake of their evening
meal. The doctor might or might not join them. Mrs. Shand, who did not like the open air, would
have hers sent to her in the drawing-room. Mr. Rewble would certainly be there. Mr. Posttlethwaite,
who had been home to his dinner, had gone back to the soap-works. 'Don't you think, Jane, if
you were to go in, you could hurry them?' Then Jane went in and hurried the servant.

'There's a strange man with papa,' said Jane, as she returned.

'There are always strange men with papa,' said Fanny. 'I daresay he has come to have his tooth
out.' For the doctor's practice was altogether general. From a baby to a back-tooth, he attended
to everything now, as he had done forty years ago.

'But this man isn't like a patient. The door was half open, and I saw papa holding him by both
hands.'

'A lunatic!' exclaimed Mrs. Rewble, thinking that Mr. Rewble ought to be sent at once to her
father's assistance.

'He was quite quiet, and just for a moment I could see papa's face. It wasn't a patient at
all. Oh, Maria!'

'What is it, child?' asked Mrs. Rewble.

'I do believe that Dick has come back.'

They all jumped up from their seats suddenly. Then Mrs. Rewble reseated herself. 'Jane is such
a fool!' she said.

'I do believe it,' said Jane. 'He had yellow trousers on, as if he had come from a long way
off. And I'm sure papa was very glad,--why should he take both his hands?'

'I feel as though my legs were sinking under me,' said Maria.

'I don't think it possible for a moment,' said Mrs. Rewble. 'Maria, you are so romantic! You
would believe anything.'

'It is possible,' said Mrs. Posttlethwaite.

'If you will remain here, I will go into the house and inquire,' said Mrs. Rewble. But it did
not suit the others to remain there. For a moment the suggestion had been so awful that they
had not dared to stir; but when the elder sister slowly moved towards the door which led into
the house from the garden, they all followed her. Then suddenly they heard a scream, which
they knew to come from their mother. 'I believe it is Dick,' said Mrs. Rewble, standing in
the doorway so as to detain the others. 'What ought we to do?'

'Let me go in,' said Jane, impetuously. 'He is my brother.'

Maria was already dissolved in tears. Mrs. Posttlethwaite was struck dumb by the awfulness
of the occasion, and clung fast to her sister Matilda.

'It will be like one from the grave,' said Mrs. Rewble, solemnly.

'Let me go in,' repeated Jane, impetuously. Then she pushed by her sisters, and was the first
to enter the house. They all followed her into the hall, and there they found their mother
supported in the arms of the man who wore the yellow trousers. Dick Shand had in truth returned
to his father's house.

The first thing to do with a returned prodigal is to kiss him, and the next to feed him; and
therefore Dick was led away at once to the table on the lawn. But he gave no sign of requiring
the immediate slaughter of a fatted calf. Though he had not exactly the appearance of a well-to-do
English gentleman, he did not seem to be in want. The yellow trousers were of strong material,
and in good order, made of that colour for colonial use, probably with the idea of expressing
some contempt for the dingy hues which prevail among the legs of men at home. He wore a very
large checked waistcoat, and a stout square coat of the same material. There was no look of
poverty, and no doubt he had that day eaten a substantial dinner; but the anxious mother was
desirous of feeding him immediately, and whispered to Jane some instructions as to cold beef,
which was to be added to the tea and toast.

As they examined him, holding him by the arms and hands, and gazing up into his face, the same
idea occurred to all of them. Though they knew him very well now, they would hardly have known
him had they met him suddenly in the streets. He seemed to have grown fifteen years older during
the seven years of his absence. His face had become thin and long and almost hollow. His beard
went all round under his chin, and was clipped into the appearance of a stiff thick hedge--equally
thick, and equally broad, and equally protrusive at all parts. And within this enclosure it
was shorn. But his mouth had sunk in, and his eyes. In colour he was almost darker than brown.
You would have said that his skin had been tanned black, but for the infusion of red across
it here and there. He seemed to be in good present health, but certainly bore the traces of
many hardships 'And here you are all just as I left you,' he said, counting up his sisters.

'Not exactly,' said Mrs. Rewble, remembering her family. 'And Matilda has got two.'

'Not husbands, I hope,' said Dick.

'Oh, Dick! that is so like you,' said Jane, getting up and kissing him again in her delight.
Then Mr. Rewble came forward, and the brothers-in-law renewed their old acquaintance.

'It seems just like the other day,' said Dick, looking round upon the rose-bushes.

'Oh my boy! my darling, darling boy!' said the mother, who had hurried up-stairs for her shawl,
conscious of her rheumatism even amidst the excitement of her son's return. 'Oh, Dick! This
is the happiest day of all my life. Wouldn't you like something better than tea?' This she
said with many memories and many thoughts; but still, with a mother's love, unable to refrain
from offering what she thought her son would wish to have.

'There ain't anything better,' said Dick very solemnly.

'Nothing half so good to my thinking,' said Mrs. Rewble, imagining that by a word in season
she might help the good work.

The mother's eyes were filled with tears, but she did not dare to speak a word. Then there
was a silence for a few moments. 'Tell us all about it, Dick,' said the father. 'There's whisky
inside if you like it.' Dick shook his head solemnly,--but, as they all thought, with a certain
air of regret. Tell us what you have to say,' repeated the doctor.

'I'm sworn off these two years.'

'Touched nothing for two years?' said the mother exultingly, with her arms and shawl again
round her son's neck.

'A teetotaller?' said Maria.

'Anything you like to call it. Only, what a gentleman's habits are in that respect needn't
be made the subject of general remark.' It was evident he was a little sore, and Jane, therefore,
offered him a dish full of gooseberries. He took the plate in his hand and ate them assiduously
for a while in silence, as though unconscious of what he was doing. 'You know all about it
now, don't you?'

'Oh my dearest boy!' ejaculated the mother.

'You didn't get better gooseberries than those on your travels,' said the doctor, calling him
back to the condition of the world around him.

Then he told them of his adventures. For two terrible years he had been a shepherd on different
sheep-runs up in Queensland. Then he had found employment on a sugar plantation, and had superintended
the work of a gang of South Sea Islanders,--Canakers they are called,--men who are brought
into the colony from the islands of the Pacific,--and who return thence to their homes generally
every three years, much to the regret of their employers. In the transit of these men agents
are employed, and to this service Dick had, after a term, found himself promoted. Then it had
come to pass that he had remained for a period on one of these islands, with the view of persuading
the men to emigrate and reemigrate; and had thus been resident among them for more than a couple
of years. They had used him well, and he had liked the islands,--having lived in one of them
without seeing another European for many months. Then the payments which had from time to time
been made to him by the Queensland planters were stopped, and his business, such as it had
been, came to an end. He had found himself with just sufficient money to bring him home; and
here he was.

'My boy, my darling boy!' exclaimed his mother again, as though all their joint troubles were
now over.

The doctor remembered the adage of the rolling stone, and felt that the return of a son at
the age of thirty, without any means of maintaining himself, was hardly an unalloyed blessing.
He was not the man to turn a son out of doors. He had always broadened his back to bear the
full burden of his large family. But even at this moment he was a little melancholy as he thought
of the difficulty of finding employment for the wearer of those yellow trousers. How was it
possible that a man should continue to live an altogether idle life at Pollington and still
remain a teetotaller? 'Have you any plans I can help you in now?' he asked.

'Of course he'll remain at home for a while before he thinks of anything,' said the mother.

'I suppose I must look about me,' said Dick. By-the-by, what has become of John Caldigate?'

They all at once gazed at each other. It could hardly be that he did not in truth know what
had become of John Caldigate.

'Haven't you heard?' asked Maria.

'Of course he has heard,' said Mrs. Rewble.

'You must have heard,' said the mother.

'I don't in the least know what you are talking about. I have heard nothing at all.'

In very truth he had heard nothing of his old friend,--not even that he had returned to England.
Then by degrees the whole story was told to him. 'I know that he was putting a lot of money
together,' said Dick enviously. 'Married Hester Bolton? I thought he would! Bigamy! Euphemia
Smith! Married before! Certainly not at the diggings.'

'He wasn't married up at Ahalala?' asked the doctor.

'To Euphemia Smith? I was there when they quarrelled, and when she went into partnership with
Crinkett. I am sure there was no such marriage. John Caldigate in prison for bigamy? And he
paid them twenty thousand pounds? The more fool he!'

'They all say that.'

'But it's an infernal plant. As sure as my name is Richard Shand, John Caldigate never married
that woman.'

Chapter L

Again at Sir John's Chambers

And this was the man as to whom it had been acknowledged that his evidence, if it could be
obtained, would be final. The return of Dick himself was to the Shands an affair so much more
momentous than the release of John Caldigate from prison, that for some hours or so the latter
subject was allowed to pass out of sight. The mother got him up-stairs and asked after his
linen,--vain inquiry,--and arranged for his bed, turning all the little Rewbles into one small
room. In the long run, grandmothers are more tender to their grand-children than their own
offspring. But at this moment Dick was predominant. How grand a thing to have her son returned
to her, and such a son,--a teetotaller of two years' growth, who had seen all the world of
the Pacific Ocean! As he could not take whisky-and-water, would he like ginger-beer before
he went to bed,--or arrowroot? Dick decided in favour of ginger-beer, and consented to be embraced
again.

It was, I think, to Maria's credit that she was the first to bring back the conversation to
John Caldigate's marriage. 'Was she a very horrible woman?' Maria asked, referring to Euphemia
Smith.

'There were a good many of 'em out there, greedy after gold,' said Dick; 'but she beat 'em
all; and she was awfully clever.'

'In what way, Dick?' asked Mrs. Rewble. Because she does not seem to me to have done very well
with herself.'

'She knew more about shares than any man of them all. But I think she just drank a little.
It was that which disgusted Caldigate.'

'He had been very fond of her?' suggested Maria.

'I never knew a man so taken with a woman.' Maria blushed, and Mrs. Rewble looked round at
her younger sisters as though desirous that they should be sent to bed. 'All that began on
board the ship. 

Via the tunnels are very numerous and the landscape is generally beautiful and lively on all in
the wonderful valley of the Loire (Loire) and small basins of some tributaries. It is an immense
succession of low hills and plains very uneven, with large forests, mainly vineyards and cereals
(wheat, barley, rye, oats, etc.), and wherever the culture is wonderful, but less careful
than in England, the lodges are numerous; is given to a people at every step, the horizon is almost unlimited
field inflections are less pronounced, and there are many ancient castles and palaces of modern
field as busy and happy during the summer and fall.

Angouleme (the homeland of the great novelist Ravaillac and Balzac) is the capital of the department
The Charente (Charente), which has about 390.000 inhabitants. Its territory is remarkably mountain,
reaching up to him, to the east, the spurs of the mountains of Auvergne, which separate the
Loire valley of the Garonne and give rise to the valleys of the Dordogne intermediaries and the
Charente. This river is something substantial and fed a regular shipping and trade remarkable.
It is in this department, whose wine production and manufacturing is very important that Cognac
is the people whose spirits are so pleasing to the friends of the strong libations and bear responsibility
for many escapades.

The population of barely Angouleme about 18.000 inhabitants. The city, which is ancient and
curious, takes on a rough mountain between large boulders and dominating severe Charente river
banks and they have there Touvre confluence. They are very famous
its paper mills. I can swear they were not married up to June '73.'

'You'll have to swear it,' said the doctor, 'and that with as little delay as possible.'

All this took place towards the end of August, about five weeks after the trial, and a day
or two subsequent to the interview between Bagwax and the Attorney-General. Bagwax was now
vehemently prosecuting his inquiries as to that other idea which had struck him, and was at
this very moment glowing with the anticipation of success, and at the same time broken-hearted
with the conviction that he never would see the pleasant things of New South Wales.

On the next morning, under the auspices of his father, Dick Shand wrote the following letter
to Mr. Seely, the attorney.

    'POLLINGTON, 30th August, 187-.

    Sir,--I think it right to tell you that I reached my father's house
    in this town late yesterday evening. I have come direct from one of
    the South Sea Islands via Honolulu and San Francisco, and have not
    yet been in England forty-eight hours. I am an old friend of Mr.
    John Caldigate, and went with him from England to the gold diggings
    in New South Wales. My name will be known to you, as I am now aware
    that it was frequently mentioned in the course of the late trial. It
    will probably seem odd to you that I had never even heard of the
    trial till I reached my father's house last night. I did not know
    that Caldigate had married Miss Bolton, nor that Euphemia Smith had
    claimed him as her husband.

    'I am able and willing to swear that they had not become man and
    wife up to June 1873, and that no one at Ahalala or Nobble conceived
    them to be man and wife. Of course, they had lived together. But
    everybody knew all about it. Some time before June,--early, I should
    say, in that autumn,--there had been a quarrel. I am sure they were
    at daggers drawn with each other all that April and May in respect
    to certain mining shares, as to which Euphemia Smith behaved very
    badly. I don't think it possible that they should ever have come
    together again; but in May '73,--which is the date I have heard
    named,--they certainly were not man and wife.

    'I have thought it right to inform you of this immediately on my
    return, and am, your obedient servant,

    'RICHARD SHAND.'

Mr. Seely, when he received this letter, found it to be his duty to take it at once to Sir
John Joram, up in London. He did not believe Dick Shand. But then he had put no trust in Bagwax,
and had been from the first convinced, in his own mind, that Caldigate had married the woman. The left, which should I follow Angouleme tour (Angoulême),
Poitiers, Tours, Blois and Orleans.

I lacked the time to dwell on each of those cities, uninteresting
moreover, if not his point of historical and monumental. Now that Caldigate was in prison, Mr. Seely thought
that he might as well be left there quietly, trusting to the verdict, trusting to Judge Bramber,
and trusting still more strongly on his own early impressions. This letter from Dick,--whom
he knew to have been a ruined drunkard, a disgrace to his family, and an outcast from society,--was
to his thinking just such a letter as would be got up in such a case, in the futile hope of
securing the succour of a Secretary of State. He was sure that no Secretary of State would
pay the slightest attention to such a letter. But still it would be necessary that he should
show it to Sir John, and as a trip to London was not disagreeable to his professional mind,
he started with it on the very day of its receipt.

'Of course we must have his deposition on oath,' said Sir John.

'You think it will be worth while?'

'Certainly. I am more convinced than ever that there was no marriage. That post-office clerk
has been with me,--Bagwax,--and has altogether convinced me.'

'I didn't think so much of Bagwax, Sir John.'

'I dare say not, Mr. Seely;--an absurdly energetic man,--one of those who destroy by their
over-zeal all the credit which their truth and energy ought to produce. But he has, I think,
convinced me that that letter could not have passed through the Sydney post-office in May '73.'

'If so, Sir John, even that is not much,--towards upsetting a verdict.'

'A good deal, I think, when the characters of the persons are considered. Now comes this man,
whom we all should have believed, had he been present, and tells this story. You had better
get hold of him and bring him to me, Mr. Seely.'

Then Mr. Seely hung up his hat in London for three or four days, and sent to Pollington for
Dick Shand. Dick Shand obeyed the order, and both of them waited together upon Sir John. 'You
have come back at a very critical point of time for your friend,' said the barrister.

