With cheering cries, the pursuers neared the old Martello tower, and a clump of dark forms
vanished quickly into the shrubbery as the three lanterns were flashed full upon the door.
Eric Murray, sword in hand, was the first man at the entrance, as a desperate assailant leaped
from the narrow door and sprang upon him, pistol in hand. There was the snap of a clicking
lock and then the sound of a hollow groan, for the robber's pistol had missed fire, and Captain
Murray ran the wretch through the body with the razor-bladed tulwar!

There was a silence broken only by the trampling of approaching feet, as Red Eric flashed the
light in the face of his fallen foe, for the storm had spent its fury and the stars were gleaming
out at last.

"By God! It's Hawke, himself!" he shrieked. "Alan Hawke, a midnight robber!" But, Harry Hardwicke,
with the two men at his back, had dashed on into the gun-room of the old tower, leaving Murray
with his prostrate foe--empty, not a sign of any human presence.

With one wild cry Hardwicke turned to the door, "Nadine! Nadine!" he yelled, and his voice
sounded unearthly in the night winds.

And then, from over their heads, a cheery hail replied, "All right, on deck! The lady is safe
up here with me. I am Professor Hobbs, the American. Who are you?"

"Friends! friends!" cried Hardwicke. "The house was attacked! Where is the Professor?"

"I reckon they have carried him off!" the nasal voice of the American answered. "If they've
killed him it's a great loss to science, you bet! I'm coming down." And while the gun-room
was soon filled with a motley crowd from Rozel Pier, Professor Alaric Hobbs long legs dropped
dangling down his rope ladder. He gazed, open-mouthed, at the anglicized Prince Djiddin.

"Who are you--friends, also?" now demanded the astonished "Prince Djiddin" of the rescuers.

"We are friends of Simpson!" cried the nearest. "The smugglers bludgeoned him and then threw
him off the cliff, but the banks were soft and wet, and his heavy coat saved him. He sent us
up here to the rescue, for he crawled half a mile on his hands and knees. We've found the old
Professor tied to a tree over there in the bushes. They are bringing him here. Simpson is at
the 'Jersey Arms,' all safe."

"See here, stranger!" demanded the American, still standing amazed, pistol in hand, "I winged
a couple of these damned robbers; they tried their best to get the girl away from me. I'm a
pretty good shot. Now, are you a prince or a fraud? I suspicioned you from the first! If you
are a fraud, then the History of Thibet is all damned rot! I suppose that you were just 'girl
hunting.' The girl's yere sweetheart. I see it all now. Hoodwinked the old man! Who's this
fellow that you've got tied up there, anyway? One of the Johnny-Bull-Jesse-James gang?"

"Why! It's Joe Smith, our friend!" chimed out a dozen friendly voices. Then Harry Hardwicke
stepped up to the shivering wretch who stood gazing on Alan Hawke, now propped up on a doubled-up
coat, and rapidly bleeding to death. "I'll keep your secret, and save you yet, if you will
disclose the whole, and keep mum!" Jack Blunt nodded, and hung his head in shame.

But, on his knees beside the dying man, Eric Murray bent down his head to listen to the final
adieu of the dying wanderer, whose luck had turned at last. "Justine Delande is to have all!
The drafts, and my money, at Granville. Murray, I'll tell you everything now. Ram Lal Singh
murdered old Hugh Johnstone to get the jewels that Johnstone stole. The same ones that this
old scoundrel, Fraser, here, is hiding." The red foam gathered thickly on Hawke's trembling
lips. "Tell Major Hardwicke all! He's a good fellow! The knife that Ram Lal killed old Fraser
with is in my own trunk at Granville, stored in Railroad Bureau. He got in through the window.
I was in the garden, and caught him coming out. I was watching old Johnstone, for fear he would
give me the slip. I didn't tell--I wanted to come over here and get the jewels myself. Hang
old Ram Lal! He's a cowardly murderer! Telegraph to the Viceroy to arrest the jewel seller;
he will break down and confess at once. Make him pay poor Justine Delande all my drafts--Johnstone
gave him that money for me to keep me silent about the stolen crown jewels. Now--now, all grows
dark! Lift me up high--higher!" he gasped. "I played a hard game, but the luck turned--turned
at last! That woman, Berthe Louison was too much--too much for me! Poor Justine! Tell her--tell
her--" His voice grew fainter and fainter.

"Do you know this man, Hawke?" whispered Hardwicke, forcing Jack Blunt's face down to the dying
renegade's glance.

"Never--saw him--before!" gasped Alan Hawke. "Poor Justine, tell her--" and with a sighing
gasp, his jaw dropped, and at their feet, the fool of fortune lay dead, with a last lie on
his lips.

"By God! He was dead game!" muttered Jack Blunt, kneeling there, by the stiffening form of
the wreck of a once brilliant Queen's officer. He dared not lift his craven eyes!

"He had the making of a gallant soldier in him!" cried Hardwicke, as he turned to the American,
and motioned to the rope ladder. "We must not let Miss Johnstone see the body. Some of you
run and get a ladder or some other means to aid her descent. And rouse up the nearest farm
people. Get a carriage and bring the old Professor and maid here!"

While a dozen volunteers darted away to bring a conveyance, the rest hastily covered Hawke's
body with their coats. The gun-room was now lit up, and in five minutes the waylaid carriage
was drawn by hand to the door of the lonely tower. Within it lay the bruised and exhausted
old scholar, bareheaded and ghastly, in the light of the flickering lanterns, while pretty
Mattie Jones, with a shriek of terror, ran to the side of her sweetheart, his arms still bound
with Prince Djiddin's sash. Jack Blunt's "swell mob" assurance stood him in good stead.

"It's all a mistake, my girl," bluntly said the mobs-man, feeling safe now that Alan Hawke's
lips were sealed in death. While the old Professor was revived with copious draughts of "usquebaugh,"
Jack Blunt saw the flash below him, on the darkened seas, of a red light above a white one.
And he heaved a great sigh of relief,

"There goes the Hirondelle now, driving along out to sea with the whole gang," he murmured.
"Now, by God, I am safe if this yellow masquerader only plays the man!" There was a hubbub
of cackling voices, as on the night when the geese saved Rome! Above them, on the barrack room
floor of the Martello tower, Harry Hardwicke was already holding Nadine Johnstone's drooping
head upon his breast, while the lanky American gazed at the strange picture before him. The
girl's arms were clasped around her lover's neck. "Do not leave me--not a moment!" she moaned.
Alaric Hobbs, with quick forethought, tossed his blankets down below, with a significant gesture.

"Darling! You will be mine for life, now!" cried the happy soldier, as he covered her shivering
form with his coat. Alaric Hobbs had promptly descended and hastened the necessary preparations
for departure. "Damn the explanations. Let's get the whole party out of this!" he said to Captain
Murray, and then rejoined Hardwicke.

"Tell me all, quickly!" said Hardwicke. "I am a Queen's officer and shall telegraph to the
Home Guards and send for General Wragge. I must report this by cable to the Indian Government.
There is justice yet to be done!"

"I was taking some private star observations here," whispered Hobbs, bending down at Hardwicke's
warning signal. "Storm bound, I waited for the return of my wagon at dawn. I was aroused from
sleep by the sounds of a struggle below.

"Some one had dragged this young woman screaming and wailing into the tower below. She soon
fainted. I heard the followers tell the leader of the gang that the coachman had just cut the
traces and decamped with the horses. He then bade them gather all the gang waiting in hiding
so as to carry her down to some boat below, and then closing the door, he stood on guard outside.
They were, however, baffled. Some of the scoundrels had taken the alarm and fled, seeing the
lights of the other party moving up from the pier. Were it so the harmony would be most exquisite,
for the instrument is Nature's own. We see how far we are from a realization of natural movement
when we watch carefully and note the muscular discords evident to our eyes at all times. Even
the average ballet dancing, which is supposed to be the perfection of artistic movement, is
merely a series of pirouettes and gymnastic contortions, with the theatrical smile of a pretty woman
to throw the glare of a calcium light over the imperfections and
dazzle us. They tried a pyramid of
men to reach the nine feet. But I waited till they were all good and blown with their exertions
and then, shot a couple of them! You'll find those fellows lingering somewhere in the bushes.
I had stowed the girl safely away in the middle of the pier, over the doorway, between two
pillars. She was game enough. I let them just shoot away a bit. I kept my powder and lead to
kill. I've even now four cartridges left.

"But when you came on the ground, the whole coward gang skedaddled at once, and the brave chap
you killed got his dose for good, for he stood his ground like a man! The girl didn't bother
me. She fainted in good shape when the close fighting began. I was a dead winner from position.
I could have stood them off for hours!"

"You are a hero!" warmly cried Harry Hardwicke.

"Let's all get out of this!" replied Alaric, modestly.

The American offered Hardwicke his cocktail bottle. "Let's get her down. I hear carriage wheels
now. Would you just tell me your real name, now, the name you use when you are not doing your
'character' song and dance." The young officer smiled at the American's rough address.

"Major Harry Hardwicke, Royal Engineers, and, this lady's future husband," confidently remarked
Prince Djiddin.

"Oh, yes," grinned Alaric Hobbs, "the last part I'll take for gospel truth. Well, Major, I'm
glad to know you." And he then, very practically, aided the descent of Miss Nadine Johnstone,
for a dozen stout arms now held up the ponderous old ladder which had been purposely dislodged
by the Coast Guardsmen. Alaric Hobbs surveyed his battle ground.

"If they had only dared to use lights, I might have had a harder fight," chuckled Alaric Hobbs,
as he descended the very last one. "Major," said he huskily, "I've got my things corraled up
there, and the instruments, and so on. Leave me a couple of men, and get your own people back
now to the Folly. I'll 'hold the fort' here, till you bring the proper authorities. Our man
won't run away now. He is 'permanently fixed' for a long repose from 'further anxieties.'"

But fiercely bristling up, old Andrew Fraser now loudly demanded to be allowed the ordering
of all. "This is an outrage," he babbled. "You are a cheat, a fraud, an impostor, in league
with the robbers." So, fiercely addressing Major Hardwicke, he tried to drag away Miss Nadine
Johnstone, at whose feet the stout Mattie Jones was blubbering and wailing.

"Captain Murray," sternly cried Major Hardwicke, "take Miss Nadine and her maid to the Folly.
Leave the two gardeners on guard. Return here as soon as you can, for the Professor and myself.
I will come over with him. Have a horse at once saddled and bring a man to take my dispatches
to General Wragge and for London. Bring me some writing materials. This must be reported at once."

"Go now, dearest Nadine," her lover implored. "I will join you at once. Trust to me, all in
all. I will never leave you again," and then and there, before her astounded guardian, Nadine
Johnstone threw her ams around her lover in a fond embrace. "You will come?"

"At once," cried the Major, as he cried out hastily, "Drive on!"

Old Andrew Fraser writhed in vain in Hardwicke's grasp. "Be quiet, you damned old fool!" pithily
said Alaric Hobbs. "They saved your life for you!"

"You shall never darken my doors," raged Andrew Fraser.

"I will go there to-night, and at once remove my property," coldly answered Hardwicke. "After
that I care not to visit you, save to lead your niece to the altar. But I will have a reckoning
with you! Don't fear!"

"You shall never marry her," the old pedant cried. "You shall answer to me for this whole dastardly
outrage."

"All right," coolly said Hardwicke. "It's man to man, now. I will marry your niece within a
month, and, with your written permission!" And not another single word would the disgusted
Hardwicke utter--while old Fraser clung to Alaric Hobbs, whining in his wrath. In an hour,
a motley cortege slowly left the door of the martello tower. Murray and Hardwicke walking,
armed, beside the carriage, where Mr. Jack Blunt, still bound, was the sullen companion of
the half-crazed Professor Fraser.

To the demands of "Joseph Smith's" friends Hardwicke replied: "He will undoubtedly be released
tomorrow by the proper authorities if there is a mistake."

A smart groom was already half-way to St. Heliers, galloping on with a sealed letter to General
Wragge, the commander of the Channel Island forces. "That will bring Anstruther over at once.
He must act now!" said Hardwicke. "In two days Ram Lal will be in irons at Delhi, and I think
that we will prepare a crushing little surprise for this defiant old fool and miser, Professor
Andrew Fraser." And Red Eric Murray now inwardly rejoiced to see the end of all his masquerading
as the Moonshee. He received a parting salute, also. "You are no gentleman, a vile swindler,
sir," raved old Andrew, as Captain Murray allowed him to descend and enter his own door. The
"History of Thibet" fraud rankled in old Fraser's mind.

But the "ex-Moonshee" only smiled and politely bowed, while "Prince Djiddin" sternly marched
with his prisoner, Jack Blunt, upstairs and then locked the doors of his apartments. It was
an "imperium in imperio."

In the hall, he had turned and faced Andrew Fraser only to say: "I shall await here, sir, the
orders of the civil and military authorities; yes, here, in my own room. The very moment that
they take charge, I shall, however, leave your roof. But not until then! And for your future
safety, I warn you to moderate your ignorant abuse."

There was no sleep in the house until the gray dawn at last straggled through the mists of
night. And the sound of outcry and excited alarm long continued, for Professor Andrew Fraser
and Janet Fairbarn were excitedly wailing over the easily detected work of the burglar, in
the old pedant's study. The aged Scotsman ran up and down the hall, tearing his hair and bemoaning
his lost manuscripts and papers. For, he dared not announce the loss of the stolen crown jewels!

The family coachman had already departed for Rozel Pier, to bring home the wounded Simpson,
while a doctor, summoned by the messenger from St. Heliers, was led by Janet Fairbarn to the
apartments of the heiress. Murray and Hardwicke rejoiced in secret over the recovery of the
key to the whole deadlock--from Delhi to London! The game was now won!

At ten o'clock, a staff officer of General Wragge joined Major Hardwicke and Captain Murray
in their room, while one of the terrible army of twelve policemen of an island populated with
"three thousand cooks" watched over the "Banker's Folly," and another garrisoned the old martello
tower, where Alan Hawke lay alone in the grim majesty of death. The fox-eyed American professor
"invited himself" to breakfast with Professor Andrew Fraser and cheered the broken old man.

"Never mind, we will finish up the 'History of Thibet' together," he cried, "when these two
swashbucklers are gone, and the house will be much quieter when the girl is married off and
out of the way." But old Andrew Fraser refused to be comforted. He sternly forbade all communication
with his ward and bitterly bewailed a further personal loss, which he dared not explain!

"There was a suspicious French fishing-boat lately seen knocking around Rozel," acutely said
Alaric Hobbs. "We also found the bloody trail where they dragged their wounded away down to
the beach. And so they are off on the sea, with your valuable plunder. No one knows the dead
scoundrel up there."

"But we will finish the Thibet history, if I have to go out there myself and get the honest
information." Whereat old Fraser feebly smiled and opened his heart to Alaric Hobbs at once.
When a bustling country magistrate arrived to potter around, Andrew Fraser was astounded to
see the General's aid-de-camp lead out the man whom the two officers had guarded, and send
him off to St. Heliers under a military guard.

"Hold this man only as a suspicious person. There may be some mistake. They say he is known
at Rozel Pier as an honest man," said the aide. "The real robbers seem to have escaped in the
boat. The dying robber did not seem to know this person, who has undoubtedly borne a good character
for a month past at the Jersey Arms as a lodger." It was true, and even the befuddled Simpson,
on his questioning, only could falter that he had been attacked by three unknown footpads. He
fixes his mind on not sleeping, rushes for his watch with feverish intensity if a nap does come,
to gloat over its brevity or duration, and then wonders that each
night brings him no more sleep.

There is nothing more contracting to mind and body than such idol-worship.
 "I am directed by General Wragge to say that he will visit
you, himself, officially, to-morrow, Professor Fraser, and he will have an important governmental
communication for you. Until then, I desire these two gentlemen to be allowed to remain in
your house. They will remove all their luggage this evening." And then, old Fraser, with a
presage of coming trouble, shivered in a sullen silence. Conscience smote him, sorely.

"The lost jewels!" In fact, a handsomely appointed carriage and a van, in the afternoon, removed
all of the effects of the two pseudo "orientals," who, half an hour after the carriage had
arrived, appeared in their respective undress uniforms of the Royal Engineers and the Eighth
Lancers, to the dismay of old Fraser--now affrighted at his dangerous position. There was gloom
in the house now, for Miss Nadine Johnstone flatly refused to even see her guardian a single
moment! And Simpson, alone, sat in conclave with Major Hardwicke, who had learned privately
of the secret removal of Alan Hawke's body to St. Heliers. Messengers, in uniform, coming and
going rapidly, were hourly admitted to Major Hardwicke's presence, and already a pale-faced
woman was on her way from Geneva to rejoin Madame Alixe Delavigne, at the old chateau mansion
where Captain Murray only awaited the arrival of Anstruther now ready to open his siege batteries
on the man who had covered up his brother's crime. There was not a word to be gleaned from
the authorities, and St. Heliers was simply convulsed in a useless fever of curiosity. Even
Frank Hatton, representing the London press, was muzzled. Not a soul was, as yet, permitted
to approach the old martello tower, where Alan Hawke had faced the Moonshee, "man to man."
A squad of coast guardsmen sternly picketed the vicinity of Rozel Head. And a great smuggling
raid was the only accepted explanation to the public.

