From a heart overflowing with bitterness and impotent protest against the condition to which
his own act had reduced him, Haldane was learning to indulge in such bitter soliloquy with
increasing frequency. It is ever the tendency of those who find themselves at odds with the
world, and in conflict with the established order of things, to inveigh with communistic extravagance
against the conservatism and wary prudence which they themselves would have maintained had
all remained well with them. The Haldane who had meditated "gloomy grandeur" would not have
looked at the poor, besmirched Haldane who had just accepted what the world would regard as
charity. The only reason why the proud, aristocratic youth could tolerate and make excuse for
the disreputable character who was glad to eat the dinner given by Jeremiah Growther, was that
this same ill-conditioned fellow was himself. Thus every bitter thing which he said against
society was virtually self-condemnation. And yet his course was most natural, for men almost
invariably forget that their views change with their fortunes. Thousands will at once form
a positive opinion of a subject from its aspect seen at their standpoint, where one will walk
around and scan it on all sides.

Either to spite himself, or to show his confidence in one whom others regarded as utterly unworthy
of trust, Mr. Growther remained away sufficiently long for Haldane to have made up a bundle
of all the valuables in the house, and have escaped. The young man soon discovered that there
were valuables, but anything like vulgar theft never entered his mind. That people should believe
him capable of acting the part of a common thief was one of the strange things in his present
experience which he could not understand.

Finally, to the immense relief of the honest and conservative dog, that had growled himself
hoarse, Haldane gave the room its finishing touches, and betook himself to the woodpile again.
The cat watched his departure with philosophic composure. Like many fair ladies, she had thought
chiefly of herself during the interview with the stranger, from whom she had managed to secure
a little agreeable attention without giving anything in return; and, now that it was over,
she complacently purred herself to sleep, with nothing to regret.

"Hullo! you're here yet, eh!" said Mr. Growther, entering the gate.

"Can you name any good reason why I should not be here?" asked Haldane, somewhat nettled.

"No, but I could plenty of bad reasons."

"Keep them to yourself then," said the young man, sullenly resuming his work.

"You talk as if you was an honest man," growled the old gentleman, hobbling into the house.

Sitting down in his stout oak chair to rest himself, he stared in silence for a time at the
changes that Haldane had wrought. At last he commenced:

"Now, Jeremiah Growther, I hope you can see that you are a perfect pig! I hope you can see
that dirt and confusion are your nateral elements; and you had to live like a pig till a boy
just out of jail came to show you what it was to live like a decent human. But you've been
showed before, and you'll get things mixed up to-morrow. A-a-h!

"Where's that young fellow goin' to sleep to-night? That's none o' your business. Yes, 'tis
my business, too. I'm always mighty careful to know where I'm goin' to sleep, and if I don't
sleep well my cat and dog hear from me the next day. You could be mighty comfortable tonight
in your good bed with this young chap sittin' on a curb-stun in the rain; but I be hanged if
you shall be. It's beginnin' to rain now--it's goin' to be a mean night--mean as yourself--a
cold, oncomfortable drizzle; just such a night as makes these poor homeless devils feel that
since they are half under water they might as well go down to the river and get under altogether.
P'raps they do it sometimes in the hope of finding a warm, dry place somewhere. Dreadful suddint
change for 'em, though! And it's we respectable, comfortable people that's to blame for these
suddint changes half the time.

"You know that heady young chap out there will go to the bad if somebody don't pull him up.
You know that it would be mean as dirt to let him go wanderin' off to-night with only fifty
cents in his pocket, tryin' to find some place to put his head in out of the storm; and yet
you want to git out of doin' anything more for him. You're thinkin' how much more comfortable
it will be to sit dozin' in your chair, and not have any stranger botherin' round. But I'll
head you off agin in spite of your cussed, mean, stingy, selfish, old, shrivelled-up soul,
that would like to take its ease even though the hull world was a-groanin' outside the door.
A-a-h!"

Having made it clear to the perverse Jeremiah Growther--against whom he seemed to hold such
an inveterate spite--what he must do, he arose and called to Haldane:

"What are you doin' out there in the rain?"

"I'll be through in a few minutes."

"I don't want the rest done till mornin'."

"It will pay neither of us for me to come back here to do what's left."

"It may pay you, and as to its payin' me, that's my business."

"Not altogether--I wish to do my work on business principles; I haven't got down to charity yet."

"Well, have your own way, then; I s'pose other folks have a right to have it as well as myself,
sometimes. Come in soon as you are through."

By the time Haldaue finished his task the clouds had settled heavily all around the horizon,
hastening forward an early and gloomy twilight, and the rain was beginning to fall steadily.
His mood comported with the aspect of sky and earth, and weariness, the fast ally of despondency,
aided in giving a leaden hue to the future and a leaden weight, to his thoughts. The prospect
of trudging a mile or more through the drenching rain to his previous squalid resting-place
at No. 13, whose only attraction consisted in the fact that no questions were asked, was so
depressing that he decided to ask Mr. Growther for permission to sleep in the corner of his
woodshed.

"Come in," shouted Mr. Growther, in response to his knock at the door.

"I'm through," said Haldane laconically.

"Well, I ain't," replied Mr. Growther; "you wouldn't mind taking that cheer till I am, would you?"

Haldane found the cushioned armchair and the genial fire exceedingly to his taste, and he felt
that in such comfortable quarters he could endure hearing the old man berate himself or any
one else for an hour or more.

"Where are you goin' to sleep to-night?" asked his quaint-visaged host.

"That is a problem I had been considering myself," answered Haldane, dubiously. "I had about
concluded that, rather than walk back through the rain to the wretched place at which I slept
last night, I would ask for the privilege of sleeping in your wood-shed. It wouldn't be much
worse than the other place, or any place in which I could find lodging if I were known. Since
I did not steal your silver I suppose you can trust me with your wood."

"Yet they say your folks is rich."

"Yes, I can go to as elegant a house as there is in this city."

"Why in thunder don't you go there, then?"

"Because I would rather be in your wood-shed and other places like it for the present."

"I can't understand that."

"Perhaps not, but there are worse things than sleeping hard and cold. There are people who
suffer more through their minds than their bodies. I am not going back among my former acquaintances
till I can go as a gentleman."

The old man looked at him approvingly a moment, and then said sententiously:

"Well, you may be a bad cuss, but you ain't a mean one."

Haldane laughed outright. "Mr. Growther," said he, "you do me honor. I foresee you will trust
me with your wood-pile to-night."

"No I won't nuther. You might not take my wood, but you would take cold, and then I'd have
to nuss you and pay doctor's bills, and bother with you a week or more. I might even have your
funeral on my hands. You needn't think you're goin' to get me into all this trouble, fur I'm
one that hates trouble, unless it's fur myself; and, if I do say it, it's askin' a little too
much of me, almost a stranger, to 'tend to your funeral. I don't like funerals--never did--and
I won't have nothin' to do with yours. There's a room right upstairs here, over the kitchen,
where you can sleep without wakin' up the hull neighborhood a coughin' before mornin'. Now
don't say nothin' more about it. I'm thinkin' of myself plaguy sight more'n I am of you. If
I could let you go to the dogs without worryin' about it, I'd do it quick enough; but I've
got a miserable, sneakin' old conscience that won't stand right up and make me do right, like
a man; but when I want to do some thin' mean it begins a gnawin' and a gnawin' at me till I
have to do what I oughter for the sate of a little peace and comfort. A-a-h!"

"Your uncomfortable conscience seems bent on making me very comfortable; and yet I pledge you
my word that I will stay only on one condition, and that is, that you let me get supper and
breakfast for you, and also read the paper aloud this evening. I can see that you are tired
and lame from your walk. Will you agree?"

"Can't very well help myself. These easterly storms allers brings the rheumatiz into my legs.
About all they are good fur now is to have the rheumatiz in 'em. So set plates for two, and
fire ahead."

Haldane entered into his tasks with almost boyish zest. "I've camped out in the woods, and
am considerable of a cook," said he. "You shall have some toast browned to a turn, to soak
in your tea, and then you shall have some more with hot cream poured over it. I'll shave the
smoked beef so thin that you can see to read through it."

"Umph! I can't see after dark any more than an old hen."

"How did you expect to read the paper then?" asked Haldane, without pausing in his labors.

"I only read the headin's. I might as well make up the rest as the editors, fur then I can
make it up to suit me. It's all made up half the time, you know."

"Well, you shall hear the editors' yarns to-night then, by way of variety."

The old man watched the eager young fellow as he bustled from the cupboard to the table, and
from the store-closet to the fireplace, with a kindly twinkle in his small eyes, from which
the deep wrinkles ran in all directions and in strange complexity. There could scarcely be
a greater contrast than that between the headstrong and stalwart youth and the withered and
eccentric hermit; but it would seem that mutual kindness is a common ground on which all the
world can meet and add somewhat to each other's welfare.

The sound hard wood which Haldane had just sawn into billets blazed cheerily on the hearth,
filling the quaint old kitchen with weird and flickering lights and shades. Mr. Growther was
projected against the opposite wall in the aspect of a benevolent giant, and perhaps the large,
kindly, but unsubstantial shadow was a truer type of the man than the shrivelled anatomy with
which the town was familiar. The conservative dog, no longer disquieted by doubts and fears,
sat up and blinked approvingly at the preparation for supper. The politic cat, now satisfied
that any attentions to the stranger would not compromise her, and might lead to another delicate
morsel, fawned against his legs, and purred as affectionately as if she had known him all her
life and would not scratch him instantly if he did anything displeasing to her.

Take it altogether, it was a domestic scene which would have done Mrs. Arnot's heart good to
have witnessed; but poor Mrs. Haldane would have sighed over it as so utterly unconventional
as to be another proof of her son's unnatural tastes. In her estimation he should spend social
evenings only in aristocratic parlors; and she mourned over the fact that from henceforth he
was excluded from these privileged places of his birthright, with a grief only less poignant
than her sorrow over what seemed to her a cognate truth, that his course and character also
excluded him from heaven.

CHAPTER XXIV

HOW PUBLIC OPINION IS OFTEN MADE

"I don't s'pose there's any use of two such reprobates as us thinkin' about sayin' grace,"
said Mr. Growther, taking his place at the head of the table; "and yet, as I said, I allers
have a sneakin' wish jest to go through the form; so we'll all begin in the same way--cat and
dog and God's rational critters. Howsomever, they don't know no better, and so their consciences
is clear. I'll own up this toast is good, if I am eatin' it like a heathen. If you can't find
anything else to do, you can take to cookin' for a livin'."

"No one in town, save yourself, would trust me in their kitchen."

"Well, it does seem as if a man had better lose everything rather than his character," said
Mr. Growther thoughtfully.

"Then it seems a pity a man can lose it so cursed easily," added Haldane bitterly, "for, having
lost it, all the respectable and well-to-do would rather one should go to the devil a thousand
times than give him a chance to win it back again."

"You put it rather strong--rather strong," said the old man, shaking his head; "for some reason
or other I am not as mad at myself and everything and everybody to-night as usual, and I can
see things clearer. Be honest now. A month ago you belonged to the rich, high-flyin' class.
How much then would you have had to do with a young fellow of whom you knew only four things--that
he gambled, got drunk, 'bezzled a thousand dollars, and had been in jail? That's all most people
in town know about you."

Haldane laid down his knife and fork and fairly groaned.

"I know the plain truth is tough to hear and think about, and I'm an old brute to spile your
supper by bringing it up. I hope you won't think I'm trying to save some victuals by doin'
it. And yet it's the truth, and you've got to face it. But face it to-morrow--face it to-morrow;
have a comfortable time to-night."

"Your statement of the case is perfectly bald," said Haldane, with a troubled brow; "there
are explanatory and excusing circumstances."

"Yes, no doubt; but the world don't take much account of them. When one gits into a scrape,
about the only question asked is, What did he do? And they all jump to the conclusion that
if he did it once he'll do it agin. Lookin' into the circumstances takes time and trouble,
and it isn't human nature to bother much about other people."

"What chance is there, then, for such as I am?"

The old man hitched uneasily on his chair, but at last, with his characteristic bluntness said,
"Hanged if I know! They say that them that gits down doesn't very often git up again. Yet I
know they do sometimes."

"What would you do if you were me?"

"Hanged if I know that either! Sit down and cuss myself to all eternity, like enough. I feel
like doin' it sometimes as it is. A-a-h!"

"I think I know a way out of the slough," said Haldane more composedly--his thoughts recurring
to his literary hopes--"and if I do, you will not be sorry."

"Of course I won't be sorry. A man allers hates one who holds a mortgage against him which
is sure to be foreclosed. That's the way the devil's got me, and I hate him about as bad as
I do myself, and spite him every chance I git. Of course, I'll be glad to see you git out of
his clutches; but he's got his claws in you deep, and he holds on to a feller as if he'd pull
him in two before he'll let go."

"Mr. Growther, I don't want to get into a quarrel with you, for I have found that you are very
touchy on a certain point; but I cannot help hinting that you are destined to meet a great
disappointment when through with your earthly worry. I wish my chances were as good as yours."

"Now you are beginnin' to talk foolishly. I shall never be rid of myself, and so will never
be rid of my worry."

"Well, well, we won't discuss the question; it's too deep for us both; but in my judgment it
will be a great piece of injustice if you ever find a warmer place than your own hearthstone."

"That's mighty hot, sometimes, boy; and, besides, your judgment hasn't led you very straight
so far," said the old man testily. "But don't talk of such things. I don't want to come to
'em till I have to."

"Suppose I should become rich and famous, Mr. Growther," said Haldane, changing the subject;
"would you let me take a meal with you then?"

"That depends. If you put on any airs I wouldn't."

"Good for you!"

"Oh, I'd want to make much of you, and tell how I helped you when you was down, and so git
all the reflected glory I could out of you. I've learned how my sneakin' old speret pints every
time; but I'll head it off, and drive it back as I would a fox into its hole."

In spite of some rather harrowing and gloomy thoughts on the part of two of them, the four
inmates of the cottage made a very comfortable supper; for Mr. Growther always insisted that
since his cat and dog could "stand him," they should fare as well as he did.

Having cleared the table, Haldane lighted a candle--kerosene lamps were an abomination that
Mr. Growther Would not abide--and began reading aloud the "Evening Spy." The old gentleman
half listened and half dozed, pricking up his ears at some tale of trouble or crime, and almost
snoring through politics and finance. At last he was half startled out of his chair by a loud,
wrathful oath from Haldane.

"Look here, young man," he said; "the devil isn't so far off from either of us that you need
shout for him."

"True, indeed! he isn't far off, and he has everything his own way in this world. Listen to
this"--and he read with sharp, bitter emphasis the following editorial paragraph, headed "Unnatural
Depravity":

"Being ever inclined to view charitably the faults and failings of others, and to make allowance
for the natural giddiness of youth, we gave a rather lenient estimate, not of the crime committed
by Mr. Arnot's clerk, Egbert Haldane, but of the young man himself. It would seem that our
disposition to be kindly led us into error, for we learn from our most respectable German contemporary,
published in this city, that this same unscrupulous young fraud has been guilty of the meanness
of taking advantage of a poor foreigner's ignorance of our language. Having found it impossible
to obtain lodgings among those posted in the current news of the day, and thus to impose on
any one to whom he was known, he succeeded in obtaining board of a respectable German, and
ran up as large a bill as possible at the bar, of course. When the landlord of the hotel and
restaurant at last asked for a settlement, this young scapegrace had the insolence to insist
that he had paid every cent of his bill, though he had not a scrap of paper or proof to support
his assertion. Finding that this game of bluster would not succeed, and that his justly incensed
host was about to ask for his arrest, he speedily came down from his high and virtuous mood,
and compromised by pretending to offer all the money he had.

"This was undoubtedly a mere pretence, for he had worn a valuable watch in the morning, and
had parted with it during the day. Though the sum he apparently had upon his person was scarcely
half payment, the kind-hearted German took him at his word, and also left him seventy-five
cents to procure lodgings elsewhere. In what role of crime he will next appear it is hard to
guess; but it seems a pity that Mr. Arnot did not give him the full benefit of the law, for
thus the community would have been rid, for a time at least, of one who can serve his day and
generation better at breaking stone under the direction of the State than by any methods of
his own choosing. He is one of those phenomenal cases of unnatural depravity; for, as far as
we can learn, he comes from a home of wealth, refinement, and even Christian culture. We warn
our fellow-citizens against him."

"A-a-a-h!" ejaculated Mr. Growther, in prolonged and painful utterance, as if one of his teeth
had just been drawn. "Now that is tough! I don't wonder you think Satan had a finger in that
pie. Didn't I tell you the editors made up half that's in the papers? I don't know what started
this story. There's generally a little beginning, like the seed of a big flauntin' weed; but
I don't believe you did so mean a thing. In fact, I don't think I'm quite mean enough to have
done it myself."

"You, and perhaps one other person, will be the only ones in town, then, who will not believe
it against me. I know I've acted wrong and like a fool; but what chance has a fellow when he
gets credit for evil only, and a hundred-fold more evil than is in him? Curse it all! since
every one insists that I have gone wholly over to the devil, I might as well go."

"That's it, that's it! we're all right at his elbow, a-helpin' him along. But how did this
story start? The scribbler in the German paper couldn't have spun it, like a spider, hully
out of his own in'ards."

Haldane told him the whole story, sketching the "kind-hearted German" in his true colors.

At its conclusion Mr. Growther drew a long, meditative breath, and remarked sententiously,
"Well, I've allers heard that 'sperience was an awfully dear school; but we do learn in it.
I'll bet my head you will never pay another dollar without takin' a receipt."

"What chance will I ever have to make another dollar? They have raised a mad-dog cry against
me, and I shall be treated as if I were a dog."

"Why don't you go home, then?"

"I'll go to the bottom of the river first."

"That would suit the devil, the crabs, and the eels," remarked Mr. Growther.

"Faugh! crabs and eels!" exclaimed Haldane with a shudder of disgust.

"That's all you'd find at the bottom of the river, except mud," responded Mr. Growther, effectually
quenching all tragic and suicidal ideas by his prosaic statement of the facts. "Young man,"
he continued, tottering to his feet, "I s'pose you realize that you are in a pretty bad fix.
I ain't much of a mother at comfortin'. When I feel most sorry for any one I'm most crabbed.
It's one of my mean ways. If there's many screws loose in you, you will go under. If you are
rash, or cowardly, or weak--that is, ready to give up-like--you will make a final mess of your
life; but if you fight your way up you'll be a good deal of a man. Seems to me if I was as
young and strong as you be, I'd pitch in. I'd spite myself; I'd spite the devil; I'd beat the
world; I'd just grit my teeth, and go fur myself and everything else that stood in my way,
and I'd whip 'em all out, or I'd die a-fightin'. But I've got so old and rheumatic that all
I can do is cuss. A-a-h!"

"I will take your advice--I will fight it out," exclaimed the excitable youth with an oath.
Between indignation and desperation he was thoroughly aroused. He already cherished only revenge
toward the world, and he was catching the old man's vindictive spirit toward himself.

Mr. Growther seemed almost as deeply incensed as his guest at the gross injustice of the paragraph,
which, nevertheless, would be widely copied, and create public opinion, and so double the difficulties
in the young man's way; and he kept up as steady a grumble and growl as had his sorely disquieted
dog in the afternoon. But Haldane lowered at the fire for a long time in silence.

"Well," concluded the quaint old cynic, "matters can't be mended by swearin' at 'em, is advice
I often give myself, but never take. I s'pose it's bed-time. To-morrow we will take another
squint at your ugly fortunes, and see which side pints toward daylight. Would you mind readin'
a chapter in the Bible first?"

"What have I to do with the Bible?"

"Well, the Bible has a good deal to say about you and most other people."

"Like those who pretend to believe it, it has nothing good to say about me. I've had about
all the hard names I can stand for one night."

"Read where it hits some other folks, then."

"Oh, I will read anywhere you like. It's a pity if I can't do that much for perhaps the only
one now left in the world who would show me a kindness."

"That's a good fellow. There's one chapter I'd like to hear to-night. The words come out so
strong and hearty-like that they generally express just my feelin's. Find the twenty-third
chapter of Matthew, and read where it says, 'Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites.'"

Haldane read the chapter with much zest, crediting all its denunciation to others, in accordance
with a very general fashion. When he came to the words, "Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers,"
the old man fairly rubbed his hands together in his satisfaction, exclaiming:

"That's it! that's genuine! that's telling us sleek, comfortable sinners the truth without
mincin'! No smooth, deludin' lies in that chapter. That's the way to talk to people who don't
want their right hand to know what cussedness their left hand is up to. Now, Jeremiah Growther,
the next time you want to do a mean thing that you wouldn't have all the town know, just remember
what a wrigglin' snake in the grass you are."

With this personal exhortation Mr. Growther brought the evening to a close, and, having directed
Haldane to his comfortable quarters, hobbled and mumbled off to an adjoining room, and retired
for the night. The dying fire revealed for a time the slumbering cat and dog, but gradually
the quaint old kitchen faded into a blank of darkness.

CHAPTER XXV

A PAPER PONIARD

Throughout an early breakfast Mr. Growther appeared to be revolving some subject in his mind,
and his question, at last, was only seemingly abrupt, for it came at the end of quite a long
mental altercation, in which, of course, he took sides against himself.

"I say, young man, do you think you could stand me?"

"What do you mean?" asked Haldane.

"Well, before you say no, you ought to realize all the bearin's of the case. The town is down
on you. Respectable people won't have nothin' to do with you, any more than they would walk
arm in arm with the charcoal-man in their Sunday toggery. I aren't respectable, so you can't
blacken me. I've showed you I'm not afraid to trust you. You can't sleep in the streets, you
can't eat pavin'-stuns and mud, and you won't go home. This brings me to the question again:
Can you stand me? I warn you I'm an awful oncomfortable customer to live with; I won't take
any mean advantage of you in this respect, and, what's more, I don't s'pose I'll behave any
better for your sake or anybody else's. I'm all finished and cooled off, like an old iron casting,
and can't be bent or made over in any other shape. You're crooked enough, the Lord knows; but
you're kind o' limber yet in your moral j'nts, and you may git yourself in decent shape if
you have a chance. I've taken a notion to give you a chance. The only question is, Can you
stand me?"

"It would be strange if I could not stand the only man in Hillaton who has shown a human and
friendly interest in me. But the thing I can't stand is taking charity."

"Who's asked you to take charity?"

"What else would it be--my living here on you?"

"I can open a boardin'-house if I want to, can't I? I have a right to lend my own money, I
s'pose. You can open a ledger account with me to a penny. What's more, I'll give you a receipt
every time," added the old man, with a twinkle in his eye; "you don't catch me gettin' into
the papers as 'kind-hearted' Mr. Growther."

"Mr. Growther, I can scarcely understand your kindness to me, for I have no claim on you whatever.
As much as I would like to accept your offer, I scarcely feel it right to do so. I will bring
discredit to you with certainty, and my chances of repaying you seem very doubtful now."

"Now, look here, young man, I've got to take my choice 'twixt two evils. On one side is you.
I don't want you botherin' round, seein' my mean ways. For the sake of decency I'll have to
try to hold in a little before you, while before my cat and dog I can let out as I please;
so I'd rather live alone. But the tother side is a plaguy sight worse. If I should let you
go a-wanderin' off you don't know where, the same as if I should start my dog off with a kick,
knowin' that every one else in town would add a kick or fire a stun, I couldn't sleep nights
or enjoy my vittels. I'd feel so mean that I should jest set and cuss myself from mornin' till
night. Look here, now; I couldn't stan' it," concluded Mr. Growther, overcome by the picture
of his own wretchedness. "Let's have no more words. Come back every night till you can do better.
Open an account with me. Charge what you please for board and lodgin', and pay all back with
lawful interest, if it'll make you sleep better." And so it was finally arranged.

Haldane started out into the sun-lighted streets of the city as a man might sally forth in
an enemy's country, fearing the danger that lurked on every side, and feeling that his best
hope was that he might be unnoted and unknown. He knew that the glance of recognition would
also be a glance of aversion and scorn, and, to his nature, any manifestation of contempt was
worse than a blow. He now clung to his literary ventures as the one rope by which he could
draw himself out of the depths into which he had fallen, and felt sure that he must hear from
some of his manuscripts within a day or two. He went to the post-office in a tremor of anxiety
only to hear the usual response, "Nothing for E. H."

With heavy steps and a sinking heart he then set out in his search for something to do, and
after walking weary miles he found only a small bit of work, for which he received but small
compensation. He returned despondently in the evening to his refuge at Mr. Growther's cottage,
and his quaint good Samaritan showed his sympathy by maintaining a perpetual growl at himself
and the "disjinted world" in general. But Haldane lowered at the fire and said little.

Several successive days brought disappointment, discouragement, and even worse. The slanderous
paragraph concerning his relations with Mr. Shrumpf was copied by the Morning Courier, with
even fuller and severer comment. Occasionally upon the street and in his efforts to procure
employment, he was recognized, and aversion, scorn, or rough dismissal followed instantly.

For a time he honestly tried to obtain the means of livelihood, but this became more and more
difficult. People of whom he asked employment naturally inquired his name, and he was fairly
learning to hate it from witnessing the malign changes in aspect and manner which its utterance
invariably produced. The public had been generally warned against him, and to the natural distrust
inspired by his first crime was added a virtuous indignation at the supposed low trickery in
his dealing with the magnanimous Mr. Shrumpf, "the poor but kind-hearted German." Occasionally,
that he might secure a day's work in full or in part, he was led to suppress his name and give
an alias.

He felt as if he had been caught in a swift black torrent that was sweeping him down in spite
of all that he could do; he also felt that the black tide would eventually plunge him into
an abyss into which he dared not look. He struggled hard to regain a footing, and clutched
almost desperately at everything that might impede or stay his swift descent; but seemingly
in vain.

His mental distress was such that he was unable to write, even with the aid of stimulants;
and he also felt that it was useless to attempt anything further until he heard from the manuscripts
already in editorial hands. But the ominous silence in regard to them remained unbroken, As
a result, he began to give way to moods of the deepest gloom and despondency, which alternated
with wild and reckless impulses.

He was growing intensely bitter toward himself and all mankind. Even the image of his kind
friend, Mrs. Arnot, began to merge itself into merely that of the wife of the man who had dealt
him a blow from which he began to fear he would never recover. He was too morbid to be just
to any one, even himself, and he felt that she had deserted and turned against him also, forgetting
that he had given her no clew to his present place of abode, and had sent a message indicating
that he would regard any effort to discover him as officious and intrusive. He quite honestly
believed that by this time she had come to share in the general contempt and hostility which
is ever cherished toward those whom society regards as not only depraved and vile, but also
dangerous to its peace. It seemed as if both she and Laura had receded from him to an immeasurable
distance, and he could not think of either without almost gnashing his teeth in rage at himself,
and at what he regarded as his perverse and cruel fate. At times he would vainly endeavor to
banish their images from his mind, but more often would indulge in wild and impossible visions
of coming back to them in a dazzling halo of literary glory, and of overwhelming them with
humiliation that they were so slow to recognize the genius which smouldered for weeks under
their very eyes.

But his dreams were in truth "baseless fabrics" for at last there came a letter addressed to
"E. H.," with the name of a popular literary paper printed upon it. He clutched it with a hand
that shook in his eagerness, and walked half a mile before finding a nook sufficiently secluded
in which to open the fateful missive. There were moments as he hastened through the streets
when the crumpled letter was like a live coal in his hand; again it seemed throbbing with life,
and he held it tighter, as though it might escape. With a chill at heart he also admitted that
this bit of paper might be a poniard that would stab his hope and so destroy him.

He eventually entered a half-completed dwelling, which some one had commenced to build but
was not able to finish.

It was a wretched, prosaic place, that apparently had lost its value even to the owner, and
had become to the public at large only an unsightly blot upon the street. There was no danger
of his being disturbed here, for the walls were not sufficiently advanced to have ears, and
even a modern ghost would scorn to haunt a place whose stains were not those of age, and whose
crumbling ruins resulted only from superficial and half-finished work. Indeed, the prematurely
old and abortive house had its best counterpart in the young man himself, who stole into one
of its small, unplastered rooms with many a wary glance, as though it were a treasure-vault
which he was bent on plundering.

Feeling at last secure from observation, he tremblingly opened the letter, which he hoped contained
the first instalment of wealth and fame. It was, indeed, from the editor of the periodical,
and, remembering the avalanche of poetry and prose from beneath which this unfortunate class
must daily struggle into life and being, it was unusually kind and full; but to Haldane it
was cruel as death--a Spartan short-sword, only long enough to pierce his heart. It was to
the following effect:

"E. H.--DEAR SIR: It would be easier to throw your communication into the waste-basket than
thus to reply; and such, I may add, is the usual fate of productions like yours. But something
in your letter accompanying the MSS. caught my attention, and induced me to give you a little
good advice, which I fear you will not take, however. You are evidently a young and inexperienced
man, and I gather from your letter that you are in trouble of some nature, and, also, that
you are building hopes, if not actually depending, upon the crude labors of your pen. Let me
tell you frankly at once that literature is not your forte. It you have sent literary work
to other parties like that inclosed to me you will never hear from it again. In the first place,
you do not write correctly; in the second, you have nothing to say. We cannot afford to print
words merely--much less pay for them. What is worse, many of your sentences are so unnatural
and turgid as to suggest that you sought in stimulants a remedy for paucity of ideas. Take
friendly advice. Attempt something that you are capable of doing, and build your hopes on that.
Any honest work--even sawing wood--well done, is better than childish efforts to perform what,
to us, is impossible. Before you can do anything in the literary world it is evident that years
of culture and careful reading would be necessary. But, as I have before said, your talents
do not seem to be in this direction. Life is too precious to be wasted in vain endeavor; and
that reminds me that I have spent several moments, and from the kindliest motives, in stating
to you facts which you may regard as insults. But were the circumstances the same I would give
my own son the same advice. Do not be discouraged; there is plenty of other work equally good
and useful as that for which you seem unfitted. Faithfully yours, ---- ----"

CHAPTER XXVI

A SORRY KNIGHT

The writer has known men to receive mortal wounds in battle, of which, at the moment, they
were scarcely conscious. The mind, in times of grand excitement, has often risen so far superior
to the material body that only by trickling blood or faintness have persons become aware of
their injuries. But "a wounded spirit, who can bear?" and when did hope, self-love, or pride,
ever receive home-thrusts unconsciously?

The well-meaning letter, written by the kindly editor, and full of wholesome advice, cut like
a surgeon's knife in some desperate case when it is a question whether the patient can endure
the heroic treatment necessary. Haldane's stilted and unnatural tales had been projected into
being by such fiery and violent means that they might almost be termed volcanic in their origin;
but the fused mass which was the result, resembled scoria or cinders rather than fine metal
shaped into artistic forms. Although his manuscripts could have been sold in the world's market
only by the pound, he had believed, or, at least, strongly hoped otherwise, like so many others,
who, with beating hearts, have sent the children of their brains out to seek their fortunes
with no better results.

The unbroken and ominous silence of the returned manuscript is a severe disappointment even
to those who from safe and happy homes have sought to gain the public ear, and whose impelling
motive toward literature is scarcely more than an impulse of vanity. But to Haldane the letter,
which in giving the editorial estimate of one of his stories revealed the fate of all the others,
brought far more than a mere disappointment. It brought despair and the recklessness and demoralization
which inevitably follow. The public regarded him as a depraved, commonplace vagabond, eminent
only in his capacity for evil and meanness, and he now inclined strongly to the same view of
himself. True self-respect he had never possessed, and his best substitute, pride, at last
gave way. He felt that he was defeated for life, and the best that life could now offer was
a brief career of sensual pleasure. Mrs. Arnot and Laura Romeyn were so far removed from him
as the stars; it was torment to think of them, and he would blot out their memory and the memory
of all that he had hoped for, with wine and excitement. It seemed to him that the world said
to him with united voice, "Go to the devil," and then made it impossible for him to do otherwise.

Since he was defeated--since all his proud assurances to his mother that he would, alone and
unaided, regain his lost good name and position in society, had proved but empty boasts--he
would no longer hide the fact from her, not in the hope of being received at home as a repentant
prodigal (even the thought of such a course was unendurable), but with the purpose of obtaining
from her the means of entering upon a life of vicious pleasure.

The young man's father--impelled both by his strong attachment for his wife, and also by the
prudent forethought with which men seek to protect and provide for those they love, long after
they have passed away from earthly life--had left his property wholly in trust to his wife,
associating with her one or two other chosen counsellors. As long as she lived and remained
unmarried she controlled it, the husband trusting to her affection for her children to make
suitable provision for them. He had seen with prophetic anxiety the mother's fond indulgence
of their only son, and the practical man dreaded the consequences. He therefore communicated
to her verbally, and also embodied in his will, his wish that his son should have no control
over the principal of such portion of the estate as would eventually fall to him until he had
established a character that secured the confidence of all good men, and satisfied the judgment
of the cautious co-executors. The provisions of the will still further required that, should
the young man prove erratic and vicious, his income should be limited in such ways as would,
as far as possible, curb excess.

Haldane knew all this, and in the days of his confidence in himself and his brilliant future
had often smiled at these "absurd restrictions." The idea that there would ever be any reason
for their enforcement was preposterous, and the thought of his fond, weak mother refusing anything
that he demanded, was still further out of the range of possibility.

The wretched youth now sank into a far lower depth than he had ever yet reached. He deliberately
resolved to take advantage of that mother's weakness, and for the basest ends. While under
the influence of hope and pride, he had resolved to receive no assistance even from her, so
that he might wholly claim the credit of regaining all that he had lost; but now, in the recklessness
of despair, he proposed not only to ask for all the money he could obtain, but, if necessary,
extort it by any means in his power.

He and the forlorn place of his bitter revery grew more and more into harmony. The small, half-finished
apartment of the ruinous new house became more truly the counterpart of his life, it was bare;
it was unsightly from the debris of its own discolored and crumbling walls. The possibility
of sweet home scenes had passed from it, and it had become a place in which an orgy might be
hidden, or some revolting crime committed. To precisely this use Haldane put his temporary
refuge before leaving it; for excesses and evil deeds that the mind has deliberately resolved
upon are virtually accomplished facts as far as the wrong-doer is concerned. Before leaving
his dingy hiding-place Haldane had in the depths of his soul been guilty of drunkenness and
all kinds of excess. He also purposed unutterable baseness toward the widowed mother whom,
by every principle of true manhood, he was bound to cherish and shield; and he had in volition
more certainly committed the act of self-destruction than does the poor wretch who, under some
mad, half-insane impulse, makes permanent by suicide the evils a little fortitude and patient
effort might have remedied. There is no self-murder so hopeless and wicked as that of deliberate
sin against one's own body and soul.

No man becomes a saint or villain in an hour or by a single step; but there are times when
evil tendencies combine with adverse influences and circumstances to produce sudden and seemingly
fatal havoc in character. As the world goes, Haldane was a well-meaning youth, although cursed
with evil habits and tendencies, when he entered the isolated, half-finished house. He was
bad and devilish when he came out upon the street again, and walked recklessly toward the city,
caring not who saw or recognized him. In the depths of his heart he had become an enemy to
society, and, so far from hoping to gain its respect and good-will, he defied and intended
to outrage it to the end of life.

A man in such a mood gravitates with almost certainty toward the liquor-saloon, and Haldane
naturally commenced drinking at the various dens whose doors stood alluringly open. His slender
purse did not give him the choice of high-priced wines, and to secure the mad excitement and
oblivion he craved, only fiery compounds were ordered--such as might have been distilled in
the infernal regions to accomplish infernal results; and they soon began to possess him like
a legion of evil spirits.

If Shakespeare characterized the "invisible spirit of wine" as a "devil" in the unsophisticated
days of old, when wine was wine, and not a hell-broth concocted of poisonous drugs, what unspeakable
fiends must lurk in the grimy bottles whose contents, analyzed and explained, would appall
some, at least, of the stolid and stony-hearted venders!

Haldane soon felt himself capable of any wickedness, any crime. He became a human volcano,
that might at any moment pass into a violent and murderous action, regardless of consequences--indeed,
as utterly incapable of foreseeing and realizing them as the mountain that belches destruction
on vineyard and village.

We regard ourselves as a civilized and Christian people, and yet we tolerate on every corner
places where men are transformed into incarnate devils, and sent forth to run amuck in our
streets, and outrage the helpless women and children in their own homes. The naked inhabitants
of Dahomey could do no worse in this direction.

But Haldane was not destined to end his orgy in the lurid glare of a tragedy, for, as the sun
declined, the miserable day was brought to a wretched and fitting close. Unconsciously he had
strayed to the saloon on whose low steps Messrs. Van Wink and Ketchem had left him on the memorable
night from which he dated his downfall. Of course he did not recognize the place, but there
was one within that associated him inseparably with it, and also with misfortunes of his own.
As Haldane leaned unsteadily against the bar a seedy-looking man glared at him a moment, and
then stepped to his side, saying:

"I'll take a few dhrinks wid ye. Faix! after all the trouble ye've been to me ye oughter kape
me in dhrink the year."

Turning to the speaker, the young man recognized Pat M'Cabe, whom he also associated with his
evil fortunes, and toward whom he now felt a strong vindictiveness, the sudden and unreasoning
anger of intoxication. In reply, therefore, he threw the contents of his glass into Pat's face,
saying with a curse:

"That is the way I drink with such as you."

Instantly there was a bar-room brawl of the ordinary brutal type, from whose details we gladly
escape. Attracted by the uproar, a policeman was soon on hand, and both the combatants were
arrested and marched off to the nearest police station. Bruised, bleeding, disheveled, and
with rent garments, Haldane again passed through the streets as a criminal, with the rabble
hooting after him. But now there was no intolerable sense of shame as at first. He had become
a criminal at heart; he had deliberately and consciously degraded himself, and his whole aspect
had come to be in keeping with his character.

It may be objected that the transformation had been too rapid. It had not been rapid. His mother
commenced preparing him for this in the nursery by her weak indulgence. She had sown the seeds
of which his present actions were the legitimate outgrowth. The weeds of his evil nature had
been unchecked when little, and now they were growing so rank as to overshadow all.

Multitudes go to ruin who must trace their wrong bias back to cultivated and even Christian homes.

CHAPTER XXVII

GOD SENT HIS ANGEL

The mad excitement of anger and drunkenness was speedily followed by stupor, and the night
during which Haldane was locked up in the station-house was a blank. The next morning he was
decidedly ill as the result of his debauch; for the after-effects of the vile liquor he had
drank was such as to make any creature save rational man shun it in the future with utter loathing.

But the officers of the law had not the slightest consideration for his aching head and jarring
nerves. He was hustled off to the police court with others, and he now seemed in harmony with
the place and company.

Pat M'Cabe was a veteran in these matters, and had his witnesses ready, who swore to the truth,
and anything else calculated to assist Pat, their crony, out of his scrape. Unfortunately for
Haldane, the truth was against him, and he remained sullen and silent, making no defence. The
natural result, therefore, of the brief hearing, was his committal to the common jail for ten
days, and the liberation of Pat, with a severe reprimand.

Thus, after the lapse of a few brief weeks, Haldane found himself in the same cell whence he
had gone out promising and expecting to accomplish so much. He could not help recalling his
proud words to his mother and Mrs. Arnot as he looked around the bare walls, and he was sufficiently
himself again to realize partially how complete and disgraceful had been his defeat. But such
was his mood that it could find no better expression than a malediction upon himself and the
world in general. Then, throwing himself upon his rude and narrow couch, he again resigned
himself to his stupor, from which he had been aroused to receive his sentence.

It was late in the afternoon when he awoke, and his cell was already growing dusky with the
coming night. It was a place congenial to shadows, and they came early and lingered till the
sun was high.

But as Haldane slowly regained full consciousness, and recalled all that had transpired, he
felt himself to be under a deeper shadow than the night could cast. The world condemned him,
and he deserved condemnation; but he was also deserving of pity. Scarcely more than twenty,
he had seemingly spoiled his life utterly. It was torment to remember the past, and the future
was still darker; for his outraged physical nature so bitterly resented its wrongs by racking
pains that it now seemed to him that even a brief career of sensual gratification was impossible,
or so counterbalanced with suffering as to be revolting. Though scarcely more than across the
threshold of life, existence had become an unmitigated evil. Had he been brought up in an atmosphere
of flippant scepticism he would have flung it away as he would a handful of nettles; but his
childish memory had been made familiar with that ancient Book whose truths, like anchors, enable
many a soul on the verge of wreck to outride the storm. He was too well acquainted with its
teachings to entertain for a moment the shallow theory that a man can escape the consequences
of folly, villany, and unutterable baseness by merely ceasing to breathe.

He could not eat the coarse food brought to him for supper, and his only craving was for something
to quench his feverish thirst. His long lethargy was followed by corresponding sleeplessness
and preternatural activity of brain. That night became to him like the day of judgment; for
it seemed as if his memory would recall everything he had ever done or said, and place all
before him in the most dreary and discouraging aspect.

He saw his beautiful and aristocratic home, which he had forfeited so completely that the prison
would be more endurable than the forced and painful toleration of his presence, which was the
best he could hope for from his mother and sisters; and he felt that he would much rather stay
where he was for life than again meet old neighbors and companions. But he now saw how, with
that home and his father's honored name as his vantage ground, he might have made himself rich
and honored.

The misspent days and years of the past became like so many reproachful ghosts, and he realized
that he had idled away the precious seed-time of his life, or, rather, had been busy sowing
thorns and nettles, that had grown all too quickly and rankly. Thousands had been spent on
his education; and yet he was oppressed with a sense of his ignorance and helplessness. Rude
contact with the world had thoroughly banished self-conceit, and he saw that his mind was undisciplined
and his knowledge so superficial and fragmentary as to be almost useless. The editor of the
paper whose columns he had hoped to illumine told him that he could not even write correctly.

While in bitterness of soul he cursed himself for his wasted life, he knew that he was not
wholly to blame. Indeed, in accordance with a trait as old as fallen man, he sought to lay
the blame on another. He saw that his own folly had ever found an ally in his mother's indulgence,
and that, instead of holding him with a firm yet gentle hand to his tasks and duties, she had
been the first to excuse him from them and to palliate his faults. Instead of recalling her
fond and blind idolatry with tenderness, he felt like one who had been treacherously poisoned
with a wine that was sweet while it rested on the palate, but whose after-taste is vile, and
whose final effect is death.

There is no memory that we cherish so sacredly and tenderly as that of our parents' kind and
patient love. It often softens the heart of the hardened man and abandoned woman when all other
influences are powerless. But when love degenerates into idolatry and indulgence, and those
to whom the child is given as a sacred trust permit it to grow awry, and develop into moral
deformity, men and women, as did Haldane, may breathe curses on the blindness and weakness
that was the primal cause of their life-failure. Throughout that long and horrible night he
felt only resentment toward his mother, and cherished no better purpose toward her than was
embodied in his plan to wring from her, even by methods that savored of blackmail, the means
of living a dissipated life in some city where he was unknown, and could lose himself in the
multitude.

But the ten days of enforced seclusion and solitude that must intervene seemed like an eternity.
With a shudder he thought of the real eternity, beyond, when the power to excite or stupefy
his lower nature would be gone forever. That shadow was so dark and cold that it seemed to
chill his very soul, and by a resolute effort of will he compelled his mind to dwell only on
the immediate future and the past.

Day at last dawned slowly and dimly in his cell, and found him either pacing up and down like
some wild creature in its cage, turning so often by reason of the limited space as to be almost
dizzy, or else sitting on his couch with his haggard face buried in his hands.

After fighting all night against the impulse to think about Mrs. Arnot and her niece, he at
last gave up the struggle, and permitted his mind to revert to them. Such thoughts were only
pain now, and yet for some reason it seemed as if his mind were drawn irresistibly toward them.
He felt that his deep regret was as useless and unavailing as the November wind that sweeps
back and forth the withered and fallen leaves. His whole frame would at times tremble with
gusts of remorseful passion, and again he would sigh long and drearily.

He now realized what a priceless opportunity he had lost. It was once his privilege to enter
Mrs. Arnot's beautiful home assured of welcome. She had been deeply interested in him for his
mother's sake, and might have become so for his own. He had been privileged to meet Laura Romeyn
as her equal, at least in social estimation, and he might have made himself worthy of her esteem,
and possibly of her affection. He saw that he had foolishly clamored, like a spoiled child,
for that which he could only hope to possess by patient waiting and manly devotion; and now,
with a regret that was like a serpent's tooth, he felt that such devotion might have been rewarded.

But a few months ago, whose life had been more rich with promise than his, or to whom had been
given a better vantage-ground? And yet he had already found the lowest earthly perdition possible,
and had lost hope of anything better.

In his impotent rage and despair he fairly gnashed his teeth and cursed himself, his fate,
and those who had led to his evil fortunes. Then, by a natural revulsion of feeling, he sobbed
like a child that has lost its way and can discover no returning path, and whose heart the
darkness of the fast-approaching night fills with unutterable dread.

He was a criminal--in his despair he never hoped to be anything else--but he was not a hardened
criminal and was still capable of wishing to be different. In the memory of his bitter experience
a pure and honorable life now appeared as beautiful as it was impossible. He had no expectation,
however, of ever living such a life, for pride, the cornerstone of his character, had given
way, and he was too greatly discouraged at the time to purpose reform even in the future. Without
the spur and incentive of hope we become perfectly helpless in evil; therefore all doctrines
and philosophies which tend to quench or limit hope, or which are bounded by the narrow horizon
of time and earth, are, in certain emergencies, but dead weights, dragging down the soul.

At last, from sheer exhaustion, he threw himself on his couch, and fell into a troubled sleep,
filled with broken and distorted visions of the scenes that had occupied his waking hours.
But he gradually became quieter, and it appeared in his dream as if he saw a faint dawning
in the east which grew brighter until a distinct ray of light streamed from an infinite distance
to himself. Along this shining pathway an angel seemed approaching him. The vision grew so
distinct and real that he started up and saw Mrs. Arnot sitting in the doorway, quietly watching
him. Confused and oblivious of the past, he stepped forward to speak to her with the natural
instinct of a gentleman. Then the memory of all that had occurred rolled before him like a
black torrent, and he shrank back to his couch and buried his face in his hands. But when Mrs.
Arnot came and placed her hand on his shoulder, saying gently, but very gravely, "Egbert, since
you would not come to me I have come to you," he felt that his vision was still true, and that
God had sent his angel.

CHAPTER XXVIII

FACING THE CONSEQUENCES

A young man of Haldane's age is capable of despairing thoughts, and even of desperate moods,
of quite extended continuance; but it usually requires a long lifetime of disaster and sin
to bury hope so deep that the stone of its sepulchre is not rolled away as the morning dawns.
Haldane had thought that his hope was dead; but Mrs. Arnot's presence, combined with her manner,
soon made it clear, even to himself, that it was not; and yet it was but a weak and trembling
hope, scarcely assured of its right to exist, that revived at her touch and voice. His heart
both clung to and shrank from the pure, good woman who stood beside him.

He trembled, and his breast heaved convulsively for a few moments, and she quietly waited until
he should grow more calm, only stroking his bowed head once or twice with a slight and reassuring
caress. At last he asked in a low, hoarse voice:

"Do you know why I am here?"

"Yes, Egbert."

"And yet you have come in kindness--in mercy, rather."

"I have come because I am deeply interested in you."

"I am not worthy--I am not fit for you to touch."

"I am glad you feel so."

"Then why do you come?"

"Because I wish to help you to become worthy."

"That's impossible. It's too late."

"Perhaps it is. That is a question for you alone to decide; but I wish you to think well before
you do decide it."

"Pardon me, Mrs. Arnot," he said emphatically, raising his head, and dashing away bitter tears;
"the world has decided that question for me, and all have said in one harsh, united voice,
'You shall not rise.' It has ground me under its heel as vindictively as if I were a viper.
You are so unlike the world that you don't know it. It has given me no chance whatever."

"Egbert, what have you to do with the world?"

"God knows I wanted to recover what I had lost," he continued in the same rapid tone. "God
knows I left this cell weeks since with the honest purpose of working my way up to a position
that would entitle me to your respect, and change my mother's shame into pride. But I found
a mad-dog cry raised against me. And this professedly Christian town has fairly hunted me back
to this prison."

Mrs. Arnot sighed deeply, but after a moment said, "I do not excuse the Christian town, neither
can I excuse you."

"You too, then, blame me, and side against me."

"No, Egbert, I side with you, and yet I blame you deeply; but I pity you more."

He rose, and paced the cell with his old, restless steps. "It's no use," he said; "the world
says, 'Go to the devil,' and gives me no chance to do otherwise."

"Do you regard the world--whatever you may mean by the phrase--as your friend?"

"Friend!" he repeated, with bitter emphasis.

"Why, then, do you take its advice? I did not come here to tell you to go to perdition."

"But if the world sets its face against me like a flint, what is there for me to do but to
remain in prison or hide in a desert, unless I do what I had purposed, defy it and strike back,
though it be only as a worm that tries to sting the foot that crushes it."

"Egbert, if you should die, the world would forget that you had ever existed, in a few days."

"Certainly. It would give me merely a passing thought as of a nuisance that had been abated."

"Well, then, would it not be wise to forget the world for a little while? You are shut away
from it for the present, and it cannot molest you. In the meantime you can settle some very
important personal questions. The world has power over your fate only as you give it power.
You need not lie like a helpless worm in its path, waiting to be crushed. Get up like a man,
and take care of yourself. The world may let you starve, but it cannot prevent you from becoming
good and true and manly; if you do become so, however, rest assured the world will eventually
find a place for you, and, perhaps, an honored place. But be that as it may, a good Christian
man is sustained by something far more substantial than the world's breath."

Out of respect for Mrs. Arnot, Haldane was silent. He supposed that her proposed remedy for
his desperate troubles was that he should "become a Christian," and to this phrase he had learned
to give only the most conventional meaning.

"Becoming a Christian," in his estimation, was the making of certain professions, going through
peculiar and abnormal experiences, and joining a church, the object of all this being to escape
a "wrath to come" in the indefinite future. To begin with, he had not the slightest idea how
to set in motion these spiritual evolutions, had he desired them; and to his intense and practical
nature the whole subject was as unattractive as a library of musty and scholastic books. He
wanted some remedy that applied to this world, and would help him now. He did not associate
Mrs. Arnot's action with Christian principle, but believed it to be due to the peculiar and
natural kindness of her heart. Christians in general had not troubled themselves about him,
and, as far as he could judge, had turned as coldly from him as had others. His mother had
always been regarded as an eminently religious woman, and yet he knew that she was morbidly
sensitive to the world's opinion and society's verdict.

From childhood he had associated religion with numerous Sunday restraints and the immaculate
mourning-dress which seemed chiefly to occupy his mother's thoughts during the hour preceding
service. He had no conception of a faith that could be to him what the Master's strong sustaining
hand was to the disciple who suddenly found himself sinking in a stormy sea.

It is not strange that the distressed in body or mind turn away from a religion of dreary formalities
and vague, uncomprehended mental processes. Instant and practical help is what is craved; and
just such help Christ ever gave when he came to manifest God's will and ways to men. By whose
authority do some religious teachers now lead the suffering through such a round-about, intricate,
or arid path of things to be done and doctrines to be accepted before bringing them to Christ?

But when a mind has become mystified with preconceived ideas and prejudices, it is no easy
task to reveal to it the truth, however simple. Mrs. Arnot had come into the light but slowly
herself, and she had passed through too many deep and prolonged spiritual experiences to hope
for any immediate and radical change in Haldane. Indeed, she was in great doubt whether he
would ever receive the faithful words she proposed speaking to him; and she fully believed
that anything he attempted in his own strength would again end in disheartening failure.

"Egbert," she said gently, but very gravely, "have you fully settled it in your own mind that
I am your friend and wish you well?"

"How can I believe otherwise, since you are here, and speaking to me as you do?"

"Well, I am going to test your faith in me and my kindness. I am going to speak plainly, and
perhaps you may think even harshly. You are very sick, and if I am to be your physician I must
give you some sharp, decisive treatment. Will you remember through it all that my only motive
is to make you well?"

"I will try to."

"You have kept away from me a long time. Perhaps when released from this place you will again
avoid me, and I may never have another opportunity like the present. Now, while you have a
chance to think, I am going to ask you to face the consequences of your present course. Within
an hour after passing out of this cell you will have it in your power to trample on your better
nature and stupefy your mind. But now, if you will, you have a chance to use the powers God
has given you, and settle finally on your plan of life."

"I have already trampled on my manhood--what is worse, I have lost it. I haven't any courage
or strength left."

"That can scarcely be true of one but little more than twenty. You are to be here in quietness
for the next ten days, I learn. It is my intention, so far as it is in my power to bring it
about, that you deliberately face the consequences of your present course during this time.
By the consequences I do not mean what the world will think of you, but, rather, the personal
results of your action--what you must suffer while you are in the world, and what you must
suffer when far beyond the world. Egbert, are you pleased with yourself? are you satisfied
with yourself?"

"I loathe myself."

"You can get away from the world--you are away from it now, and soon you will be away from
it finally--but you can never get away from yourself. Are you willing to face an eternal consciousness
of defeat, failure, and personal baseness?"

He shuddered, but was silent.

"There is no place in God's pure heaven for the drunkard--the morally loathsome and deformed.
Are you willing to be swept away among the chaff and the thorns, and to have, forever, the
shameful and humiliating knowledge that you rightfully belong to the rubbish of the universe?
Are you willing to have a sleepless memory tell you in every torturing way possible what a
noble, happy man you might have been, but would not be? Your power to drown memory and conscience,
and stupefy your mind, will last a little while only at best. How are you going to endure the
time when you must remember everything and think of everything? These are more important questions
than what the world thinks of you."

"Have you no pity?" he groaned.

"Yes, my heart overflows with pity. Is it not kindness to tell you whither your path is leading?
If I had the power I would lay hold of you, and force you to come with me into the path of
life and safety," she answered, with a rush of tears to her eyes.

Her sympathy touched him deeply, and disarmed her words of all power to awaken resentment.

"Mrs. Arnot," he cried, passionately, "I did mean--I did try--to do better when I left this
place; but, between my own accursed weakness and the hard-hearted world, I am here again, and
almost without hope."

"Egbert, though I did not discourage you at the time, I had little hope of your accomplishing
anything when you left this cell some weeks since. You went out to regain your old position
and the world's favor, as one might look for a jewel or sum of money he had lost. You can never
gain even these advantages in the way you proposed, and if you enjoy them again the cause will
exist, not in what you do only, but chiefly in what you are. When you started out to win the
favor of society, from which you had been alienated partly by misfortune, but largely through
your own wrong action, there was no radical change in your character, or even in your controlling
motives. You regretted the evil because of its immediate and disagreeable consequences. I do
not excuse the world's harshness toward the erring; but, after all, if you can disabuse your
mind of prejudice you will admit that its action is very natural, and would, probably, have
been your own before you passed under this cloud. Consider what the world knows of you. It,
after all, is quite shrewd in judging whom it may trust and whom it is safe to keep at arm's-length.
Knowing yourself and your own weaknesses as you do, could you honestly recommend yourself to
the confidence of any one? With your character unchanged, what guarantee have you against the
first temptation or gust of passion to which you are subjected? You had no lack of wounded
pride and ambition when you started out, but you will surely admit that such feelings are of
little value compared with Christian integrity and manly principle, which render anything dishonorable
or base impossible.

"I do not consider the world's favor worth very much, but the world's respect is, for it usually
respects only what is respectable. As you form a character that you can honestly respect yourself,
you will find society gradually learning to share in that esteem. Believe me, Egbert, if you
ever regain the world's lost favor, which you value so highly, you will discover the first
earnest of it in your own changed and purified character. The world will pay no heed to any
amount of self-assertion, and will remain equally indifferent to appeals and upbraidings; but
sooner or later it will find out just what you are in your essential life, and will estimate
you accordingly. I have dwelt on this phase of your misfortune fully, because I see that it
weighs so heavily on your heart. Can you accept my judgment in the matter? Remember, I have
lived nearly three times as long as you have, and speak from ripe experience. I have always
been a close observer of society, and am quite sure I am right. If you were my own son I would
use the same words."

"Mrs. Arnot," he replied slowly, with contracted brow, "you are giving me much to think about.
I fear I have been as stupid as I have been bad. My whole life seems one wretched blunder."

"Ah, if you will only think, I shall have strong hopes of you. But in measuring these questions
do not use the inch rule of time and earth only. As I have said before, remember you will soon
have done with earth forever, but never can you get away from God, nor be rid of yourself.
You are on wretched terms with both, and will be, whatever happens, until your nature is brought
into harmony with God's will. We are so made, so designed in our every fibre, that evil tortures
us like a diseased nerve; and it always will till we get rid of it. Therefore, Egbert, remember--O
that I could burn it into your consciousness--the best that you can gain from your proposed
evil course is a brief respite in base and sensual stupefaction, or equally artificial and
unmanly excitement, and then endless waking, bitter memories, and torturing regret. Face this
truth now, before it is too late. Good-by for a time. I will come again when I can; or you
can send for me when you please;" and she gave him her hand in cordial pressure.

He did not say a word, but his face was very white, and it was evident that her faithful words
had opened a prospect that had simply appalled him.

CHAPTER XXIX

HOW EVIL ISOLATES

If Haldane had been left alone on an ice-floe in the Arctic Ocean he could scarcely have felt
worse than he did during the remainder of the day after Mrs. Arnot's departure. A dreary and
increasing sense of isolation oppressed him. The words of his visitor, "What have you to do
with the world?" and "If you were dead it would forget you in a few days," repeated themselves
over and over again. His vindictive feeling against society died out in the consciousness of
his weakness and insignificance. What is the use of one's smiting a mountain with his fist?
Only the puny hand feels the blow. The world became, under Mrs. Arnot's words, too large and
vague a generality even to be hated.

In order to be a misanthrope one must also be an egotist, dwarfing the objects of his spite,
and exaggerating the small atom that has arrayed itself against the universe. It is a species
of insanity, wherein a mind has lost perception of the correct relationship between different
existences. The poor hypochondriac who imagined himself a mountain was a living satire on many
of his fellow-creatures, who differ only in being able to keep similar delusions to themselves.

Mrs. Arnot's plain, honest, yet kindly words had thrown down the walls of prejudice, and Haldane's
mind lay open to the truth. As has been said, his first impression was a strange and miserable
sense of loneliness. He saw what a slender hold he had upon the rest of humanity. The majority
knew nothing of him, while, with few exceptions, those who were aware of his existence despised
and detested him, and would breathe more freely if assured of his death. He instinctively felt
that the natural affections of his mother and sisters were borne down and almost overwhelmed
by his course and character. If they had any visitors in the seclusion to which his disgrace
had driven them, his name would be avoided with morbid sensitiveness, and yet all would be
as painfully conscious of him as if he were a corpse in the room, which by some monstrous necessity
could not be buried. While they might shed natural tears, he was not sure but that deep in
their hearts would come a sense of relief should they hear that he was dead, and so could not
deepen the stain he had already given to a name once so respectable. He knew that his indifference
and overbearing manner toward his sisters had alienated them from him; while in respect to
Mrs. Haldane, her aristocratic conventionality, the most decided trait of her character, would
always be in sharp contest with her strong mother-love, and thus he would ever be only a source
of disquiet and wretchedness whether present or absent. In view of the discordant elements
and relations now existing, there was not a place on earth less attractive than his own home.

It may at first seem a contradiction to say that the thought of Mrs. Arnot gave him a drearier
sense of isolation than the memory of all else. In her goodness she seemed to belong to a totally
different world from himself and people in general. He had nothing in common with her. She
seemed to come to him almost literally as an angel of mercy, and from an infinite distance,
and her visits must, of necessity, be like those of the angels, few and far between, and, in
view of his character, must soon cease. He shrank from her purity and nobility even while drawn
toward her by her sympathy. He instinctively felt that in all her deep commiseration of him
she could not for a moment tolerate the debasing evil of his nature, and that this evil, retained,
would speedily and inevitably separate them forever. Could he be rid of it? He did not know.
He could not then see how. In his weakness and despondency it seemed inwrought with every fibre
of his being, and an essential part of himself. As for Laura, she was like a bright star that
had set, and was no longer above his dim horizon.

As he felt himself thus losing his hold on the companionship and remembrance of others, he
was thrown back upon himself, and this led him to feel with a sort of dreary foreboding that
it would be a horrible thing thus to be chained forever to a self toward which the higher faculties
of his soul must ever cherish only hatred and loathing. Even now he hated himself--nay, more,
he was enraged with himself--in view of the folly of which he had been capable. What could
be worse than the endless companionship of the base nature which had already dragged him down
so low?

As the hours passed, the weight upon his heart grew heavier, and the chill of dread more unendurable.
He saw his character as another might see it. He saw a nature to which, from infancy, a wrong
bias had been given, made selfish by indulgence, imperious and strong only in carrying out
impulses and in gratifying base passions, but weak as water in resisting evil and thwarting
its vile inclinations. The pride and hope that had sustained him in what he regarded as the
great effort of his life were gone, and he felt neither strength nor courage to attempt anything
further. He saw himself helpless and prostrate before his fate, and yet that fate was so terrible
that he shrank from it with increasing dread.

What could he do? Was it possible to do anything? Had he not lost his footing? If a man is
caught in the rapids, up to a certain point his struggle against the tide is full of hope,
but beyond that point no effort can avail. Had he not been swept so far down toward the final
plunge that grim despair were better than frantic but vain effort?

And yet he felt that he could not give himself up to the absolute mastery of evil without one
more struggle. Was there any chance? Was he capable of making the needful effort?

Thus hopes and fears, bitter memories and passionate regrets, swept to and fro through his
soul like stormy gusts. A painful experience and Mrs. Arnot's words were teaching the giddy,
thoughtless young fellow what life meant, and were forcing upon his attention the inevitable
questions connected with it which must be solved sooner or later, and which usually grow more
difficult as the consideration of them is delayed, and they become complicated. As his cell
grew dusky with its early twilight, as he thought of another long night whose darkness would
be light compared with the shadow brooding on his prospects, his courage and endurance gave way.

With something of the feeling of a terror-stricken child he called the under-sheriff, and asked
for writing materials. With a pencil he wrote hastily:

"MRS. ARNOT--I entreat you to visit me once more to-day. Your words have left me in torture.
I cannot face the consequences and yet see no way of escape. It would be very cruel to leave
me to my despairing thoughts for another night, and you are not cruel."

In despatching the missive he said, "I can promise that if this note is delivered to Mrs. Arnot
at once, the bearer shall be well paid."

Moments seemed hours while he waited for an answer. Suppose the letter was not delivered--suppose
Mrs. Arnot was absent. A hundred miserable conjectures flitted through his mind; but his confidence
in his friend was such that even his morbid fear did not suggest that she would not come.

The lady was at the dinner-table when the note was handed to her, and after reading it she
rose hastily and excused herself.

"Where are you going?" asked her husband sharply.

"A person in trouble has sent for me."

"Well, unless the person is in the midst of a surgical operation, he, she, or it, whichever
this person may be, can wait till you finish your dinner."

"I am going to visit Egbert Haldane," said Mrs. Arnot quietly. "Jane, please tell Michael to
come round with the carriage immediately."

"You visit the city prison at this hour! Now I protest. The young rake probably has the delirium
tremens. Send our physician rather, if some one must go, though leaving him to the jailer and
a strait-jacket would be better still."

"Please excuse me," answered his wife, with her hand on the door-knob; "you forget my relations
to Mrs. Haldane; her son has sent for me."

"'Her relations to Mrs. Haldane!' As if she were not always at the beck and call of every beggar
and criminal in town! I do wish I had a wife who was too much of a lady to have anything to
do with this low scum."

A few moments later Mr. Arnot broke out anew with muttered complaint and invective, as he heard
the carriage driven rapidly away.

As by the flickering light of a dip candle Mrs. Arnot saw Haldane's pale, haggard face, she
did not regret that she had come at once, for a glance gave to her the evidence of a human
soul in its extremity.

In facing these deep questions of life, some regard themselves as brave or philosophical. Perhaps
it were nearer the truth to say they are stolid, and are staring at that which they do not
understand and cannot yet realize. Where in history do we read--who from a ripe experience
can give--an instance of a happy life developing under the deepening shadow of evil? Suppose
one has seen high types of character and happiness, and was capable of appreciating them, but
finds that he has cherished a sottish, beastly nature so long that it has become his master,
promising to hold him in thraldom ever afterward;--can there be a more wretched form of captivity?
The ogre of a debased nature drags the soul away from light and happiness--from all who are
good and pure--to the hideous solitude of self and memory.

There are those who will be incredulous and even resentful in view of this picture, but it
will not be the first time that facts have been quarrelled with. It is true that many are writhing
and groaning in this cruel bondage, mastered and held captive by some debasing appetite or
passion, perhaps by many. Sometimes, with a bitter, despairing sorrow, of which superficial
observers of life can have no idea, they speak of these horrid chains; sometimes they tug at
them almost frantically. A few escape, but more are dragged down and away--away from honorable
companionships and friendships; away from places of trust, from walks of usefulness and safety;
away from parents, from wife and children, until the awful isolation is complete, and the guilty
soul finds itself alone with the sin that mastered it, conscious that God only will ever see
and remember. Human friends will forget--they must forget in order to obtain relief from an
object that has become morally too unsightly to be looked upon; and in mercy they are so created
that they can forget, though it may be long before it is possible.

There are people who scout this awful mystery of evil. They have beautiful little theories
of their own, which they have spun in the seclusion of their studies. They keep carefully within
their shady, flower-bordered walks, and ignore the existence of the world's dusty highways,
in which so many are fainting and being trampled upon. What they do not see does not exist.
What they do not believe is not true. They cannot condemn too severely the lack of artistic
taste and liberal culture which leads any one to regard sin as other than a theologian's phrase
or a piquant element in human life, which otherwise would be rather dull and flavorless.

Mrs. Arnot was not a theorist, nor was she the elegant lady, wholly given to the aesthetic
culture that her husband desired; she was a large-hearted woman, and she understood human life
and its emergencies sufficiently well to tremble with apprehension when she saw the face of
Egbert Haldane, for she felt that a deathless soul in its crisis--its deepest spiritual need--was
looking to her solely for help.

CHAPTER XXX

IDEAL KNIGHTHOOD

Mrs. Arnot again came directly to the youth and put her hand on his shoulder with motherly
freedom and kindliness. Beyond even the word of sympathy is the touch of sympathy, and it often
conveys to the fainting heart a subtle power to hope and trust again which the materialist
cannot explain. The Divine Physician often touched those whom he healed. He laid his hand fearlessly
on the leper from whom all shrank with inexpressible dread. The moral leper who trembled under
Mrs. Arnot's hand felt that he was not utterly lost and beyond the pale of hope, if one so
good and pure could still touch him; and there came a hope, like a ray struggling through thick
darkness, that the hand that caressed might rescue him.

"Egbert," said the lady gravely, "tell me what I can do for you."

"I cannot face the consequences," he replied in a low, shuddering tone.

"And do you only dread the consequences?" Mrs. Arnot asked sadly. "Do you not think of the
evil which is the cause of your trouble?"

"I can scarcely separate the sin from the suffering. My mind is confused, and I am overwhelmed
with fear and loneliness. All who are good and all that is good seemed to be slipping from
me, and I should soon be left only to my miserable self. O, Mrs. Arnot, no doubt I seem to
you like a weak, guilty coward. I seem so to myself. If it were danger or difficulty I had
to face I would not fear; but this slow, inevitable, increasing pressure of a horrible fate,
this seeing clearly that evil cuts me off from hope and all happiness, and yet to feel that
I cannot escape from it--that I am too weak to break my chains--it is more than I can endure.
I fear that I should have gone mad if you had not come. Do you think there is any chance for
me? I feel as if I had lost my manhood."

Mrs. Arnot took the chair which the sheriff had brought on her entrance, and said quietly,
"Perhaps you have, Egbert; many a man has lost what you mean by that term."

"You speak of it with a composure that I can scarcely understand," said Haldane, with a quick
glance of inquiry. "It seems to me an irreparable loss."

"It does not seem so great a loss to me," replied Mrs. Arnot gently. "As your physician you
must let me speak plainly again. It seems to me that what you term your manhood was composed
largely of pride, conceit, ignorance of yourself, and inexperience of the world. You were liable
to lose it at any time, just as you did, partly through your own folly and partly through the
wrong of others. You know, Egbert, that I have always been interested in young men, and what
many of them regard as their manhood is not of much value to themselves or any one else."

"Is it nothing to be so weak, disheartened, and debased that you lie prostrate in the mire
of your own evil nature, as it were, and with no power to rise?" he asked bitterly.

"That is sad indeed."

"Well, that's just my condition--or I fear it is, though your coming has brought a gleam of
hope. Mrs. Arnot," he continued passionately, "I don't know how to be different; I don't feel
capable of making any persistent and successful effort. I feel that I have lost all moral force
and courage. The odds are too great. I can't get up again."

"Perhaps you cannot, Egbert," said Mrs. Arnot very gravely; "it would seem that some never do--"

He buried his face in his hands and groaned.

"You have, indeed, a difficult problem to solve, and, looking at it from your point of view,
I do not wonder that it seems impossible."

"Cannot you, then, give me any hope?"

"No, Egbert; I cannot. It is not in my power to make you a good man. You know that I would
do so if I could."

"Would to God I had never lived, then," he exclaimed, desperately.

"Can you offer God no better prayer than that? Will you try to be calm, and listen patiently
to me for a few moments? When I said I could not give you hope--I could not make you a good
man--I expressed one of my strongest convictions. But I have not said, Egbert, that there is
no hope, no chance, for you. On the contrary, there is abundant hope--yes, absolute certainty--of
your achieving a noble character, if you will set about it in the right way. But as one of
the first and indispensable conditions of success, I wish you to realize that the task is too
great for you alone; too great with my help; too great if the world that seems so hostile should
unite to help you; and yet neither I nor all the world could prevent your success if you went
to the right and true source of help. Why have you forgotten God in your emergency? Why are
you looking solely to yourself and to another weak fellow-creature like yourself?"

"You are in no respect like me, Mrs. Arnot, and it seems profanation even to suggest the thought."

"I have the same nature. I struggled vainly and almost hopelessly against my peculiar weaknesses
and temptations and sorrows until I heard God saying, 'Come, my child, let us work together.
It is my will you should do all you can yourself, and what you cannot do I will do for you.'
Since that time I have often had to struggle hard, but never vainly. There have been seasons
when my burdens grew so heavy that I was ready to faint; but after appealing to my heavenly
Father, as a little child might cry for help, the crushing weight would pass away, and I became
able to go on my way relieved and hopeful."

"I cannot understand it," said the young man, looking at her in deep perplexity.

"That does not prevent its being true. The most skilful physician cannot explain why certain
beneficial effects follow the use of certain remedies; but when these effects become an established
fact of experience it were sensible to employ the remedy as soon as possible. One might suffer
a great deal, and, perhaps, perish, while asking questions and waiting for answers. To my mind
the explanation is very simple. God is our Creator, and calls himself our Father. It would
be natural on general principles that he should take a deep interest in us; but he assures
us of the profoundest love, employing our tenderest earthly ties to explain how he feels toward
us. What is more natural than for a father to help a child? What is more certain, also, than
that a wise father would teach a child to do all within his ability to help himself, and so
develop the powers with which he is endowed? Only infants are supposed to be perfectly helpless."

"It would seem that what you say ought to be true, and yet I have always half-feared God--that
is, when I thought about him at all. I have been taught that he was to be served; that he was
a jealous God; that he was angry with the sinful, and that the prayers of the wicked were an
abomination. I am sure the Bible says the latter is true, or something like it."

"It is true. If you set your heart on some evil course, or are deliberating some dishonesty
or meanness, be careful how you make long or short prayers to God while wilfully persisting
in your sin. When a man is robbing and cheating, though in the most legal manner--when he is
gratifying lust, hate, or appetite, and intends to continue doing so--the less praying he does
the better. An avowed infidel is more acceptable. But the sweetest music that reaches heaven
is the honest cry for help to forsake sin; and the more sinful the heart that thus cries out
for deliverance the more welcome the appeal. Let me illustrate what I mean by your own case.
If you should go out from this prison in the same spirit that you did once before, seeking
to gain position and favor only for the purpose of gratifying your own pride--only that self
might be advantaged, without any generous and disinterested regard for others, without any
recognition of the sacred duties you owe to God, and content with a selfish, narrow, impure
soul--if, with such a disposition, you should commence asking for God's help as a means to
these petty, miserable ends, your prayers would, and with good reason, be an abomination to
him. But if you had sunk to far lower depths than those in which you now find yourself, and
should cry out for purity, for the sonship of a regenerated character, your voice would not
only reach your divine Father's ear, but his heart, which would yearn toward you with a tender
commiseration that I could not feel were you my only son."

The sincerity and earnestness of Mrs. Arnot's words were attested by her fast-gathering tears.

"This is all new to me. But if God is so kindly disposed toward us--so ready to help--why does
he not reveal himself in this light more clearly? why are we so slow and long in finding him
out? Until you came he seemed against me."

"We will not discuss this matter in general. Take your own experience again. Perhaps it has
been your fault, not God's, that you misunderstood him. He tries to show how he feels toward
us in many ways, chiefly by his written Word, by what he leads his people to do for us, and
by his great mind acting directly on ours. Has not the Bible been within your reach? Have none
of God's servants tried to advise and help you? I think you must have seen some such effort
on my part when you were an inmate of my home. I am here this evening as God's messenger to
you. All the hope I have of you is inspired by his disposition and power to help you. You may
continue to stand aloof from him, declining his aid, just as you avoided your mother, and myself
all these weeks when we were longing to help you; but if you sink, yours will be the fate of
one who refuses to grasp the strong hand that is and ever has been seeking yours."

"Mrs. Arnot," said Haldane thoughtfully, "if all you say is true there is hope for me--there
is hope for every one."

Mrs. Arnot was silent for a moment, and then said, with seeming abruptness:

"You have read of the ancient knights and their deeds, have you not?"

"Yes," was the wondering reply, "but the subject seems very remote."

"You are in a position to realize my very ideal of knightly endeavor."

"I, Mrs. Arnot! What can you mean?"

"Whether I am right or wrong I can soon explain what I mean. The ancient knight set his lance
in rest against what seemed to him the wrongs and evils of the world. In theory he was to be
without fear and without reproach--as pure as the white cross upon his mantle. But in fact
the average knight was very human. His white cross was soon soiled by foreign travel, but too
often not before his soul was stained with questionable deeds. It was a life of adventure and
excitement, and abundantly gratifying to pride and ambition. While it could be idealized into
a noble calling, it too often ended in a lawless, capricious career of self-indulgence. The
cross on the mantle symbolized the heavy blows and sorrows inflicted on those who had the misfortune
to differ in opinion, faith, or race with the knight, the steel of whose armor seemingly got
into his heart, rather than any personal self-denial. Without any moral change on his own part,
or being any way better than they, he could fight the infidel or those whose views differed
from his with great zest.

"But the man who will engage successfully in a crusade against the evil of his own heart must
have the spirit of a true knight, for he attempts the most difficult and heroic task within
the limits of human endeavor. It is comparatively easy to run a tilt against a fellow-mortal,
or an external evil; but to set our lance in rest against a cherished sin, a habit that has
become our second nature, and remorselessly ride it down--to grapple with a secret fault in
the solitude of our own soul, with no applauding hands to spur us on, and fight and wrestle
for weary months--years perhaps--this does require heroism of the highest order, and the man
who can do it is my ideal knight.

"You inveigh against the world, Egbert, as if it were a harsh and remorseless foe, bent on
crushing you; but you have far more dangerous enemies lurking in your own heart. If you could
thoroughly subdue these with God's aid, you would at the same time overcome the world, or find
yourself so independent of it as scarcely to care whether or no it gave you its favor. When
you left this prison before, you sought in the wrong way to win the position you had lost.
You were very proud of your former standing; but you had very little occasion to be, for you
had inherited it. The deeds of others, not your own, had won it for you. If you had realized
it, it gave you a great vantage, but that was all. If you had been content to have remained
a conceited, commonplace man, versed only in the fashionable jargon and follies of the hour,
and basing your claims on the wealth which you had shown neither the ability nor industry to
win, you would never have had my respect.

"Well, to tell the truth, such shadows of men are respected by no one, not even themselves,
even though they may commit no deed which society condemns, But if in this prison cell you
set your face like a flint against the weaknesses and grave faults of your nature which have
brought you here, and which would have made you anything but an admirable man had you retained
your old position--if, with God as your fast ally, you wage unrelenting and successful war
against all that is unworthy of a Christian manhood--I will not only respect, I will honor
you. You will be one of my ideal knights."

As Mrs. Arnot spoke, Haldane's eyes kindled, and his drooping manner was exchanged for an aspect
that indicated reviving hope and courage.

"I have lost faith in myself," he said slowly; "and as yet I have no faith in God; but after
what you have said I do not fear him as I did. I have faith in you, however, Mrs. Arnot, and
I would rather gain your respect than that of all the world. You know me now better than any
one else. Do you truly believe that I could succeed in such a struggle?"

"Without faith in God you cannot. Even the ancient knight, whose success depended so much on
the skill and strength of his arm, and the temper of his weapons and armor, was supposed to
spend hours in prayer before attempting any great thing. But with God's help daily sought and
obtained, you cannot fail. You can achieve that which the world cannot take from you--which
will be a priceless possession after the world has forgotten you and you it--a noble character."

Haldane was silent several moments, then, drawing a long breath, he said, slowly and humbly:

"How I am to do this I do not yet understand; but if you will guide me, I will attempt it."

"This book will guide you, Egbert," said Mrs. Arnot, placing her Bible in his hands. "God himself
will guide you if you ask sincerely. Good-night." And she gave him such a warm and friendly
grasp of the hand as to prove that evil had not yet wholly isolated him from the pure and good.

CHAPTER XXXI

THE LOW STARTING-POINT

On the afternoon of the following day Mrs. Arnot again visited Haldane, bringing him several
letters from his mother which had been sent in her care; and she urged that the son should
write at once in a way that would reassure the mother's heart.

In his better mood the young man's thoughts recurred to his mother with a remorseful tenderness,
and he eagerly sought out the envelope bearing the latest date, and tore it open. As he read,
the pallor and pain expressed in his face became so great that Mrs. Arnot was much troubled,
fearing that the letter contained evil tidings.

Without a word he handed it to her, and also two inclosed paragraphs cut from newspapers.

"Do you think your mother would wish me to see it?" asked Mrs. Arnot, hesitatingly.

"I wish you to see it, and it contains no injunctions of secrecy. Indeed, she has been taking
some very open and decided steps which are here indicated."

Mrs. Arnot read:

"MY UNNATURAL SON--Though you will not write me a line, you still make it certain that I shall
hear from you, as the inclosed clippings from Hillaton papers may prove to you. You have forfeited
all claim on both your sisters and myself. Our lawyer has been here to-day, and has shown me,
what is only too evident, that money would be a curse to you--that you would squander it and
disgrace yourself still more, if such a thing were possible. As the property is wholly in my
hands, I shall arrange it in such a way that you shall never have a chance to waste it. If
you will comply with the following conditions I will supply all that is essential to one of
your nature and tastes. I stipulate that you leave Hillaton, and go to some quiet place where
our name is not known, and that you there live so quietly that I shall hear of no more disgraceful
acts like those herein described. I have given up the hope of hearing anything good. If you
will do this I will pay your board and grant you a reasonable allowance. If you will not do
this, you end all communication between us, and we must be as strangers until you can show
an entirely different spirit. Yours in bitter shame and sorrow,

"EMILY HALDANE."

The clippings were Mr. Shrumpf's version of his own swindle, and a tolerably correct account
of the events which led to the present imprisonment.

"Will you accept your mother's offer?" Mrs. Arnot asked, anxiously, for she was much troubled
as to what might be the effect of the unfortunate letter at this juncture.

"No!" he replied with sharp emphasis.

"Egbert, remember you have given your mother the gravest provocation."

"I also remember that she did her best to make me the fool I have been, and she might have
a little more patience now. The truth is that mother's God was respectability, and she will
never forgive me for destroying her idol."

"Read the other letters; there may be that in them which will be more reassuring."

"No, I thank you," he replied, bitterly; "I have had all that I can stand for one day. She
believes the infernal lie which that scoundrel Shrumpf tells, and gives me no hearing;" and
he related to Mrs. Arnot the true version of the affair.

She had the tact to see that his present perturbed condition was not her opportunity, and she
soon after left him in a mood that promised little of good for the future.

But in the long, quiet hours that followed her departure his thoughts were busy. However much
he might think that others were the cause of his unhappy plight, he had seen that he was far
more to blame. It had been made still more clear that, even if he could shift this blame somewhat,
he could not the consequences. Mrs. Arnot's words had given him a glimpse of light, and had
revealed a path, which, though still vague and uncertain, promised to lead out of the present
labyrinth of evil. During the morning hours he had dared to hope, and even to pray, that he
might find a way of escape from his miserable self and the wretched condition to which it had
brought him.

For a long time he turned the leaves of Mrs. Arnot's Bible, and here and there a text would
flash out like a light upon the clouded future, but as a general thing the words had little
meaning.

To his ardent and somewhat imaginative nature she had presented the struggle toward a better
life in the most attractive light. He was not asked to do something which was vague and mystical;
he was not exhorted to emotions and beliefs of which he was then incapable, nor to forms and
ceremonies that were meaningless to him, nor to professions equally hollow. On the contrary,
the evils, the defects of his own nature, were given an objective form, and he could almost
see himself, like a knight, with lance in rest, preparing to run a tilt against the personal
faults which had done him such injury. The deeper philosophy, that his heart was the rank soil
from which sprang these faults, like Cadmus' armed men, would come with fuller experience.

But in a measure he had understood and had been inspired by Mrs. Arnot's thought. Although
from a weak mother's indulgence and his own, from wasted years and bad companionships, his
life was wellnigh spoiled, he still had sufficient mind to see that to fight down the clamorous
passions of his heart into subjection would be a grand and heroic thing. If from the yielding
mire of his present self a noble and granite-like character could be built up, so strongly
and on such a sure foundation that it would stand the shocks of time and eternity, it were
worth every effort of which human nature is capable. Until Mrs. Arnot had spoken her wise and
kind, yet honest words, he had felt himself unable to stand erect, much less to enter on a
struggle which would tax the strongest.

But suppose God would deign to help, suppose it was the divine purpose and practice to supplement
the feeble efforts of those who, like himself, sought to ally their weakness to his strength,
might not the Creator and the creature, the Father and the child, unitedly achieve what it
were hopeless to attempt unaided?

Thoughts like these more or less distinctly had been thronging his mind during the morning,
and though the path out of his degradation was obscure and uncertain, it had seemed the only
way of escape. He knew that Mrs. Arnot would not consciously mock him with delusive hopes,
and as she spoke her words seemed to have the ring and echo of truth. When the courage to attempt
better things was reviving, it was sad that he should receive the first disheartening blow
from his mother. Not that she purposed any such cruel stroke; but when one commences wrong
in life one is apt to go on making mischief to the end. Poor Mrs. Haldane's kindness and severity
had always been ill-timed.

For some hours, as will be seen, the contents of the mother's letter inspired only resentment
and caused discouragement; but calmer thoughts explained the letter, and confirmed Mrs. Arnot's
words, that he had given the "gravest provocation."

At the same time the young man instinctively felt that if he attempted the knightly effort
that Mrs. Arnot had so earnestly urged, his mother could not help him much, and might be a
hindrance. Her views would be so conventional, and she would be so impatient of any methods
that were not in accordance with her ideas of respectability, that she might imperil everything
should he yield to her guidance. If, therefore, he could obtain the means of subsistence he
resolved to remain in Hillaton, where he could occasionally see Mrs. Arnot. She had been able
to inspire the hope of a better life, and she could best teach him how such a life was possible.

The next day circumstances prevented Mrs. Arnot from visiting the prison, and Haldane employed
part of the time in writing to his mother a letter of mingled reproaches and apologies, interspersed
with vague hopes and promises of future amendment, ending, however, with the positive assurance
that he would not leave Hillaton unless compelled to do so by hunger.

To Mrs. Haldane this letter was only an aggravation of former misconduct, and a proof of the
unnatural and impracticable character of her son. The fact that it was written from a prison
was hideous, to begin with. That, after all the pains at which she had been to teach him what
was right, he could suggest that she was in part to blame for his course seemed such black
ingratitude that his apologies and acknowledgments of wrong went for nothing. She quite overlooked
the hope, expressed here and there, that he might lead a very different life in the future.
His large and self-confident assurances made before had come to naught, and she had not the
tact to see that he would make this attempt in a different spirit.

It was not by any means a knightly or even a manly letter that he wrote to his mother; it was
as confused as his own chaotic moral nature; but if Mrs. Haldane had had a little more of Mrs.
Arnot's intuition, and less of prejudice, she might have seen scattered through it very hopeful
indications. But even were such indications much more plain, her anger, caused by his refusal
to leave Hillaton, and the belief that he would continue to disgrace himself and her, would
have blinded her to them. Under the influence of this anger she sat down and wrote at once:

Since you cast off your mother for strangers--since you attempt again what you have proved
yourself incapable of accomplishing--since you prefer to go out of jail to be a vagrant and
a criminal in the streets, instead of accepting my offer to live a respectable and secluded
life where your shame is unknown, I wash my hands of you, and shall take pains to let it be
understood that I am no longer responsible for you or your actions. You must look to strangers
solely until you can conform your course to the will of the one you have so greatly wronged.

Haldane received this letter on the morning of the day which would again give him freedom.
Mrs. Arnot had visited him from time to time, and had been pleased to find him, as a general
thing, in a better and more promising mood. He had been eager to listen to all that she had
to say, and he seemed honestly bent on reform. And yet, while hopeful, she was not at all sanguine
as to his future. He occasionally gave way to fits of deep despondency, and again was over-confident,
while the causes of these changes were not very apparent, and seemingly resulted more from
temperament than anything else. She feared that the bad habits of long standing, combining
with his capricious and impulsive nature, would speedily betray him into his old ways. She
was sure this would be the case unless the strong and steady hand of God sustained him, and
she had tried to make him realize the same truth. This he did in a measure, and was exceedingly
distrustful; and yet he had not been able to do much more than hope God would help him--for
to anything like trustful confidence he was still a stranger.

The future was very dark and uncertain. What he was to do, how he was to live, he could not
foresee. Even the prison seemed almost a refuge from the world, out into which he would be
thrown that day, as one might be cast from a ship, to sink or swim, as the case might be.

While eager to receive counsel and advice from Mrs. Arnot, he felt a peculiar reluctance to
take any pecuniary assistance, and he fairly dreaded to have her offer it; still, it might
be all that would stand between him and hunger.

After receiving his mother's harsh reply to his letter, his despondency was too great even
for anger. He was ashamed of his weakness and discouragement, and felt that they were unmanly,
and yet was powerless to resist the leaden depression that weighed him down.

Mrs. Arnot had promised to call just before his release, and when she entered his cell she
at once saw that something was amiss. In reply to her questioning he gave her the letter just
received.

After reading it Mrs. Arnot did not speak for some time, and her face wore a sad, pained look.

At last she said, "You both misunderstand each other; but, Egbert, you have no right to cherish
resentment. Your mother sincerely believes your course is all wrong, and that it will end worse
than before. I think she is mistaken. And yet perhaps she is right, and it will be easier for
you to commence your better and reformed life in the seclusion which she suggests. I am sorry
to say it to you, Egbert, but I have not been able to find any employment for you such as you
would take, or I would be willing to have you accept. Perhaps Providence points to submission
to your mother's will."

"If so, then I lose what little faith I have in Providence," he replied impetuously. "It is
here, in this city, that I have fallen and disgraced myself, and it is here I ought to redeem
myself, if I ever do. Weeks ago, in pride and self-confidence, I made the effort, and failed
miserably, as might have been expected. Instead of being a gifted and brilliant man, as I supposed,
that had been suddenly brought under a cloud as much through misfortune as fault, I have discovered
myself to be a weak, commonplace, illiterate fellow, strong only in bad passions and bad habits.
Can I escape these passions and habits by going elsewhere? You have told me, in a way that
excited my hope, of God's power and willingness to help such as I am. If he will not help me
here, he will not anywhere; and if, with his aid, I cannot surmount the obstacles in my way
here, what is God's promised help but a phrase which means nothing, and what are we but victims
of circumstances?"

"Are you not reaching conclusions rather fast, Egbert? You forget that I and myriads of others
have had proof of God's power and willingness to help. If wide and varied experience can settle
any fact, this one has been settled. But we should ever remember that we are not to dictate
the terms on which he is to help us."

"I do not mean to do this," said Haldane eagerly, "but I have a conviction that I ought to
remain in Hillaton. To tell you the truth, Mrs. Arnot, I am afraid to go elsewhere," he added
in a low tone, while tears suffused his eyes. "You are the only friend in the universe that
I am sure cares for me, or that I can trust without misgivings. To me God is yet but little
more than a name, and one that heretofore I have either forgotten or feared. You have led me
to hope that it might be otherwise some day, but it is not so yet, and I dare not go away alone
where no one cares for me, for I feel sure that I would give way to utter despondency, and
recklessness would follow as a matter of course."

"O Egbert," sighed Mrs. Arnot, "how weak you are, and how foolish, in trusting so greatly in
a mere fellow-creature."

"Yes, Mrs. Arnot, 'weak and foolish.' Those two words now seem to sum up my whole life and
all there is of me."

"And yet," she added earnestly, "if you will, you can still achieve a strong, and noble character.
O that you had the courage and heroic faith in God to fight out this battle to the end! Should
you do so, as I told you before, you would be ideal knight. Heaven would ring with your praise,
however unfriendly the world might be. I cannot conceive of a grander victory than that of
a debased nature over itself. If you should win such a victory, Egbert--if, in addition, you
were able, by the blessing of God on your efforts, to build up a strong, true character--I
would honor you above other men, even though you remained a wood-sawyer all your days," and
her dark eyes became lustrous with deep feeling as she spoke.

Haldane looked at her fixedly for a moment, and grew very pale. He then spoke slowly and in
a low tone:

"To fail after what you have said and after all your kindness would be terrible. To continue
my old vile self, and also remember the prospect you now hold out--what could be worse? And
yet what I shall do, what I shall be, God only knows. But in sending you to me I feel that
he has given me one more chance."

"Egbert," she replied eagerly, "God will give you chances as long as you breathe. Only the
devil will tell you to despair. He, never. Remember this should you grow old in sin. To tell
you the truth, however, as I see you going out into the world so humbled, so self-distrustful,
I have far more hope for you than when you first left this place, fully assured that you were,
in yourself, sufficient for all your peculiar difficulties. And now, once more, good-by, for
a time. I will do everything I can for you. I have seen Mr. Growther to-day, and he appears
very willing that you should return to his house for the present. Strange old man! I want to
know him better, for I believe his evil is chiefly on the outside, and will fall off some day,
to his great surprise."

CHAPTER XXXII

A SACRED REFRIGERATOR

The glare of the streets was intolerable to Haldane after his confinement, and he hastened
through them, looking neither to the right hand nor to the left. A growl from Mr. Growther's
dog greeted him as he entered, and the old man himself snarled:

"Well, I s'pose you stood me as long as you could, and then went to prison for a while for
a change."

"You are mistaken, Mr. Growther; I went to prison because I deserved to go there, and it's
very good of you to let me come back again."

"No, it ain't good of me, nuther. I want a little peace and comfort, and how could I have 'em
while you was bein' kicked and cuffed around the streets? Here, I'll get you some dinner. I
s'pose they only gave you enough at jail to aggravate your in'ards."

"No, nothing more, please. Isn't there something I can do? I've sat still long enough."

Mr. Growther looked at him a moment, and then said:

"Are you sayin' that because you mean it?"

"Yes."

"Would you mind helpin' me make a little garden? I know I ought to have done it long ago, but
I'm one of those 'crastinating cusses, and rheumatic in the bargain."

"I'll make your garden on the one condition that you stand by and boss the job."

"O, I'm good at bossin', if nothing else. There ain't much use of plantin' anything, though,
for every pesky bug and worm in town will start for my patch as soon as they hear on't."

"I suppose they come on the same principle that I do."

"They hain't so welcome--the cussed little varmints! Some on 'em are so blasted mean that I
know I ought to be easier on 'em just out of feller feelin'. Them cut-worms now--if they'd
only take a plant and satisfy their nateral appetites on it, it would go a good ways, and the
rest o' the plants would have a chance to grow out of harm's way; but the nasty little things
will jest eat 'em off above the ground, as if they was cut in two by a knife, and then go on
to anuther. That's what I call a mean way of gettin' a livin'; but there's lots of people like
'em in town, who spile more than they eat. Then there's the squash-bug. If it's his nater to
eat up the vines I s'pose he must do it, but why in thunder must he smell bad enough to knock
you over into the bargain? It's allers been my private opinion that the devil made these pests,
and the Lord had nothin' to do with 'em. The idea that he should create a rose, and then a
rose-bug to spile it, ain't reconcilable to what little reason I've got."

"Well," replied Haldane with a glimmer of a smile, "I cannot account for rose-bugs and a good
many worse things. I notice, however, that in spite of all these enemies people manage to raise
a great deal that's very nice every year. Suppose we try it."

They were soon at work, and Haldane felt the better for a few hours' exercise in the open air.

The next morning Mrs. Arnot brought some papers which she said a legal friend wished copied,
and she left with them, inclosed in an envelope, payment in advance. After she had gone Haldane
offered the money to Mr. Growther, but the old man only growled:

"Chuck it in a drawer, and the one of us who wants it first can have it."

For the next two or three weeks Mrs. Arnot, by the dint of considerable effort, kept up a supply
of MSS., of which copies were required, and she supplemented the prices which the parties concerned
were willing to pay. Her charitable and helpful habits were well known to her friends, and
they often enabled her thus to aid those to whom she could not give money direct. But this
uncertain employment would soon fail, and what her protege was then to do she could not foresee.
No one would trust him, and no one cared to have him about his premises.

But in the meantime the young man was thinking deeply for himself. He soon concluded not to
make Mr. Growther's humble cottage a hiding-place; and he commenced walking abroad through
the city after the work of the day. He assumed no bravado, but went quietly on his way like
any other passer-by. The majority of those who knew who he was either ignored his existence,
or else looked curiously after him, but some took pains to manifest their contempt. He could
not have been more lonely and isolated if he were walking a desert.

Among the promises he had made Mrs. Arnot was that he would attend church, and she naturally
asked him to come to her own.

"As you feel toward my husband, it will probably not be pleasant for you to come to our pew"
she had said; "but I hope the time will come when bygones will be bygones. The sexton, however,
will give you a seat, and our minister preaches excellent sermons"

Not long after, true to his word, the young man went a little early, as he wished to be as
unobtrusive as possible. At the same time there was nothing furtive or cringing in his nature.
As he had openly done wrong, he was now resolved to try as openly to do right, and let people
ascribe whatever motive they chose.

But his heart misgave him as he approached the new elegant church on the most fashionable street.
He felt that his clothes were not in keeping with either the place of worship or the worshippers.

Mr. Arnot's confidential clerk was talking with the sexton as he hesitatingly mounted the granite
steps, and he saw that dignified functionary, who seemed in some way made to order with the
church over which he presided, eye him askance while he lent an ear to what was evidently a
bit of his history. Walking quietly but firmly up to the official, Haldane asked:

"Will you give me a seat, sir?"

The man reddened, frowned, and then said:

"Really, sir, our seats are generally taken Sunday mornings. I think you will feel more at
home at our mission chapel in Guy street."

"And among the guys, why don't you add?" retorted Haldane, his old spirit flashing up, and
he turned on his heel and stalked back to Mr. Growther's cottage.

"Short sermon to-day," said the old man starting out of a doze.

Haldane told him of his reception.

The wrinkles in the quaint visage of his host grew deep and complicated, as though he had tasted
something very bitter, and he remarked sententiously:

"If Satan could he'd pay that sexton a whoppin' sum to stand at the door and keep sinners out."

"No need of the devil paying him anything; the well-dressed Christians see to that. As I promised
Mrs. Arnot to come, I tried to keep my word, but this flunky's face and manner alone are enough
to turn away such as I am. None but the eminently respectable need apply at that gate of heaven.
If it were not for Mrs. Arnot I would believe the whole thing a farce."

"Is Jesus Christ a farce?" asked the practical Mr. Growther, testily. "What is the use of jumping
five hundred miles from the truth because you've happened to run afoul of some of those Pharisees
that he cussed?"

Haldane laughed and said, "You have a matter-of-fact way of putting things that there is no
escaping. It will, probably, do me more good to stay home and read the Bible to you than to
be at church."

The confidential clerk, who had remained gossiping in the vestibule, thought the scene he had
witnessed worth mentioning to his employer, who entered with Mrs. Arnot not very long after,
and lingered for a word or two. The man of business smiled grimly, and passed on. He usually
attended church once a day, partly from habit and partly because it was the respectable thing
to do. He had been known to remark that he never lost anything by it, for some of his most
successful moves suggested themselves to his mind during the monotony of the service.

To annoy his wife, and also to gratify a disposition to sneer at the faults of Christians,
Mr. Arnot, at the dinner, commenced to commend ironically the sexton's course.

"A most judicious man!" he affirmed. "Saint Peter himself at the gate could not more accurately
strain out the saints from the sinners--nay, he is even keener-eyed than Saint Peter, for he
can tell first-class from second-class saints. Though our church is not full, I now understand
why we have a mission chapel. You may trust 'Jeems' to keep out all but the very first-class--those
who can exchange silk and broadcloth for the white robe. But what on earth could have brought
about such a speedy transition from jail to church on the part of Haldane?"

"I invited him," said Mrs. Arnot, in a pained tone; "but I did not think it would be to meet
with insult"

"Insult! Quite the reverse. I should think that such as he ought to feel it an honor to be
permitted a place among the second-class saints."

Mrs. Arnot's thoughts were very busy that afternoon. She was not by nature an innovator, and,
indeed, was inclined to accept the established order of things without very close questioning.
Her Christian life had been developed chiefly by circumstances purely personal, and she had
unconsciously found walks of usefulness apart from the organized church work. But she was a
devout worshipper and a careful listener to the truth. It had been her custom to ride to the
morning service, and, as they resided some distance from the church, to remain at home in the
evening, giving all in her employ a chance to go out.

Concerning the financial affairs of the church she was kept well informed, for she was a liberal
contributor, and also to all other good causes presented. From earliest years her eye had always
been accustomed to the phases presented by a fashionable church, and everything moved forward
so quietly and with such sacred decorum that the thought of anything wrong did not occur to her.

But the truth that one who was endeavoring to lead a better life had been practically turned
from the door of God's house seemed to her a monstrous thing. How much truth was there in her
husband's sarcasm? How far did her church represent the accessible Jesus of Nazareth, to whom
all were welcomed, or how far did it misrepresent him? Now that her attention was called to
the fact, she remembered that the congregation was chiefly made up of the elite of the city,
and that she rarely had seen any one present who did not clearly present the fullest evidence
of respectability. Were those whom the Master most emphatically came to seek and save excluded?
She determined to find out speedily.

Summoning her coachman, she told him that she wished to attend church that evening. She dressed
herself very plainly, and entered the church closely veiled. Instead of going to her own pew,
she asked the judicious and discriminating sexton for a seat. After a careless glance he pointed
to one of the seats near the door, and turned his back upon her. A richly dressed lady and
gentleman entered soon after, and he was all attention, marshalling them up the aisle into
Mrs. Arnot's own pew, since it was known she did not occupy it in the evening. A few decent,
plain-looking women, evidently sent thither by the wealthy families in whose employ they were,
came in hesitatingly, and those who did not take seats near the entrance, as a matter of course,
were motioned thither without ceremony. The audience room was but sparsely filled, large families
being represented by one or two members or not at all. But Mrs. Arnot saw none of Haldane's
class present--none who looked as if they were in danger, and needed a kind, strong, rescuing
hand--none who looked hungry and athirst for truth because perishing for its lack. In that
elegant and eminently respectable place, upholstered and decorated with faultless taste, there
was not a hint of publicans and sinners. One might suppose he was in the midst of the millennium,
and that the classes to whom Christ preached had all become so thoroughly converted that they
did not even need to attend church. There was not a suggestion of the fact that but a few blocks
away enough to fill the empty pews were living worse than heathen lives.

The choir performed their part melodiously, and a master in music could have found no fault
with the technical rendering of the musical score. They were paid to sing, and they gave to
such of their employers as cared to be present every note as it was written, in its full value.
As never before, it struck Mrs. Arnot as a performance. The service she had attended hitherto
was partly the creation of her own earnest and devotional spirit. To-night she was learning
to know the service as it really existed.

The minister was evidently a conscientious man, for he had prepared his evening discourse for
his thin audience as thoroughly as he had his morning sermon. Every word was carefully written
down, and the thought of the text was exhaustively developed. But Mrs. Arnot was too far back
to hear well. The poor man seemed weary and discouraged with the arid wastes of empty seats
over which he must scatter the seeds of truth to no purpose. He looked dim and ghostly in the
far-away pulpit, and in spite of herself his sermon began to have the aspect of a paid performance,
the effect of which would scarcely be more appreciable than the sighing of the wind without.
The keenest theologian could not detect the deviation of a hair from the received orthodox
views, and the majority present were evidently satisfied that his views would be correct, for
they did not give very close attention. The few plain domestics near her dozed and nodded through
the hour, and so gained some physical preparation for the toils of the week, but their spiritual
natures were as clearly dormant as their lumpish bodies.

After the service Mrs. Arnot lingered, to see if any one would speak to her as a stranger and
ask her to come again. Such was clearly not the habit of the congregation. She felt that her
black veil, an evidence of sorrow, was a sort of signal of distress which ought to have lured
some one to her side with a kind word or two, but beyond a few curious glances she was unnoticed.
People spoke who were acquainted, who had been introduced to each other. As the worshippers
(?) hastened out, glad to escape to regions where living questions and interests existed, the
sexton, who had been dozing in a comfortable corner, bustled to the far end of the church,
and commenced, with an assistant, turning out the lights on either side so rapidly that it
seemed as if a wave of darkness was following those who had come thither ostensibly seeking light.

Mrs. Arnot hastened to her carriage, where it stood under the obscuring shadow of a tree, and
was driven home sad and indignant--most indignant at herself that she had been so absorbed
in her own thoughts and life that she had not discovered that the church to build and sustain
which she had given so liberally was scarcely better than a costly refrigerator.

CHAPTER XXXIII

A DOUBTFUL BATTLE IN PROSPECT

The painful impression made by the evening service that has been described acted as a rude
disenchantment, and the beautiful church, to which Mrs. Arnot had returned every Sabbath morning
with increasing pleasure, became as repulsive as it had been sacred and attractive. To her
sincere and earnest spirit anything in the nature of a sham was peculiarly offensive; and what,
she often asked herself, could be more un-Christlike than this service which had been held
in his name?

The revelation so astonished and disheartened her that she was prone to believe that there
was something exceptional in that miserable Sabbath evening's experience, and she determined
to observe further and more closely before taking any action. She spoke frankly of her feelings
and purposes to Haldane, and in so doing benefited the young man very much; for he was thus
led to draw a sharp line between Christ and the Christlike and that phase of Christianity which
is largely leavened with this world. No excuse was given him to jumble the true and the false
together.

"You will do me a favor if you will quietly enter the church next Sunday morning and evening,
and unobtrusively take one of the seats near the door," she said to him. "I wish to bring this
matter to an issue as soon as possible. If you could manage to enter a little in advance of
me, I would also be glad. I know how Christ received sinners, and I would like to see how we
who profess to be representing him, receive those who come to his house."

Haldane did as she requested. In a quiet and perfectly unobtrusive manner he walked up the
granite steps into the vestibule, and his coarse, gray suit, although scrupulously clean, was
conspicuous in its contrast with the elegant attire of the other worshippers. He himself was
conspicuous also; for many knew who he was, and whispered the information to others. A "jail-bird"
was, indeed, a rara avis in that congregation, and there was a slight, but perfectly decorous,
sensation. However greatly these elegant people might lack the spirit of Him who was "the friend
of publicans and sinners" they would not for the world do anything that was overtly rude or
ill-bred. Only the official sexton frowned visibly as the youth took a seat near the door.
Others looked askance or glided past like polished icicles. Haldane's teeth almost chattered
with the cold. He felt himself oppressed, and almost pushed out of the house, by the moral
atmosphere created by the repellent thoughts of some who apparently felt the place defiled
by his presence. Mrs. Arnot, with her keen intuition, felt this atmosphere also, and detected
on the part of one or two of the officers of the Church an unchristian spirit. Although the
sermon was an excellent one that morning, she did not hear it.

In the evening a lady draped in a black veil sat by Haldane. The service was but a dreary counterpart
of the one of the previous Sabbath. The sky had been overcast and slightly threatening, and
still fewer worshippers had ventured out.

Beyond furtive and curious glances no one noticed them save the sexton, who looked and acted
as if Haldane's continued coming was a nuisance, which, in some way, he must manage to abate.

The young man waited for Mrs. Arnot at her carriage-door, and said as he handed her in:

"I have kept my word; but please do not ask me to come to this church again, or I shall turn
infidel."

"I shall not come myself again," she replied, "unless there is a decided change."

The next morning she wrote notes to two of the leading officers of the church, asking them
to call that evening; and her request was so urgent that they both came at the appointed hour.

Mrs. Arnot's quiet but clear and distinct statement of the evils of which she had become conscious
greatly surprised and annoyed them. They, with their associates, had been given credit for
organizing and "running" the most fashionable and prosperous church in town. An elegant structure
had been built and paid for, and such a character given the congregation that if strangers
visited or were about to take up their abode in the city they were made to feel that the door
of this church led to social position and the most aristocratic circles. Of course, mistakes
were made. People sometimes elbowed their way in who were evidently flaunting weeds among the
patrician flowers, and occasionally plain, honest, but somewhat obtuse souls would come as
to a Christian church. But people who were "not desirable"--the meaning of this phrase had
become well understood in Hillaton--were generally frozen out by an atmosphere made so chilly,
even in August, that they were glad to escape to other associations less benumbing. Indeed,
it was now so generally recognized that only those of the best and most assured social position
were "desirable," that few others ventured up the granite steps or sought admittance to this
region of sacred respectability. And yet all this had been brought about so gradually, and
so entirely within the laws of good breeding and ecclesiastical usage, and also under the most
orthodox preaching, that no one could lay his finger on anything upon which to raise an issue.

The result was just what these officers had been working for, and it was vexatious indeed that,
after years of successful manipulation, a lady of Mrs. Arnot's position should threaten to
make trouble.

"My dear Mrs. Arnot," said one of these polished gentlemen, with a suavity that was designed
to conciliate, but which was nevertheless tinged with philosophical dogmatism, "there are certain
things that will not mix, and the attempt to mingle them is wasting time on the impossible.
It is in accordance with the laws of nature that each class should draw together according
to their affinities and social status. Our church is now entirely homogeneous, and everything
moves forward without any friction."

"It appears to me sadly machine-like," the lady remarked.

"Indeed, madam," with a trace of offended dignity, "is not the Gospel ably preached?"

"Yes, but it is not obeyed. We have been made homogeneous solely on worldly principles, and
not on those taught in the Gospels."

They could not agree, as might have been supposed, and Mrs. Arnot was thought to be unreasonable
and full of impracticable theories.

"Very well, gentlemen," said Mrs. Arnot, with some warmth, "if there can be no change in these
respects, no other course is left for me but to withdraw;" and the religious politicians bowed
themselves out, much relieved, feeling that this was the easiest solution of the question.

Mrs. Arnot soon after wrote to the Rev. Dr. Barstow, pastor of the church, for a letter of
dismission. The good man was much surprised by the contents of this missive. Indeed, it so
completely broke a chain of deep theological speculation that he deserted his study for the
street. Here he met an officer of the church, a man somewhat advanced in years, whom he had
come to regard as rather reserved and taciturn in disposition. But in his perplexity he exhibited
Mrs. Arnot's letter, and asked an explanation.

"Well," said the gentleman, uneasily, "I understand that Mrs. Arnot is dissatisfied, and perhaps
she has some reason to be."

"Upon what grounds?" asked the clergyman hastily.

"Suppose we call upon her," was the reply. "I would rather you should hear her reasons from
herself; and, in fact, I would be glad to hear them also."

Half an hour later they sat in Mrs. Arnot's parlor.

"My dear madam," said Dr. Barstow, "are you willing to tell us frankly what has led to the
request contained in this letter? I hope that I am in no way to blame."

"Perhaps we have all been somewhat to blame," replied Mrs. Arnot in a tone so gentle and quiet
as to prove that she was under the influence of no unkindly feeling or resentment; "at least
I feel that I have been much to blame for not seeing what is now but too plain. But habit and
custom deaden our perceptions. The aspect of our church was that of good society--nothing to
jar upon or offend the most critical taste. Your sermons were deeply thoughtful and profound,
and I both enjoyed and was benefited by them. I came and went wrapped up in my own spiritual
life and absorbed in my own plans and work, when, unexpectedly, an incident occurred which
revealed to me what I fear is the animus and character of our church organization. I can best
tell you what I mean by relating my experience and that of a young man whom I have every reason
to believe wishes to lead a better life, yes, even a Christian life;" and she graphically portrayed
all that had occurred, and the impressions made upon her by the atmosphere she had found prevalent,
when she placed herself in the attitude of a humble stranger.

"And now," she said in conclusion, "do we represent Christ, or are we so leavened by the world
that it may be doubted whether he would acknowledge us?"

The minister shaded his pained and troubled face with his hand.

"We represent the world," said the church officer emphatically; "I have had a miserable consciousness
of whither we were drifting for a long time, but everything has come about so gradually and
so properly, as it were, that I could find no one thing upon which I could lay my finger and
say, This is wrong and I protest against it. Of course, if I had heard the sexton make such
a remark to any one seeking to enter the house of God as was made to the young man you mention
I should have interfered. And yet the question is one of great difficulty. Can such diverse
classes meet on common ground?"

"My dear sir," said Mrs. Arnot earnestly, "I do not think we, as a church, are called upon
to adjust these diverse classes, and to settle, on the Sabbath, nice social distinctions. The
Head of the Church said, 'Whosoever will, let him come.' We, pretending to act in his name
and by his authority, say, 'Whosoever is sufficiently respectable and well-dressed, let him
come.' I feel that I cannot any longer be a party to this perversion.

"If we would preserve our right to be known as a Christian church we must say to all, to the
poor, to the most sinful and debased, as well as to those who are now welcomed, 'Come'; and
when they are within our walls they should be made to feel that the house does not belong to
an aristocratic clique, but rather to him who was the friend of publicans and sinners. Christ
adjusted himself to the diverse classes. Are we his superiors?"

"But, my dear madam, are there to be no social distinctions?"

"I am not speaking of social distinctions. Birth, culture, and wealth will always, and very
properly, too, make great differences. In inviting people to our homes we may largely consult
our own tastes and preferences, and neither good sense nor Christian duty requires that there
should be intimacy between those unfitted for it by education and character. But a church is
not our house, but God's house, and what right have we to stand in the door and turn away those
whom he most cordially invites? Christ had his beloved disciple, and so we can have our beloved
and congenial friends. But there were none too low or lowly for him to help by direct personal
effort, by sympathetic contact, and I, for one, dare not ignore his example."

"Do you not think we can better accomplish this work by our mission chapel?"

"Where is your precedent? Christ washed the feet of fishermen in order to give us an example
of humility, and to teach us that we should be willing to serve any one in his name. I heartily
approve of mission chapels as outposts; but, as in earthly warfare, they should be posts of
honor, posts for the brave, the sagacious, and the most worthy. If they are maintained in the
character of second-class cars, they are to that extent unchristian. If those who are gathered
there are to be kept there solely on account of their dress and humble circumstances, I would
much prefer taking my chances of meeting my Master with them than in the church which practically
excludes them.

"Christ said, 'I was a stranger, and ye took me in.' I came to our church as a stranger twice.
I was permitted to walk in and walk out, but no one spoke to me, no one invited me to come
again. It seems to me that I would starve rather than enter a private house where I was so
coldly treated. I have no desire for startling innovations. I simply wish to unite myself with
a church that is trying to imitate the example of the Master, and where all, whatever may be
their garb or social and moral character, are cordially invited and sincerely welcomed."

Dr. Barstow now removed his hand from his face. It was pale, but its expression was resolute
and noble.

"Mrs. Arnot, permit me to say that you are both right and wrong," he said. "Your views of what
a church should be are right; you are wrong in wishing to withdraw before having patiently
and prayerfully sought to inculcate a true Christian spirit among those to whom you owe and
have promised Christian fidelity. You know that I have not very long been the pastor of this
church, but I have already felt that something was amiss. I have been oppressed and benumbed
with a certain coldness and formality in our church life. At the same time I admit, with contrition,
that I have given way to my besetting sin. I am naturally a student, and when once in my study
I forget the outside world. I am prone to become wholly occupied with the thought of my text,
and to forget those for whom I am preparing my discourse. I, too, often think more of the sermon
than of the people, forgetting the end in the means, and thus I fear I was becoming but a voice,
a religious philosophy, among them, instead of a living and a personal power. You have been
awakened to the truth, Mrs. Arnot, and you have awakened me. I do not feel equal to the task
which I clearly foresee before me; I may fail miserably, but I shall no longer darken counsel
with many words. You have given me much food for thought; and while I cannot foretell the end,
I think present duty will be made clear. In times of perplexity it is our part to do what seems
right, asking God for guidance, and then leave the consequences to him. One thing seems plain
to me, however, that it is your present duty to remain with us, and give your prayers and the
whole weight of your influence on the side of reform."

"Dr. Barstow," said Mrs. Arnot, her face flushing slightly, "you are right; you are right.
I have been hasty, and, while condemning others, was acting wrong myself. You have shown the
truer Christian spirit. I will remain while there is any hope of a change for the better."

"Well, Mrs. Arnot," said Mr. Blakeman, the elderly church officer, "I have drawn you out partly
to get your views and partly to get some clearer views myself. I, too, am with you, doctor,
in this struggle; but I warn you both that we shall have a hot time before we thaw the ice
out of our church."

"First pure, and then peaceable," said the minister slowly and musingly; and then they separated,
each feeling somewhat as soldiers who are about to engage in a severe and doubtful battle.

CHAPTER XXXIV

A FOOTHOLD

The skies did not brighten for Haldane, and he remained perplexed and despondent. When one
wishes to reform, everything does not become lovely in this unfriendly world. The first steps
are usually the most difficult, and the earliest experience the most disheartening. God never
designed that reform should be easy. As it is, people are too ready to live the life which
renders reform necessary. The ranks of the victims of evil would be doubled did not a wholesome
fear of the consequences restrain.

Within a few short weeks the fortunes of the wealthy and self-confident youth had altered so
greatly that now he questioned whether the world would give him bread, except on conditions
that were painfully repugnant.

There was his mother's offer, it is true; but had Mrs. Haldane considered the nature of this
offer, even she could scarcely have made it. Suppose he tried to follow out his mother's plan,
and went to a city where he was unknown, could she expect an active young fellow to go to an
obscure boarding-house, and merely eat and sleep? By an inevitable law the springing forces
of his nature must find employment either in good or evil. If he sought employment of any kind
the question would at once arise, "Who are you?" and sooner or later would come his history.
In his long, troubled reveries he thought of all this, and the prospect of vegetating in dull
obscurity at his mother's expense was as pleasant as that of being buried alive.

Moreover, he could not endure to leave Hillaton in utter defeat. He was prostrate, and felt
the foot of adverse fate upon his neck, but he would not acknowledge himself conquered. If
he could regain his feet he would renew the struggle; and he hoped in some way to do so. As
yet, however, the future was a wall of darkness.

Neither did he find any rest for his spiritual feet. For some reason he could not grasp the
idea of a personal God who cared enough for him to give any practical help. In spite of all
that Mrs. Arnot could say, his heart remained as cold and heavy as a stone within his breast.

But to some extent he could appreciate the picture she had presented. He saw one who, through
weakness and folly, had fallen into the depths of degradation, patiently and bravely fighting
his way up to a true manhood; and he had been made to feel that it was such a noble thing to
do that he longed to accomplish it. Whether he could or no he was not sure, for his old confidence
was all gone. But he daily grew more bent on making an honest trial, and in this effort a certain
native persistency and unwillingness to yield would be of much help to him.

He was now willing, also, to receive any aid which self-respect permitted him to accept, and
was grateful for the copying obtained for him by Mrs. Arnot. But she frankly told him that
it would not last long. The question what he should do next pressed heavily upon him.

As he was reading the paper to Mr. Growther one evening, his eye caught an advertisement which
stated that more hands were needed at a certain factory in the suburbs. He felt sure that if
he presented himself in the morning with the others he would be refused, and he formed the
bold purpose of going at once to the manufacturer. Having found the stately residence, he said
to the servant who answered his summons:

"Will you say to Mr. Ivison that a person wishes to see him?"

The maid eyed him critically, and concluded, from his garb, to leave him standing in the hall.

Mr. Ivison left his guests in the parlor and came out, annoyed at the interruption.

"Well, what do you wish, sir?" he said, in a tone that was far from being encouraging, at the
same time gaining an unfavorable impression from Haldane's dress.

"In the evening paper you advertised for more hands in your factory. I wish employment."

"Are you drunk, or crazy, that you thus apply at my residence?" was the harsh reply.

"Neither, sir; I--"

"You are very presuming, then."

"You would not employ me if I came in the morning."

"What do you mean? Who are you?"

"I am at least human. Can you give one or two moments to the consideration of my case?"

"One might afford that much," said the gentleman with a half-apologetic laugh; for the pale
face and peculiar bearing of the stranger were beginning to interest him.

"I do not ask more of your time, and will come directly to the point. My name is Haldane, and,
as far as I am concerned, you know nothing good concerning me."

"You are correct," said Mr. Ivison coldly. "I shall not need your services."

"Mr. Ivison," said Haldane in a tone that made the gentleman pause, "ought I to be a thief
and a vagabond?"

"Certainly not."

"Then why do you, and all who, like you, have honest work to give, leave me no other alternative?
I have acted wrongly and foolishly, but I wish to do better. I do not ask a place of trust,
only work with others, under the eyes of others, where I could not rob you of a cent's worth
if I wished. In the hurry and routine of your office you would not listen to me, so I come
to-night and make this appeal. If you refuse it, and I go to the devil, you will have a hand
in the result."

The prompt business-man, whose mind had learned to work with the rapidity of his machinery,
looked at the troubled, half-desperate face a moment, and then said emphatically:

"By Jove, you are right! I'll give you work. Come to-morrow. Good-night, and good luck to your
good intentions. But remember, no nonsense."

Here at last was a chance; here at last was regular employment. It was one step forward. Would
he be able to hold it? This seemed doubtful on the morrow after he had realized the nature
of his surroundings. He was set to work in a large room full of men, boys, and slatternly-dressed
girls. He was both scolded and laughed at for the inevitable awkwardness of a new beginner,
and soon his name and history began to be whispered about. During the noon recess a rude fellow
flung the epithet of "jail-bird" at him, and, of course, it stuck like a burr. Never in all
his life had he made such an effort at self-control as that which kept his hands off this burly
tormentor.

He both puzzled and annoyed his companions. They knew that he did not belong to their class,
and his bearing and manner made them unpleasantly conscious of his superiority; and yet all
believed themselves so much more respectable than he, that they felt it was a wrong to them
that he should be there at all. Thus he was predestined to dislike and ill-treatment. But that
he could act as if he were deaf and blind to all that they could do or say was more than they
could understand. With knit brows and firmly-closed lips he bent his whole mind to the mastery
of the mechanical duties required of him, and when they were over he strode straight to his
humble lodging-place.

Mr. Growther watched him curiously as he reacted into lassitude and despondency after the strain
and tension of the day.

"It's harder to stand than 'tis to git along with me, isn't it?"

"Yes, much harder."

"O thunder! better give it up, then, and try something else."

"No, it's my only chance."

"There's plenty other things to do."

"Not for me. These vulgar wretches I am working with think it an outrage that a 'jail-bird,'
as they call me, contaminates the foul air that they breathe. I may be driven out by them;
but," setting his teeth, "I won't give up this foothold of my own accord."

"You might have been President if you had shown such grit before you got down."

"That's not pleasant to think of now."

"I might 'a known that; but it's my mean way of comfortin' people. A-a-h."

Haldane's new venture out into the world could scarcely have had a more painful and prosaic
beginning; but, as he said, he had gained a "foothold."

There was one other encouraging fact, of which he did not know. Mr. Ivison sent for the foreman
of the room in which Haldane had been set at work, and said:

"Give the young fellow a fair chance, and report to me from time to time how he behaves; but
say nothing of this to him. If he gets at his old tricks, discharge him at once; but if he
shows the right spirit, I wish to know it."

CHAPTER XXXV

"THAT SERMON WAS A BOMBSHELL"

The following Sabbath morning smiled so brightly that one might be tempted to believe that
there was no sin and misery in the world, and that such a church as Mrs. Arnot condemned was
an eminently proper organization. As the congregation left their elegant homes, and in elegant
toilets wended their way to their elegant church, they saw nothing in the blue sky and sunshine
to remind them of the heavy shadows brooding over the earth. What more was needed than that
they should give an hour to their aesthetic worship, as they had done in the past when the
weather permitted, and then return to dinner and a nap and all the ordinary routine of life?
There were no "beasts at Ephesus" to fight now. The times had changed, and to live in this
age like an ancient Christian would be like going to Boston on foot when one might take a palace
car. Hundreds of fully grown, perfectly sane people filed into the church, who complacently
felt that in attending service once or twice a week, if so inclined, they were very good Christians.
And yet, strange to say, there was a conspicuous cross on the spire, and they had named their
church "St. Paul's."

St. Paul! Had they read his life? If so, how came they to satirize themselves so severely?
A dwarf is the more to be pitied if named after a giant.

It was very queer that this church should name itself after the tent-maker, who became all
things to all men, and who said, "I made myself servant unto all that I might gain the more."

It was very unfortunate for them to have chosen this saint, and yet the name, Saint Paul, had
a very aristocratic sound in Hillaton, and thus far had seemed peculiarly fitted to the costly
edifice on which it was carved.

And never had the church seemed more stately than on this brilliant Sabbath morning, never
had its elegance and that of the worshippers seemed more in harmony.

But the stony repose and calm of their Gothic temple was not reflected in the faces of the
people. There was a general air of perturbation and expectancy. The peculiar and complacent
expression of those who are conscious of being especially well dressed and respectable was
conspicuously absent. Annoyed, vexed, anxious faces passed into the vestibule. Knots of twos,
threes, and half-dozens lingered and talked eagerly, with emphatic gestures and much shaking
of heads. Many who disliked rough weather from any cause avoided their fellow-members, and
glided hastily in, looking worried and uncomfortable. Between the managing officers, who had
felicitated themselves on having secured a congregation containing the creme de la creme of
the city, on one hand, and the disquieted Mr. Blakeman, who found the church growing uncomfortably
cold, on the other, Mrs. Arnot's words and acts and the minister's implied pledge to bring
the matter squarely to an issue, had become generally known, and a foreboding as of some great
catastrophe oppressed the people. If the truth were known, there were very general misgivings;
and, now that the people had been led to think, there were some uncomfortable aspects to the
question. Even that august dignitary the sexton was in a painful dilemma as to whether it would
be best to assume an air of offended dignity, or veer with these eddying and varying currents
until sure from what quarter the wind would finally blow. He had learned that it was Mrs. Arnot
whom he had twice carelessly motioned with his thumb into a back seat, and he could not help
remarking to several of the more conservative members, that "it was very unjust and also unkind
in Mrs. Arnot to palm herself off on him as an ordinary pusson, when for a long time it had
been the plainly understood policy of the church not to encourage ordinary pussons."

But the rumor that something unusual was about to take place at St. Paul's brought thither
on this particular Sabbath all kinds and descriptions of people; and the dignified functionary
whose duty it was to seat them grew so hot and flustered with his unwonted tasks, and made
such strange blunders, that both he and others felt that they were on the verge of chaos. But
the most extraordinary appearing personage was no other than Mr. Jeremiah Growther; and, as
with his gnarled cane he hobbled along at Haldane's side, he looked for all the world as if
some grotesque and antique carving had come to life and was out for an airing. Not only the
sexton, but many others, looked askance at the tall, broad-shouldered youth of such evil fame,
and his weird-appearing companion, as they walked quite far up the aisle before they could
find a seat.

Many rubbed their eyes to be sure it was not a dream. What had come over the decorous and elegant
St. Paul's? When before had its dim, religious light revealed such scenes? Whence this irruption
of strange, uncouth creatures--a jail-bird in a laborer's garb, and the profane old hermit,
whom the boys had nicknamed "Jerry Growler," and who had not been seen in church for years.

Mrs. Arnot, followed by many eyes, passed quietly up to her pew, and bowed her head in prayer.

Prayer! Ah! in their perturbation some had forgotten that this was the place of prayer, and
hastily bowed their heads also.

Mr. Arnot had been engaged in his business to the very steps, and much too absorbed during
the week to hear or heed any rumors; but as he walked up the aisle he stared around in evident
surprise, and gave several furtive glances over his shoulder after being seated. As his wife
raised her head, he leaned toward her and whispered:

"What's the matter with Jeems? for, if I mistake not, there are a good many second-class saints
here to-day." But not a muscle changed in Mrs. Arnot's pale face. Indeed, she scarcely heard
him. Her soul was and had been for several days in the upper sanctuary, in the presence of
God, pleading with him that he would return to this earthly temple which the spirit of the
world had seemingly usurped.

When Dr. Barstow arose to commence the service, a profound hush fell upon the people. Even
his face and bearing impressed and awed them, and it was evident that he, too, had climbed
some spiritual mountain, and had been face to face with God.

As he proceeded with the service in tones that were deep and magnetic, the sense of unwonted
solemnity increased. Hymns had been selected which the choir could not perform, but must sing;
and the relation between the sacred words and the music was apparent. The Scripture lessons
were read as if they were a message for that particular congregation and for that special occasion,
and, as the simple and authoritative words fell on the ear the general misgiving was increased.
They seemed wholly on Mrs. Arnot's side; or, rather, she was on theirs.

When, at last, Dr. Barstow rose, not as a sacred orator and theologian who is about to deliver
a sermon, but rather as an earnest man, who had something of vital moment to say, the silence
became almost oppressive.

Instead of commencing by formally announcing his text, as was his custom, he looked silently
and steadily at his people for a moment, thus heightening their expectancy.

"My friends," he began slowly and quietly, and there was a suggestion of sorrow in his tone
rather than of menace or denunciation; "my friends, I wish to ask your calm and unprejudiced
attention to what I shall say this morning. I ask you to interpret my words in the light of
the word of God and your own consciences; and if I am wrong in any respect I will readily acknowledge
it. Upon a certain occasion Christ said to his disciples, 'Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of'; and he at once proved how widely his spirit differed from theirs. They accepted
the lesson--they still followed him, and through close companionship eventually acquired his
merciful, catholic spirit. But at this time they did not understand him nor themselves. Perhaps
we can best understand the spirit we are of by considering his, and by learning to know him
better whom we worship, by whose name we are called.

"During the past week I have been brought face to face with the Christ of the Bible, rather
than the Christ of theology and philosophy, who has hitherto dwelt in my study; and I have
learned with sorrow and shame that my spirit differed widely from his. The Christ that came
from heaven thought of the people, and had compassion on the multitude. I was engrossed with
my sermons, my systems of truth, and nice interpretations of passages that I may have rendered
more obscure. But I have made a vow in his name and strength that henceforth I will no longer
come into this pulpit, or go into any other, to deliver sermons of my own. I shall no longer
philosophize about Christ, but endeavor to lead you directly to Christ; and thus you will learn
by comparison what manner of spirit you are of, and, I trust, become imbued with his Spirit.
I shall speak the truth in love, and yet without fear, and with no wordy disguise. If we discover
any sad and fatal mistake in our religious life, let us correct it before it is too late."

It would be impossible to portray the effect of the sermon that followed, coming, as it did,
from a strong soul stirred to its depths by the truth under consideration. The people for the
time being were swayed by it and carried away. What was said was seen to be truth, felt to
be truth; and as the divine Man stood out before them luminous in his own loving and compassionate
deeds, which manifested his character and the principles of the faith he founded, the old,
exclusive, self-pleasing life of the church shrivelled up as a farce and a sham.

"In conclusion," said Dr. Barstow, "what was the spirit of this Man when he summoned publicans
and fishermen to be his followers? what was his spirit when he laid his hand on the leper?
what, when he said to the outcast, 'Neither do I condemn thee; go and sin no more'? what, when
to the haughty Pharisees, the most respectable people of that day, he threatened, 'Woe unto you!'

"He looked after the rich and almost perfect young man, by whom he was nevertheless rejected,
and loved him; he also said to the penitent thief, 'To-day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.'
His heart was as large as humanity. Such was his spirit.'"

After a moment's pause, in which there was a hush of breathless expectancy, Dr. Barstow's deep
tones were again heard. "God grant that henceforth yonder doors may be open to all whom Christ
received, and with the same welcome that he gave. If this cannot be, the name of St. Paul,
the man who 'made himself the servant unto all that he might gain the more,' can no longer
remain upon this church save in mockery. If this cannot be, whoever may come to this temple,
Christ will not enter it, nor dwell within it.'"

The people looked at each other, and drew a long breath. Even those who were most in love with
the old system forgot Dr. Barstow, and felt for the moment that they had a controversy with
his Master.

The congregation broke up in a quiet and subdued manner. All were too deeply impressed by what
they had heard to be in a mood for talking as yet; and of the majority, it should be said in
justice that, conscious of wrong, they were honestly desirous of a change for the better.

During the sermon Mr. Growther's quaint and wrinkled visage had worked most curiously, and
there were times when he with difficulty refrained from a hearty though rather profane indorsement.

On his way home he said to Haldane, "I've lived like a heathen on Lord's day and all days;
but, by the holy poker, I'll hear that parson hereafter every Sunday, rain or shine, if I have
to fight my way into the church with a club."

A peculiar fire burned in the young man's eyes and his lips were very firm, but he made no
reply. The Man whose portraiture he had beheld that day was a revelation, and he hoped that
this divine yet human Friend might make a man of him.

"Well," remarked Mr. Arnot, sententiously, "that sermon was a perfect bombshell; and, mark
my words, it will either blow the doctor out of his pulpit, or some of the first-class saints
out of their pews."

But a serene and hopeful light shone from Mrs. Arnot's eyes, and she only said, in a low tone:

"The Lord is in his holy temple."

CHAPTER XXXVI

MR. GROWTHER FEEDS AN ANCIENT GRUDGE

The problem in regard to the future of St. Paul's Church, which had so greatly burdened Dr.
Barstow, was substantially solved. Christ had obtained control of the preacher's heart, and
henceforth would not be a dogma, but a living presence, in his sermons. The Pharisees of old
could not keep the multitudes from him, though their motives for following him were often very
mixed. Although the philosophical Christ of theology, whom Dr. Barstow had ably preached, could
not change the atmosphere of St. Paul's, the Christ of the Bible, the Man of Sorrows, the meek
and lowly Nazarene, could, and the masses would be tempted to feel that they had a better right
in a place sacred to his worship than those who resembled him in spirit as little as they did
in the pomp of their life.

There would be friction at first, and some serious trouble. Mr. Arnot's judgment was correct,
and some of the "first-class saints" (in their own estimation) would be "blown out of their
pews." St. Paul's would eventually cease to be the fashionable Church par excellence; and this
fact alone would be good and sufficient reason for a change on the part of some who intend
to be select in their associations on earth, whatever relations with the "mixed multitude"
they may have to endure in heaven. But the warm-hearted and true-hearted would remain; and
every church grows stronger as the Pharisees depart and the publicans and sinners enter.

The congregation that gathered at the evening service of the memorable Sabbath described in
the previous chapter was prophetic. Many of the wealthy and aristocratic members were absent,
either from habit or disgust. Haldane, Mr. Growther, and many who in some respects resembled
them, were present. "Jeems," the discriminating sexton, had sagaciously guessed that the wind
was about to blow from another quarter, and was veering around also, as fast as he deemed it
prudent. "Ordinary pussons" received more than ordinary attention, and were placed within earshot
of the speaker.

But the problem of poor Haldane's future was not clear by any means. It is true a desire to
live a noble life had been kindled in his heart, but as yet it was little more than a good
impulse, an aspiration. In the fact that his eyes had been turned questioningly and hopefully
toward the only One who has ever been able to cope with the mystery of evil, there was rich
promise; but just what this divine Friend could do for him he understood as little as did the
fishermen of Galilee. They looked for temporal change and glory; he was looking for some vague
and marvellous change and exaltation.

But the Sabbath passed, and he remained his old self. Hoping, longing for the change did not
produce it.

It was one of Mr. Growther's peculiarities to have a fire upon the hearth even when the evenings
were so warm as not to require it. "Might as well kinder git ourselves used to heat," he would
growl when Haldane remonstrated.

After the evening service they both lowered at the fire for some time in silence.

"Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven," had been Dr. Barstow's text; and, as is usually the case, the necessity of conversion
had been made clearer than just what conversion is; and many more than the disquieted occupants
of the quaint old kitchen had been sent home sorely perplexed how to set about the simple task
of "believing." But it was a happy thing for all that they had been awakened to the fact that
something must be done. After that sermon none could delude themselves with the hope that being
decorous, well-dressed worshippers at St. Paul's would be all that was required.

But Mr. Growther needed no argument on this subject, and he had long believed that his only
chance was, as he expressed it, "such an out-and-out shakin' to pieces, and makin' over agin
that I wouldn't know myself." Then he would rub his rheumatic legs despondently and add, "But
my speretual j'ints have got as stiff and dry as these old walkin' pins; and when I try to
git up some good sort o' feelin' it's like pumpin' of a dry pump. I only feel real hearty when
I'm a cussin'. A-a-h!"

But the day's experience and teaching had awakened anew in his breast, as truly as in Haldane's,
the wish that he could be converted, whatever that blessed and mysterious change might be;
and so, with his wrinkled face seamed with deeper and more complex lines than usual, the poor
old soul stared at the fire, which was at once the chief source of his comfort and the emblem
of that which he most dreaded. At last he snarled:

"I'm a blasted old fool for goin' to meetin' and gittin' all riled up so. Here, I haven't had
a comfortable doze today, and I shall be kickin' around all night with nothin' runnin' in my
head but 'Except ye be convarted, except ye be convarted'; I wish I had as good a chance of
bein' convarted as I have of bein' struck by lightnin'."

"I wish I needed conversion as little as you," said Haldane despondently.

"Now look here," snapped the old man; "I'm in no mood for any nonsense to-night. I want you
to know I never have been convarted, and I can prove it to you plaguy quick if you stroke me
agin the fur. You've got the advantage of me in this business, though you have been a hard
cuss; for you are young and kind o' limber yet." Then, as he glanced at the discouraged youth,
his manner changed, and in a tone that was meant to be kindly he added, "There, there! Why
don't you pluck up heart? If I was as young as you be, I'd get convarted if it took me all summer."

Haldane shook his head, and after a moment slowly and musingly said, as much to himself as
to the giver of this good advice:

"I'm in the Slough of Despond, and I don't know how to get out. I can see the sunny uplands
that I long to reach, but everything is quaking and giving way under my feet. After listening
to Dr. Barstow's grand sermon this morning, my spirit flamed up hopefully. Now he has placed
a duty directly in my path that I cannot perform by myself. Mrs. Arnot has made it clear to
me that the manhood I need is Christian manhood. Dr. Barstow proves out of the Bible that the
first step toward this is conversion--which seems to be a mysterious change which I but vaguely
understand. I must do my part myself, he says, yet I am wholly dependent on the will and co-operation
of another. Just what am I to do? Just when and how will the help come in? How can I know that
it will come? or how can I ever be sure that I have been converted?"

"O, stop splittin' hairs!" said Mr. Growther, testily. "Hanged if I can tell you how it's all
goin' to be brought about--go ask the parson to clear up these p'ints for you--but I can tell
you this much: when you git convarted you'll know it. If you had a ragin' toothache, and it
suddenly stopped and you felt comfortable all over, wouldn't you know it? But that don't express
it. You'd feel more'n comfortable; you'd feel so good you couldn't hold in. You'd be fur shoutin';
you wouldn't know yourself. Why, doesn't the Bible say you'd be a new critter? There'll be
just such a change in your heart as there is in this old kitchen when we come in on a cold,
dark night and light the candles, and kindle a fire. I tell you what 'tis, young man, if you
once got convarted your troubles would be wellnigh over."

Though the picture of this possible future was drawn in such homely lines, Haldane looked at
it with wistful eyes. He had become accustomed to his benefactor's odd ways and words, and
caught his sense beneath the grotesque imagery. As he was then situated, the future drawn by
the old man and interpreted by himself was peculiarly attractive. He was very miserable, and
it is most natural, especially for the young, to wish to be happy. He had been led to believe
that conversion would lead to a happiness as great as it was mysterious--a sort of miraculous
ecstasy, that would render him oblivious of the hard and prosaic conditions of his lot. Through
misfortune and his own fault he possessed a very defective character. This character had been
formed, it is true, by years of self-indulgence and wrong, and Mrs. Arnot had asserted that
reform would require long, patient, and heroic effort. Indeed, she had suggested that in fighting
and subduing the evils of one's own nature a man attained the noblest degree of knighthood.
He had already learned how severe was the conflict in which he had been led to engage.

But might not this mysterious conversion make things infinitely easier? If a great and radical
change were suddenly wrought in his moral nature, would not evil appetites and propensities
be uprooted like vile weeds? If a "new heart" were given him, would not the thoughts and desires
flowing from it be like pure water from an unsullied spring? After the "old things"--that is
the evil--had passed away, would not that which was noble and good spring up naturally, and
almost spontaneously?

This was Mr. Growther's view; and he had long since learned that the old man's opinions were
sound on most questions. This seemed, moreover, the teaching of the Bible also, and of such
sermons as he could recall. And yet it caused him some misgivings that Mrs. Arnot had not indicated
more clearly this short-cut out of his difficulties.

But Mr. Growther's theology carried the day. As he watched the young man's thoughtful face
he thought the occasion ripe for the "word in season."

"Now is the time," he said; "now while yer moral j'ints is limber. What's the use of climbin'
the mountain on your hands and knees when you can go up in a chariot of fire, if you can only
git in it?" and he talked and urged so earnestly that Haldane smiled and said:

"Mr. Growther, you have mistaken your vocation. You ought to have been a missionary to the
heathen."

"That would be sendin' a thief to ketch a thief. But you know I've a grudge agin the devil,
if I do belong to him; and if I could help git you out of his clutches it would do me a sight
o' good."

"If I ever do get out I shall indeed have to thank you."

"I don't want no thanks, and don't desarve any. You're only giving me a chance to hit the adversary
'twixt the eyes," and the old man added his characteristic "A-a-h!" in an emphatic and vengeful
manner, as if he would like to hit very hard.

Human nature was on the side of Mr. Growther's view of conversion. Nothing is more common than
the delusive hope that health, shattered by years of wilful wrong, can be regained by the use
of some highly extolled drug, or by a few deep draughts from some far-famed spring.

Haldane retired to rest fully bent upon securing this vague and mighty change as speedily as
possible.

CHAPTER XXXVII

HOPING FOR A MIRACLE

Mr. Ivison, Haldane's employer, was a worshipper at St. Paul's, and, like many others, had
been deeply impressed by the sermon. Its influence had not wholly exhaled by Monday, and, as
this gentleman was eminently practical, he felt that he ought to do something, as well as experience
a little emotion. Thus he was led to address the following note to Haldane:

Last week I gave you a chance; this week I am induced to give you a good word. While I warn
you that I will tolerate no weak dallying with your old temptations, I also tell you that I
would like to see you make a man of yourself, or, more correctly, perhaps, as Dr. Barstow would
express it, be made a man of. If one wants to do right, I believe there is help for him (go
and ask the Rev. Dr. Barstow about this); and if you will go right straight ahead till I see
you can be depended upon, I will continue to speak good words to you and for you, and perhaps
do more. GEORGE IVISON.

This note greatly encouraged Haldane, and made his precarious foothold among the world's industries
seem more firm and certain. The danger of being swept back into the deep water where those
struggle who have no foothold, no work, no place in society would not come from the caprice
or forgetfulness of his employer, but from his own peculiar temptations and weaknesses. If
he could patiently do his duty in his present humble position, he justly believed that it would
be the stepping-stone to something better. But, having learned to know himself, he was afraid
of himself; and he had seen with an infinite dread what cold, dark depths yawn about one whom
society shakes off as a vile and venomous thing, and who must eventually take evil and its
consequences as his only portion. The hot, reeking apartment wherein he toiled was the first
solid ground that he had felt beneath his feet for many days. If he could hold that footing,
the water might shoal so that he could reach the land. It is true he could always look to his
mother for food and clothing if he would comply with her conditions. But, greatly perverted
as his nature had been, food and clothing, the maintenance of a merely animal life, could no
longer satisfy him. He had thought too deeply, and had seen too much truth, to feed contentedly
among the swine.

But the temptations which eventually lead to the swine--could he persistently resist these?
Could he maintain a hard, monotonous routine of toil, with no excitements, no pleasures, with
nothing that even approached happiness? He dared not give way; he doubted his strength to go
forward alone with such a prospect. If conversion be a blessed miracle by which a debased nature
is suddenly lifted up, and a harsh, lead-colored, prosaic world transfigured into the vestibule
of heaven, he longed to witness it in his own experience.

It was while he was in this mood that his thoughts recurred to Dr. Marks, the good old clergyman
who had been the subject of his rude, practical joke months before. He recalled the sincere,
frank letter which led to their evening interview, and remembered with a thrill of hope the
strong and mysterious emotion that had seized upon him as the venerable man took his hand in
his warm grasp, and said in tones of pathos that shook his soul, "I wish I could lead you by
loving force into the paths of pleasantness and peace." Wild and reckless fool as he then was,
it had been only by a decided effort and abrupt departure that he had escaped the heavenly
influences which seemed to brood in the quiet study where the good man prayed and spun the
meshes of the nets which he daily cast for souls. If he could visit that study again with a
receptive heart, might not the emotion that he bad formerly resisted rise like a flood, and
sweep away his old miserable self, and he become in truth a "new creature"?

The thought, having been once entertained, speedily grew into a hope, and then became almost
a certainty. He felt that he would much rather see Dr. Marks than Dr. Barstow, and that if
he could feel that kind, warm grasp again, an impulse might be given him which even Mrs. Arnot's
wise and gentle words could not inspire.

Before the week was over he felt that something must be done either to soften his hard lot
or to give him strength to endure it.

The men, boys, and girls who worked at his side in the mill were in their natures like their
garb, coarse and soiled. They resented the presence of Haldane for a twofold reason; they regarded
the intrusion of a "jail-bird" among them in the light of an insult; they were still more annoyed,
and perplexed also, that this disreputable character made them feel that he was their superior.
Hence a system of petty persecution grew up. Epithets were flung at him, and practical jokes
played upon him till his heart boiled with anger or his nerves were irritated to the last degree
of endurance. More than once his fist was clenched to strike; but he remembered in time that
the heavier the blow he struck, the more disastrously it would react against himself.

After the exasperating experiences and noise of the day, Mr. Growther's cottage was not the
quiet refuge he needed. Mr. Growther's growl was chronic, and it rasped on Haldane's overstrained
nerves like the filing of a saw. Dr. Barstow's sermons of the previous Sabbath had emphatically
"riled" the old gentleman, and their only result, apparently, was to make him more out-of-sorts
and vindictive toward his poor, miserable little self than ever. He was so irascible that even
the comfortable cat and dog became aware that something unusual was amiss, and, instead of
dozing securely, they learned to keep a wary and deprecatory eye on their master and the toes
of his thick-soled slippers.

"I've been goin' on like a darned old porkerpine," he said to Haldane one evening," and if
you don't git convarted soon you'd better git out of my way. If you was as meek as Moses and
twice as good you couldn't stand me much longer;" and the poor fellow felt that there was considerable
truth in the remark.

The mill closed at an earlier hour on Saturday afternoon, and he determined to visit Dr. Marks
if he could obtain permission from his employer to be absent a few hours on Monday morning.
He wrote a note to Mr. Ivison, cordially thanking him for his encouraging words, but adding,
frankly, that he could make no promises in regard to himself. "All that I can say, is," he
wrote, "that I am trying to do right now, and that I am grateful to you for the chance you
have given me. I wish to get the 'help' you suggest in your note to me, but, in memory of certain
relations to my old pastor, Dr. Marks, I would rather see him than Dr. Barstow, and if you
will permit me to be absent a part of next Monday forenoon I will esteem it a great favor,
and will trespass on your kindness no further. I can go after mill-hours on Saturday, and will
return by the first train on Monday."

Mr. Ivison readily granted the request, and even became somewhat curious as to the result.

When Mrs. Arnot had learned from Haldane the nature of his present employment, she had experienced
both pleasure and misgivings. That he was willing to take and try to do such work rather than
remain idle, or take what he felt would be charity, proved that there was more good metal in
his composition than she had even hoped; but she naturally felt that the stinging annoyances
of his position would soon become intolerable. She was not surprised, although she was somewhat
perplexed, at the receipt of the following letter:

MY DEAR MRS. ARNOT.--You have been such a true, kind friend to me, and have shown so much interest
in my welfare, that I am led to give you a fuller insight into my present experiences and hopes.
You know that I wish to be a Christian. You have made Christian manhood seem the most desirable
thing that I can ever possess, but I make little or no progress toward it. Something must be
done, and quickly too. Either there must be a great change in me, or else in my circumstances.
As there is no immediate prospect of the latter, I have been led to hope that there can be
such a change in me that I shall be lifted above and made superior to the exasperating annoyances
of my condition. Yes, I am hoping even far more. If I could only experience the marvellous
change which Dr. Barstow described so eloquently last Sunday evening, might I not do right
easily and almost spontaneously? It is so desperately hard to do right now! If conversion will
render my steep, thorny path infinitely easier, then surely I ought to seek this change by
every means in my power. Indeed, there must be a change in me, or I shall lose even the foothold
I have gained. I am subjected, all day long, to insult and annoyance. At times I am almost
desperate and on the verge of recklessness. Every one of the coarse creatures that I am compelled
to work with is a nettle that loses no chance to sting me; and there is one among them, a big,
burly fellow, who is so offensive that I cannot keep my hands off him much longer if I remain
my old self. You also know what a reception I must ever expect in the streets when I am recognized.
The people act as if I were some sort of a reptile, which they must tolerate at large, but
can, at least, shun with looks of aversion. And then, when I get to Mr. Growther's cottage
I do not find much respite. It seems like ingratitude to write this, but the good old man's
eccentric habit of berating himself and the world in general has grown wearisome, to say the
least. I want to be lifted out of myself--far above these petty vexations and my own miserable
weaknesses.

Once, before I left home, I played a rude joke on our good old pastor. Instead of resenting
it he wrote me such a kind letter that I went to his study to apologize. While there his manner
and words were such that I had to break away to escape a sudden and mysterious influence that
inclined me toward all that is good. I have hoped that if I should visit him I might come under
that influence again, and so be made a new and better man.

I have also another motive, which you will understand. Mother and I differ widely on many things,
and always will; but I long to see her once more. I have been thinking of late of her many
kindnesses--o that she had been less kind, less indulgent! But she cannot help the past any
more than I can, and it may do us both good to meet once more. I do not think that she will
refuse to see me or give me shelter for a few hours, even though her last letter seemed harsh.

I shall also be glad to escape for a few hours from my squalid and wretched surroundings. The
grime of the sordid things with which I have so long been in contact seems eating into my very
soul, and I long to sleep once more in my clean, airy room at home.

But I am inflicting myself too long upon you. That I have ventured to do so is due to your
past kindness, which I can only wonder at, but cannot explain. Gratefully yours, E. HALDANE.

Mrs. Arnot was more than curious; she was deeply interested in the result of this visit, and
she hoped and prayed earnestly that it might result in good. But she had detected an element
in the young man's letter which caused her considerable uneasiness. His idea of conversion
was a sudden and radical change in character that would be a sort of spiritual magic, contravening
all the natural laws of growth and development. He was hoping to escape from his evil habits
and weaknesses, which were of long growth, as the leper escaped from his disease, by a healing
and momentary touch. He would surely be disappointed: might he not also be discouraged, and
give up the patient and prayerful struggle which the sinful must ever wage against sin in this
world? She trusted, however, that God had commenced a good work in his heart, and would finish it.

Even the sight of his native city, with its spires glistening in the setting sun, moved Haldane
deeply, and when in the dusk he left the train, and walked once more through the familiar streets,
his heart was crowded with pleasant and bitter memories, which naturally produced a softened
and receptive mood.

He saw many well-remembered faces, and a few glanced at him as if he suggested one whom they
had known. But he kept his hat drawn over his eyes, and, taking advantage of the obscurity
of the night, escaped recognition.

"It is almost like coming back after one has died," he said to himself. "I once thought myself
an important personage in this town, but it has got on better without me than it would have
done with me. Truly, Mrs. Arnot is right--it's little the world cares for any one, and the
absurdest of all blunders is to live for its favor."

It was with a quickly beating heart that he rang the bell at the parsonage, and requested to
be shown up to Dr. Marks' study. Was this the supreme moment of his life, and he on the eve
of that mysterious, spiritual change, of which he had heard so much, and the results of which
would carry him along as by a steady, mighty impulse through earth's trials to heaven's glory?
He fairly trembled at the thought.

The girl who had admitted him pointed to the open study door, and he silently crossed its threshold.
The good old clergyman was bending over his sermon, to which he was giving his finishing touches,
and the soft rays of the student's lamp made his white hair seem like a halo about his head.

The sacred quiet of the place was disturbed only by the quill of the writer, who was penning
words as unworldly as himself. Another good old divine, with his Bible in his hand, looked
down benignantly and encouragingly at the young man from his black-walnut frame. He was the
sainted predecessor of Dr. Marks, and the sanctity of his life of prayer and holy toil also
lingered in this study. Old volumes and heavy tomes gave to it the peculiar odor which we associate
with the cloister, and suggested the prolonged spiritual musings of the past, which are so
out of vogue in the hurried, practical world of to-day. This study was, indeed, a quiet nook--a
little, slowly moving eddy left far behind by the dashing, foaming current of modern life;
and Haldane felt impressed that he had found the hallowed place, the true Bethel, where his
soul might be born anew.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

THE MIRACLE TAKES PLACE

"The body of my sermon is finished; may the Lord breathe into it the breath of life!" ejaculated
Dr. Marks, leaning back in his chair.

Haldane now secured his attention by knocking lightly on the open door. The old gentleman arose
and came forward with the ordinary kindly manner with which he would greet a stranger.

"You do not remember me," said Haldane.

"I cannot say that I do. My eyesight is not as good as when I was at your age."

"I am also the last one you expect to see, but I trust I shall not be unwelcome when you know
my motive for coming. I am Egbert Haldane, and I have hoped that your study would remain open,
though nearly all respectable doors are closed against me."

"Egbert Haldane! Can I believe my eyes?" exclaimed the old clergyman, stepping eagerly forward.

"When last in this place," continued the youth, "I was led by your generous forgiveness of
my rude behavior toward you to say, that if I ever wished to become a Christian I would come
to you sooner than to any one else. I have come, for I wish to be a Christian."

"Now the Lord be praised! He has heard his servant's prayers," responded Dr. Marks fervently.
"My study is open to you, my son, and my heart, too," he added, taking Haldane's hand in both
of his with a grasp that emphasized his cordial words. "Sit down by me here, and tell me all
that is on your mind."

This reception was so much kinder than he had even hoped, that Haldane was deeply moved. The
strong, genuine sympathy unsealed his lips, and in honest and impetuous words he told the whole
story of his life since their last interview. The good doctor was soon fumbling for his handkerchief,
and as the story culminated, mopped his eyes, and ejaculated, "Poor fellow!" with increasing
frequency.

"And now," concluded Haldane, "if I could only think that God would receive me as you have--if
he would only change me from my miserable self to what I know I ought to be, and long to be--I
feel that I could serve him with gratitude and gladness the rest of my life, even though I
should remain in the humblest station; and I have come to ask you what I am to do?"

"He will receive you, my boy; he will receive you. No fears on that score," said the doctor,
with a heartiness that carried conviction. "But don't ask me what to do. I'm not going to interfere
in the Lord's work. He is leading you. Now I believe the Lord has taken you in hand, and I
shall not presume to meddle. Bow with me in prayer that he may speedily bring you into his
marvellous light and knowledge." And the good man knelt and spread his hands toward heaven,
and prayed with the simplicity and undoubting faith of an ancient patriarch.

Was his faith contagious? Did the pathos of his voice, his strongly manifested sympathy, combine
with all that had gone before to melt the young man's heart? Or, in answer to the prayer, was
there present One whose province it is to give life? Like the wind that mysteriously rises
and comes toward one with its viewless, yet distinctly felt power. Haldane was conscious of
influences at work in his heart that were as potent as they were incomprehensible. Fear and
doubt were passing away. Deep emotion thrilled his soul. Nothing was distinct save a rush of
feeling which seemed to lift him up as on a mighty tide, and bear him heavenward.

This was what he had sought; this was what he had hoped; this strong, joyous feeling, welling
up in his heart like a spring leaping into the sunlight, must be conversion.

When he arose from his knees his eyes were full of tears, but a glad radiance shone through
them, and grasping the doctor's hand, he said brokenly:

"I believe your prayer has been answered. I never felt so strangely--so happy before."

"Come with me," cried the old man, impetuously, "come with me. Your mother must learn at once
that her son, who 'was dead, is alive again';" and a few moments later Haldane was once more
in the low carriage, on his way, with the enthusiastic doctor, to his old home.

"We won't permit ourselves to be announced," said the childlike old clergyman as they drove
up the gravelled road. "We will descend upon your mother and sisters like an avalanche of happiness."

The curtains in the sitting-room were not drawn, and the family group was before them. The
apartment was furnished with elegance and taste, but the very genius of dreariness seemed to
brood over its occupants. The sombre colors of their mourning dresses seemed a part of the
deep shadow that was resting upon them, and the depth and gloom of the shadow was intensified
by their air of despondency and the pallor of their faces. The younger daughter was reading,
but the elder and the mother held their hands listlessly in their laps, and their eyes were
fixed on vacancy, after the manner of those whose thoughts are busy with painful themes.

Haldane could endure but a brief glance, and rushed in, exclaiming:

"Mother, forgive me!"

His presence was so unexpected and his onset so impetuous that the widow had no time to consider
what kind of a reception she ought to give her wayward son, of whom she had washed her hands.

Her mother-love triumphed; her heart had long been sore with grief, and she returned his embrace
with equal heartiness.

His sisters, however, had inherited more of their mother's conventionality than of her heart;
and the fact that this young man was their brother did not by any means obliterate from their
minds the other facts, that he had a very bad reputation and that he was abominably dressed.
Their greeting, therefore, was rather grave and constrained, and suggested that there might
have been a death in the family, and that their brother had come home to attend the funeral.

But the unworldly Dr. Marks was wholly absorbed in the blessed truth that the dead was alive
and the lost found. He had followed Haldane into the apartment, rubbing his hands, and beaming
general congratulation. Believing that the serene light of Heaven's favor rested on the youth,
he had forgotten that it would be long before society relaxed its dark frown. It seemed to
him that it was an occasion for great and unmixed rejoicing.

After some brief explanations had been given to the bewildered household, the doctor said:

"My dear madam, I could not deny myself the pleasure of coming with your son, that I might
rejoice with you. The Lord has answered our prayers, you see, and you have reason to be the
happiest woman living."

"I am glad, indeed," sighed the widow, "that some light is beginning to shine through this
dark and mysterious providence, for it has been so utterly dark and full of mystery that my
faith was beginning to waver."

"The Lord will net suffer you to be tempted above that you are able," said the clergyman, heartily.
"When relief is essential it comes, and it always will come, rest assured. Take comfort, madam;
nay, let your heart overflow with joy without fear. The Lord means well by this young man.
Take the unspeakable blessing he sends you with the gladness and gratitude of a child receiving
gifts from a good Father's hands. Since he has begun the good work, he'll finish it."

"I hope so. I do, indeed, hope that Egbert will now come to his senses, and see things and
duty in their true light, as other people do," ejaculated the widow, fervently. "If he had
only taken the excellent advice you first gave him here how much better it would have been
for us all! But now--" A dreary sigh closed the sentence.

"But now," responded the doctor, a little warmly, "the Lord has saved a soul from death, and
that soul is your only son. It appears to me that this thought should swallow up every other;
and it will, when you realize it," he concluded, heartily. "This world and the fashion of it
passeth away. Since all promises well for the world to come, you have only cause for joy. As
for my excellent advice, I was better pleased with it at the time than the Lord was. I now
am thankful that he let it do no more harm than it did."

"We cannot help the past, mother," said Haldane, eagerly, "let us turn our eyes to the future,
which is all aglow with hope. I feel that God has forgiven me, and the thought fills my heart
with a tumult of joy. Your warm embrace assures me that you have also forgiven the wrong, the
shame, and sorrow you have received at my hands. Henceforth it shall be my life-effort that
you receive the reverse of all this. I at last feel within me the power to live as a true man
ought."

"I trust your hopes may be realized, Egbert; I do, indeed; but you were so confident before--and
then we all know what followed," concluded his mother, with a shudder.

"My present feeling, my present motives, in no respect resemble my condition when I started
out before. I was then a conceited fool, ignorant of myself, the world, and the task I had
attempted. But now I feel that all is different. Mother," he exclaimed with a rush of emotion,
"I feel as if heaven had almost begun in my heart! why, then, do you cloud this bright hour
with doubts and fears?"

"Well, my son, we will hope for the best," said his mother, endeavoring to throw off her despondency,
and share in the spirit which animated her pastor. "But I have dwelt so long in sorrow and
foreboding that it will require time before I can recover my old natural tone. These sudden
and strong alternations of feeling and action on your part puzzle and disquiet me, and I cannot
see why one brought up as you have been should not maintain a quiet, well-bred deportment,
and do right as a matter of course, as your sisters do. And yet, if Dr. Marks truly thinks
that you mean to do right from this time forward, I shall certainly take courage; though how
we are going to meet what has already occurred I hardly see."

"I do, indeed, believe that your son intends to do right, and I also believe that the Lord
intends to help him--which is of far greater consequence," said Dr. Marks. "I will now bid
you good-night, as to-morrow is the Sabbath; and let me entreat you, my dear madam, in parting,
to further by your prayer and sympathy the good work which the Lord has begun."

Haldane insisted on seeing the old gentleman safely back to his study. Their ride was a rather
quiet one, each being busy with his own thoughts. The good man had found his enthusiasm strangely
quenched in the atmosphere in which Mrs. Haldane dwelt, and found that, in spite of himself,
he was sharing in her doubts and fears as to the future course of the erratic and impulsive
youth at his side. He blamed himself for this, and tried to put doubt resolutely away. By a
few earnest words he sought to show the young man that only as the grace of God was daily asked
for and daily received could he hope to maintain the Christian life.

He now began to realize what a difficult problem was before the youth. Society would be slow
to give him credit for changed motives and character, and as proof would take only patient
continuance in well-doing. The good doctor now more than suspected that in his own home Haldane
would find much that was depressing and enervating. Worse than all, he would have to contend
with an excitable and ungoverned nature, already sadly warped and biased wrongly. "What will
be the final result?" sighed the old gentleman to himself. But he soon fell back hopefully
on his belief that the Lord had begun a good work and would finish it.

Haldane listened attentively and gratefully to all that his old friend had to say, and felt
sure that he could and would follow the advice given. Never before had right living seemed
so attractive, and the path of duty so luminous. But the thought that chiefly filled him with
joy was that henceforth he would not be compelled to plod forward as a weary pilgrim. He felt
that he had wings; some of the divine strength had been given him. He believed himself changed,
renewed, transformed; he was confident that his old self had perished and passed away, and
that, as a new creature, ennobling tendencies would control him completely. He felt that prayer
would henceforth be as natural as breathing, and praise and worship, the strong and abiding
instincts of his heart.

CHAPTER XXXIX

VOTARIES OF THE WORLD

When Haldane returned he found that his sisters had retired. He was not sorry, for he wished
a long and unrestrained talk with his mother; but that lady pleaded that the events of the
evening had so unnerved her, and that there was so much to be considered, that she must have
quiet. In the morning they would try to realize their situation, and decide upon the best course
to be pursued.

Even in his exaltation the last suggestion struck Haldane unpleasantly. Might not his mother
mark out, and take as a test of his sincerity, some course that would accord with her ideas
of right, but not with his? But the present hour was so full of mystical and inexplicable happiness
that he gave himself up to it, believing that the divine hands, in which he believed himself
to be, would provide for him as a helpless child is cared for.

The mill-people among whom he had worked the previous week would scarcely have recognized him
as he came down to breakfast the following morning, dressed with taste and elegance. It was
evident that his sisters could endure him with better grace than when clad in his coarse, working
garb, redolent with the hitherto unimagined odors pertaining to well-oiled machinery. They,
with his mother, greeted him, however, with the air of those who are in the midst of the greatest
misfortunes, but who hope they see a coming ray of light.

With their sincere but conventional ideas of life he was, in truth, a difficult problem. Nor
can they be very greatly blamed. This youth, who might have been their natural protector against
every scandalous and contemptuous word, and whose arm it would have been their pride to take
before the world, had now such a reputation that only an affection all-absorbing and unselfish
would be willing to brave the curious and scornful stare that follows one who had been so disgraced.
Mrs. Haldane and her daughters were not without natural affection, but they were morbidly sensitive
to public opinion. Like many who live somewhat secluded from the world, they imagined that
vague and dreaded entity was giving them much more attention than it did. "What will people
say?" was a terrible question to them.

Nothing could be further from their nature than an attempt to attract the world's attention
by loud manners or flaunting dress; but it was essential to their peace that good society should
regard them as eminently respectable, aristocratic, and high-toned--as a family far removed
from vulgar and ordinary humanity. That their name, in the person of a son and brother, had
been dragged through courts, criminal records, and jails, was an unparalleled disaster, that
grew more overwhelming as they brooded over it. It seemed to them that the world's great eye
was turned full upon them in scorn and wonder, and that only by maintaining their perfect seclusion,
or by hiding among strangers, could they escape its cruel glare.

After all, their feelings were only morbid developments of the instincts of a refined womanly
nature; but the trouble was, they had not the womanly largeness of heart and affection which
would have made them equal to the emergency, however painful. Poor Mrs. Haldane was one of
those unfortunate people who always fall below the occasion; indeed, she seldom realized it.
Providence had now given her a chance to atone for much of her former weakness and ruinous
indulgence, but her little mind was chiefly engrossed with the question, What can we do to
smooth matters over, and regain something like our old standing in society? As the result of
a long consultation with her daughters, it was concluded that their best course was to go abroad.
There they could venture out with him who was the skeleton of the household, without having
every one turn and look after them with all kinds of comment upon their lips. After several
years in Europe they hoped society would be inclined to forget and overlook the miserable record
of the past few months.

That the young man himself would offer opposition to the plan, and prefer to return to the
scene of his disgrace, and to his sordid toil, did not enter their minds.

In the enthusiasm of his new-born faith Haldane had determined to face the public gaze, and
hear Dr. Marks preach. It is true, he had greatly dreaded the ordeal--and for his mother and
sisters, far more than for himself. When he began to intimate something of this feeling his
mother promptly motioned to the waitress to withdraw from the room. He then soon learned that
they had not attended church since Mrs. Haldane's return from her memorable visit to Hillaton,
and that they had no intention of going to-day.

"The very thought makes me turn faint and sick," said the poor, weak gentlewoman.

"We should feel like sinking through the floor of the aisle," chorused the pallid young ladies.

Haldane ceased partaking of his breakfast at once, and leaned back in his chair.

"Do you mean to say," he asked gloomily, "that my folly has turned this house into a tomb,
and that you will bury yourselves here indefinitely?"

"Well," sighed the mother, "if we live this wretched life of seclusion, brooding over our troubles
much longer, smaller tombs will suffice us. You see that your sisters are beginning to look
like ghosts, and I'm sure I feel that I can never lift up my head again. I know it is said
that time works wonders. Perhaps if we went abroad for a few years, and then resided in some
other city, or in the seclusion of some quiet country place, we might escape this--" and Mrs.
Haldane finished with a sigh that was far worse than any words could have been. After a moment
she concluded: "But, of course, we cannot go out here, where all that has happened is so fresh,
and uppermost in every one's mind. The more I think of it, the more decided I am that the best
thing for us all is to go to some quiet watering-place in Europe, where there are but few,
if any, Americans; and in time we may feel differently."

Her son ate no more breakfast. He was beginning to realize, as he had not before, that he was
in a certain sense a corpse, which this decorous and exquisitely refined family could not bury,
but would hide as far as possible.

"You then expect me to go with you to Europe?" he said.

"Certainly. We could not go without a gentleman."

"That I scarcely am now, mother, in your estimation or in society's. I think you could get
on better without me."

"Now, Egbert, be sensible."

"What am I to do in this secluded European watering-place, where there are no Americans, and
at which we are to sojourn indefinitely?"

"I am sure I have not thought. Your sisters, at least, can venture out and get a breath of
fresh air. It is time you thought of them rather than of yourself. You could amuse yourself
with the natives, or by fishing and hunting."

"Mother!" he exclaimed, impetuously, "I no longer desire to merely amuse myself. I wish to
become a man, in the best sense of the word."

Mrs. Haldane evidently experienced a disagreeable nervous shock at the sudden intensity of
his manner, but she said, with rebuking quietness:

"I am sure I wish you to become such a man, thoroughly well bred, and thoroughly under self-control.
It is my purpose to enable you to appear like a perfect gentleman from this time forward, and
I expect that you will be one."

"What will I be but a well-dressed nonentity? what will I be but a coward, seeking to get away
as far as possible from the place of my defeat, and to hide from its consequences?" he answered,
with sharp, bitter emphasis.

"Egbert, your tendency to exaggeration and violent speech is more than I can bear in my weak,
nervous condition. When you have thought this matter over calmly, and have realized how I and
your sisters feel, you will see that we are right--that is, if Dr. Marks is correct, and you
do really wish to atone for the past as far as it now can be done."

The young man paced restlessly up and down the room in an agitated manner, which greatly disquieted
his mother and sisters.

"Can you not realize," he at last burst out, "that I, also, have a conscience? that I am no
longer a child? and that I cannot see things as you do?"

"Egbert," exclaimed his elder sister, lifting her hand deprecatingly, "we are not deaf."

"If you will only follow your conscience," continued Mrs. Haldane, in her low monotone, "all
will be well. It is your being carried away by gusts of impulse and violent passions that makes
all the trouble. If you had followed your conscience you would at once have left Hillaton at
my request, and hidden yourself in the seclusion that I indicated. If you had done so, you
might have saved yourself and us from all that has since occurred."

"But I would have lost my self-respect. I should have done worse--"

"Self-respect!" interrupted his mother, with an expression akin to disgust flitting across
her pale face. "How can you use that word after what has happened, and especially now that
you are working among those vulgar factory people, and living with that profane old creature
who goes by the name of 'Jerry Growler.' To think that you, who bear your father's name, should
have fallen so low! The daily and hourly mortification of thinking of all this, here, where
for so many years there was not a speck upon our family reputation, is more than flesh and
blood can endure. Our only course now is to go away where we are not known. Our best hope is
to make you appear like what your father meant you should be, and try to forget that you have
been anything else; and if you have any sense of obligation to us left you will do what you
can to carry out our efforts. Dr. Marks thinks you have met with 'a change of heart.' I am
sure yon can prove it in no better way than by a docile acquiescence in the wishes of one who
has a natural right to control you, and whose teachings," she added complacently, "had they
been followed, would have enabled you to hold up your head to-day among the proudest in the land."

Haldane buried his face in his hands, and fairly groaned, in his disappointment and sense of
humiliation.

"Is it possible," asked one of his sisters "that you thought that we could all go out to church
to-day as usual, and commence life to-morrow where he left off when you first went away from home?"

"I expected nothing of the kind," said her brother, lifting up a face that was pale from suppressed
feeling; "the fact is, I have thought little about all this that is uppermost in your minds.
I have been all through the phase of shrinking from the world's word and touch, as if my whole
being were a diseased nerve. While in that condition I suffered enough, God knows; but even
in the police court I was not made to feel more thoroughly that I was a disgraced criminal
than I have been here, in my childhood's home. Perhaps you can't help your feeling; but the
result is all the same. Through the influence of a woman who belongs to heaven rather than
earth, I was led to forget the world and all about it; I was led to wish to form a good character
for its own sake. I wanted to be rid of the debasing vices of my nature which she had made
me hate, and which would separate me from such as she is. I wanted your forgiveness, mother.
More than all, I wanted God's forgiveness, and that great change in my nature which he alone
can bestow. I felt that Dr. Marks could help me, because I believed in him; and he did carry
me, as it were, to the very gate of heaven. I expected, at least, a little sympathy from you
all, and a God-speed as I went back to my work tomorrow. I even hoped that you might take me
by the hand, and say to those who knew us here, 'My son was lost, but is found. He wishes to
live a manly, Christian life, and all who are Christians should help him.' I find, on the contrary,
that Christ and his words are forgotten; that I am regarded as a hideous and deformed creature,
that must be disguised as far as possible, and spirited off to some remote corner of the earth,
and there virtually buried alive. Thus different are the teachings of the Bible and the teachings
of the world. I thought I could not endure my hard lot at Hillaton any longer, but I shall
go back to it quite content."

As the youth uttered these words, with his usual impetuosity, his mother could only weep and
tremble in her weak and nervous way; but his sisters exclaimed:

"Go back to your old mill-life at Hillaton!"

"Yes, by the first train, to-morrow."

"Well!" they chorused, with a long breath, but as all language seemed inadequate they added
nothing to their exclamation.

Mrs. Haldane slowly wiped her eyes, and said, "Egbert is excited now, and does not realize
how we feel. After he has thought it all over quietly he will see things in a different light,
and will perceive that he should take counsel from his mother rather than from a stranger"
(with peculiar emphasis on this word). "If he really wishes to do his duty as a Christian man,
he will see that the first and most sacred obligations resting on him are to us and not to
others, even though they may be more angelic than we are. You promised last evening that it
would be your life-effort to make amends for the wrongs you have inflicted upon us; and going
back to your old, sordid life and vulgar associations would be a strange way of keeping this
pledge. I suggest that we all retire to our rooms, and in the after part of the day we shall
be calmer, and therefore more rational;" and the ladies quietly glided out, like black shadows.
Indeed, they and their lives had become little more than attenuated shadows.

There is nothing which so thoroughly depletes and robs moral character of all substance--there
is nothing which so effectually destroys all robust individuality--as the continuous asking
of the question, "What will, people say?"

Poor Haldane went to his room, and paced it by the hour. He had learned thus early that the
Christian life was not made up of sacred and beatific emotions, under the influence of which
duty would become an easy, sun-illumined path.

He already was in sore perplexity as to what his duty was in this instance. Ought he not to
devote himself to his mother and sisters, and hope that time would bring a healthful change
in their morbid feeling? Surely what they asked would not seem hard in the world's estimation--a
trip to Europe, and a life of luxurious ease and amusement--for society would agree with his
mother, that he could be as good and Christian-like as he pleased in the meantime. The majority
would say that if he could in part make amends by acquiescence in so reasonable a request,
and one that promised so much of pleasure and advantage to himself, he ought certainly to yield.

But all that was good and manly in the young fellow's nature rose up against the plan. In the
first place, he instinctively felt that his mother and sisters' views on nearly all subjects
would be continually at variance with his own, since they were coming to look at life from
such totally different standpoints. He also believed that he would be an ever-present burden
and source of mortification to them. As a child and a boy he had been their idol. They had
looked forward to the time when he, with irreproachable manners and reputation, would become
their escort in the exclusive circles in which they were entitled to move. Now he was and would
continue to be the insuperable bar to those circles; and by their sighs and manner he would
be continually reminded of this fact. Fallen idols are a perpetual offence to their former
worshippers, as they ever remind of the downfall of towering hopes.

With all his faults, Haldane had too much spirit to go through life as one who must be tolerated,
endured, kept in the background, and concerning whom no questions must be asked.

He did think the matter over long and carefully, and concluded that even for his mother and
sisters' sake it would be best that they should live apart. If he could thoroughly retrieve
his character where he had lost it, they would be reconciled to him; if he could not, he would
be less of a burden and a mortification absent than present.

When he considered his own feelings, the thought of skulking and hiding through life made his
cheek tingle with shame and disgust. Conscience sided with his inclination to go back to his
old, hard fight at Hillaton; and it also appeared to him that he could there better maintain
a Christian life, in spite of all the odds against him, than by taking the enervating course
marked out by his mother. He also remembered, with a faint thrill of hope, that whatever recognition
he could get at Hillaton as a changed, a better man, it would be based on the rock of truth.

He therefore concluded to go back as he had intended, and with the decision came his former,
happy, mystical feeling, welling up in his heart like the sweet refreshing waters of a spring,
the consciousness of which filled his heart with courage and confidence as to the future.

"Surely," he exclaimed, "I am a changed, a converted man. These strange, sweet emotions, this
unspeakable gladness of heart in the midst of so much that is painful and distracting, prove
that I am. I have not taken this journey in vain."

Haldane met only his sisters at dinner, for the scene of the morning had prostrated his mother
with a nervous headache. In spite of his efforts, it was a constrained and dismal affair, and
all were glad when it was over.

In the evening they all met in Mrs. Haldane's room, and the young man told them his decision
so firmly and quietly that, while they were both surprised and angry, they saw it was useless
to remonstrate. He next drew such a dreary picture of the future as they had designed it, that
they were half inclined to think he was right, and that his presence would be a greater source
of pain than of comfort to them. He also convinced them that it would be less embarrassing
for them to go to Europe alone than with his escort, and that the plan of going abroad need
not be given up.

But Mrs. Haldane was strenuous on the point that he should leave Hillaton, accept of her old
offer, and live a quiet, respectable life in some retired place where he was not known.

"I will not have it said," she persisted, "that my son is working as a common factory hand,
nor will I have our name associated with that wretched old creature whose profanity and general
outlandishness are the town-talk and the constant theme of newspaper squibs. You at least owe
it to us to let this scandal die out as speedily as possible. If you will comply with these
most reasonable requirements, I will see that you have an abundant support. If you will not,
I have no evidence of a change in your character; nor can I see any better way than to leave
you to suffer the consequences of your folly until you do come to your senses."

"Mother, do you think a young fellow of my years and energy could go to an out-of-the-way place,
and just mope, eat, and sleep for the sake of being supported? I would rather starve first.
I fear we shall never understand each other; and I have reached that point in life when I must
follow my own conscience. I shall leave to-morrow morning before any of you are up; and in
my old working clothes. Good-by;" and before they could realize it he had kissed them and left
the room.

They weakly sighed as over the inevitable; but one of his sisters said, "He will be glad enough
to come to your terms before winter."

CHAPTER XL

HUMAN NATURE

At an early hour Haldane, true to his purpose, departed from the home of his childhood in the
guise of a laborer, as he had come. His mother heard his step on the stairs, for she had passed
a sleepless night, agitated by painful emotions. She wished to call him back; she grieved over
his course as a "dark and mysterious providence," as a misfortune which, like death, could
not be escaped; but with the persistence of a little mind, capable of taking but a single and
narrow view, she was absolutely sure she was right in her course, and that nothing but harsh
and bitter experience would bring her wayward son to his senses.

Nor did it seem that the harsh experience would be wanting, for the morning was well advanced
when he reached his place of work, and he received a severe reprimand from the foreman for
being so late. His explanation, that he had received permission to be absent, was incredulously
received. It also seemed that gibes, taunts, and sneers were flung at him with increasing venom
by his ill-natured associates, who were vexed that they had not been able to drive him away
by their persecutions.

But the object of their spite was dwelling in a world of which they knew nothing, and in which
they had no part, and, almost oblivious of their existence, he performed his mechanical duty
in almost undisturbed serenity.

Mr. Growther welcomed him back most heartily and with an air of eager expectation, and when
Haldane briefly but graphically narrated his experience, he hobbled up and down the room in
a state of great excitement.

"You've got it! you've got it! and the genuine article, too, as sure as my name is Jeremiah
Growther!" he exclaimed; "I'd give the whole airth, and anything else to boot, that was asked,
if I could only git religion. But it's no use for me to think about it; I'm done, and cooled
off, and would break inter ten thousand pieces if I tried to change myself. I couldn't feel
what you feel any more than I could run and jump as you kin. My moral j'ints is as stiff as
hedge-stakes. If I tried to git up a little of your feelin', it would be like tryin' to hurry
along the spring by buildin' a fire on the frozen ground. It would only make one little spot
soft and sloppy; the fire would soon go out: then it would freeze right up agin. Now, with
you it's spring all over; you feel tender and meller-like, and everything good is ready to
sprout. Well, well! if I do have to go to old Nick at last, I'm powerful glad he's had this
set-back in your case."

Long and earnestly did Haldane try to reason his quaint friend out of his despairing views
of himself. At last the old man said testily:

"Now, look here; you're too new-fledged a saint to instruct a seasoned and experienced old
sinner like me. You don't know much about the Lord's ways yet, and I know all about the devil's
ways. Because you've got out of his clutches (and I'm mighty glad you have) you needn't make
light of him, and take liberties with him as if he was nobody, 'specially when Scripter calls
him 'a roarin' lion.' If I was as young as you be, I'd make a dead set to git away from him;
but after tryin' more times than you've lived years, I know it ain't no use. I tell you I can't
feel as you feel, any more than you can squeeze water out of them old andirons. A-a-h!"

Haldane was silent, feeling that the old man's spiritual condition was too knotty a problem
for him to solve.

After a few moments Mr. Growther added, in a voice that he meant to be very solemn and impressive:

"But I want you to enjoy your religious feelin's all the same. I will listen to all the Scripter
readin' and prayin' you're willin' to do, without makin' any disturbance. Indeed, I think I
will enjoy my wittles more, now that an honest grace can be said over 'em. An' when you read
the Bible, you needn't read the cussin' parts, if yer don't want to. I'll read 'em to myself
hereafter. I'll give you all the leeway that an old curmudgeon like myself kin; and I expect
to take a sight o' comfort in seein' you goin' on your way rejoicin'."

And he did seem to take as much interest in the young man's progress and new spiritual experiences
as if he alone were the one interested. His efforts to control his irritability and profanity
were both odd and pathetic, and Haldane would sometimes hear him swearing softly to himself,
with strange contortions of his wrinkled face, when in former times he would have vented his
spite in the harshest tones.

Haldane wrote fully to Mrs. Arnot of his visit to his native city and its happy results, and
enlarged upon his changed feelings as the proof that he was a changed man.

Her reply was prompt and was filled with the warmest congratulations and expressions of the
sincerest sympathy. It also contained these words:

"I fear that you are dwelling too largely upon your feelings and experiences, and are giving
to them a value they do not possess. Not that I would undervalue them--they are gracious tokens
of God's favor; but they are not the grounds of your salvation and acceptance with God."

Haldane did not believe that they were--he had been too well taught for that--but he regarded
them as the evidences that he was accepted, that he was a Christian; and he expected them to
continue, and to bear him forward, and through and over the peculiar trials of his lot, as
on a strong and shining tide.

Mrs. Arnot also stated that she was just on the eve of leaving home for a time, and that on
her return she would see him and explain more fully her meaning.

In conclusion, she wrote: "I think you did what was right and best in returning to Hillaton.
At any rate, you have reached that age when you must obey your own conscience, and can no longer
place the responsibility of your action upon others. But, remember, that you owe to your mother
the most delicate forbearance and consideration. You should write to her regularly, and seek
to prove that you are guided by principle rather than impulse. Your mother has much reason
to feel as she does, and nothing can excuse you from the sacred duties you owe to her."

Haldane did write as Mrs. Arnot suggested. In a few days he received the following letter from
his mother:

"We shall sail for Europe as soon as we can get ready for the journey. Our lawyer is making
all the necessary arrangements for us. I will leave funds with him, and whenever you are ready
in good faith to accept my offer, leave Hillaton, and live so that this scandal can die out,
you can obtain from him the means of living decently and quietly. As it is, I live in daily
terror lest you again do something which will bring our name into the Hillaton papers; and,
of course, everything is copied by the press of this city. Will the time ever come when you
will consider your mother's and sisters' feelings?"

For a time all went as well as could be expected in the trying circumstances of Haldane's life.
His prayers for strength and patience were at first earnest, and their answers seemed assured--so
assured, indeed, that in times of haste and weariness prayer eventually came to be hurried
or neglected. Before he was aware of it, feeling began to ebb away. He at last became troubled,
and then alarmed, and made great effort to regain his old, happy emotions and experiences;
but, like an outgoing tide, they ebbed steadily away.

His face indicated his disquiet and anxiety, for he felt like one who was clinging to a rope
that was slowly parting, strand by strand.

Keen-eyed Mr. Growther watched him closely, and was satisfied that something was amiss. He
was much concerned, and took not a little of the blame upon himself.

"How can a man be a Christian, or anything else that's decent, when he keeps such cussed company
as I be?" he muttered. "I s'pose I kinder pisen and wither up his good feelin's like a sulphuric
acid fact'ry."

One evening he exclaimed to Haldane, "I say, young man, you had better pull out o' here."

"What do you mean?"

"I'll give you a receipt in full and a good character, and then you look for a healthier boardin'-place."

"Ah, I see! You wish to be rid of me?"

"No, you don't see, nuther. I wish you to be rid of me."

"Of course, if you wish me to go, I'll go at once," said Haldane, in a despondent tone.

"And go off at half-cock into the bargain? I ain't one of the kind, you know, that talks around
Robin Hood's barn. I go straight in at the front door and out at the back. It's my rough way
of coming to the p'int at once. I kin see that you're runnin' behind in speret'al matters,
and I believe that my cussedness is part to blame. You don't feel good as you used to. It would
never do to git down at the heel in these matters, 'cause the poorest timber in the market
is yer old backsliders. I'd rather be what I am than be a backslider. The right way is to take
these things in time, before you git agoin' down hill too fast. It isn't that I want to git
rid of you at all. I've kinder got used to you, and like to have you 'round 'mazingly; but
I don't s'pose it's possible for you to feel right and live with me, and so you had better
cut stick in time, for you must keep a-feelin' good and pi'us-like, my boy, or it's all up
with you."

"Then you don't want me to go for the sake of your own comfort?"

"Not a bit of it. I only want you to git inter a place that isn't so morally pisened as this,
where I do so much cussin'; for I will and must cuss as long as there's an atom left of me
as big as a head of a pin. A-a-h!"

"Then I prefer to take my chances with you to going anywhere else."

"Think twice."

"I have thought more than twice."

"Then yer blood be on yer own head," said Mr. Growther with tragic solemnity, as if he were
about to take Haldane's life. "My skirts is clear after this warnin'."

"Indeed they are. You haven't done me a bit of harm."

"Where does the trouble come from then? Who is a-harmin' you?"

"Well, Mr. Growther," said Haldane, wearily, "I hardly know what is the matter. I am losing
zest and courage unaccountably. My old, happy and hopeful feelings are about all gone, and
in their place all sorts of evil thoughts seem to be swarming into my mind. I have tried to
keep all this to myself, but I have become so wretched that I must speak. Mrs. Arnot is away,
or she might help me, as she ever does. I wish that I felt differently; I pray that I may,
but in spite of all I seem drifting back to my old miserable self. Every day I fear that I
shall have trouble at the mill. When I felt so strong and happy I did not mind what they said.
One day I was asked by a workman, who is quite a decent fellow, how I stood it all? and I replied
that I stood it as any well-meaning Christian man could. My implied assertion that I was a
Christian was taken up as a great joke, and now they call me the 'pi'us jail-bird.' As long
as I felt at heart that I was a Christian, I did not care; but now their words gall me to the
quick. I do not know what to think. It seems to me that if any one ever met with a change I
did. I'm sure I wish to feel now as I did then; but I grow worse every day. I am losing self-control
and growing irritable. This evening, as I passed liquor saloons on my way home, my old appetite
for drink seemed as strong as ever. What does it all mean?"

Mr. Growther's wrinkled visage worked curiously, and at last he said in a tone and manner that
betokened the deepest distress:

"I'm awfully afeerd you're a-backslidin'."

"I wish I had never been born," exclaimed the youth, passionately, "for I am a curse to myself
and all connected with me, I know I shall have trouble with one man at the mill. I can see
it coming, and then, of course, I shall be discharged. I seem destined to defeat in this my
last attempt to be a man, and I shall never have the courage or hope to try again. If I do
break down utterly, I feel as if I will become a very devil incarnate. O! how I wish that Mrs.
Arnot was home."

"Now this beats me all out," said Mr. Growther, in great perplexity. "A while ago you felt
like a saint and acted like one, now you talk and act as if Old Nick and all his imps had got
a hold on ye. How do you explain all this, for it beats me?"

"I don't and can't explain. But here are the facts, and what are you going to do with them?"

"I ain't a-goin' to do nothin' with 'em except cuss 'em; and that's all I kin do in any case.
You've got beyond my depth."

The sorely tempted youth could obtain but little aid and comfort, therefore, from his quaint
old friend, and, equally perplexed and unable to understand himself, he sought to obtain such
rest as his disquieted condition permitted.

As a result of wakefulness in the early part of the night, he slept late the following morning,
and hastened to his work with scarcely a mouthful of breakfast. He was thus disqualified, physically
as well as mentally, for the ordeal of the day.

He was a few minutes behind time, and a sharp reprimand from the foreman rasped his already
jangling nerves. But he doggedly set his teeth and resolved to see and hear nothing save that
which pertained to his work.

He might have kept his resolve had there been nothing more to contend with than the ordinary
verbal persecution. But late in the afternoon, when he had grown weary from the strain of the
day, his special tormentor, a burly Irishman, took occasion, in passing, to push him rudely
against a pert and slattern girl, who also was foremost in the tacit league of petty annoyance.
She acted as if the contact of Haldane's person was a purposed insult, and resented it by a
sharp slap of his face.

Her stinging stroke was like a spark to a magazine; but paying no heed to her, he sprang toward
her laughing ally with fierce oaths upon his lips, and by a single blow sent him reeling to
the floor. The machinery was stopped sharply, as far as possible, by the miscellaneous workpeople,
to whom a fight was a boon above price, and with shrill and clamorous outcries they gathered
round the young man where he stood, panting, like a wounded animal at bay.

His powerful antagonist was speedily upon his feet, and at once made a rush for the youth who
had so unexpectedly turned upon him; and though he received another heavy blow, his onset was
so strong that he was able to close with Haldane, and thus made the conflict a mere trial of
brute force.

As Haldane afterward recalled the scene, he was conscious that at the time he felt only rage,
and a mad desire to destroy his opponent.

In strength they were quite evenly matched, and after a moment's struggle both fell heavily,
and Haldane was able to disengage himself. As the Irishman rose, and was about to renew the
fight, he struck him so tremendous a blow on the temple that the man went to the floor as if
pierced by a bullet, and lay there stunned and still.

When Haldane saw that his antagonist did not move, time was given him to think; he experienced
a terrible revulsion. He remembered his profanity and brutal rage, he felt that he had broken
down utterly. He was overwhelmed by his moral defeat, and covering his face with his hands,
he groaned "Lost, lost!"

"By jocks," exclaimed a rude, half-grown fellow, "that clip would have felled an ox."

"Do you think he's dead?" asked the slattern girl, now thoroughly alarmed at the consequences
of the blow she had given.

"Dead!" cried Haldane, catching the word, and, pushing all aside, he knelt over his prostrate foe.

"Water, bring water, for God's sake!" he said eagerly, lifting up the unconscious man.

It was brought and dashed in his face. A moment later, to Haldane's infinite relief he revived,
and after a bewildered stare at the crowd around him, fixed his eyes on the youth who had dealt
the blow, and then a consciousness of all that had occurred seemed to return. He showed his
teeth in impotent rage for a moment, as some wild animal might have done, and then rose unsteadily
to his feet.

"Go back to your work, all on ye," thundered the foreman, who, now that the sport was over,
was bent on making a great show of his zeal; "as for you two bull-dogs, you shall pay dearly
for this; and let me say to you, Mister Haldane, that the pious dodge won't answer any longer."

A moment later, with the exception of flushed faces and excited whisperings, the large and
crowded apartment wore its ordinary aspect, and the machinery clanked on as monotonously as ever.

Almost as mechanically Haldane moved in the routine of his labor, but the bitterness of despair
was in his heart.

He forgot that he would probably be discharged that day; he forgot that a dark and uncertain
future was before him. He only remembered his rage and profanity, and they seemed to him damning
proofs that all he had felt, hoped, and believed was delusion.

CHAPTER XLI

MRS. ARNOT'S CREED

When Haldane entered the cottage that evening his eyes were bloodshot and his face so haggard
that Mr. Growther started out of his chair, exclaiming: "Lord a' massy! what's the matter?"

"Matter enough," replied the youth, with a reckless oath. "The worst that I feared has happened."

"What's happened?" asked the old man excitedly.

"I've been fighting in the work-room like a bull-dog, and swearing like a pirate. That's the
kind of a Christian I am, and always will be. What I was made for, I don't see," he added,
as he threw himself into a chair.

"Well, well, well!" said Mr. Growther dejectedly, "I was in hopes she'd git here in time; but
I'm afeered you've just clean backslid."

"No kind of doubt on that score," replied the young man, with a bitter laugh; "though I now
think I never had very far to slide. And yet it all seems wrong and unjust. Why should my hopes
be raised? why should such feelings be inspired, if this was to be the end? If I was foreordained
to go to the devil, why must an aggravating glimpse of heaven be given me? I say it's all cruel
and wrong. But what's the use! Come, let's have supper, one must eat as long as he's in the body."

It was a silent and dismal meal, and soon over. Then Haldane took his hat without a word.

"Where are you goin'?" asked Mr. Growther, anxiously.

"I neither know nor care."

"Don't go out to-night, I expect somebody."

"Who, in the name of wonder?"

"Mrs. Arnot."

"I could as easily face an angel of light now as Mrs. Arnot," he replied, pausing on the threshold;
for even in his reckless mood the old man's wistful face had power to restrain.

"You are mistaken, Egbert," said a gentle voice behind him. "You can face me much more easily
than an angel of light. I am human like yourself, and your friend."

She had approached the open door through the dusk of the mild autumn evening, and had heard
his words. He trembled at her voice, but ventured no reply.

"I have come to see you, Egbert; you will not leave me."

"Mrs. Arnot," he said passionately, "I am not worth the trouble you take in my behalf, and
I might as well tell you at once that it is in vain."

"I do not regard what I do for you as 'trouble,' and I know it is not in vain," she replied,
with calm, clear emphasis.

Her manner quieted him somewhat; but after a moment he said:

"You do not know what has happened to-day, nor how I have been feeling for many days past."

"Your manner indicates how you. feel; and you may tell me what has happened if you wish. If
you prefer that we should be alone, come with me to my carriage, and in the quiet of my private
parlor you can tell me all."

"No," said Haldane gloomily; "I am not fit to enter your house, and for other reasons would
rather not do so. I have no better friend than Mr. Growther, and he already knows it all. I
may as well tell you here; that is, if you are willing to stay."

"I came to stay," said Mrs. Arnot quietly; and sitting down, she turned a grave and expectant
face toward him.

"I cannot find words in which to tell you my shame, and the utterness of my defeat."

"Yes, you can, Egbert. I believe that you have always told me the truth about yourself."

"I have, and I will again," he said desperately; "and yet it seems like profanation to describe
such a scene to you." But he did describe it, briefly and graphically, nevertheless. As he
spoke of his last fierce blow, which vanquished his opponent, Mr. Growther muttered:

"Sarved him right; can't help feelin' glad you hit 'im so hard; but then that's in keepin'
with the cussedness of my natur'."

A glimmer of a smile hovered around Mrs. Arnot's flexible mouth, but she only asked quietly:

"Is that all?"

"I should think that was enough, after all that I had felt and professed."

"I fear I shall shock you, Egbert, but I am not very much surprised at your course. Indeed
I think it was quite natural, in view of the circumstances. Perhaps my nature is akin to Mr.
Growther's, for I am rather glad that fellow was punished; and I think it was very natural
for you to punish him as you did. So far from despairing of you, I am the more hopeful of you."

"Mrs. Arnot!" exclaimed the youth in undisguised astonishment

"Now do not jump to hasty and false conclusions from my words; I do not say that your action
was right. In the abstract it was decidedly wrong, and for your language there is no other
excuse save that an old, bad habit asserted itself at a time when you had lost self-control.
I am dealing leniently with you, Egbert, because it is a trick of the adversary to tempt to
despair as well as to over-confidence. At the same time I speak sincerely. You are and have
been for some time in a morbid state of mind. Let my simple common-sense come to your aid in
this emergency. The very conditions under which you have been working at the mill imposed a
continuous strain upon your nervous power. You were steadily approaching a point where mere
human endurance would give way. Mark, I do not say that you might not have been helped to endure
longer, and to endure everything; but mere human nature could not have endured it much longer.
It is often wiser to shun certain temptations, if we can, than to meet them. You could not
do this; and if, taking into account all the circumstances, you could have tamely submitted
to this insult, which was the culmination of long-continued and exasperating injury, I should
have doubted whether you possessed the material to make a strong, forceful man. Of course,
if you often give way to passion in this manner, you would be little better than a wild beast;
but for weeks you had exercised very great forbearance and self-control--for one of your temperament,
remarkable self-control--and I respect you for it. We are as truly bound to be just to ourselves
as to others. Your action was certainly wrong, and I would be deeply grieved and disappointed
if you continued to give way to such ebullitions of passion; but remembering your youth, and
all that has happened since spring, and observing plainly that you are in an unhealthful condition
of mind and body, I think your course was very natural indeed, and that you have no occasion
for such despondency."

"Yes," put in Mr. Growther; "and he went away without his breakfast, and it was mighty little
he took for lunch; all men are savages when they haven't eaten anything."

"Pardon me, Mrs. Arnot," said Haldane gloomily, "all this does not meet the case at all. I
had been hoping that I was a Christian; what is more, it seems to me that I had had the feelings
and experiences of a Christian."

"I have nothing to say against that," said the lady quietly; "I am very glad that you had."

"After what has occurred what right have I to think myself a Christian?"

"As good a right as multitudes of others."

"Now, Mrs. Arnot, that seems to me to be contrary to reason."

"It is not contrary to fact. Good people in the Bible, good people in history, and to my personal
knowledge, too, have been left to do outrageously wrong things. To err is human; and we are
all very human, Egbert."

"But I don't feel that I am a Christian any longer," he said sadly.

"Perhaps you are not, and never were. But this is a question that you can never settle by consulting
your own feelings."

"Then how can I settle it?" was the eager response.

"By settling fully and finally in your mind what relation you will sustain to Jesus Christ.
He offers to be your complete Saviour from sin. Will you accept of him as such? He offers to
be your divine and unerring guide and example in your everyday life. Will you accept of him
as such? Doing these two things in simple honesty and to the best of our ability is the only
way to be a Christian that I know of."

"Is that all?" muttered Mr. Growther, rising for a moment from his chair in his deep interest
in her words. She gave him an encouraging smile, and then turned to Haldane again.

"Mrs. Arnot," he said, "I know that you are far wiser in these matters than I, and yet I am
bewildered. The Bible says we must be converted; that we must be born again. It seems to require
some great, mysterious change that shall renew our whole nature. And it seemed to me that I
experienced that change. It would be impossible for me to describe to you my emotions. They
were sincere and profound. They stirred the very depths of my soul, and under their influence
it was a joy to worship God and to do his will. Had I not a right to believe that the hour
in which I first felt those glad thrills of faith and love was the hour of my conversion?"

"You had a right to hope it."

"But now, to-day, when every bad passion has been uppermost in my heart, what reason have I
to hope?"

"None at all, looking to yourself and to your varying emotions."

"Mrs. Arnot, I am bewildered. I am all at sea. The Bible, as interpreted by Dr. Barstow and
Dr. Marks, seems to require so much; and what you say is required is simplicity itself."

"If you will listen patiently, Egbert, I will give you my views, and I think they are correct,
for I endeavor to take them wholly from the Bible. That which God requires is simplicity itself,
and yet it is very much; it is infinite. In the first place, one must give up self-righteousness--not
self-respect, mark you--but mere spiritual self-conceit, which is akin to the feeling of some
vulgar people who think they are good enough to associate with those who are immeasurably beyond
them, but whose superiority they are too small to comprehend. We must come to God in the spirit
of a little child; and then, as if we were children, he will give to us a natural and healthful
growth in the life that resembles his own. This is the simplest thing that can be done, and
all can do it; but how many are trying to work out their salvation by some intricate method
of human device, and, stranger still, are very complacent over the mechanical and abnormal
results! All such futile efforts, of which many are so vain, must be cast aside. Listen to
Christ's own words: 'Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.' He who would enter upon
the Christian life, must come to Christ as the true scientist sits at the feet of nature--docile,
teachable, eager to learn truth that existed long before he was born, and not disposed to thrust
forward some miserable little system of his own. Nothing could be simpler, easier, or more
pleasing to Christ himself than the action of Mary as she sat at his feet and listened to him;
but many are like Martha, and are bustling about in his service in ways pleasing to themselves;
and it is very hard for them to give up their own way. I've had to give up a great deal in
my time, and perhaps you will.

"In addition to all trust in ourselves, in what we are and what we have done, we must turn
away from what we have felt; and here I think I touch your present difficulties. We are not
saved by the emotions of our own hearts, however sacred and delightful they may seem. Nor do
they always indicate just what we are and shall be. A few weeks since you thought your heart
had become the abiding-place of all that was good; now, it seems to you to be possessed by
evil. This is common experience; at one time the Psalmist sings in rapturous devotion; again,
he is wailing in penitence over one of the blackest crimes in history. Peter is on the Mount
of Transfiguration; again he is denying his master with oaths and curses. Even good men vary
as widely as this; but Christ is 'the same, yesterday, to-day, and forever.' By good men I
mean simply those who are sincerely wishing and trying to obtain mastery over the evil of their
natures. If you still wish to do this, I have abundant hope for you--as much hope as ever I had."

"Of what value, then, were all those strange, happy feelings which I regarded as the proofs
of my conversion?" Haldane asked, with the look of deep perplexity still upon his face.

"Of very great value, if you look upon them in their true light. They were evidences of God's
love and favor. They showed how kindly disposed he is toward you. They can prove to you how
abundantly able he is to reward all trust and service, giving foretastes of heavenly bliss
even in the midst of earthly warfare. The trouble has been with you, as with so many others,
that you have been consulting your variable emotions instead of looking simply to Christ, the
author and finisher of our faith. Besides, the power is not given to us to maintain an equable
flow of feeling for any considerable length of time. We react from exaltation into depression
inevitably. Our feelings depend largely also upon earthly causes and our physical condition,
and we can never be absolutely sure how far they are the result of the direct action of God's
Spirit upon our minds. It is God's plan to work through simple, natural means, so that we may
not be looking and waiting for the supernatural. And yet it would seem that many are so irrational
that, when they find mere feeling passing away, they give up their hope and all relationship
to Christ, acting as if the immutable love of God were changing with their flickering emotions."

"I have been just so irrational," said Haldane in a low, deep tone.

"Then settle it now and forever, my dear young friend, that Jesus Christ, who died to save
you, wishes to save you every day and all the days of your life. He does not change a hair-breadth
from the attitude indicated in the words, 'Come unto me; and whosoever cometh unto me I will
in no wise cast out.'"

"Do you mean to say he feels that way toward me all the time, in spite of all my cantankerous
moods?" asked Mr. Growther eagerly.

"Most certainly."

"I wouldn't a' thought it if I'd lived a thousand years."

"What, then, is conversion?" asked Haldane, feeling as if he were being led safely out of a
labyrinth in which he had lost himself.

"In my view it is simply turning away from everything to Christ as the sole ground of our salvation
and as our divine guide and example in Christian living."

"But how can we ever know that we are Christians?"

"Only by the honest, patient, continued effort to obey his brief command, 'Follow me.' We may
follow near, or we may follow afar off; but we can soon learn whether we wish to get nearer
to him, or to get away from him, or to just indifferently let him drop out of our thoughts.
The Christian is one who holds and maintains certain simple relations to Christ. 'Ye are my
friends,' he said, not if you feel thus and so, but, 'if ye do whatsoever I command you;' and
I have found from many years' experience that 'his commandments are not grievous.' For every
burden he imposes he gives help and comfort a hundred times. The more closely and faithfully
we follow him, the more surely do fear and doubt pass away. We learn to look up to him as a
child looks in its mother's face, and 'his Spirit beareth witness with our spirit that we are
his.' But the vital point is, are we following him? Feeling varies so widely and strangely
in varied circumstances and with different temperaments that many a true saint of God would
be left in cruel uncertainty if this were the test. My creed is a very simple one, Egbert;
but I take a world of comfort in it. It contains only three words--Trust, follow Christ --that
is all."

"It is so simple and plain that I am tempted to take it as my creed also," said Haldane, with
a tinge of hope and enthusiasm in his manner,

"And yet remember," warned his friend earnestly, "there is infinite requirement in it. A child
can make a rude sketch of a perfect statue that will bear some faint resemblance to it. If
he persevere he can gradually learn to draw the statue with increasing accuracy. In taking
this Divine Man as your example, you pledge yourself to imitate One whom you can ever approach
but never reach. And yet there is no occasion for the weakest to falter before this infinite
requirement, for God himself in spirit is present everywhere to aid all in regaining the lost
image of himself. It is to no lonely unguided effort that I urge you, Egbert, but to a patient
co-working with your Maker, that you may attain a character that will fit you to dwell at last
in your kingly Father's house; and I tell you frankly, for your encouragement, that you are
capable of forming such a character. I will now bid you good-night, and leave you to think
over what I have said. But write to me or come to me whenever you wish."

"Good-night, Mr. Growther; hate yourself if you will, but remember that the Bible assures us
that 'God is love'; you cannot hate him."

CHAPTER XLII

THE LEVER THAT MOVES THE WORLD

The power of truth can scarcely be overestimated, and the mind that earnestly seeks it becomes
noble in its noble quest. If this can be said of truth in the abstract, and in its humbler
manifestations, how omnipotent truth becomes in its grandest culmination and embodied in a
being capable of inspiring our profoundest fear and deepest love. One may accept of religious
forms and philosophies, and be little changed thereby. One may be perfectly saturated with
ecclesiasticism, and still continue a small-natured man. But the man that accepts of Jesus
Christ as a personal and living teacher, as did the fishermen of Galilee, that man begins to
grow large and noble, brave and patient.

Egbert Haldane has been sketched as an ordinary youth. There are thousands like him who have
been warped and marred by early influences, but more seriously injured by a personal and wilful
yielding to whatever form of evil proved attractive. The majority are not so unwary or so unfortunate
as he was; but multitudes, for whom society has comparatively little criticism, are more vitiated
at heart, more cold-blooded and deliberate in their evil. One may form a base character, but
maintain an outward respectability; but let him not be very complacent over the decorous and
conventional veneer which masks him from the world. If one imagines that he can corrupt his
own soul and make it the abiding-place of foul thoughts, mean impulses, and shrivelling selfishness,
and yet go forward very far in God's universe without meeting overwhelming disaster, he will
find himself thoroughly mistaken.

The sin of another man finds him out in swift sequence upon its committal, and such had been
Haldane's experience. He had been taught promptly the nature of the harvest which evil produces
inevitably.

The terrible consequences of sin prevent and deter from it in many instances, but they have
no very great reformatory power it would seem. Multitudes to-day are in extremis from destroying
vices, and recognize the fact; but so far from reacting upward into virtue, even after vice
(save in the intent of the heart) has ceased to be possible, there seems to be a moral inertia
which nothing moves, or a reckless and increasing impetus downward.

It would appear that, in order to save the sinful, a strong, and yet gentle and loving, hand
must be laid upon them. The stern grasp of justice, the grip of pain, law--human and divine--with
its severe penalties, and conscience re-echoing its thunders, all lead too often to despondency,
recklessness, and despair. It would be difficult to imagine a worse hell than vice often digs
for its votaries, even in this world; and in spite of all human philosophies, and human wishes
to the contrary, it remains a fact that the guilty soul trembles at a worse hereafter, and
yet no sufferings, no fears, no fate can so appall as to turn the soul from its infatuation
with that which is destroying it. More potent than commands, threats, and their dire fulfilment,
is love, which wins and entreats back to virtue the man whom even Omnipotence could not drive back.

In the flood God overwhelmed the sinful world in sudden destruction, but the race continued
sinning all the same. At last God came among men, and shared in their lot and nature. He taught
them, he sympathized with them, he loved them, he died for them, and when the wondrous story
is told as it should be, the most reckless pause to listen, the most callous are touched, and
those who would otherwise despair in their guilt are led to believe that there is a heart large
and tender enough to pity and save even such as the world is ready to spurn into a dishonored
grave.

The love of God as manifested in Christ of Nazareth is doing more for humanity than all other
influences combined. The best and noblest elements of our civilization can be traced either
directly or indirectly to him, and shadows brood heavily over both the lands and hearts that
neither know nor care for him.

It would seem, then, that not the wrath of God, but his love, is most effective in separating
men from the evil which would otherwise destroy them. God could best manifest this love by
becoming a man "made like unto his brethren"; for the love of God is ever best taught and best
understood, not as a doctrine, but when embodied in some large-hearted and Christlike person.

Such a person most emphatically was Mrs. Arnot; and because of these divine characteristics
her gentle, womanly hand became more potent to save young Haldane than were all the powers
of evil and the downward impetus of a bad life to destroy.

How very many, like him, might be saved, were more women of tact and culture, large-hearted
also and willing to give a part of their time to such noble uses!

By a personal and human ministry, the method that has ever been most effective in God's providence,
Haldane was at last brought into close, intimate relations with the Divine Teacher himself.
He was led to look away from his own fitful emotions and vague experiences to One who was his
strong and unchanging friend. He was led to take as his daily guide and teacher the One who
developed Peter the fisherman, Paul the bigot, Luther the ignorant monk, into what they eventually
became, and it was not strange, therefore, that his crude, misshapen character should gradually
assume the outlines of moral symmetry, and that strength should take the place of weakness.
He commenced to learn by experience the truth which many never half believe, that God is as
willing to lovingly fashion the spiritual life of some humble follower as he is to shape the
destiny of those who are to be famous in the annals of the church and the world.

To Haldane's surprise he was not discharged from his humble position in Mr. Ivison's employ,
and the explanation, which soon afterward appeared, gave him great encouragement. The man whom
he had so severely punished in his outburst of passion, vented his spite by giving to the Morning
Courier an exaggerated and distorted account of the affair, in which the youth was made to
exchange places with himself, and appear as a coarse, quarrelsome bully.

When Haldane's attention was called to the paragraph his face flushed with indignation as he
read it; but he threw the paper down and went to his work without a word of comment. He had
already about despaired of anything like justice or friendly recognition from the public, and
he turned from this additional wrong with a feeling not far removed from indifference. He was
learning the value of Mrs. Arnot's suggestion, that a consciousness of one's own integrity
can do more to sustain than the world's opinion, and her words on the previous evening had
taught him how a companionship, and eventually a character, might be won that could compensate
him for all that he had lost or might suffer.

His persecutor was, therefore, disappointed in seeing how little annoyance his spite occasioned,
nor was his equanimity increased by a message from Mr. Ivison ordering his instant discharge.

The following morning the foreman of the room in which Haldane worked came to him with quite
a show of friendliness, and said:

"It seems ye're in luck, for the boss takes an interest in ye. Read that; I wouldn't a' thought
it."

Hope sprang up anew in the young man's breast as he read the following words:

EDITOR COURIER.--Dear Sir: You will doubtless give space for this correction in regard to the
fracas which took place in my factory a day or two since. You, with all right-minded men, surely
desire that no injustice should be done to any one in any circumstances. Very great injustice
was done to young Haldane in your issue of to-day. I have taken pains to inform myself accurately,
and have learned that he patiently submitted to a petty persecution for a long time, and at
last gave way to natural anger under a provocation such as no man of spirit could endure. His
tormentor, a coarse, ill-conditioned fellow, was justly punished, and I have discharged him
from my employ. I have nothing to offer in extenuation of young Haldane's past faults, and,
if I remember correctly, the press of the city has always been fully as severe upon him as
the occasion demanded. If any further space is given to his fortunes, justice at least, not
to say a little encouraging kindness, should be accorded to him, as well as severity. It should
be stated that for weeks he has been trying to earn an honest livelihood, and in a situation
peculiarly trying to him I have been told that he sincerely wishes to reform and live a cleanly
and decent life, and I have obtained evidence that satisfies me of the truth of this report.
It appears to me that it is as mean a thing for newspapers to strike a man who is down, but
who is endeavoring to rise again, as it is for an individual to do so, and I am sure that you
will not consciously permit your journal to give any such sinister blow. Respectfully yours,
John Ivison.

In editorial comment came the following brief remark:

We gladly give Mr. Ivison's communication a prominent place. It is not our intention to "strike"
any one, but merely to record each day's events as they come to us. With the best intentions
mistakes are sometimes made. We have no possible motive for not wishing young Haldane well--we
do wish him success in achieving a better future than his past actions have led us to expect.
The city would be much better off if all of his class were equally ready to go to work.

Here at least was some recognition. The fact that he was working, and willing to work, had
been plainly stated, and this fact is an essential foundation-stone in the building up of a
reputation which the world will respect.

Although the discharge of the leading persecutor, and Mr. Ivison's letter, did not add to Haldane's
popularity at the mill, they led to his being severely let alone at first, and an increasingly
frank and affable manner on the part of the young man, as he gained in patience and serenity,
gradually disarmed those who were not vindictive and blind from prejudice.

Poor Mrs. Haldane seemed destined to be her son's evil genius to the end. When people take
a false view of life there seems a fatality in all their actions. The very fact that they are
not in accord with what is right and true causes the most important steps of their lives to
appear ill-timed, injudicious, and unnatural. That they are well-meaning and sincere does not
help matters much, if both tact and sound principles are wanting. Mrs. Haldane belonged to
the class that are sure that everything is right which seems right to them. True, it was a
queer little jumble of religious prejudices and conventional notions that combined to produce
her conclusions; but when once they were reached, no matter how absurd or defective they appeared
to others, she had no more doubt of them than of the Copernican system.

Her motherly feelings had made her willing to take her son to some hiding-place in Europe;
but since that could not be, and perhaps was not best, she had thoroughly settled it in her
mind that he should accept of her offer and live at her expense the undemonstrative life of
an oyster in the social and moral ooze of the obscurest mud-bank he could find. In this way
the terrible world might be led to eventually leave off talking and thinking of the Haldane
family--a consummation that appeared to her worth any sacrifice. When the morning paper brought
another vile story (copied from the Hillaton "Courier") of her son's misdoings, her adverse
view of his plans and character was confirmed beyond the shadow of a doubt. She felt that there
was a fatality about the place and its associations for him, and her one hope was to get him away.

She cut the article from the paper and inclosed it to him with the accompanying note:

"We go to New York this afternoon, and sail for Europe to-morrow. You send us in parting a
characteristic souvenir, which I return to you. The scenes and associations indicated in this
disgraceful paragraph seem more to your taste than those which your family have hitherto enjoyed
as their right for many generations. While this remains true, you, of necessity, cut yourself
off from your kindred, and we, who are most closely connected, must remain where our names
cannot be associated with yours. I still cherish the hope, however, that you may find the way
of the transgressor so hard that you will be brought by your bitter experience to accept of
my offer and give the world a chance to forget your folly and wickedness. When you will do
this in good faith (and my lawyer will see that it is done in good faith), you may draw on
him for the means of a comfortable support. In bitter shame and sorrow, your mother,

"EMILY HALDANE."

This letter was a severe blow to her son, for it contained the last words of the mother that
he might not see for years. While he felt it to be cruelly unjust to him and his present aims,
he was calm enough now to see that the distorted paragraph which led to it fitted in only too
well with the past, and so had the coloring of truth. When inclined to blame his mother for
not waiting for his versions of these miserable events and accepting of them alone, he was
compelled to remember that she was in part awakened from her blind idolatry of him by the discovery
of his efforts to deceive her in regard to his increasing dissipation. Even before he had entered
Mr. Arnot's counting-room he had taught her to doubt his word, and now she had evidently lost
confidence in him utterly. He foresaw that this confidence could be regained only by years
of patient well-doing, and that she might incline to believe in him more slowly even than comparative
strangers. But he was not disposed to be very angry and resentful, for he now had but little
confidence in himself. He had been led, however, by his bitter experience and by Mrs. Arnot's
faithful ministry to adopt that lady's brief but comprehensive creed, He was learning to trust
in Christ as an all-powerful and personal friend; he was daily seeking to grasp the principles
which Christ taught, but more clearly acted out, and which are essential to the formation of
a noble character. He had thus complied with the best conditions of spiritual growth; and the
crude elements of his character, which had been rendered more chaotic by evil, slowly began
to shape themselves into the symmetry of a true man.

In regard to his mother's letter, all that he could do was to inclose to her, with the request
that it be forwarded, Mr. Ivison's defence of him, which appeared in the "Courier" of the following
morning.

"You perceive," he wrote, "that a stranger has taken pains to inform himself correctly in regard
to the facts of the case, and that he has for me some charity and hope. I do not excuse the
wrong of my action on that occasion or on any other, but I do wish, and I am trying, to do
better, and I hope to prove the same to you by years of patient effort. I may fail miserably,
however, as you evidently believe. The fact that my folly and wickedness have driven you and
my sisters into exile, is a very great sorrow to me, but compliance with your request that
I should leave Hillaton and go into hiding would bring no remedy at all. I know that I should
do worse anywhere else, and my self-respect and conscience both require that I should fight
the battle of my life out here where I have suffered such disgraceful defeat."

CHAPTER XLIII

MR. GROWTHER "STUMPED"

About three weeks after the occasion upon which Haldane's human nature had manifested itself
in such a disastrous manner as he had supposed, Mrs. Arnot, Dr. Barstow, and Mr. Ivison happened
to find themselves together at an evening company.

"I have been wishing to thank you, Mr. Ivison," said the lady, "for your just and manly letter
in regard to young Haldane. I think it encouraged him very much, and has given him more hopefulness
in his work. How has he been doing of late? The only reply he makes to my questioning is, 'I
am plodding on.'"

"Do you know," said Mr. Ivison, "I am beginning to take quite an interest in that young fellow.
He has genuine pluck. You cannot understand, Mrs. Arnot, what an ordeal he has passed through.
He is naturally as mettlesome as a young colt, and yet day after day he was subjected to words
and actions that were to him like the cut of a whip."

"Mr. Ivison," said Mrs. Arnot, with a sudden moisture coming into her eyes, "I have long felt
the deepest interest in this young man. In judging any one I try to consider not only what
he does, but all the circumstances attending upon his action. Knowing Haldane's antecedents,
and how peculiarly unfitted he was by early life and training for his present trials, I think
his course since he was last released from prison has been very brave," and she gave a brief
sketch of his life and mental states, as far as a delicate regard for his feelings permitted,
from that date.

Dr. Barstow, in his turn, also became interested in the youth, not only for his own sake, but
also in the workings of his mind and his spiritual experiences. It was the good doctor's tendency
to analyze everything and place all psychological manifestations under their proper theological
heads.

"I feel that I indirectly owe this youth a large debt of gratitude, since his coming to our
church and his repulse, in the first instance, has led to decided changes for the better in
us all, I trust. But his experience, as you have related it, raises some perplexing questions.
Do you think he is a Christian?"

"I do not know. I think he is," replied Mrs. Arnot.

"When do you think he became a Christian?"

"Still less can I answer that question definitely."

"But would not one naturally think it was when he was conscious of that happy change in the
study of good old Dr. Marks?"

"Poor Haldane has been conscious of many changes and experiences, but I do not despise or make
light of any of them. It is certainly sensible to believe that every effect has a cause; and
for one I believe that these strange, mystical, and often rich and rapturous experiences, are
largely and perhaps wholly caused in many instances by the direct action of God's Spirit on
the human spirit. Again, it would seem that men's religious natures are profoundly stirred
by human and earthly causes, for the emotion ceases with the cause. It appears to me that if
people would only learn to look at these experiences in a sensible way, they would be the better
and wiser for them. We are thus taught what a grand instrument the soul is, and of what divine
harmonies and profound emotions it is capable when played upon by any adequate power. To expect
to maintain this exaltation with our present nature is like requiring of the athlete that he
never relax his muscles, or of the prima donna that she never cease the exquisite trill which
is but the momentary proof of what her present organization is capable. And yet it would appear
that many, like poor Haldane, are tempted on one hand to entertain no Christian hope because
they cannot produce these deep and happy emotions; or, on the other hand, to give up Christian
hope because these emotions cease in the inevitable reaction that follows them. In my opinion
it is when we accept of Christ as Saviour and Guide we become Christians, and a Christian life
is the maintenance of this simple yet vital relationship. We thus continue branches of the
'true vine.' I think Haldane has formed this relationship."

"It would seem from your account that he had formed it, consciously, but a very brief time
since," said Dr. Barlow, "and yet for weeks previous he had been putting forth what closely
resembles Christian effort, exercising Christian forbearance, and for a time at least enjoying
happy spiritual experiences. Can you believe that all this is possible to one who is yet dead
in trespasses and sins?"

"My dear Dr. Barstow, I cannot apply your systematic theology to all of God's creatures any
more than I could apply a rigid and carefully lined-out system of parental affection and government
to your household. I know that you love all of your children, both when they are good and when
they are bad, and that you are ever trying to help the naughty ones to be better. I am inclined
to think that I could learn more sound theology on these points in your nursery and dining-room
than in your study. I am sure, however, that God does not wait till his little bewildered children
reach a certain theological mile-stone before reaching out his hand to guide and help them."

"You are both better theologians than I am," said Mr. Ivison, "and I shall not enter the lists
with you on that ground; but I know what mill-life is to one of his caste and feeling, and
his taking such work, and his sticking to it under the circumstances, is an exhibition of more
pluck than most young men possess. And yet it was his only chance, for when people get down
as low as he was they must take any honest work in order to obtain a foothold. Even now, burdened
as he is by an evil name, it is difficult to see how he can rise any higher."

"Could you not give him a clerkship?" asked Mrs. Arnot.

"No, I could not introduce him among my other clerks. They would resent it as an insult."

"You could do this," said Mrs. Arnot with a slight flush, "but I do not urge it or even ask
it. You are in a position to show great and generous kindness toward this young man. As he
who was highest stooped to the lowliest, so those high in station and influence can often stoop
to the humble and fallen with a better grace than those hearer to them in rank. If you believe
this young man is now trustworthy, and that trusting him would make him still more so, you
could give him a desk in your private office, and thus teach your clerks a larger charity.
The influential and assured in position must often take the lead in these matters."

Mr. Ivison thought a moment, and then said: "Your proposition is unusual, Mrs. Arnot, but I'll
think of it. I make no promises, however."

"Mr. Ivison," added Mrs. Arnot, in her smiling, happy way, "I hope you may make a great deal
of money out of your business this year; but if, by means of it, you can also aid in making
a good and true man, you will be still better off. Dr. Barstow here can tell you how sure such
investments are."

"If I should follow your lead and that of Dr. Barstow, all my real estate would be in the 'Celestial
City,'" laughed Mr. Ivison. "But I have a special admiration for the grace of clear grit, and
this young fellow, in declining his mother's offer and trying to stand on his feet here in
Hillaton, where every one is ready to tread him down, shows pluck, whatever else is wanting.
I've had my eye on him for some time, and I'm about satisfied he's trying to do right. But
it is difficult to know what to do for one with his ugly reputation. I will see what can be
done, however."

That same evening chilly autumn winds were blowing without, and Mr. Growther's passion for
a wood fire upon the hearth was an indulgence to which Haldane no longer objected. The frugal
supper was over, and the two oddly diverse occupants of the quaint old kitchen glowered at
the red coals in silence, each busy with his own thoughts. At last Haldane gave a long deep
sigh, which drew to him at once Mr. Growther's small twinkling eyes.

"Tough old world, isn't it, for sinners like us?" he remarked.

"Well, Mr. Growther, I've got rather tired of inveighing against the world; I'm coming to think
that the trouble is largely with myself."

"Umph!" snarled the old man, "I've allers knowed the trouble was with me, for of all crabbed,
cranky, cantankerous, old--"

"Hold on," cried Haldane, laughing, "don't you remember what Mrs. Arnot said about being unjust
to one's self? The only person that I have ever known you to wrong is Jeremiah Growther, and
it seems to me that you do treat him outrageously sometimes."

At the name of Mrs. Arnot the old man's face softened, and he rubbed his hands together as
he chuckled, "How Satan must hate that woman!"

"I was in hopes that her words might lead you to be a little juster to yourself," continued
Haldane, "and it has seemed to me that you, as well as I, have been in a better mood of late."

"I don't take no stock in myself at all," said Mr. Growther emphatically. "I'm a crooked stick
and allers will be--a reg'lar old gnarled knotty stick, with not 'nuff good timber in it to
make a penny whistle. That I haven't been in as cussin' a state as usual isn't because I think
any better of myself, but your Mrs. Arnot has set me a-thinkin' on a new track. She come to
see me one day while you was at the mill, and we had a real speret'al tussel. I argufied my
case in such a way that she couldn't git round it, and I proved to her that I was the driest
and crookedest old stick that ever the devil twisted out o' shape when it was a-growin'. On
a suddent she turned the argerment agin me in a way that has stumped me ever since. 'You are
right, Mr. Growther,' she said, 'it was the devil and not the Lord that twisted you out of
shape. Now who's the stronger,' she says, 'and who's goin' to have his own way in the end?
Suppose you are very crooked, won't the Lord get all the more glory in making you straight,
and won't his victory be all the greater over the evil one?' Says I, 'Mrs. Arnot, that's puttin'
my case in a new light. If I should be straightened out, it would be the awfulest set-back
Old Nick ever had; and if such a thing should happen he'd never feel sure of any one after
that.' Then she turned on me kinder sharp, and says she, 'What right have you to say that God
is allers lookin' round for easy work? What would you think of a doctor who would take only
slight cases, and have nothing to do with people who were gittin' dangerous-like? Isn't Jesus
Christ the great physician, and don't your common-sense tell you that he is jist as able to
cure you as a little child?'

"I declare I was stumped. Like that ill-mannered cuss in the Scripter who thought his old clothes
good enough for the weddin', I was speechless.

"But I got a worse knock down than that. Says she, 'Mr. Growther, I will not dispute all the
hard things you have said of yourself (you see I had beat her on that line of argerment); I
won't dispute all that you say (and I felt a little sot up agin, for I didn't know what she
was a-drivin' at), but,' says she, 'I think you've got some natural feelin's. Suppose you had
a little son, and while he was out in the street a wicked man should carry him off and treat
him so cruelly that, instead of growin' to be strong and fine-lookin', he should become a puny,
deformed little critter. Suppose at last you should hear where he was, and that he was longin'
to escape from the cruel bands of his harsh master, who kept on a-treatin' of him worse and
worse, would you, his father, go and coolly look at him and say, "If you was only a handsome
boy, with a strong mind in a strong body, I'd deliver you out of this tyrant's clutches and
take you back to be my son again; but since you are a poor, weak, deformed little critter,
that can never do much, or be much, I'll leave you here to be abused and tormented as before"--is
that what you would do, Mr. Growther?'

"Well, she spoke it all so earnest and real-like that I got off my guard, and I jist riz right
up from my cheer, and I got hold of my heavy old cane there, and it seemed as if my hair stood
right up on end, I was that mad at the old curmudgeon that had my boy, and I half shouts, 'No!
that ain't what I'd do, I'd go for that cuss that stole my boy, and for every blow he'd given
the little chap, I'd give him a hundred.'

"'But what would you do with the poor little boy?' she asks. At that I began to choke, my feelin's
was so stirred up, and moppin' my eyes, I said, 'Poor little chap, all beaten and abused out
o' shape! What would I do with him? Why, I couldn't do 'nuff for him in tryn' to make him forget
all the hard times he'd had.' Then says she, 'You would twit the child with bein' weak, puny,
and deformed, would you?' I was now hobblin' up and down the room in a great state of excitement,
and says I, 'Mrs. Arnot, mean a man as I am, I wouldn't treat any human critter so, let alone
my own flesh and blood, that had been so abused that it makes my heart ache to think on't.'

"'Don't you think you would love the boy a little even though he had a hump on his back and
his features were thin and sharp and pale?' 'Mrs. Arnot,' says I, moppin' my eyes agin, 'if
you say another word about the little chap I shall be struck all of a heap, fur my heart jist
kinder-- kinder pains like a toothache to do somethin' for him.' Then all of a suddent she
turns on me sharp agin, and says she, 'I think you are a very inconsistent man, Mr. Growther.
You have been runnin' yourself down, and yet you claim to be better than your Maker. He calls
himself our Heavenly Father, and yet you are sure that you have a kinder and more fatherly
heart than he. You are one of his little, weak, deformed children, twisted all out of shape,
as you have described, by his enemy and yours, and yet you the same as say that you would act
a great deal more like a true father toward your child than he will toward his. You virtually
say that you would rescue your child and be pitiful and tender toward him, but that your Heavenly
Father will leave you in the clutches of the cruel enemy, or exact conditions that you cannot
comply with before doing anything for you. Haven't you read in the Bible that "Like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him"? You think very meanly of yourself,
but you appear to think more meanly of God. Where is your warrant for doing so?'

"The truth bust in on me like the sunlight into this old kitchen when we open the shutters
of a summer mornin'. I saw that I was so completely floored in the argerment, and had made
such a blasted old fool of myself all these years, that I just looked around for a knot-hole
to crawl into. I didn't know which way to look, but at last I looked at her, and my withered
old heart gave a great thump when I saw two tears a-standin' in her eyes. Then she jumps up
and gives me that warm hand o' her'n and says: 'Mr. Growther, whenever you wish to know how
God feels toward you, think how you felt toward that little chap that was abused and beaten
all out o' shape,' and she was gone. Well, the upshot of it all is that I don't think a bit
better of myself--not one bit--but that weakly little chap, with a peaked face and a hump on
his back, that Mrs. Arnot made so real-like that I see him a-lookin' at me out of the cheer
there half the time--he's a makin' me better acquainted with the Lord, for the Lord knows I've
got a hump on my back and humps all over; but I keep a-sayin' to myself, 'Like as a father
pitieth his children,' and I don't feel near as much like cussin' as I used to. That little
chap that Mrs. Arnot described is doin' me a sight o' good, and if I could find some poor little
critter just like him, with no one to look after him, I'd take him in and do for him in a minit."

"Mr. Growther," said Haldane, huskily, "you have found that poor misshapen, dwarfed creature
that I fear will never attain the proportions of a true man. Of course you see through Mrs.
Arnot's imagery. In befriending me you are caring for one who is weak and puny indeed."

"Oh, you won't answer," said Mr. Growther with a laugh. "I can see that your humps is growin'
wisibly less every day, and you're too big and broad-shouldered for me to be a pettin' and
a yearnin' over. I want jest such a peaked little chap as Mrs. Arnot pictured out, and that's
doin' me such a sight o' good."

Again the two occupants of the old kitchen gazed at the fire for a long time in silence, and
again there came from the young man the same long-drawn sigh that had attracted Mr. Growther's
attention before.

"That's the second time," he remarked.

"I was thinking," said Haldane, rising to retire, "whether I shall ever have better work than
this odious routine at the mill."

Mr. Growther pondered over the question a few minutes, and then said sententiously: "I'm inclined
to think the Lord gives us as good work as we're cap'ble of doin'. He'll promote you when you've
growed a little more."

CHAPTER XLIV

GROWTH

The next morning Haldane received a message directing him to report at Mr. Ivison's private
office during the noon recess.

"Be seated," said that gentleman as the young man, wearing an anxious and somewhat surprised
expression, entered hesitatingly and diffidently. "You need not look so troubled, I have not
sent for you to find fault--quite the reverse. You have 'a friend at court,' as the saying
goes. Not that you needed one particularly, for I have had my eye upon you myself, and for
some days past have been inclined to give you a lift. But last evening Mrs. Arnot spoke in
your behalf, and through her words I have been led to take the following step. For reasons
that perhaps you can understand, it would be difficult for me to give you a desk among my other
clerks. I am not so sensitive, now that I know your better aims, and it is my wish that you
take that desk there, in this, my private office. Your duties will be very miscellaneous. Sometimes
I shall employ you as my errand-boy, again I may intrust you with important and confidential
business. I stipulate that you perform the humblest task as readily as any other."

Haldane's face flushed with pleasure, and he said warmly, "I am not in a position, sir, to
consider any honest work beneath me, and after your kindness I shall regard any service I can
render you as a privilege."

"A neat answer," laughed Mr. Ivison. "If you do your work as well I shall be satisfied. Pluck
and good sense will make a man of you yet. I want you to understand distinctly that it has
been your readiness and determination, not only to work, but to do any kind of work, that has
won my good-will. Here's a check for a month's salary in advance. Be here to-morrow at nine,
dressed suitably for your new position. Good-morning."

"Halloo! What's happened?" asked Mr. Growther as Haldane came in that evening with face aglow
with gladness and excitement.

"According to your theory I've been promoted sure," laughed the youth, and he related the unexpected
event of the day.

"That's jest like Mrs. Arnot," said Mr. Growther, rubbing his hands as he ever did when pleased;
"she's allers givin' some poor critter a boost. T'other day 'twas me, now agin it's you, and
they say she's helpin' lots more along. St. Peter will have to open the gate wide when she
comes in with her crowd. 'Pears to me sometimes that I can fairly hear Satan a-gnashin' of
his teeth over that woman. She's the wust enemy he has in town."

"I wish I might show her how grateful I am some day," said Haldane, with moistened eyes; "but
I clearly foresee that I can never repay her."

"No matter if you can't," replied the old man. "She don't want any pay. It's her natur' to
do these things."

Haldane gave his whole mind to the mastery of his new duties, and after a few natural blunders
speedily acquired a facility in the diverse tasks allotted him. In a manner that was perfectly
unobtrusive and respectful he watched his employer, studied his methods and habit of mind,
and thus gained the power of anticipating his wishes. Mr. Ivison began to find his office and
papers kept in just the order he liked, the temperature maintained at a pleasant medium, and
to receive many little nameless attentions that added to his comfort and reduced the wear and
tear of life to a hurried business-man; and when in emergencies Haldane was given tasks that
required brains, he proved that he possessed a fair share of them.

After quite a lapse of time Mr. Ivison again happened to meet Mrs. Arnot, and he said to her:

"Haldane thinks you did him a great kindness in suggesting our present arrangement; but I am
inclined to think you did me a greater, for you have no idea how useful the young fellow is
making himself to me."

"Then you will have to find a new object of benevolence," answered the lady, "or you will have
all your reward in this world."

"There it is again," said Mr. Ivison, with his hearty laugh, "you and Dr. Barstow give a man
no peace. I'm going to take breath before I strike in again."

In his new employment, Haldane, from the first, had found considerable leisure on his hands,
and after a little thought decided to review carefully the studies over which he had passed
so superficially in his student days.

Mr. Growther persisted in occupying the kitchen, leaving what had been designed as the parlor
or sitting-room of his cottage to dust and damp. With his permission the young man fitted this
up as a study, and bought a few popular works on science, as the nucleus of a library. After
supper he read the evening paper to Mr. Growther, who soon fell into a doze, and then Haldane
would steal away to his own quarters and pursue with zest, until a late hour, some study that
had once seemed to him utterly dry and unattractive.

Thus the months glided rapidly and serenely away, and he was positively happy in a mode of
life that he once would have characterized as odiously humdrum. The terrible world, whose favor
had formerly seemed essential, and its scorn unendurable, was almost forgotten; and as he continued
at his duties so steadily and unobtrusively the hostile world began to unbend gradually its
frowning aspect toward him. Those whom he daily met in business commenced with a nod of recognition,
and eventually ended with a pleasant word. At church an increasing number began to speak to
him, not merely as a Christian duty, but because the young man's sincere and earnest manner
interested them and inspired respect.

The fact that he recognized that he was under a cloud and did not try to attract attention,
worked in his favor. He never asked the alms of a kindly word or glance, by looking appealingly
to one and another. It became his habit to walk with his eyes downcast, not speaking to nor
looking toward any one unless first addressed. At the same time his bearing was manly and erect,
and marked by a certain quiet dignity which inevitably characterizes all who are honestly trying
to do right.

Because he asked so little of society it was the more disposed to give, and from a point of
bare toleration it passed on to a willingness to patronize with a faint encouraging smile.
And yet it was the general feeling that one whose name had been so sadly besmirched must be
kept at more than arm's-length.

"He may get to heaven," said an old lady who was remarking upon his regular attendance at church,
"but he can never hope to be received in good society again."

In the meantime the isolated youth was finding such an increasing charm in the companionship
of the gifted minds who spoke to him from the printed pages of his little library that he felt
the deprivation less and less.

But an hour with Mrs. Arnot was one of his chief pleasures, to which he looked forward with
glad anticipation. For a long time he could not bring himself to go to her house or to take
the risk of meeting any of her other guests, and in order to overcome his reluctance she occasionally
set apart an evening for him alone and was "engaged" to all others. These were blessed hours
to the lonely young fellow, and their memory made him stronger and more hopeful for days thereafter.

In his Christian experience he was gaining a quiet serenity and confidence. He had fully settled
it in his mind, as Mrs. Arnot had suggested, that Jesus Christ was both willing and able to
save him, and he simply trusted and tried to follow.

"Come," said that lady to him one evening, "it's time you found a nook in the vineyard and
went to work."

He shook his head emphatically as he replied, "I do not feel myself either competent or worthy.
Besides, who would listen to me?"

"Many might with profit. You can carry messages from Mr. Ivison, can you not take a message
from your Divine Master? I have thought it all over, and can tell you where you will be listened
to at least, and where you may do much good. I went, last Sunday, to the same prison in which
I visited you. and I read to the inmates. It would be a moral triumph for you, Egbert, to go
back there as a Christian man and with the honest purpose of doing good. It would be very pleasant
for me to think of you at work there every Sabbath. Make the attempt, to please me, if for
no better reason."

"That settles the question, Mrs. Arnot," said Haldane, with a troubled smile. "I would try
to preach in Choctaw, if you requested it, and I fear all that I can say 'out o' my own head,'
as Mr. Growther would put it, will be worse than Choctaw. But I can at least read to the prisoners;
that is," he added, with downcast eyes and a flush of his old shame, "if they will listen to
me, which I much doubt. You, with your large generous sympathies, can never understand how
greatly I am despised, even by my own class."

"Please remember that I am of your class now, for you are of the household of faith. I know
what you mean, Egbert. I am glad that you are so diffident and so little inclined to ask on
the ground of your Christian profession that the past be overlooked. If there is one thing
that disgusts me more than another it is the disposition to make one's religion a stepping-stone
to earthly objects and the means of forcing upon others a familiarity or a relationship that
is offensive to them. I cannot help doubting a profession of faith that is put to such low
uses. I know that you have special reason for humility, but you must not let it develop into
timidity. All I ask is that you read to such poor creatures in the prison as will listen to
you a chapter in the Bible, and explain it as well as you can, and then read something else
that you think will interest them."

Haldane made the attempt, and met, at first, as he feared, with but indifferent success. Even
criminals looked at him askance as he came in the guise of a religious teacher. But his manner
was so unassuming, and the spirit "I am better than thou" was so conspicuously absent, that
a few were disarmed, and partly out of curiosity, and partly to kill the time that passed so
slowly, they gathered at his invitation. He sat down among them as if one of them, and in a
voice that trembled with diffidence read a chapter from the gospels. Since he "put on no airs,"
as they said, one and another drew near until all the inmates of the jail were grouped around
him. Having finished the chapter, Haldane closed the Bible and said:

"I do not feel competent to explain this chapter. Perhaps many of you understand it better
than I do. I did not even feel that I was worthy to come here and read the chapter to you,
but the Christian lady who visited you last Sunday asked me to come, and I would do anything
for her. She visited me when I was a prisoner like you, and through her influence I am trying
to be a better man. I know, my friends, from sad experience, that when we get down under men's
feet, and are sent to places like these, we lose heart and hope; we feel that there is no chance
for us to get up again, we are tempted to be despairing and reckless; but through the kindness
and mercy of that good lady, Mrs. Arnot, I learned of a kindness and mercy greater even than
hers. The world may hate us, scorn us, and even trample us down, and if we will be honest with
ourselves we must admit that we have given it some reason to do all this--at least I feel that
I have--but the world can't keep us down, and what is far worse than the world, the evil in
our own hearts can't keep us down, if we ask Jesus Christ to help us up. I am finding this
out by experience, and so know the truth of what I am saying. This Bible tells us about this
strong, merciful One, this Friend of publicans and sinners, and if you would like me to come
here Sunday afternoons and read about him, I will do so very gladly, but I don't wish to force
myself upon you if I'm not wanted."

"Come, my hearty, come every time," said an old sailor, with a resounding oath. "Tain't likely
I'll ever ship with your captain, for sech as I've come to be couldn't pass muster. Howsumever,
it's kind o' comfortin' to hear one talk as if there was plenty of sea-room, even when a chap
knows he's drivin' straight on the rocks."

"Come, oh, come again," entreated the tremulous voice of one who was crouching a little back
of his chair.

Haldane turned, and with a start recognized the fair young girl, whose blue eyes and Madonna-like
face had, for a moment, even in the agony of his own shame, secured his attention while in
the police court, more than a year before. She was terribly changed, and yet by that strange
principle by which we keep our identity through all mutations, Haldane knew that she was the
same, and felt that by a glance he could almost trace back her life through its awful descent
to the time when she was a beautiful and innocent girl. As a swift dark tide might sweep a
summer pinnace from its moorings, and dash it on the rocks until it became a crushed and shapeless
thing, so passion or most untoward circumstances had suddenly drawn this poor young creature
among coarse, destructive vices that had shattered the delicate, womanly nature in one short
year into utter wreck.

"Come again," she whispered in response to Haldane's glance; "come soon, or else I shall be
in my grave, and I've got the awful fear that it is the mouth of the bottomless pit. Otherwise
I'd be glad to be in it."

"Poor child!" said Haldane, tears coming into his eyes.

"Ah!" she gasped, "will God pity me like that?"

"Yes, for the Bible says, 'The Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy,' My own despairing
thoughts have taught me to look for all of God's promises."

"You know nothing of the depths into which I have fallen," she said in a low tone; "I can see
that in your face."

Again Haldane ejaculated, "Poor child!" with a heartfelt emphasis that did more good than the
longest homily. Then finding the Bible story which commences, "And, behold, a woman in the
city, which was a sinner," he turned a leaf down saying:

"I am neither wise enough nor good enough to guide you, but I know that Mrs. Arnot will come
and see you. I shall leave my Bible with you, and, until she comes, read where I have marked."

Mrs. Arnot did come, and the pure, high-born woman shut the door of the narrow cell, and taking
the head of her fallen sister into her lap, listened with responsive tears to the piteous story,
as it was told with sighs, sobs, and strong writhings of anguish.

As the girl became calmer and her mind emerged from the chaos of her tempestuous and despairing
sorrow, Mrs. Arnot led her, as it were, to the very feet of Jesus of Nazareth, and left her
there with these words:

"He came to seek and save just such as you are--the lost. He is reaching down his rescuing
hand of love to you, and when you grasp it in simple confiding trust you are saved."

Before the week closed, the poor creature forever turned her face away from the world in which
she had so deeply sinned and suffered: but before she departed on the long journey, he who
alone can grant to the human soul full absolution, had said to her, "Thy sins are forgiven;
go in peace."

As Mrs. Arnot held her dying head she whispered, "Tell him that it was his tears of honest
sympathy that first gave me hope."

That message had a vital influence over Haldane's subsequent life. Indeed these words of the
poor dying waif were potent enough to shape all his future career. He was taught by them the
magnetic power of sympathy, and that he who in the depths of his heart feels for his fellow-creatures,
can help them. He had once hoped that he would dazzle men's eyes by the brilliancy of his career,
but he had long since concluded that he must plod along the lowly paths of life. Until his
visit to the prison and its results the thought had scarcely occurred to him that he could
help others. He had felt that he had been too sorely wounded himself ever to be more than an
invalid in the world's hospital; but he now began to learn that his very sin and suffering
enabled him to approach nearer to those who were, as he was once, on the brink of despair or
in the apathy of utter discouragement, and to aid them more effectively because of his kindred
experience.

The truth that he, in the humblest possible way, could engage in the noble work for which he
revered Mrs. Arnot, came like a burst of sunlight into his shadowed life, and his visits to
the prison were looked forward to with increasing zest.

From reading the chapter merely he came to venture on a few comments. Then questions were asked,
and he tried to answer some, and frankly said he could not answer others. But these questions
stimulated his mind and led to thought and wider reading. To his own agreeable surprise, as
well as that of his prison class, he occasionally was able to bring, on the following Sabbath,
a very satisfactory answer to some of the questions; and this suggested the truth that all
questions could be answered if only time and wisdom enough could be brought to bear upon them.

He gradually acquired a facility in expressing his thoughts, and, better still, he had thoughts
to express. Some of the prisoners, who were in durance but for a brief time, asked him to take
a class in the Guy-Street Mission Chapel.

"They will scarcely want me there as a teacher," he said with a slight flush.

But the superintendent and pastor, after some hesitation and inquiry, concluded they did want
him there, and with some ex-prisoners as a nucleus, he unobtrusively formed a class near the
door. The two marked characteristics of his Christian efforts--downright sincerity and sympathy--were
like strong, far-reaching hands, and his class began to grow until it swamped the small neighboring
classes with uncouth and unkempt-looking creatures that were drawn by the voice that asserted
their manhood and womanhood in spite of their degradation. Finally, before another year ended,
a large side-room was set apart for Haldane and his strange following, and he made every one
that entered it, no matter how debased, believe that there were possibilities of good in them
yet, and he was able to impart this encouraging truth because he so thoroughly believed it himself.

As he stood before that throng of publicans and sinners, gathered from the slums of the city,
and, with his fine face lighted up with thought and sympathy, spoke to them the truth in such
a way that they understood it and felt its power, one could scarcely have believed that but
two years before he had been dragged from a drunken brawl to the common jail. The explanation
is simple--he had followed closely that same divine Master who had taught the fishermen of Galilee.

CHAPTER XLV

LAURA ROMEYN

Mrs. Haldane and her daughters found European life so decidedly to their taste that it was
doubtful whether they would return for several years. The son wrote regularly to his mother,
for he had accepted of the truth of Mrs. Arnot's words that nothing could excuse him from the
sacred duties which he owed to her. As his fortunes improved and time elapsed without the advent
of more disgraceful stories, she also began to respond as frequently and sympathetically as
could be expected of one taking her views of life. She was at last brought to acquiesce in
his plan of remaining at Hillaton, if not to approve of it, and after receiving one or two
letters from Mrs. Arnot, she was inclined to believe in the sincerity of his Christian profession.
She began to share in the old lady's view already referred to, that he might reach heaven at
last, but could never be received in good society again.

"Egbert is so different from us, my dears," she would sigh to her daughters, "that I suppose
we should not judge him by our standards. I suppose he is doing as well as he ever will--as
well indeed as his singularly unnatural disposition permits."

It did not occur to the lady that she was a trifle unnatural and unchristian herself in permitting
jealousy to creep into her heart, because Mrs. Arnot had wielded a power for good over her
son which she herself had failed to exert.

She instructed her lawyer, however, to pay to him an annuity that was far beyond his needs
in his present frugal way of living.

This ample income enabled him at once to carry out a cherished purpose, which had been forming
in his mind for several months, and which he now broached to Mrs. Arnot.

"For the last half year," he said, "I have thought a great deal over the possibilities that
life offers to one situated as I am. I have tried to discover where I can make my life-work,
maimed and defective as it ever must be, most effective, and it has seemed to me that I could
accomplish more as a physician than in any other calling. In this character I could naturally
gain access to those who are in distress of body and mind, but who are too poor to pay for
ordinary attendance. There are hundreds in this city, especially little children, that, through
vice, ignorance, or poverty, never receive proper attention in illness. My services would not
be refused by this class, especially if they were gratuitous."

"You should charge for your visits, as a rule," said wise Mrs. Arnot. "Never give charity unless
it is absolutely necessary."

"Well, I could charge so moderately that my attendance would not be a burden. I am very grateful
to Mr. Ivison for the position he gave me, but I would like to do something more and better
in life than I can accomplish as his clerk. A physician among the poor has so many chances
to speak the truth to those who might otherwise never hear it. Now this income from my father's
estate would enable me to set about the necessary studies at once, and the only question in
my mind is, will they receive me at the university?"

"Egbert," said Mrs. Arnot, with one of those sudden illuminations of her face which he so loved
to see, "do you remember what I said long ago, when you were a disheartened prisoner, about
my ideal of knighthood? If you keep on you will fulfil it."

"I remember it well," he replied, "but you are mistaken. My best hope is to find, as you said
upon another occasion, my own little nook in the vineyard, and quietly do my work there."

After considerable hesitation the faculty of the university received Haldane as a student,
and Mr. Ivison parted with him very reluctantly. His studies for the past two years, and several
weeks of careful review, enabled him to pass the examinations required in order to enter the
Junior year of the college course.

As his name appeared among those who might graduate in two years, the world still further relaxed
its rigid and forbidding aspect, and not a few took pains to manifest to him their respect
for his resolute upward course.

But he maintained his old, distant, unobtrusive manner, and no one was obliged to recognize,
much less to show, any special kindness to him, unless they chose to do so. He evidently shrank
with a morbid sensitiveness from any social contact with those who, in remembrance of his past
history, might shrink from him. But he had not been at the university very long before Mrs.
Arnot overcame this diffidence so far as to induce him to meet with certain manly fellows of
his class at her house.

In all the frank and friendly interchange of thought between Mrs. Arnot and the young man there
was one to whom, by tacit consent, they did not refer, except in the most casual manner, and
that was Laura Romeyn. Haldane had not seen her since the time she stumbled upon him in his
character of wood-sawyer. He kept her image in a distant and doubly-locked chamber of his heart,
and seldom permitted his thoughts to go thither. Thus the image had faded into a faint yet
lovely outline which he had learned to look upon with a regret that was now scarcely deep enough
to be regarded as pain. She had made one or two brief visits to her aunt, but he had taken
care never to meet her. He had learned incidentally, however, that she had lost her father,
and that her mother was far from well.

When calling upon Mrs. Arnot one blustering March evening, toward the close of his Junior year,
that lady explained her anxious, clouded face by saying that her sister, Mrs. Romeyn, was very
ill, and after a moment added, half in soliloquy, "What would she do without Laura?"

From this he gathered that the young girl was a loving daughter and a faithful nurse, and the
image of a pale, yet lovely watcher rose before him with dangerous frequence and distinctness.

A day or two after he received a note from Mrs. Arnot, informing him that she was about to
leave home for a visit to her invalid sister, and might be absent several weeks. Her surmise
proved correct, and when she returned Laura came with her, and the deep mourning of the orphan's
dress but faintly reflected the darker sorrow that shrouded her heart. When, a few sabbaths
after her arrival, her veiled figure passed up the aisle of the church, he bowed his head in
as sincere sympathy as one person can give for the grief of another.

For a long time he did not venture to call on Mrs. Arnot, and then came only at her request.
To his great relief, he did not see Laura, for he felt that, conscious of her great loss and
the memories of the past, he should be speechless in her presence. To Mrs. Arnot he said:

"Your sorrow has seemed to me such a sacred thing that I felt that any reference to it on my
part would be like a profane touch; but I was sure you would not misinterpret my silence or
my absence, and would know that you were never long absent from my thoughts."

He was rewarded by the characteristic lighting up of her face as she said:

"Hillaton would scarcely give you credit for such delicacy of feeling, Egbert, but you are
fulfilling my faith in you. Neither have I forgotten you and your knightly conflict because
I have not seen or written to you. You know well that my heart and hands have been full. And
now a very much longer time must elapse before we can meet again. In her devotion to her mother
my niece has overtaxed her strength, and her physical and mental depression is so great that
our physician strongly recommends a year abroad. You can see how intensely occupied I have
been in preparations for our hurried departure. We sail this week. I shall see your mother,
no doubt, and I am glad I can tell her that which I should be proud to hear of a son of mine."

The year that followed was a long one to Haldane. He managed to keep the even tenor of his
way, but it was often as the soldier makes his weary march in the enemy's country, fighting
for and holding, step by step, with difficulty. His intense application in his first year of
study and the excitements of the previous years at last told upon him, and he often experienced
days of extreme lassitude and weariness. At one time he was quite ill, and then he realized
how lonely and isolated he was. He still kept his quarters at the hermitage, but Mr. Growther,
with the kindest intentions, was too old and decrepit to prove much of a nurse.

In his hours of enforced idleness his imagination began to retouch the shadowy image of Laura
Romeyn with an ideal beauty. In his pain and weakness her character of watcher--in which her
self-sacrificing devotion had been so great as to impair her health--was peculiarly attractive.
She became to him a pale and lovely saint, too remote and sacred for his human love, and yet
sufficiently human to continually haunt his mind with a vague and regretful pain that he could
never reach her side. He now learned from its loss how valuable Mrs. Arnot's society had been
to him. Her letters, which were full and moderately frequent, could not take the place of her
quiet yet inspiriting voice.

He was lonely, and he recognized the fact. While there were hundreds now in Hillaton who wished
him well, and respected him for his brave struggle, he was too shadowed by disgraceful memories
to be received socially into the homes that he would care to visit. Some of the church people
invited him out of a sense of duty, but he recognized their motive, and shrank from such constrained
courtesy with increasing sensitiveness.

But, though he showed human weakness and gave way to long moods of despondency, at times inclining
to murmur bitterly at his lot, he suffered no serious reverses. He patiently, even in the face
of positive disinclination, maintained his duties. He remembered how often the Divine Man,
in his shadowed life, went apart for prayer, and honestly tried to imitate this example, so
specially suited to one as maimed and imperfect as himself.

He found that his prayers were answered, that the strong Friend to whom he had allied his weakness
did not fail him. He was sustained through the dark days, and his faith eventually brought
him peace and serenity. He gained in patience and strength, and with better health came renewed
hopefulness.

Although not a brilliant student, he was able to complete his university course and graduate
with credit. He then took the first vacation that he had enjoyed for years, and, equipping
himself with fishing-rod and a few favorite authors, he buried himself in the mountains of Maine.

His prison and mission classes missed him sadly. Mr. Growther found that he could no longer
live a hermit's life, and began in good earnest to look for the "little, peaked-faced chap"
that had grown to be more and more of a reality to him; but the rest of Hillaton almost forgot
that Haldane had ever existed.

In the autumn he returned, brown and vigorous, and entered upon his studies at the medical
school connected with the university with decided zest. To his joy he found a letter from Mrs.
Arnot, informing him that the health of her niece was fully restored, and that they were about
to return. And yet it was with misgivings that he remembered that Laura would henceforth be
an inmate of Mrs. Arnot's home. As a memory, however beautiful, she was too shadowy to disturb
his peace. Would this be true if she had fulfilled all the rich promises of her girlhood, and
he saw her often?

With a foreboding of future trouble he both dreaded and longed to see once more the maiden
who had once so deeply stirred his heart, and who in the depths of his disgrace had not scorned
him when accidentally meeting him in the guise and at the tasks of a common laborer.

It was with a quickened pulse that he read in the "Spy" one Monday evening, that Mrs. Arnot
and niece had arrived in town. It was with a quicker pulse that he received a note from her
a few days later asking him to call that evening, and adding that two or three other young
men whom he knew to be her especial favorites would be present.

Because our story has confined itself chiefly to the relations existing between Haldane and
Mrs. Arnot, it must not be forgotten that her active sympathies were enlisted in behalf of
many others, some of whom were almost equally attached to her and she to them.

After a little thought Haldane concluded that he would much prefer that his first interview
with Laura should be in the presence of others, for he could then keep in the background without
exciting remark.

He sincerely hoped that when he saw her he might find that her old power over him was a broken
spell, and that the lovely face which had haunted him all these years, growing more beautiful
with time, was but the creation of his own fancy. He was sure she would still be pretty, but
if that were all he could go on his way without a regretful thought. But if the shy maiden,
whose half-entreating, compassionate tones had interrupted the harsh rasping of his saw years
ago, were the type of the woman whom he should meet that evening, might not the bitterest punishment
of his folly be still before him?

He waited till sure that the other guests had arrived, and then entered to meet, as he believed,
either a hopeless thraldom or complete disenchantment.

As he crossed the threshold of the parlor the pleasure of seeing Mrs. Arnot again, and of receiving
her cordial greeting, obliterated all other thoughts from his mind.

He had, however, but a moment's respite, for the lady said:

"Laura, my friend Mr. Haldane."

He turned and saw, by actual vision, the face that in fancy he had so often looked upon. It
was not the face that he expected to see at all. The shy, blue-eyed maiden, who might have
reminded one of a violet half hidden among the grass, had indeed vanished, but an ordinary
pretty woman had not taken her place.

He felt this before he had time to consciously observe it, and bowed rather low to hide his
burning face; but she frankly held out her hand and said, though with somewhat heightened color
also:

"Mr. Haldane, I am glad to meet you again."

Then, either to give him time to recover himself, or else, since the interruption was over,
she was glad to resume the conversation that had been suspended, she turned to her former companions.
Mrs. Arnot also left him to himself a few moments, and by a determined effort he sought to
calm the tumultuous riot of his blood. He was not phlegmatic on any occasion; but even Mrs.
Arnot could not understand why he should be so deeply moved by this meeting. She ascribed it
to the painful and humiliating memories of the past, and then dismissed his manner from her
mind. He speedily gained self-control, and, as is usual with strong natures, became unusually
quiet and undemonstrative. Only in the depths of his dark eyes could one have caught a glimpse
of the troubled spirit within, for it was troubled with a growing consciousness of an infinite
loss.

CHAPTER XLVI

MISJUDGED

The young men who were Mrs. Arnot's guests were naturally attracted to Laura's side, and she
speedily proved that she possessed the rare power of entertaining several gentlemen at the
same time, and with such grace and tact as to make each one feel that his presence was both
welcome and needed in the circle.

Mrs. Arnot devoted herself to Haldane, and showed how genuine was her interest in him by taking
up his life where his last letter left it, and asking about all that had since occurred. Indeed,
with almost a mother's sympathy, she led him to speak of the experiences of the entire year.

"It seems to me," he said, "that I have scarcely more than held my ground."

