The first story--The Gold Sickle; or, Hena, the Virgin of the Isle of Sen--fittingly preludes
the grand drama conceived by the author. There the Gallic people are introduced upon the stage
of history in the simplicity of their customs, their industrious habits, their bravery, lofty
yet childlike--such as they were at the time of the Roman invasion by Caesar, 58 B. C. The
present story is the thrilling introduction to the class struggle, that starts with the conquest
of Gaul, and, in the subsequent seventeen stories, is pathetically and instructively carried
across the ages, down to the French Revolution of 1848.

D. D. L.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

Preface to the Translation

Chapter 1. The Conflagration                1

Chapter 2. In the Lion's Den                8

Chapter 3. Gallic Virtue                   24

Chapter 4. The Trial                       35

Chapter 5. Into the Shallows               41

Chapter 6. The Eve of Battle               52

Chapter 7. The Battle of Vannes            59

Chapter 8. After the Battle                80

Chapter 9. Master and Slave                88

Chapter 10. The Last Call to Arms         102

Chapter 11. The Slaves' Toilet            107

Chapter 12. Sold into Bondage             115

Chapter 13. The Booth across the Way      126

FOOTNOTES

CHAPTER I.

THE CONFLAGRATION.

The call to arms, sounded by the druids of the forest of Karnak and by the Chief of the Hundred
Valleys against the invading forces of the first Caesar, had well been hearkened to.

The sacrifice of Hena, the Virgin of the Isle of Sen, seemed pleasing to Hesus. All the peoples
of Brittany, from North to South, from East to West, rose to combat the Romans. The tribes
of the territory of Vannes and Auray, those of the Mountains of Ares, and many others, assembled
before the town of Vannes, on the left bank, close to the mouth of the river which empties
into the great bay of Morbihan. This redoubtable position where all the Gallic forces were
to meet, was situated ten leagues from Karnak, and had been chosen by the Chief of the Hundred
Valleys, who had been elected Commander-in-Chief of the army.

Leaving behind them their fields, their herds, and their dwellings, the tribes were here assembled,
men and women, young and old, and were encamped round about the town of Vannes. Here also were
Joel, his family, and his tribe.

Albinik the mariner, together with his wife Meroë left the camp towards sunset, bent on an
errand of many days' march. Since her marriage with Albinik, Meroë; was the constant, companion
of his voyages and dangers at sea, and like him, she wore the seaman's costume. Like him she
knew at a pinch how to put her hand to the rudder, to ply the oar or the axe, for stout was
her heart, and strong her arm.

In the evening, before leaving the Gallic army, Meroë dressed herself in her sailor's garments--a
short blouse of brown wool, drawn tight with a leather belt, large broad breeches of white
cloth, which fell below her knees, and shoes of sealskin. She carried on her left shoulder
her short, hooded cloak, and on her flowing hair was a leathern bonnet. By her resolute air,
the agility of her step, the perfection of her sweet and virile countenance, one might have
taken Meroë for one of those young men whose good looks make maidens dream of marriage. Albinik
also was dressed as a mariner. He had flung over his back a sack with provisions for the way.
The large sleeves of his blouse revealed his left arm, wrapped to the elbow in a bloody bandage.

Husband and wife had left Vannes for some minutes, when Albinik, stopping, sad and deeply moved,
said to Meroë:

"There is still time--consider. We are going to beard the lion in his den. He is tricky, distrustful
and savage. It may mean for us slavery, torture, or death. Meroë, let me finish alone this
trip and this enterprise, beside which a desperate fight would be but a trifle. Return to my
father and mother, whose daughter you are also!"

"Albinik, you had to wait for the darkness of night to say that to me. You would not see me
blush with shame at the thought of your thinking me a coward;" and the young woman, while making
this answer, instead of turning back, only hastened her step.

"Let it be as your courage and your love for me bid," replied her husband. "May Hena, my holy
sister, who is gone, protect us at the side of Hesus."

The two continued their way along the crests of a chain of lofty hills. They had thus at their
feet and before their eyes a succession of deep and fertile valleys. As far as eye could reach,
they saw here villages, yonder small hamlets, elsewhere isolated farms; further off rose a
flourishing town crossed by an arm of the river, in which were moored, from distance to distance,
large boats loaded with sheaves of wheat, casks of wine, and fodder.

But, strange to say, although the evening was clear, not a single one of those large herds
of cattle and of sheep was to be seen, which ordinarily grazed there till nightfall. No more
was there a single laborer in sight on the fields, although it was the hour when, by every
road, the country-folk ordinarily began to return to their homes; for the sun was fast sinking.
This country, so populous the preceding evening, now seemed deserted.

The couple halted, pensive, contemplating the fertile lands, the bountifulness of nature, the
opulent city, the hamlets, and the houses. Then, recollecting what they knew was to happen
in a few moments, soon as the sun was set and the moon risen, Albinik and Meroë; shivered with
grief and fear. Tears fell from their eyes, they sank to their knees, their eyes fixed with
anguish on the depths of the valleys, which the thickening evening shade was gradually invading.
The sun had disappeared, but the moon, then in her decline, was not yet up. There was thus,
between sunset and the rising of the moon, a rather long interval. It was a bitter one for
husband and wife; bitter, like the certain expectation of some great woe.

"Look, Albinik," murmured the young woman to her spouse, although they were alone--for it was
one of those awful moments when one speaks low in the middle of a desert--"just look, not a
light: not one in these houses, hamlets, or the town. Night is come, and all within these dwellings
is gloomy as the night without."

"The inhabitants of this valley are going to show themselves worthy of their brothers," answered
Albinik reverently. "They also wish to respond to the voice of our venerable druids, and to
that of the Chief of the Hundred Valleys."

"Yes; by the terror which is now come upon me, I feel we are about to see a thing no one has
seen before, and perhaps none will see again."

"Meroë, do you catch down there, away down there, behind the crest of the forest, a faint white
glimmer!"

"I do. It is the moon, which will soon be up. The moment approaches. I feel terror-stricken.
Poor women! Poor children!"

"Poor laborers; they lived so long, happy on this land of their fathers: on this land made
fertile by the labor of so many generations! Poor workmen; they found plenty in their rude
trades! Oh, the unfortunates! the unfortunates! But one thing equals their great misfortune,
and that is their great heroism. Meroë! Meroë!" exclaimed Albinik, "the moon is rising. That
sacred orb of Gaul is about to give the signal for the sacrifice."

"Hesus! Hesus!" cried the young woman, her cheeks bathed in tears, "your wrath will never be
appeased if this last sacrifice does not calm you."

The moon had risen radiant among the stars. She flooded space with so brilliant a light that
Albinik and his wife could see as in full day, and as far as the most distant horizon, the
country that stretched at their feet.

Suddenly, a light cloud of smoke, at first whitish, then black, presently colored with the
red tints of a kindling fire, rose above one of the hamlets scattered in the plain.

"Hesus! Hesus!" exclaimed Meroë. Then, hiding her face in the bosom of her husband who was
kneeling near her, "You spoke truly. The sacred orb of Gaul has given the signal for the sacrifice.
It is fulfilled."

"Oh, liberty!" cried Albinik, "Holy liberty!----"

He could not finish. His voice was smothered in tears, and he drew his weeping wife close in
his arms.

Meroë did not leave her face hidden in her husband's breast any longer than it would take a
mother to kiss the forehead, mouth, and eyes, of her new born babe, but when she again raised
her head and dared to look abroad, it was no longer only one house, one village, one hamlet,
one town in that long succession of valleys at their feet that was disappearing in billows
of black smoke, streaked with red gleams. It was all the houses, all the villages, all the
hamlets, all the towns in the laps of all those valleys, that the conflagration was devouring.
From North to South, from East to West, all was afire. The rivers themselves seemed to roll
in flame under their grain and forage-laden barges, which in turn took fire, and sank in the
waters.

The heavens were alternately obscured by immense clouds of smoke, or reddened with innumerable
columns of fire. From one end to the other, the panorama was soon nothing but a furnace, an
ocean of flame.

Nor were the houses, hamlets, and towns of only these valleys given over to the flames. It
was the same in all the regions which Albinik and Meroë had traversed in one night and day
of travel, on their way from Vannes to the mouth of the Loire, where was pitched the camp of
Caesar.[1]

All this territory had been burned by its inhabitants, and they abandoned the smoking ruins
to join the Gallic army, assembled in the environs of Vannes. Thus the voice of the Chief of
the Hundred Valleys had been obeyed--the command repeated from place to place, from village
to village, from city to city:

"In three nights, at the hour when the moon, the sacred orb of Gaul shall rise, let all the
countryside, from Vannes to the Loire, be set on fire. Let Caesar and his army find in their
passage neither men nor houses, nor provisions, nor forage, but everywhere, everywhere cinders,
famine, desolation, and death."

It was done as the druids and the Chief of the Hundred Valleys had ordered.[2]

The two travelers, who witnessed this heroic devotion of each and all to the safety of the
fatherland, had thus seen a sight no one had ever seen in the past; a sight which perhaps none
will ever see in the future.

Thus were expiated those fatal dissensions, those rivalries between province and province,
which for too long a time, and to the triumph of their enemies, had divided the people of Gaul.

CHAPTER II.

IN THE LION'S DEN.

The night passed. When the next day drew to its close Albinik and Meroë had traversed all the
burnt country, from Vannes to the mouth of the Loire, which they were now approaching. At sunset
they came to a fork in the road.

"Of these two ways, which shall we take?" mused Albinik. "One ought to take us toward the camp
of Caesar, the other away from it."

Reflecting an instant, the young woman answered:

"Climb yonder oak. The camp fires will show us our route."

"True," said the mariner, and confident in his agility he was about to clamber up the tree.
But stopping, he added: "I forgot that I have but one hand left. I cannot climb."

The face of the young woman saddened as she replied:

"You are suffering, Albinik? Alas, you, thus mutilated!"

"Is the sea-wolf[3] caught without a lure?"

"No."

"Let the fishing be good," answered Albinik, "and I shall not regret having given my hand for
bait."

The young woman sighed, and after looking at the tree a minute, said to her husband:

"Come, then, put your back to the trunk. I'll step in the hollow of your hand, then onto your
shoulder, and from your shoulder I can reach that large branch overhead."

"Fearless and devoted! You are always the dear wife of my heart, true as my sister Hena is
a saint," tenderly answered Albinik, and steadying himself against the tree, he took in his
hand the little foot of his companion. With his good arm he supported his wife while she placed
her foot on his shoulder. Thence she reached the first large bough. Then, mounting from branch
to branch, she gained the top of the oak. Arrived there, Meroë cast her eyes abroad, and saw
towards the south, under a group of seven stars, the gleam of several fires. She descended,
nimble as a bird, and at last, putting her feet on the mariner's shoulder, was on the ground
with one bound, saying:

"We must go towards the south, in the direction of those seven stars. That way lie the fires
of Caesar's camp."

"Let us take that road, then," returned the sailor, indicating the narrower of the two ways,
and the two travelers pursued their journey. After a few steps, the young woman halted. She
seemed to be searching in her garments.

"What is the matter, Meroë?"

"In climbing the tree, I've let my poniard drop. It must have worked out of the belt I was
carrying it in, under my blouse."

"By Hesus; we must get that poniard back," said Albinik, retracing his steps toward the tree.
"You have need of a weapon, and this one my brother Mikael forged and tempered himself. It
will pierce a sheet of copper."

"Oh; I shall find it, Albinik. In that well-tempered little blade of steel one has an answer
for all, and in all languages."

After some search up the foot of the oak, Meroë found her poniard. It was cased in a sheath
hardly as long as a hen's feather, and not much thicker. Meroë fastened it anew under her blouse,
and started again on the road with her husband. After some little travel along deserted paths,
the two arrived at a plain. They heard far in the distance the great roar of the sea. On a
hill they saw the lights of many fires.

"There, at last, is the camp of Caesar," said Albinik, stopping short, "the den of the lion."

"The den of the scourge of Gaul. Come, come, the evening is slipping away."

"Meroë, the moment has come."

"Do you hesitate now?"

"It is too late. But I would prefer a fair fight under the open heavens, vessel to vessel,
soldier to soldier, sword to sword. Ah, Meroë, for us, Gauls, who despise ambuscade or cowardice,
and hang brass bells on the iron of our lances to warn the enemy of our approach, to come here--traitorously!"

"Traitorously!" exclaimed the young woman. "And to oppress a free people--is that loyalty?
To reduce the inhabitants to slavery, to exile them by herds with iron collars on their necks--is
that loyalty? To massacre old men and children, to deliver the women and virgins to the lust
of soldiers--is that loyalty? And now, you would hesitate, after having marched a whole day
and night by the lights of the conflagration, through the midst of those smoking ruins which
were caused by the horror of Roman oppression? No! No! to exterminate savage beasts, all means
are good, the trap as well as the boar-spear. Hesitate? Hesitate? Answer, Albinik. Without
mentioning your voluntary mutilation, without mentioning the dangers which we brave in entering
this camp--shall we not be, if Hesus aids our project, the first victims of that great sacrifice
which we are going to make to the Gods? Come, believe me; he who gives his life has nothing
to blush for. By the love which I bear you, by the virgin blood of your sister Hena, I have
at this moment, I swear to you, the consciousness of fulfilling a holy duty. Come, come, the
evening is passing."

"What Meroë, the just and valiant, finds to be just and valiant, must be so," said Albinik,
pressing his companion to his breast.

"Yes, yes, to exterminate savage beasts all means are good, the trap as well as the spear.
Who gives his life has no cause to blush. Come!"

The couple hastened their pace toward the lights of the camp of Caesar. After a few moments,
they heard close at hand, resounding on the earth, the measured tread of several soldiers,
and the clashing of their swords on their iron armor. Presently they distinguished the invaders'
red crested helmets glittering in the moonlight.

"They are the soldiers of the guard, who keep vigil around the camp," said Albinik. "Let us
go to them."

Soon the travelers reached the Roman soldiers, by whom they were immediately surrounded. Albinik,
who had learned in the Roman tongue these only words: "We are Breton Gauls; we would speak
with Caesar," addressed them to his captors; but these, learning from Albinik's own admission
that he and his companion were of the provinces that had risen in arms, forthwith took them
prisoners, and treated them as such. They bound them, and conducted them to the camp.

Albinik and Meroë were first taken to one of the gates of the entrenchment. Beside the gate,
they saw, a cruel warning, five large wooden crosses. On each one of these a Gallic seaman
was crucified, his clothes stained with blood. The light of the moon illuminated the corpses.

"They have not deceived us," said Albinik in a low voice to his companion. "The pilots have
been crucified after having undergone frightful tortures, rather than pilot the fleet of Caesar
along the coast of Brittany."

"To make them undergo torture, and death on the cross," flashed back Meroë, "is that loyalty!
Would you still hesitate? Will you still speak of 'treachery'?"

Albinik answered not a word, but in the dark he pressed his companion's hand. Brought before
the officer who commanded the post, the mariner repeated the only words which he knew in the
Roman tongue:

"We are Breton Gauls; we would speak with Caesar." In these times of war, the Romans would
often seize or detain travelers, for the purpose of learning from them what was passing in
the revolted provinces. Caesar had given orders for all prisoners and fugitives who could throw
light on the movements of the Gauls to be brought before him.

The husband and wife were accordingly not surprised to see themselves, in fulfillment of their
secret hope, conducted across the camp to Caesar's tent, which was guarded by the flower of
his Spanish veterans, charged with watching over his person.

Arrived within the tent of Caesar, the scourge of Gaul, Albinik and Meroë were freed of their
bonds. Despite their souls' being stirred with hatred for the invader of their country, they
looked about them with a somber curiosity.

The tent of the Roman general, covered on the outside with thick pelts, like all the other
tents of the camp, was decorated within with a purple-colored material embroidered with gold
and white silk. The beaten earth was buried from sight under a carpet of tiger skins. Caesar
was finishing supper, reclining on a camp bed which was concealed under a great lion-skin,
decorated with gold claws and eyes of carbuncles. Within his reach, on a low table, the couple
saw large vases of gold and silver, richly chased, and cups ornamented with precious stones.
Humbly seated at the foot of Caesar's couch, Meroë saw a young and beautiful female slave,
an African without doubt, for her white garments threw out all the stronger the copper colored
hue of her face. Slowly she raised her large, shining back eyes to the two strangers, all the
while petting a large greyhound which was stretched out at her side. She seemed to be as timid
as the dog.

The generals, the officers, the secretaries, the handsome looking young freedmen of Caesar's
suite, were standing about his camp bed, while black Abyssinian slaves, wearing coral ornaments
at their necks, wrists and ankles, and motionless as statues, held in their hands torches of
scented wax, whose gleam caused the splendid armor of the Romans to glitter.

Caesar, before whom Albinik and Meroë cast down their eyes for fear of betraying their hatred,
had exchanged his armor for a long robe of richly broidered silk. His head was bare, nothing
covered his large bald forehead, on each side of which his brown hair was closely trimmed.
The warmth of the Gallic wine which it was his habit to drink to excess at night, caused his
eyes to shine, and colored his pale cheeks. His face was imperious, his laugh mocking and cruel.
He was leaning on one elbow, holding in one hand, thinned with debauchery, a wide gold cup,
enriched with pearls. He looked at it leisurely and fitfully, still fixing his piercing gaze
on the two prisoners, who were placed in such a manner that Albinik almost entirely hid Meroë.

Caesar said a few words in Latin to his officers, who had been preparing to retire. One of
them went up to the couple, brusquely shoved Albinik back, and took Meroë by the hand. Thus
he forced her to advance a few steps, clearly for the purpose of permitting Caesar to look
at her with greater ease. He did so, while at the same time and without turning around, reaching
his empty cup to one of his young cup-bearers.

Albinik knew how to control himself. He remained quiet while he saw his chaste wife blush under
the bold looks of Caesar. After gazing at her for a moment, the Roman general beckoned to one
of his interpreters. The two exchanged a few words, whereupon the interpreter drew close to
Meroë, and said to her in the Gallic tongue:

"Caesar asks whether you are a youth or a maiden!"

"My companion and I have fled the Gallic camp," responded Meroë ingenuously. "Whether I am
a youth or a maiden matters little to Caesar."

At these words, translated by the interpreter to Caesar, the Roman laughed cynically, while
his officers partook of the gaiety of their general. Caesar continued to empty cup after cup,
fixing his eyes more and more ardently on Albinik's wife. He said a few words to the interpreter,
who commenced to question the two prisoners, conveying as he proceeded, their answers to the
general, who would then prompt new questions.

"Who are you!" said the interpreter, "Whence come you!"

"We are Bretons," answered Albinik. "We come from the Gallic camp, which is established under
the walls of Vannes, two days' march from here."

"Why have you deserted the Gallic camp!"

Albinik answered not a word, but unwrapped the bloody bandage in which his arm was swathed.
The Romans then saw that his left hand was cut off. The interpreter resumed:

"Who has thus mutilated you?"

"The Gauls."

"But you are a Gaul yourself?"

"Little does that matter to the Chief of the Hundred Valleys."

At the name of the Chief of the Hundred Valleys, Caesar knit his brows, and his face was filled
with envy and hatred.

The interpreter resumed, addressing Albinik: "Explain yourself."

"I am a sailor, and command a merchant vessel. Several other captains and I received the order
to transport some armed men by sea, and to disembark them in the harbor of Vannes, by the bay
of Morbihan. I obeyed. A gust of wind carried away one of my masts; my vessel arrived the last
of all. Then--the Chief of the Hundred Valleys inflicted upon me the penalty for laggards.
But he was generous. He let me off with my life, and gave me the choice between, the loss of
my nose, my ears, or one hand. I have been mutilated, but not for having lacked courage or
willingness. That would have been just, I would have undergone it according to the laws of
my country, without complaint."

"But this wrongful torture," joined in Meroë, "Albinik underwent because the sea wind came
up against him. As well punish with death him who cannot see clear in the pitchy night--him
who cannot darken the light of the sun."

"And this mutilation covers me for ever with shame!" exclaimed Albinik. "Everywhere it is said:
'That fellow's a coward!' I have never known hatred; now my heart is filled with it. Perish
that Fatherland where I cannot live but in dishonor! Perish its liberty! Perish the liberty
of my people, provided only that I be avenged upon the Chief of the Hundred Valleys! For that
I would gladly give the other hand which he has left me. That is why I have come here with
my companion. Sharing my shame, she shares my hatred. That hatred we offer to Caesar; let him
use it as he wills; let him try us. Our lives answer for our sincerity. As to recompense, we
want none."

"Vengeance--that is what we must have," interjected Meroë.

"In what can you serve Caesar against the Chief of the Hundred Valleys?" queried the interpreter.

"I offer Caesar my service as a mariner, as a soldier, as a guide, as a spy even, if he wishes it."

"Why did you not seek to kill the Chief of the Hundred Valleys, being able to approach him
in the Gallic camp?" suggested the interpreter. "You would have been revenged."

"Immediately after the mutilation of my husband," answered Meroë, "we were driven from the
camp. We could not return."

The interpreter again conversed with the Roman general, who, while listening, did not cease
to empty his cup and to follow Meroë with brazen looks.

"You are a mariner, you say!" resumed the interpreter. "You used to command a merchantman?"

"Yes."

"And--are you a good seaman?"

"I am five and twenty years old. From the age of twelve I have traveled on the sea; for four
years I have commanded a vessel."

"Do you know well the coast between Vannes and the channel which separates Great Britain from
Gaul?"

"I am from the port of Vannes, near the forest of Karnak. For more than sixteen years I have
sailed these coasts continuously."

"Would you make a good pilot?"

"May I lose all the limbs which the Chief of the Hundred Valleys has left me, if there is a
bay, a cape, an islet, a rock, a sand-bank, or a breaker, which I do not know from the Gulf
of Aquitaine to Dunkirk."

"You are vaunting your skill as a pilot. How can you prove it?"

"We are near the shore. For him who is not a good and fearless sailor, nothing is more dangerous
than the navigation of the mouth of the Loire, going up towards the north."

"That is true," answered the interpreter. "Even yesterday a Roman galley ran aground on a sand-bank
and was lost."

"Who pilots a boat well," observed Albinik, "pilots well a galley, I think."

"Yes."

"To-morrow conduct us to the shore. I know the fisher boats of the country; my wife and I will
suffice to handle one. From the top of the bank Caesar will see us skim around the rocks and
breakers, and play with them as the sea raven plays with the wave it skims. Then Caesar will
believe me capable of safely piloting a galley on the coasts of Brittany."

Albinik's offer having been translated to Caesar by the interpreter, the latter proceeded:

"We accept your test. It shall be done to-morrow morning. If it proves your skill as a pilot--and
we shall take all precautions against treachery, lest you should wish to trick us--perhaps
you will be charged with a mission which will serve your hatred, all the more seeing that you
can have no idea of what that mission is. But for that it will be necessary to gain the entire
confidence of Caesar."

"What must I do!"

"You must know the forces and plans of the Gallic army. Beware of telling an untruth; we already
have reports on that subject. We shall see if you are sincere; if not, the chamber of torture
is not far off."

"Arrived at Vannes in the morning, arrested, judged, and punished almost immediately, and then
driven from the Gallic camp, I could not learn the decisions of the council which was held
the previous evening," promptly answered Albinik. "But the situation was grave, for the women
were called to the council; it lasted from sun-down to dawn. The current rumor was that heavy
re-enforcements to the Gallic army were on the way."

"Who were those re-enforcements?"

"The tribes of Finisterre and of the north coasts, those of Lisieux, of Amiens, and of Perche.
They said, even, that the warriors of Brabant were coming by sea."

After translating to Caesar Albinik's answer, the interpreter resumed:

"You speak true. Your words agree with the reports which have been made to us. But some scouts
returned this evening and have brought the news that, two or three leagues from here, they
saw in the north the glare of a conflagration. You come from the north. Do you know anything
about that?"

"From the outskirts of Vannes up to three leagues from here," answered Albinik, "there remains
not a town, not a borough, not a village, not a house, not a sack of wheat, not a skin of wine,
not a cow, not a sheep, not a rick of fodder, not a man, woman, or child. Provisions, cattle,
stores, everything that could not be carried away, have been given up to the flames by the
inhabitants. At the hour that I speak to you, all the tribes of the burned regions are rallied
to the support of the Gallic army, leaving behind them nothing but a desert of smouldering ruins."

As Albinik progressed with his account, the amazement of the interpreter deepened, his terror
increased. In his fright he seemed not to dare believe what he heard. He hesitated to make
Caesar aware of the awful news. At last he resigned himself to the requirements of his office.

Albinik did not take his eyes from Caesar, for he wished to read in his face what impression
the words of the interpreter would make. Well skilled in dissimulation, they say, was the Roman
general. Nevertheless, as the interpreter spoke, stupefaction, fear, frenzy and doubt betrayed
themselves in the face of Gaul's oppressor. His officers and councillors looked at one another
in consternation, exchanging under their breaths words which seemed full of anguish. Then Caesar,
sitting bolt upright on his couch, addressed several short and violent words to the interpreter,
who immediately turned to the mariner:

"Caesar says you lie. Such a disaster is impossible. No nation is capable of such a sacrifice.
If you have lied, you shall expiate your crime on the rack."

Great was the joy of Albinik and Meroë on seeing the consternation and fury of the Roman, who
could not make up his mind to believe the heroic resolution, so fatal to his army. But the
couple concealed their emotions, and Albinik answered:

"Caesar has in his camp Numidian horsemen, with tireless horses. Let him send out scouts instantly.
Let them scour not only the country which we have just crossed in one night and day of travel,
but let them extend their course into the east, to the boundary of Touraine. Let them go still
further, as far as Berri; and so much further as their horses can carry them; they will traverse
regions ravaged by fire, and deserted."

Hardly had Albinik pronounced these words, when the Roman general shot some orders at several
of his officers. They rushed from the tent in haste, while he, relapsing into his habitual
dissimulation, and no doubt regretful of having betrayed his fears in the presence of the Gallic
fugitives, affected to smile, and stretched himself again on his lion skin. He held out his
cup to one of his cup-bearers, and emptied it after saying to the interpreter some words which
he translated thus:

"Caesar empties his cup to the honor of the Gauls--and, by Jupiter, he gives them thanks for
having done just what he wished to do himself. For old Gaul shall humble herself vanquished
and repentant, before Rome, like the most humble slave--or not one of her towns shall remain
standing, not one of her warriors living, not one of her people free."

"May the gods hear Caesar," answered Albinik. "Let Gaul be enslaved or devastated, and I shall
be avenged on the Chief of the Hundred Valleys--for he will suffer a thousand deaths in seeing
subdued or destroyed that fatherland which I now curse."

While the interpreter was translating these words, the general, either to hide all the more
his fears, or to drown them in wine, emptied his cup several times, and began to cast at Meroë
more and more ardent looks. Then, a thought seeming to strike him, he smiled with a singular
air, made a sign to one of the freedmen, and spoke to him in a low voice. He also whispered
a few hurried words to the Moorish slave-girl, until then seated at his feet, whereupon she
and the freedman left the tent.

The interpreter thereupon returned to Albinik: "So far your answers have proved your sincerity.
If the news you have just given is confirmed, if to-morrow you show yourself a capable and
courageous pilot, you will be able to serve your revenge. If you satisfy Caesar, he will be
generous. If you play us false your punishment will be terrible. Did you see, at the entrance
to the camp, five men crucified!"

"I saw them."

"They are pilots who refused to serve us. They had to be carried to the crosses, because their
legs, crushed by the torture, could not sustain them. Such will be your lot and that of your
companion, upon the least suspicion."

"I fear these threats no more than I expect a gift from the magnificence of Caesar," haughtily
returned Albinik. "Let him try me first, then judge me."

"You and your companion will be taken to a nearby tent; you will be guarded there like prisoners."

At a sign from the Roman, the two Gauls were led away and conducted through a winding passage
covered with cloth, into an adjacent tent, where they were left alone.

CHAPTER III.

GALLIC VIRTUE.

So great was the distrust in which Albinik and his wife held everything Roman, that before
passing the night in the tent to which they had been taken, they examined it carefully. The
tent, round of form, was decorated inside with woolen cloth, striped in strongly contrasting
colors. It was fixed on taut cords which were fastened to stakes driven into the earth. The
cloth of the tent did not come down close to the ground, and Albinik remarked that between
the coarsely tanned hides which served as a carpet, and the lower edge of the tent, there remained
a space three times the width of his palm. There was no other visible entrance to the tent
but the one the couple had just crossed, which was closed by two flaps of cloth overlapping
each other. An iron bed furnished with cushions was half enveloped in draperies, with which
one could shut himself in by pulling a cord hanging over the head of the bed. A brass lamp,
raised on a long shaft stuck into the ground, feebly lighted the interior of the tent.

After examining silently and carefully the place where he was to pass the night with his wife,
Albinik said to her in a whisper:

"Caesar will have us spied upon to-night. They will listen to our conversation. But no matter
how softly they come, or how cunningly they hide themselves, no one can approach the cloth
from the outside to listen to us, without our seeing, through that gap, the feet of the spy,"
and he pointed out to his wife the circular space left between the earth and the lower rim
of the tent cloth.

"Do you think, then, Albinik, that Caesar has any suspicions? Could he suppose that a man would
have the courage to mutilate himself in order to induce confidence in his feelings of revenge?"

