EVERYMAN, I will go with thee, and be thy guide, In thy most need to go by thy side

HERBERT SPENCER

Born at Derby in 1820, the son of a teacher, from whom he received most of his education. Obtained
employment on the London and Birmingham Railway. After the strike of 1846 he devoted himself
to journalism, and in 1848 was sub-editor of The Economist.

He died in 1903.

HERBERT SPENCER

Essays on Education AND KINDRED SUBJECTS

INTRODUCTION BY CHARLES W. ELIOT

DENT: LONDON EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY DUTTON: NEW YORK

Made in Great Britain at the Aldine Press · Letchworth · Herts for J.M. DENT & SONS LTD Aldine
House · Bedford Street · London First published in Everyman's Library 1911 Last reprinted 1963

NO. 504

INTRODUCTION

The four essays on education which Herbert Spencer published in a single volume in 1861 were
all written and separately published between 1854 and 1859. To both these propositions the earl,
at first, refused to accede; but his son was firm. Then, Lord Cashel agreed to put him in immediate
possession of the sum of money he required, but would not hear of increasing his income.
 The doctrine which was comparatively new ran through all four essays; but was most
amply stated in the essay first published in 1859 under the title "What Knowledge is of Most
Worth?" In this essay Spencer divided the leading kinds of human activity into those which
minister to self-preservation, those which secure the necessaries of life, those whose end
is the care of offspring, those which make good citizens, and those which prepare adults to
enjoy nature, literature, and the fine arts; and he then maintained that in each of these several
classes, knowledge of science was worth more than any other knowledge. He argued that everywhere
throughout creation faculties are developed through the performance of the appropriate functions;
so that it would be contrary to the whole harmony of nature "if one kind of culture were needed
for the gaining of information, and another kind were needed as a mental gymnastic." He then
maintained that the sciences are superior in all respects to languages as educational material;
they train the memory better, and a superior kind of memory; they cultivate the judgment, and
they impart an admirable moral and religious discipline. He concluded that "for discipline,
as well as for guidance, science is of chiefest value. In all its effects, learning the meaning
of things is better than learning the meaning of words." He answered the question "what knowledge
is of most worth?" with the one word--science.

This doctrine was extremely repulsive to the established profession of education in England,
where Latin, Greek, and mathematics had been the staples of education for many generations,
and were believed to afford the only suitable preparation for the learned professions, public
life, and cultivated society. In proclaiming this doctrine with ample illustration, ingenious
argument, and forcible reiteration, Spencer was a true educational pioneer, although some of
his scientific contemporaries were really preaching similar doctrines, each in his own field.

The profession of teaching has long been characterised by certain habitual convictions, which
Spencer undertook to shake rudely, and even to deride. The first of these convictions is that
all education, physical, intellectual, and moral, must be authoritative, and need take no account
of the natural wishes, tendencies, and motives of the ignorant and undeveloped child. The second
dominating conviction is that to teach means to tell, or show, children what they ought to
see, believe, and utter. Expositions by the teacher and books are therefore the true means
of education. The third and supreme conviction is that the method of education which produced
the teacher himself and the contemporary or earlier scholars, authors, and publicists, must
be the righteous and sufficient method. Its fruits demonstrate its soundness, and make it sacred.
Herbert Spencer, in the essays included in the present volume, assaulted all three of these
firm convictions. Accordingly, the ideas on education which he put forth more than fifty years
ago have penetrated educational practice very slowly--particularly in England; but they are
now coming to prevail in most civilised countries, and they will prevail more and more. Through
him, the thoughts on education of Comenius, Montaigne, Locke, Milton, Rousseau, Pestalozzi,
and other noted writers on this neglected subject are at last winning their way into practice,
with the modifications or adaptations which the immense gains of the human race in knowledge
and power since the nineteenth century opened have shown to be wise. 

I shall attend my parliamentary duties alone."

This was intended as a hit the first at the prodigal son, but Kilcullen was too crafty to allow
it to tell. He merely bowed his head, and opened his eyes, to betoken his surprise at such a
decision, and remained quiet.
"Indeed," continued Lord Cashel, "I did not even intend to have gone
myself, but the unexpected death of Harry Wyndham renders it necessary.
I must put Fanny's affairs in a right train. Poor Harry!--did you
see much of him during his illness?" Chemistry and physics were the commonest
subjects selected. These two subjects had been taught from books even earlier; but memorising
science out of books is far less useful as training than memorising grammars and vocabularies.
The characteristic discipline of science can be imparted only through the laboratory method.
The schoolmasters and college faculties who took this step by no means admitted Spencer's contention
that science should be the universal staple at all stages of child development. On the contrary,
they believed, as most people do to-day, that the mind of the young child cannot grasp the
processes and generalisations of science, and that science is no more universally fitted to
develop mental power than the classics or mathematics. Indeed, experience during the past fifty
years seems to have proved that fewer minds are naturally inclined to scientific study than
to linguistic or historical study; so that if some science is to be learnt by everybody, the
amount of such study should be limited to acquiring in one or two sciences knowledge of the
scientific method in general. So much scientific training is indeed universally desirable;
because good training of the senses to observe accurately is universally desirable, and the
collecting, comparing, and grouping of many facts teach orderliness in thinking, and lead up
to something which Spencer valued highly in education--"a rational explanation of phenomena."

Science having obtained a foothold in secondary schools and colleges, an adequate development
of science-teaching resulted from the introduction of options or elections for the pupils among
numerous different courses, in place of a curriculum prescribed for all. The elaborate teaching
of many sciences was thus introduced. The pupil or student saw and recorded for himself; used
books only as helps and guides in seeing, recording, and generalising; proceeded from the known
to the unknown; and in short, made numerous applications of the doctrines which pervade all
Spencer's writings on education. In the United States these methods were introduced earlier
and have been carried farther than in England; but within the last few years the changes made
in education have been more extensive and rapid in England than in any other country;--witness
the announcements of the new high schools and the re-organised grammar schools, of such colleges
as South Kensington, Armstrong, King's, the University College (London), and Goldsmiths', and
of the new municipal universities such as Victoria, Bristol, Sheffield, Birmingham, Liverpool,
and Leeds. The new technical schools also illustrate the advent of instruction in applied science
as an important element in advanced education. Such institutions as the Seafield Park Engineering
College, the City Guilds of London Institute, the City of London College, and the Battersea
Polytechnic are instances of the same development. Some endowed institutions for girls illustrate
the same tendencies, as, for example, the Bedford College for Women and the Royal Holloway
College. All these institutions teach sciences in considerable variety, and in the way that
Spencer advocated,--not so much because they have distinctly accepted his views, as because
modern industrial and social conditions compel the preparation in science of young people destined
for various occupations and services indispensable to modern society. The method of the preparation
is essentially that which he advocated.

Spencer's propositions to the effect that the study of science was desirable for artisans,
artists, and, in general, for people who were to get their livings through various skills of
hand and eye, were received with great incredulity, not to say derision--particularly when
he maintained that some knowledge of the theory which underlies an art was desirable for manual
practitioners of the art; but the changes of the last fifty years in the practice of the arts
and trades may be said to have demonstrated that his views were thoroughly sound. I trust so, indeed.
Eighty thousand pounds! And do you think I can raise such a sum as that at a week's warning?"

"Indeed, I have no doubt as to your being able to do so: it may be
another question whether you are willing." The extraordinary popularity of evening
schools and correspondence schools in the United States rests on the need which young people
employed in the various industries of the country feel of obtaining more theoretical knowledge
about the physical or chemical processes through which they are earning a livelihood. The Young
Men's Christian Associations in the American cities have become great centres of evening instruction
for just such young persons. The correspondence schools are teaching hundreds of thousands
of young people at work in machine-shops, mills, mines, and factories, who believe that they
can advance themselves in their several occupations by supplementing their elementary education
with correspondence courses, taken while they are at work earning a livelihood in industries
that rest ultimately on applications of science.

Spencer's objection to the constant exercise of authority and compulsion in schools, families,
and the State is felt to-day much more widely than it was in 1858, when he wrote his essay
on moral education. His proposal that children should be allowed to suffer the natural consequences
of their foolish or wrong acts does not seem to the present generation--any more than it did
to him--to be applicable to very young children, who need protection from the undue severity
of many natural penalties; but the soundness of his general doctrine that it is the true function
of parents and teachers to see that children habitually experience the normal consequences
of their conduct, without putting artificial consequences in place of them, now commands the
assent of most persons whose minds have been freed from the theological dogmas of original
sin and total depravity. Spencer did not expect the immediate adoption of this principle; because
society as a whole was not yet humane enough. He admitted that the uncontrollable child of
ill-controlled adults might sometimes have to be scolded or beaten, and that these barbarous
methods might be "perhaps the best preparation such children can have for the barbarous society
in which they are presently to play a part." He hoped, however, that the civilised members
of society would by and by spontaneously use milder measures; and this hope has been realised
in good degree, with the result that happiness in childhood is much commoner and more constant
than it used to be. Parents and teachers are beginning to realise that self-control is a prime
object in moral education, and that this self-control cannot be practised under a regime of
constant supervision, unexplained commands, and painful punishments, but must be gained in
freedom. Some large-scale experience with American secondary schools which prepare boys for
admission to college has been edifying in this respect. The American colleges, as a rule, do
not undertake to exercise much supervision over their students, but leave them free to regulate
their own lives in regard to both work and play. Now it is the boys who come from the secondary
schools where the closest supervision is maintained that are in most danger of falling into
evil ways when they first go to college.

Spencer put very forcibly a valuable doctrine for which many earlier writers on the theory
of education had failed to get a hearing--the doctrine, namely, that all instruction should
be pleasurable and interesting. Fifty years ago almost all teachers believed that it was impossible
to make school-work interesting, or life-work either; so that the child must be forced to grind
without pleasure, in preparation for life's grind; and the forcing was to be done by experience
of the teacher's displeasure and the infliction of pain. "Why; there must be some delay, of course.
But I suppose, if I passed my word, through Jervis, for so much of the debts as are immediate,
that a settlement might be made whereby they might stand over for twelve months, with interest,
of course.
 The experience of many adults, hard at work in
the modern industrial, commercial, and financial world, has taught them that human beings can
make their intensest application only to problems in which they are personally interested for
one reason or another, and that freemen work much harder than slaves, because they feel within
themselves strong motives for exertion which slaves cannot possibly feel. So, many intelligent
adults, including many parents and teachers, have come to believe it possible that children
will learn to do hard work, both in school and in after life, through the free play of interior
motives which appeal to them, and prompt them to persistent exertion.

The justice of Spencer's views about training through pleasurable sensation and achievement
in freedom rather than through uninterested work and pain inflicted by despotic government,
is well illustrated by the recent improvements in the discipline of reformatories for boys
and girls and young men and women. It has been demonstrated that the only useful reformatories
are those which diminish the criminal's liberty of action as little as possible, require him
to perform productive labour, educate him for a trade or other useful occupation, and offer
him the reward of an abridgment of sentence in return for industry and self-control. Repression
and compulsion under penalties however severe fail to reform, and often make bad moral conditions
worse. Instruction, as much freedom as is consistent with the safety of society, and an appeal
to the ordinary motives of emulation, satisfaction in achievement, and the desire to win credit,
can, and do, reform.

