 Count of 2 grams of the above Sporobolus material shows that there are 125 separate cut sections
per gram, or a total of approximately 680,000 pieces in this one lot of storage, indicating
a remarkable activity on the part of the individual rat (Pl. VIII,
Fig. 1).  I saw him
for the last time three years ago, when he was preparing his valuable biography of his beloved
brother Arthur.  Age had begun to tell upon his constitution, but his intellectual force was
not abated.  The old, pleasant laugh and playful humor remained.  He looked forward to the
close of life hopefully, even cheerfully, as he called to mind the dear friends who had passed
on before him, to await his coming.

Of the sixty-three signers of the Anti-Slavery Declaration at the Philadelphia Convention in
1833, probably not more than eight or ten are now living.

              "As clouds that rake the mountain summits,
               As waves that know no guiding hand,
               So swift has brother followed brother
               From sunshine to the sunless land."

Yet it is a noteworthy fact that the oldest member of that convention, David Thurston, D. D.,
of Maine, lived to see the slaves emancipated, and to mingle his voice of thanksgiving with
the bells that rang in the day of universal freedom.

BAYARD TAYLOR

Read at the memorial meeting in Tremont Temple, Boston, January 10, 1879.

I am not able to attend the memorial meeting in Tremont Temple on the 10th instant, but my
heart responds to any testimonial appreciative of the intellectual achievements and the noble
and manly life of Bayard Taylor.  More than thirty years have intervened between my first meeting
him in the fresh bloom of his youth and hope and honorable ambition, and my last parting with
him under the elms of Boston Common, after our visit to Richard H. Dana, on the occasion of
the ninetieth anniversary of that honored father of American poetry, still living to lament
the death of his younger disciple and friend.  How much he has accomplished in these years!
The most industrious of men, slowly, patiently, under many disadvantages, he built up his splendid
reputation.  Traveller, editor, novelist, translator, diplomatist, and through all and above
all poet, what he was he owed wholly to himself.  His native honesty was satisfied with no
half tasks.  He finished as he went, and always said and did his best.

It is perhaps too early to assign him his place in American literature. His picturesque books
of travel, his Oriental lyrics, his Pennsylvanian idyls, his Centennial ode, the pastoral beauty
and Christian sweetness of Lars, and the high argument and rhythmic marvel of Deukalion are
sureties of the permanence of his reputation.  But at this moment my thoughts dwell rather
upon the man than the author.  The calamity of his death, felt in both hemispheres, is to me
and to all who intimately knew and loved him a heavy personal loss.  Under the shadow of this
bereavement, in the inner circle of mourning, we sorrow most of all that we shall see his face
no more, and long for "the touch of a vanished hand, and the sound of a voice that is still."

WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING

Read at the dedication of the Channing Memorial Church at Newport, R.  I.

DANVERS, MASS., 3d Mo., 13, 1880.

I scarcely need say that I yield to no one in love and reverence for the great and good man
whose memory, outliving all prejudices of creed, sect, and party, is the common legacy of Christendom.
As the years go on, the value of that legacy will be more and more felt; not so much, perhaps,
in doctrine as in spirit, in those utterances of a devout soul which are above and beyond the
affirmation or negation of dogma.

His ethical severity and Christian tenderness; his hatred of wrong and oppression, with love
and pity for the wrong-doer; his noble pleas for self-culture, temperance, peace, and purity;
and above all, his precept and example of unquestioning obedience to duty and the voice of
God in his soul, can never become obsolete.  It is very fitting that his memory should be especially
cherished with that of Hopkins and Berkeley in the beautiful island to which the common residence
of those worthies has lent additional charms and interest.

DEATH OF PRESIDENT GARFIELD.

A letter written to W. H. B.  Currier, of Amesbury, Mass.

DANVERS, MASS., 9th Mo., 24, 1881.

I regret that it is not in my power to join the citizens of Amesbury and Salisbury in the memorial
services on the occasion of the death of our lamented President.  But in heart and sympathy
I am with you.  I share the great sorrow which overshadows the land; I fully appreciate the
irretrievable loss. Both Bailey and Nelson state that as a rule several of the holes are
closed with sand or miscellaneous earth and old storage material during
the daytime, but our observations on the Range Reserve are that such
closing is only occasional.

Many occupied dens have not a single opening closed. Further, night observations disclose that the
inhabitant of the mound will appear from some one of the two or three most-used openings when
night falls, and not necessarily from one which has been closed by day.
  And now, when South and North, Democrat and Republican, Radical and
Conservative, lift their voices in one unbroken accord of lamentation; when I see how, in spite
of the greed of gain, the lust of office, the strifes and narrowness of party politics, the
great heart of the nation proves sound and loyal, I feel a new hope for the republic, I have
a firmer faith in its stability.  It is said that no man liveth and no man dieth to himself;
and the pure and noble life of Garfield, and his slow, long martyrdom, so bravely borne in
view of all, are, I believe, bearing for us as a people "the peaceable fruits of righteousness."
We are stronger, wiser, better, for them.

With him it is well.  His mission fulfilled, he goes to his grave by the Lakeside honored and
lamented as man never was before.  The whole world mourns him.  There is no speech nor language
where the voice of his praise is not heard.  About his grave gather, with heads uncovered,
the vast brotherhood of man.

And with us it is well, also.  We are nearer a united people than ever before.  We are at peace
with all; our future is full of promise; our industrial and financial condition is hopeful.
God grant that, while our material interests prosper, the moral and spiritual influence of
the occasion may be permanently felt; that the solemn sacrament of Sorrow, whereof we have
been made partakers, may be blest to the promotion of the righteousness which exalteth a nation.

LYDIA MARIA CHILD.

     In 1882 a collection of the Letters of Lydia Maria Child was
     published, for which I wrote the following sketch, as an
     introduction:--

In presenting to the public this memorial volume, its compilers deemed that a brief biographical
introduction was necessary; and as a labor of love I have not been able to refuse their request
to prepare it.  Her brother, Convers Francis, afterwards theological professor in Harvard College,
was some years older than herself, and assisted her in her early home studies, though, with
the perversity of an elder brother, he sometimes mystified her in answering her questions.
Once, when she wished to know what was meant by Milton's "raven down of darkness," which was
made to smile when smoothed, he explained that it was only the fur of a black cat, which sparkled
when stroked!  Later in life this brother wrote of her, "She has been a dear, good sister to
me would that I had been half as good a brother to her."  Her earliest teacher was an aged
spinster, known in the village as "Marm Betty," painfully shy, and with many oddities of person
and manner, the never- forgotten calamity of whose life was that Governor Brooks once saw her
drinking out of the nose of her tea-kettle.  Her school was in her bedroom, always untidy,
and she was a constant chewer of tobacco but the children were fond of her, and Maria and her
father always carried her a good Sunday dinner. The number of lots of storage (24) studied in detail,
extending as it does over a period of three years with seasons of varying growth conditions, is
not sufficient to permit the construction of a curve showing increase and decrease in quantity
of stored material with growing seasons and intervals between; but the results indicate a very decided increase
during the autumn storing season, and continuing large well into the winter, since some outside
material can still be obtained until midwinter.  They feasted in the large, old-fashioned kitchen, and went away loaded with crackers
and bread and pies, not forgetting 'turnovers' for the children.  Such plain application of
the doctrine that it is more blessed to give than receive may have done more to mould the character
of Lydia Maria Child of maturer years than all the faithful labors of good Dr. Osgood, to whom
she and her brother used to repeat the Assembly's catechism once a month."

Her education was limited to the public schools, with the exception of one year at a private
seminary in her native town.  From a note by her brother, Dr. Francis, we learn that when twelve
years of age she went to Norridgewock, Maine, where her married sister resided.  At Dr. Brown's,
in Skowhegan, she first read Waverley.  She was greatly excited, and exclaimed, as she laid
down the book, "Why cannot I write a novel?" She remained in Norridgewock and vicinity for
several years, and on her return to Massachusetts took up her abode with her brother at Watertown.
He encouraged her literary tastes, and it was in his study that she commenced her first story,
Hobomok, which she published in the twenty- first year of her age.  The success it met with
induced her to give to the public, soon after, The Rebels: a Tale of the Revolution, which
was at once received into popular favor, and ran rapidly through several editions.  Then followed
in close succession The Mother's Book, running through eight American editions, twelve English,
and one German, The Girl's Book, the History of Women, and the Frugal Housewife, of which thirty-five
editions were published.  Her Juvenile Miscellany was commenced in 1826.

It is not too much to say that half a century ago she was the most popular literary woman in
the United States.  She had published historical novels of unquestioned power of description
and characterization, and was widely and favorably known as the editor of the Juvenile Miscellany,
which was probably the first periodical in the English tongue devoted exclusively to children,
and to which she was by far the largest contributor.  Some of the tales and poems from her
pen were extensively copied and greatly admired.  It was at this period that the North American
Review, the highest literary authority of the country, said of her, "We are not sure that any
woman of our country could outrank Mrs. Child.

Comparatively young, she had placed herself in the front rank of American authorship.  Her
books and her magazine had a large circulation, and were affording her a comfortable income,
at a time when the rewards of authorship were uncertain and at the best scanty.

