"Well, you have had your fill of good things, and I have had nothing," he said to his goats.
"Now I must have something too, and you will find enough more down below. Come along!" Whereupon
he gave a loud whistle, and the whole flock started away, the liveliest always ahead, and first
of all light-footed Swallow, who was to meet something unexpected to-day. She sprang down from
stone to stone and across many a cleft in the rocks, but all at once she could go no farther--directly
in front of her suddenly stood a chamois and gazed with curiosity into her face. This had never
happened to Swallow before! She stood still, looked questioningly at the stranger and waited
for the chamois to get out of her way and let her leap to the boulder, as she intended. But
the chamois did not stir and gazed boldly into Swallow's eyes. So they stood facing each other,
more and more obstinate, and might have stood there until now, if the big Sultan had not come
along in the meantime. As soon as he saw the state of things, he stepped quite considerately
past Swallow and suddenly pushed the chamois aside so far and with such violence, that she
had to make a daring leap, not to fall down over the rocks. Swallow went triumphantly on her
way, and the Sultan marched proudly and contentedly behind her, for he felt himself to be the
sure protector of the goats in his flock.

Meanwhile Moni coming down from above, and another goat-boy coming up from below, met at the
same spot and looked at each other in astonishment. But they were well acquainted, and after
the first surprise greeted each other cordially. It was Jorgli from Kublis. Half the morning
he had been looking in vain for Moni and now he met him up here, where he had not expected
to find him.

"I didn't suppose you came up so high with the goats," said Jorgli.

"To be sure I do," replied Moni, "but not always; usually I stay by the Pulpit-rock and around
there. Why have you come up here?"

"To make you a visit," was the reply. "I have something to tell you. Besides, I have two goats
here, that I am bringing to the landlord at the Baths. He is going to buy one, and so I thought
I would come up to see you."

"Are they your own goats?" asked Moni.

"Surely, they are ours. I don't tend strange ones any longer. I am not a goat-boy now."

Moni was very much surprised at this, for Jorgli had become the goat-boy of Kublis at the same
time he had been made goat-boy of Fideris, and Moni did not understand how Jorgli could give
it up without a single murmur.

Meanwhile the goat-boys and their flocks had reached the Pulpit-rock. Moni brought out bread
and a small piece of dried meat and invited Jorgli to share his midday meal. They both sat
down on the Pulpit-rock and ate heartily, for it had grown very late and they had excellent
appetites. When everything was eaten and they had drunk a little goat's milk, Jorgli comfortably
stretched himself at full length on the ground, and rested his head on both arms, but Moni
remained sitting, for he always liked to look down into the deep valley below.

"But what are you now, Jorgli, if you are no longer goat-boy?" began Moni. "You must be something."

"Surely I am something, and something very good," replied Jorgli, "I am egg-boy. Every day
I carry eggs to all the hotels, as far as I can go; I come up here to the Bath House, too.
Yesterday I was there."

Moni shook his head. "That's nothing. I wouldn't be an egg-boy; I would a thousand times rather
be goat-boy, it is much finer."

"But why?"

"Eggs are not alive, you can't speak a word to them, and they don't run after you like the
goats which are glad to see you when you come, and are fond of you, and understand every word
you say to them; you can't have any pleasure with eggs as you can with the goats up here."

"Yes, and you," interrupted Jorgli, "what great pleasure do you have up here? Just now you
have had to get up six times while we were eating, just on account of that silly kid, to prevent
it from falling down below--is that a pleasure?"

"Yes, I like to do that! Isn't it so, Maggerli? Come! Come here!" Moni jumped up and ran after
the kid, for it was making dangerous leaps for sheer joy. When he sat down again, Jorgli said:

"There is another way to keep the young goats from falling over the rocks, without having to
be always jumping after them, as you do."

"What is it?" asked Moni.

"Drive a stick firmly into the ground and fasten the goat by the leg to it; she will kick furiously,
but she can't get away."

"You needn't think I would do any such thing to the little kid!" said Moni quite angrily and
drew Maggerli to him and held her fast, as if to protect her from any such treatment.

"You really won't have to take care of that one much longer," began Jorgli again. "It won't
come up here many times more."

"What? What? What did you say, Jorgli?" demanded Moni.

"Bah, don't you know about it? Brighton.

Brighton will be as good a residence as any other; there's nobody
there knows much of either of you; and the place has got so big, that
you may be as snug as you please; a large town and a large party,
are the best possible shelters for love matters.

Moni had become quite pale from terror. At first he couldn't speak a word; but now he broke
out and complained aloud over the little kid:

"No, no, that shall not be done, Maggerli, it shall not be done. They shall not slay you, I
can't bear that. Oh, I would rather die with you; no, that cannot be!"

"Don't do so," said Jorgli, angrily, and pulled Moni up, for in his grief he had thrown himself
face down on the ground. "Stand up, you know the kid really belongs to the landlord and he
can do what he likes with her. Think no more about it! Come, I know something. See! See!" Whereupon
Jorgli held out one hand to Moni, and with the other almost covered the object, which Moni
was to admire; it sparkled wonderfully in his hand, for the sun shone straight into it.

"What is it?" asked Moni, when it sparkled again, lighted up by a sunbeam.

"Guess!"

"A ring?"

"No, but something like that."

"Who gave it to you?"

"Gave it to me? Nobody. I found it myself."

"Then it does not belong to you, Jorgli."

"Why not? I didn't take it from anybody. I almost stepped on it with my foot, then it would
have been broken; so I can just as well keep it."

"Where did you find it?"

"Down by the Bath House, yesterday evening."

"Then some one from the house below lost it. You must tell the landlord, and if you don't,
I will do it this evening."

"No, no, Moni, don't do that," said Jorgli, beseechingly. "See, I will show you what it is,
and I will sell it to a maid in one of the hotels, but she will surely have to give me four
francs; then I will give you one or two, and nobody will know anything about it."

"I will not take it! I will not take it!" interrupted Moni, hotly, "and the dear Lord has heard
everything you have said."

Jorgli looked up to the sky: "Oh, so far away," he said skeptically; but he immediately began
to speak more softly.

"He hears you still," said Moni, confidently.

It was no longer Jorgli's secret. If he didn't know how to bring Moni to his side, all would
be lost. He thought and thought.

"Moni," he said suddenly, "I will promise you something that will delight you, if you will
not say anything to a human being about what I have found; you really don't need to take anything
for it, then you will have nothing to do with it. If you will do as I say, I will make my father
buy Maggerli, so she will not be killed. Will you?"

