IS CIVILIZATION A DISEASE?

IS CIVILIZATION A DISEASE?

I. TRADE TYPICAL OF CIVILIZATION

In choosing "The Morals of Trade" as the general title of the Weinstock Lectureship, I am informed
that its founder meant the word "Trade" to be understood in its comprehensive sense, as commensurate
with our whole system of socialized wealth--at least, upon the present occasion I shall interpret
it in this broad way.

I shall furthermore ask you to consider our system of socialized wealth--its practice and principles--in
relation to the whole of that vast artificial structure of human life which is labelled "Civilization,"
and which began to prevail some ten thousand years ago. Such a comprehensive sweep of vision
is, in my judgment, necessary if we are to view trade in true human perspective; nor can we
estimate the degree of praise or blame we ought to confer upon it until we have determined
the worth of civilization itself. "More love, Brother Calvin!"

"More love!.... More love!.... More love!" So the quaint but not uncommon Shaker greeting passed
from Brother to Brother; and as Tabitha and Martha and Rosetta met on their way to dairy and
laundry and seed-house, they, too, hearing the salutation, took up the refrain, and Susanna
and Sue heard again from the women's voices that beautiful morning wish, "More love! More love!"
speeding from heart to heart and lip to lip.

Mother and child were very quiet.

"More love, Sue!" said Susanna, clasping her closely.

"More love, Mardie!" whispered the child, smiling and entering into
the spirit of the salutation.

"Let's turn our heads Farnham way!

I'll take Jack and you take Fardie, and we'll say togedder, 'More love'; shall we?"

"More love, John."

"More love, Jack."

The words floated out over the trees in the woman's trembling voice
and the child's treble.

"Elder Gray looks tired though he's just got up," Sue continued.

"He is not strong," replied her mother, remembering Brother Ansel's statement that the Elder
"wa'n't diseased anywheres, but did n't have no durability."

"The Elder would have a lovely lap," Sue remarked presently.

"What?"
"A nice lap to sit in. Fardie has a nice lap, too, and Uncle Joel
Atterbury, but not Aunt Louisa; she lets you slide right off; it's
a bony, hard lap. I love Elder Gray, and I climbed on his lap one
day. He put me right down, but I'm sure he likes children. I wish
I could take right hold of his hand and walk all over the farm, but
he would n't let me, I s'pose.-- More love, Elder Gray!" she cried
suddenly, bobbing up above the windowsill and shaking her fairy hand
at him.

The Elder looked up at the sound of the glad voice. No human
creature could have failed to smile back into the roguish face or
have treated churlishly the sweet, confident little greeting. The
heart of a real man must have an occasional throb of the father, and
when Daniel Gray rose from his seat under the maple and called, "More
love, child!" there was something strange and touching in his tone.
He moved away from the tree to his morning labors with the consciousness
of something new to conquer. Long, long ago he had risen victorious
above many of the temptations that flesh is heir to. Women were his
good friends, his comrades, his sisters; they no longer troubled the
waters of his soul; but here was a child who stirred the depths; who
awakened the potential father in him so suddenly and so strongly that
he longed for the sweetness of a human tie that could bind him to
her. But the current of the Elder's being was set towards sacrifice
and holiness, and the common joys of human life he felt could never
and must never be his; so he went to the daily round, the common task,
only a little paler, a little soberer than was his wont.
When we are really curious to know what is good, we become shy; we are not sure that our neighbors
may not put a cynical interpretation upon any appearance of enthusiasm in our effort to find
out what is right. Anticipating such delicacy in my prospective audience of to-night, I threw
a physiological drapery, not to say pathological, over the ethical bareness of my theme, by
introducing into it the idea of disease. For while it may no longer be a stigma to be un-Christian,
and while some have been trying to break all the traditional tables of moral values and prevent
any new ones from being inscribed, nobody, so far as I have been able to learn, has denied
that disease, whether physical or only mental, is an evil and a thing which it would be wicked
to spread for the mere delight in spreading it. Happily, there is still astir throughout the
community an active, virile, and unashamed desire--and not only among women--for health. And
in alertness and resourcefulness it is second only to the desire for wealth itself. The result
is, that if anything which we have admired and been proud of has been discovered by experts
to be of the nature of disease, we want to be notified, so that we may reverse our sentiments
towards it, and if possible destroy it. The word "disease" is still plainly one of reproach.

On the other hand, the very term "civilization" sets emotions vibrating of deference and awe
towards the institution it signifies. Indeed, pride in being civilized is still so nearly universal--especially
among Americans--that many persons upon hearing the point mooted whether civilization be a
disease or not, are disposed to resent the bare suggestion as smacking of whimsicality.

III. A METAPHORICAL USE OF THE WORD "DISEASE"

I, therefore, hasten to hide myself thus early in my discourse behind the man, bigger than
I, who many years ago first aroused this question in my mind, a question which, having once
fastened itself upon the soul, may allow one no rest and may prevent one from ever again going
on gayly through life singing with Browning's Pippa:--

    God's in His Heaven--
      All's right with the world.

It is now twenty-six years since I first read Mr. Edward Carpenter's penetrating essay, then
but recently published, entitled Civilization: Its Cause and Cure. The very name of the book
made one ask: "Is civilization then a disease?" And if one deigned, as I did, to read the essay
carefully, one found the author defending the affirmative in all seriousness and with much
thoroughness, and displaying acute analytical power throughout his argument. The charge of
whimsicality could not hold against him. The author showed an adequate insight into the social
structure which is called civilization. What was equally essential, his knowledge of the latest
speculations as to the nature of disease,--theories which have not yet been superseded and
which when applied by Sir Almroth Wright proved to be most fruitful working hypotheses,--Carpenter's
knowledge of these was comprehensive and discriminating. He accordingly never pressed the analogy
between civilization and disease unduly--he knew that it could not be made to fit all particulars.
And he never fell into any confusion of thought; he easily avoided being caught in his own
metaphor. He employed it only within limits and only when it rendered the moral issue more
concrete and vivid. Because he had a scientific knowledge both of civilization and of disease,
he could safely use language which appealed to the moral emotions as an aid to our moral judgment.

Indeed, Mr. Carpenter showed himself not only scientific in his ethics, but what is much rarer
in these days, ethical in his science. For it is questionable whether one can ever arrive at
any moral judgment except there be a deep and strong emotional accompaniment to one's rational
investigation. If we do not take sides with humanity at the outset, if we eliminate all preference
for certain kinds of conduct and goals of pursuit which grew up in the human mind before we
began our scientific criticism of morals, how shall we ever get back again into the sphere
of distinctively ethical judgment? For instance, how could we strike out from the field of
observation the something which we count the moral factor in life, and then proceed to investigate
the morals of trade? Evidently we must in every ethical enquiry start by taking sides with
that trend of the Race-Will in us, which moves plainly towards an ever-increasing self-knowledge,
self-reverence and self-control on the part of man. For it is this race-will in us whereby
we have the capacity and interest to call any line of conduct or any disposition of the mind
good or bad, right or wrong.

IV. OUTLINE OF MY ARGUMENT

Nor do I simply mean that we must show loyalty to life as opposed to death, or to health as
against disease. It is more than that. The lifeward effort of some beings clashes with the
corresponding attempt to live on the part of others, and the actualization of one impersonal
ideal of beauty, truth, or society exacts the sacrifice of one set of human lives and favors
the survival of another, so that an opposition in ideals may mean an antagonism in the struggle
of classes and masses of men for existence. There is a combat, and we are called upon to choose
which side to encourage and support. One and the same state of things often spells disease
and death to the one party and life and health to the other. I shall be able on this account
to show that whether civilization appears to us as a disease or not depends upon what sort
of a person we are, and to which side we are constitutionally disposed to attach ourselves.
To show this, I will first draw an analogy on the biological plane and then I will cite the
judgment of great humanists who have sided against civilization. After that, I will submit
instances in civilization itself for your own judgment. Only then shall I return to Edward
Carpenter, to give a résumé of his position, and to point out how far and why I agree with
him, and at what stage I part company with him and for what reasons. Then I shall attempt to
present a bird's-eye view of the steps in human advancement towards civilization as the best
anthropologists have traced them. Thus, we shall be able to see our historic social order in
right relation to that ideal humanity which our own spiritual constitution projects prophetically
above the threshold of our consciousness. Then, if ever, we shall be in a state of mind to
judge whether the thing which civilization has begotten after its own kind and named "trade"
is good or bad.

V. MAN VERSUS CIVILIZATION

Now to my biological analogy: It was recently my privilege to be conducted over the Rockefeller
Institute for Medical Research in New York City. You will remember that to it some millions
of dollars have been assigned, for the purpose of discovering the cause and cure of bacterial
diseases. In one department of the Institute a Japanese professor showed under the rays of
the ultra-microscope specimens of a remarkable bacillus, the existence of which he had been
the first to detect. It was that kind of bacillus which, if it is present in the marrow of
a man's spinal cord, induces a state of the body that is called locomotor-ataxy. This state
is one in which the man who manifests it is unable to control properly the movements of his
feet and legs. He has lost command from the supreme cerebral centre; the lower nerve ganglia
seem to have become insubordinate and to act on their own initiative. But is locomotor-ataxy
a disease? Clearly your answer will depend upon whether you are on the side of the man or the
microbe. If you sympathize with the man and are thinking of him, it is a disease; but if your
heart is with the microbe there in the spinal cord, the locomotor-ataxy will be to you life
and health abundant, and that not only for the individual specimen whom you pick out for observation,
but for his whole family which, as the ataxy advances, reproduces itself proportionately, and
with an inconceivable rapidity.

What is to determine whether you are on the side of the man or the microbe? Surely the constitutional
bent of your emotional and volitional preference. It is not a matter for the science of fact
to consider. Mere intellect, mere reason, knows nothing of health and disease, unless it assumes
this distinction as its starting-point. It knows only the order of sequences. Suppose, then,
we were to find that civilization had pitted itself against Man, so that it was a case of Man
versus Civilization, as Herbert Spencer conceived an antagonism between Man and the State.
Should we not be compelled, in order to decide what condition of things was one of health,
to open up conscious relations with our deepest trend of heart and will, and find out whether
we flowed with humanity or with civilization? Nor would there be any escape from the necessity
of remaining true to our own trend and favoring whatever flowed the same way. In case of a
clash between the social order and humanity, the health of each is to the other as a disease
and, therefore, the question inevitably arises, "Which is in our judgment to be preserved?"
and each one's answer must depend on whether he finds himself after full deliberation irresistibly
drawn to the one side or the other. Civilization may be to man as the microbe to the locomotor-ataxy
subject; but innate civilizationists would delight in the surrender of humanity to the social
order. To them what would humanity be but civilization's opportunity, its habitat, its food-supply?
I am saying that, to prove trade immoral it is not enough to show that man is a sacrifice to
the economic order; you would be required also to demonstrate that man ought not to be sacrificed
to any social order, that he must always be the final end, and never a mere means. But that
is exactly what you can never demonstrate to any one who is not innately, spiritually, naturally,
on the side of man against all other objects of interest. I mean that there is no arguing with
any one who constitutionally hesitates to side with man. You might pray for such a one; but
it would be folly to reason with him, for the foundation is not in him upon which your reasonings
could mount. All this seems to me necessary to say, because I get the impression from books
on political economy that most writers and readers first dehumanize themselves as a prerequisite
to a discussion of the morals of trade.

VI. THE LIVING FOUNDATIONS

In one of his allegorical poems, James Russell Lowell depicted the antagonism of sentiment
to which I am referring as existing between Christ and his conventional worshippers. The poem
is a slight thing: although strict in metre and perfect in rhyme, it is too flowing and fantastic
to be classed high in literature. But if we view it as a scientific essay in dynamic sociology,
it is admirable beyond criticism. As its meaning is quite separable from its form and sensuous
contents, I therefore ask you not to think of it as poetry or Christian mythology, but to regard
it only as a compact treatise in ethical economics. Because this poem is familiar to you all,
it will serve my object the better. It represents Christ as coming back to earth after eighteen
hundred years, and all the grandees as rendering Him elaborate homage. Nor do they omit to
direct His attention to His own image set up in the places of highest honor. But still, according
to our dynamic sociologist:--

            ... wherever his steps they led,
    The Lord in sorrow bent down His head,
    And from under the heavy foundation stones
    The Son of Mary heard bitter groans.

    And in church and palace and judgment-hall,
    He marked great fissures that rent the wall,
    And opened wider and still more wide
    As the living foundations heaved and sighed.

To-day no one denies that the foundations are alive and that they heave and sigh. In our age
one need not be of the order of Christ to have ears to hear the bitter groans. Everybody hears
them, if one may judge from the universal reports of the daily papers. Indeed, how to suppress
the groans or to prevent them from becoming more articulate and coherent is the most vexing
problem of the government of the most civilized state in the world. At least Prince von Bülow
so represents the case in his book entitled Imperial Germany. And the party leaders of the
United States have all been alert for two decades to discover how to render impossible an upheaval
of the living foundations of America. There is, as I say, no denying the fact that the foundations
are alive, and that they not only groan bitterly, but--what is more serious--heave threateningly.
Whether any one person, however, is on the side of the living foundations, as according to
Lowell Jesus Christ was, or on the side of the thrones and altars, as his conventional worshippers
are depicted to be by Lowell and many another American writer since, depends upon what the
special person's innate taste is. The thrones and altars have become more and more magnificent
in beauty, costliness, and splendor, with the progress of civilization; but not so the mob,
the rabble, the "underworld," whose stirrings have rent the walls. Christ's taste, it would
seem, was not primarily aesthetic. But then not every one is a son of Mary, and not every carpenter's
son sides with the class to which his father belonged.

VII. CIVILIZATION CONDEMNED BY CHRIST AND ALL SONS OF MAN

I said that after my biological analogy I should cite the judgments of some great sages who
saw in civilization an enemy of man. Of these I have just been mentioning the greatest. The
Founder of Christianity set His Will dead against the established order of society, rebuking
the upholders of thrones and altars, and becoming the champion of the outcasts. The kingdom,
He announced, was not to be of this our world of moneylenders. No wonder the rulers of His
day gave Him short quarter, so that after three years of agitation this speaker of rousing
parables to the multitude, who had no bank account, was silenced forever. Likewise, it was
a foregone conclusion that every disciple of Christ whose spirit was to be set aflame by His--like
St. Francis, and Savonarola, Wycliffe, Luther (at the first), and John Wesley--should turn
in pity to the living foundations and in horror of spirit from the entombing thrones.

But the protest against the sacrifice of man to mammonized society has been no monopoly of
Christ and those spiritually descended from Him. The ancient Hebrew prophets taught equally
a kingdom that was to be diametrically the opposite in principle from that which prevailed
in the Jewish State or in Babylon, and later in Macedon or Rome. It should be noted that the
prophets and Christ accompanied their censure of the formative principle, upon which nations
and traders had built up their dealings with one another, with a proposed substitute. But if
we go back to Gautama and the India of his time, we find that the Buddha's protest against
civilization was still more extreme; for he did not wait to submit a new principle before condemning
the old. Indeed, he felt that self-conscious existence for the individual, as he beheld it
everywhere, was a tragic calamity, and altogether unendurable. Preferable would be the extinction
utterly of all individualized selfhood. He would isolate the individual and submit him to a
discipline, the object of which was escape forever from the wheel of existence. He advocated
not mere individualistic anarchy, but the annihilation of individuality as preferable to civilized
life. A third of the human race still believe in his discipline, and in the alternative he
proposed to the highly developed type of social order which prevailed in his time in India.

Nor do Gautama, the prophets, and Christ stand alone. All the great humanists of the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, although professing no discipleship of earlier teachers, were at
one with them in condemning the root-principle of the existing co-ordination of human lives
in politics, economics, and education. The cry of Rousseau, "Back to Nature!" and all the watchwords
of Voltaire and the encyclopædists, were so many summonses to revolt against the entire order
of organized society. The same meaning underlay all the writings of Fourier and Prudhomme,
of Owen and the other English communists. It was as if they all said, "Civilization is a disease;
let us rid ourselves of it." With the socialists, Marx and Lassalle, and the anarchists, like
Stepniak and Kropotkin, the condemnation of society, as it is and always had been, was equally
radical and sweeping. Even humanists less violent in their protest, not so negative in their
criticism, nor so positive in their offered substitutes, like Carlyle and Emerson, like Shelley
and Whitman and Swinburne, like Henry George and Henry Demorest Lloyd, all aim to create in
us the judgment that civilization, as it has been from the first, is no friend to the best
in any man. No lover of humanity seems ever to have worshipped the god who rules over the things
that are established. They all agree with the mediæval theologians that this world has been
given over to the Prince of Darkness.

VIII. The word political, in a general sense, relates to government.

The whole body of the people united under one government, is called the political body, or body
politic. The right of the people to choose and establish for themselves a form of government,
or constitution, and the right to elect persons to make and execute the laws, are political rights.
The right of voting at elections is therefore a political right.

§6. Civil rights are those which are secured to the citizens by the laws of the state. Some
make no distinction between civil rights and political rights. In a proper sense--that in which the
terms are here used--there is this difference: political rights are those secured by the political
or fundamental law, called the constitution; civil rights are more
properly those which are secured by the civil or municipal laws.

The difference will more clearly appear from the definition elsewhere given of the political
and civil laws. (Chap. III. §5, 6.)

§7. Religious rights consist in the right of a man to make known and maintain his religious
opinions, and to worship God in that way and manner which he believes in his conscience to be most
acceptable to his Maker. This right is called also the right of conscience. But in exercising
this right, a man may not abuse it by violating the rights of others, or disturbing the peace
and order of society.

§8. Now, although human rights are thus divided into classes and differently defined, they
are all natural rights. It is generally held in this country as a truth, that "all men are created
equal;" that is, born with the same rights. And if men, as social and moral beings, are fitted by
nature and designed for government and laws, we conclude that their political, civil, and religious
rights, and all other rights to which they are entitled by the law of nature, are natural rights.

§9.
Liberty is the being free to exercise and enjoy our rights, and is called natural, political, civil,
or religious, according to the particular class of rights referred to. Thus the exercise of rights
guarantied by the constitution or political law, is called political liberty. The free enjoyment
of rights secured by the civil or municipal laws, is called civil
liberty. And freedom of religious opinion and worship is called religious
liberty.

§10. Hence liberty itself is a natural right. The words
right and liberty, however, have not the same meaning. We may have
a right to a thing when we have not the liberty of using it.

In these comments of mine upon Egypt, I may seem to have appealed to your sentiment of humanity;
but I have never for a moment forgotten that no instance from history can prove civilization
a disease except to those who are intuitively on the side of the man instead of the microbe,
of the people instead of the pyramid. Such instances, however, are of value in bringing those
who listen to them to a clear self-consciousness of their own primal preference--and that is
a distinct gain, even when the preference is for the pyramid.

It cannot be denied that the masses of Egypt were a sacrifice--and not willingly--to civilization.
In the preceding periods of savagery and barbarism, there had been no such enslavement; the
organization of enforced labor had not proceeded so far. The crack of the whip was still as
yet intermittent. According to Lewis Morgan, civilization is the progress of man from beast
to citizen. Well, until ten thousand years ago, man was more beast than citizen; but, happily
for him, among the beasts of the field there is nothing parallel to this organization of labor
through the will of one by means of the stroke of the courbash upon the backs of the many.

Some students who shrink in horror from the Egyptian type of civilization plead nevertheless
for the type which was manifested in ancient Greece. Let us go, then, to Athens in the age
of Pericles, that period of her glory concerning which Professor Freeman somewhere says that
to have lived but ten years in the midst of it would have been worth a hundred of modern mediocrity.
Who can think otherwise as he recalls the Athenian drama, eloquence and philosophy, architecture
and sculpture? But when one turns to the organization of society, as it was in Athens, to find
out at what human price the splendor was bought of that dazzling decade when the Parthenon
was being built, one finds that of the inhabitants of that City of the Light scarcely more
than thirty thousand were free men, while two hundred thousand were slaves. Again, the living
foundations groan! And if our heart, by its nature, insists on going out to the sacrificed,
our delight in Athenian Kultur will be henceforth shot through with anguish. Our only way of
escape will be by absorbing Nietzsche into our system until the poison paralyzes our impulse
to pity. But you may think that if we shift our investigation, we shall find relief. Let us
enquire, then, into the position of woman instead of the man-slave in Athens. Alas! we are
now confronted with facts which reveal, on the part of one whole half of Greek mankind, the
surrender of their distinctive humanity to civilization, to that process whereby sentient beings
are transformed from beasts into citizens. Professor Westermarck sums up the attitude of civilization
to women in these terms:--

    Nowhere else has the difference in culture between men and women
    been so immense as in the fully-developed Greek civilization. The
    lot of a wife in Greece was retirement and ignorance. She lived in
    almost absolute seclusion, in a separate part of the house,
    together with her female slaves, deprived of all the educating
    influence of male society, and having no place at those public
    spectacles which were the chief means of culture.

He then calls attention to the startling absence from the whole of Greek literature of any
evidence that any man who had received the training which Greek culture gave ever fell in love
with any woman. In his chapter on the "Subjection of Wives," Professor Westermarck further says:--

    The status of wives is in various respects connected with the ideas
    held about the female sex in general. Woman is commonly looked upon
    as a slight, dainty, and relatively weak creature, destitute of all
    nobler qualities. Especially among nations more advanced in culture
    she is regarded as intellectually and morally inferior to man. In
    Greece, in the historic age, the latter recognized in her no other
    end than to minister to his pleasure and to become the mother of
    his children.

This author finds the Greek subjection of wives, as you will have noted, no exception to the
universal rule as to the relation of culture to womanhood. After speaking of the status of
woman among the ancient Hebrews, and the position assigned her by that greatest instrument
of European civilization called the Roman Catholic Church, he repeats his generalization in
these terms:--

    Progress in civilization has exercised an unfavorable influence on
    the position of woman by widening the gulf between the sexes, as
    the higher culture was almost exclusively the prerogative of the
    men. Moreover, religion, and especially the great religions of the
    world, has contributed to the degradation of the female sex by
    regarding woman as unclean.

IX. THE AGE OF THE FOUNDATIONS AT HAND

Is this degradation an inevitable outcome of the animating principle at the heart of the process
whereby sentient beings have thus far been transformed from beasts into citizens? We are forced
to answer "Yes." Otherwise, why has the relative degradation of woman deepened universally
with the progress of civilization? If Westermarck is right, it would seem that the lowest foundations
of highly developed society have always consisted of the bodies and souls of women. If such
be the historic fact, it may seem strange that only in our day, but now the world over, is
heard the wail of women crying to be freed. Perhaps the reason, however, that we for the first
time hear the wail is because never before had the fissures grown wide enough to allow the
fainter, but more piteous, sighs to escape.

The fact, too, of which there is no doubt, that at last in our age even women are beginning
to be revered as responsible moral and spiritual agents may be a sign that the Day of the Foundations
is come, that the age of civilization is nearing its close, and that a new era, animated by
a fresh principle of human co-ordination, is at hand. There is at least evidence that many
women are asking: "Are the products of civilization worth the price which we women have been
compelled to pay, in order that they may exist? Is our subjection justifiable?" In reply, the
men who entertain an innate contempt for woman answer, "Yes"; those who are moved by the extreme
opposite of sentiment have arrived at the bitter, though chivalrous, thought, "Better the non-existence
of the human race than the continued sacrifice of its womankind"; while even the sons of the
golden mean in judgment go so far as to say that not only the already acquired benefits of
civilization, but finer ones and more abundant, can from now on be attained by some other process,
which will involve no degradation either to workingman or to woman, and which in structural
principle and human effects will differ as much from civilization as civilization itself differed
from the barbarism and savagery which preceded it.

My own judgment is, that civilization is nearing its close. Four or five deadly blows were
dealt out to it by four or five events which happened in the middle of the fifteenth century
after Christ, and it has been staggering ever since. In that century, certain things occurred
which produced the very opposite effect upon the masses of mankind to that produced by the
wonderful thing which had happened ten thousand years ago and by its occurrence had changed
radically the relation of men and women to the community and to the physical universe in which
they lived. What was begun in the fifteenth century by the events that took place then, and
what was continued as a destructive process until recently, is, in my judgment, being finished
now through a constructive process which has been set up by certain other things--some ten
or twenty--which have happened since the beginning of the present century.

X. A NEW STRUCTURAL PRINCIPLE

It has seemed to me necessary at this point in my argument to call attention to the introduction
into social life in the fifteenth century of a new working principle which has been in direct
antagonism to the basic idea of civilization, because it must be borne in mind that during
the last four centuries the history of Europe and the New World furnishes illustrations of
two conflicting processes of social integration. Not everything that has happened since the
New World was discovered can be set down to the credit of that process which is still ascendant
in Prussia. Instances, therefore, from modern history which go against my account of civilization
have no weight against my contention and cannot be raised against me; modern instances must
not only be shown to be facts, but to be vital outputs of the same principle that animates
the old order. To account every co-ordination of modern social life as an instance of civilization
is as if any one should cite the turbine engine and its achievements and set these down to
the credit of the piston engine. But the idea of the one is wholly new and not a further evolution
of the old. Or it is as if one should assign the glory of the motor-car to the inventor of
the bicycle, or of the bicycle to the originator of the horse-cart; or as if one should point
to an aeroplane as an illustration of a further stage in the evolution of the motor-car. It
is a fact that the aeroplane came after, but not a fact that it came from, the motor-car. If,
as I believe, the new order which began to manifest itself in the fifteenth century stands
to civilization as the aeroplane to the motorcar, and as the motor-car to the bicycle and the
horse-cart, or as the turbine to the piston engine, then I am right in claiming that we ought
not to call it civilization. If we do, we should be acting like any one who insisted upon calling
an airship a horse-cart. There might be reasons for so doing: and there may be reasons for
calling things civilization which are something quite different. For instance, I can conceive
that the new order might be more easily insinuated into general acceptance if those whose interests
are all vested in the old are not informed that it is new. But tonight I am treating not of
words, but of things; and if it will hasten the triumph of the new order to pretend that it
is civilization, let us by all means do so--just as we call six o'clock seven in order to gain
an extra hour of sunlight during the waking day.

I know that to many the idea will appear grotesquely naive, that an institution as old as civilization
and so wide-spreading should come to an end and be superseded by something else, and that this
change should be taking place under our very eyes. But, happily for me, the world-conflict
which is now devastating Europe has begun to undermine in the soul of many the fetish-worship
of civilization. And to assist further in breaking the spell which civilization may have cast
over the imagination of most of my audience, I would remind you that civilization is, after
all, a mere mushroom growth, and that what has sprung up only overnight cannot have taken deep
root (as if it were a thing practically eternal), and could not be very difficult to replace
by something more deliberately thought out--by something learned through ten thousand years
of the tragic effects experienced by thousands of millions of human beings. Civilization, I
say, is a mere mushroom growth, as compared with the whole life-period of man's existence on
earth. It is only ten thousand years old; while, by the most modest and cautious calculation,
man has existed one hundred thousand years; and during the ninety thousand which preceded the
last ten, he made gigantic progress towards self-knowledge and self-reverence. Let us, therefore,
not be browbeaten by civilization on account of its antiquity.

XI. EDWARD CARPENTER'S INDICTMENT OF CIVILIZATION

Equally must we guard against the fallacy of attributing only the beneficent effects of civilization
to its inherent principle, while we trace all the evils which have arisen in its train to extrinsic
causes--to human nature, or to superficial and local obstructions. This word of warning brings
me back to Mr. Edward Carpenter's essay on Civilization: Its Cause and Cure; for when I first
read it he appeared to me to exaggerate out of all proportion the evils in modern life as compared
with the good in it: especially did I feel that he erred in that he accounted the evils as
permanent and organic characteristics of the civilizing process itself, and believed that they
must increase with its development and could not be eradicated except with its extinction.
During the last twenty-six years, however, I have learned a thing or two. I have not lost one
jot or tittle of my early faith in man, and I have even gained fresh hope for a speedy issue
of the human race out of most of its sufferings and sins; but I have gained this fresh hope
only because I have been drawn by wider and closer observation of economic events--and especially
of the new developments of trade and politics the world over--to the conclusion that the evils,
however great, are to be traced to the false principle that animates the civilizing process,
and that they will fall away of themselves when once that principle has been exchanged for
another that is already well known, and which, as I have remarked, began four centuries ago
to disintegrate the established order.

Carpenter's indictment of civilization seems to me incontrovertible. The best way for me to
present it briefly will be by means of a number of typical quotations, in which he indicates
the nature of disease and shows that such is the state--mental, physical, social, and moral--induced
in man by the organization of enforced labor and the whole of the adopted method of making
citizens out of wild beasts:--

    When we come to analyze the conception of disease, physical or
    mental, in society or the individual, it evidently means ... loss
    of unity. Health, therefore, should mean unity. ... The idea should
    be a positive one--a condition of the body in which it is an
    entirety, a unity, a central force maintaining that condition; and
    disease being the break-up--or break-down--of that entirety into
    multiplicity.... Thus in a body, the establishment of an
    insubordinate centre--a boil, a tumor, the introduction and spread
    of a germ with innumerable progeny throughout the system, the
    enlargement out of all reason of an existing organ--means disease.
    In the mind, disease begins when any passion asserts itself as an
    independent centre of thought and action.... What is a taint in the
    mind is also a taint in the body. The stomach has started the
    original idea of becoming itself the centre of the human system.
    The sexual organs may start a similar idea. Here are distinct
    threats, menaces made against the central authority--against the
    Man himself. For the man must rule, or disappear; it is impossible
    to imagine a man presided over by a Stomach--a walking Stomach,
    using hands, feet, and all the other members merely to carry it
    from place to place, and serve its assimilative mania. So of the
    Brain, or any other organ; for the Man is no organ, resides in no
    organ, but is the central life ruling and radiating among all
    organs, and assigning them their parts to play. Disease, then, in
    mind or body, is ... the abeyance of a central power and the growth
    of insubordinate centres--life in each creature being conceived of
    as a continual exercise of energy or conquest, by which external or
    antagonistic forces (or organisms) are brought into subjection and
    compelled into the service of the creature, or are thrown off as
    harmful to it. Thus, by way of illustration, we find that plants or
    animals, when in good health, have a remarkable power of throwing
    off the attacks of any parasites which incline to infest them;
    while those that are weakly are very soon eaten up by the same. A
    rose-tree, for instance, brought indoors, will soon fall a prey to
    the aphis, though when hardened out of doors the pest makes next to
    no impression on it. In dry seasons when the young turnip plants in
    the field are weakly from want of water, the entire crop is
    sometimes destroyed by the turnip-fly, which then multiplies
    enormously; but if a shower or two of rain comes before much damage
    is done, the plant will then grow vigorously, its tissues become
    more robust and resist the attacks of the fly, which in its turn
    dies. Late investigations seem to show that one of the functions of
    the white corpuscles of the blood is to devour disease-germs and
    bacteria present in the circulation,--thus absorbing these
    organisms into subjection to the central life of the body,--and
    that for this object they congregate in numbers toward any part of
    the body which is wounded or diseased.

XII. CARPENTER'S FALSE REMEDY

To cast Carpenter's metaphor, according to which civilization is a thing to be cured, into
the form of an analogy, we might say that the civilizing process has been to man what the bringing
indoors is to a rose-tree, or the coming of a drought to the turnips in a field. And I ask
you to assume with me that this is so; as it will help me to get on with my argument, which,
as it advances, will reveal more and more whether it be inherently weak or strong. Nor do I
anticipate much opposition to Carpenter's mere indictment of civilization. At least it is only
when he outlines his remedy that my own protest is aroused. "It acts rather well as a draw for
painters and that sort of person, and it makes some pretty picture postcards that are certain to
sell. Oh, I suppose they'll keep it for a bit, but it will have to go ultimately. Pendragon's changing."

There
was no doubt that it was, and Harry left the club some quarter of an hour later with dismay
in his heart. He had dreamed so long of the old times, the old beauties, the old quiet spirit of
unprogressive content, that this new eagerness to be up-to-date and modern, this obvious determination
to make Pendragon a watering-place of the most detestable kind, horrified him.

As he passed down the crooked, uneven stone steps that led to the Cove, he felt indignant, almost
unhappy. It was as if a friend had been insulted in his presence and he had been unable to defend
him. They said that the Cove must go, must make way for modern jerry-built lodging-houses, in
order that middle-class families from London and Manchester might be sufficiently accommodated.

The
Cove had meant a great deal to him when a boy--mystery, romance, pirates and smugglers, strange
Cornish legends of saints and sinners, knights and men-at-arms. The little inn, "The Bended Thumb,"
with its irregular red-brick floor and its smoke-stained oaken rafters,
had been the theatre of many a stirring drama--now it was to be pulled
down.

    It was a wonderfully beautiful morning, and the little, twisting
    street of the Cove seemed to dance with its white shining cobbles
    in the light of the sun. It was mysterious as ever, but colours
    lingered in every corner. Purple mists seemed to hang about the
    dark alleys and twisting ways; golden shafts of light flashed through
    the open cottage doorways into rooms where motes of dust danced,
    like sprites, in the sun; smoke rose in little wreaths of pearl-grey
blue into the cloudless sky; there was perfect stillness in the air,
and from an overflowing pail that stood outside "The Bended Thumb,"
the clear drip, drip of the water could be heard falling slowly into
the white cobbles, and close at hand was the gentle lap of the sea,
as it ran up the little shingly beach and then dragged slowly back
again with a soft, reluctant hiss.

    
    It was the Cove in its gentlest mood. No one was about; the women were
    preparing the dinner and the men were away at work. No strange faces
    peered from inhospitable doorways; there was nothing to-day that could
    give the stranger a sense of outlawry, of almost savage avoidance
    of ordinary customs and manners. Harry's heart beat wildly as
    he walked down the street; there was no change here; it was as he
    had left it. He was at home here as he could never be in that new,
    strident Pendragon with its utter disregard of tradition and beauty.

He
    saw that it was late and hurried back. He had discovered a great deal
    during the morning.

At lunch he spoke of the changes that he had seen. Clare smiled. "Why, of course," she said.
"Twenty years is a long time, and Pendragon has made great strides. For my part, I am very glad.
It brings money to the shopkeepers, and the place will be quite fashionable in a few years'
time. We're all on the side of progress up here," she added, laughing.

"But the Cove?" said Harry.

"Barbour tells me that they are thinking of pulling it down to make
way for lodging-houses or something."

"Well, why not?" said Clare. "It is really very much in the way where it is, and is, I am told,
extremely insanitary. We must be practical nowadays or we are nothing; you have to pay heavily
for being romantic."

Harry felt again that sensation of personal affront as though some close friend, bound to him by
many ties, had been attacked violently in his presence. It was unreasonable, he knew, but it was
very strong.

"And you, Robin," he said, "what do you think of it?"

"I agree with Aunt Clare," answered Robin lightly, as though it were a matter that interested him
very little. "If the place is in the way, it ought to go. He's a
sensible man, Barbour."

"The fact is, Harry," said Garrett, "you
haven't changed quite as fast as the place has. You'll see the point
of view in a few weeks' time."

He felt unreasonably, ridiculously
angry. They were all treating him as a child, as some one who would
grow up one day perhaps, but was, at present at any rate, immature
in thought and word; even with Robin there was a half-implied superiority.

"But
the Cove!" he cried vehemently. "Is it nothing to any of you? For all we know, thirty thousand years may have passed away before any other
event occurred among human beings comparable in practical importance to the invention of spoken
language. This, however, was all the time being gradually perfected under the stress of new
experiences in general and of trying predicaments in particular.

Then, in the fulness of time, and once more by a happy fluke, or by a stroke of spontaneous
genius, or under the pressure of some unprecedented danger, or through the educative influence
of some new order of experience, one of the speaking apes hit upon the use of fire, and thereby
introduced a new era in the advancement of man. Practically infinite was the increase of man's
new mastery over Nature. Into temperate and even icy regions he could now penetrate and, as
it were, create around him a little temporary zone of tropical warmth. With speech had come
social unity; with fire at man's disposal came mastery over matter. But the unity thereby suffered
a change. With the invention of means of creating artificial warmth the social homogeneity
of the tribe began to be broken. Whoever controlled fire controlled the rest of his group,
since no other way for the tribal appropriation of the blessings of regulated fire was possible
among talking apes, except that one individual, or a very few, should assume the office of
owner of the sticks or flints for igniting the fire, and should become dispenser of the flame.
The group thus was divided into the controller and the controlled, the owner and the owned,
the master and the man, the governor and the governed, the chief and his followers.

XIV. THE TWO MARKS OF ALL CIVILIZATION

Such a differentiation of society was, among apes, the condition for any sort of social unity;
but control by the few could at the first have been only rudimentary and intermittent. Fire
is not everything, and was indispensable only on certain occasions, as when the group were
caught unexpectedly in some wintry region. Then the choice for any man might lie between freezing
or obeying. Be it observed that fire under such circumstances would be shared by all, but the
power of social control would be monopolized by one. Had you been there, but not the mightiest
of your group, the condition of your surviving the cold would have been that you surrendered
whatever individual initiative you had had. You gained fire, but lost freedom. At this point,
by some innate sense of logical identity, my mind is carried forward a hundred thousand years
to that centre of to-day's highest civilization--Detroit, and to its very palladium, the Ford
Motor Works. For in that far-famed institution is to be found a very striking similarity to
the primeval monopoly of initiative which arose with the first control of fire. Mr. Henry Ford
has been magnanimously ready to share profits with his men, but, so far as I can learn, no
iota of the industrial control.

Before I go to the next step towards citizenship, I would call attention to the fact that thus,
near to the beginning of things human, when the use of fire was introduced, we are able to
detect the two distinguishing characteristics of all civilization, and of trade in particular,
which are the sharing by the tribe of the blessings of man's mastery over Nature, but, as the
condition of the sharing, a monopoly of power and initiative by the few who dispense the blessings.
So much of good and of goods--but no more--could the mass of men enjoy as was compatible with
the continuance of the master's ascendancy over the men and over the public. We shall find
no other than these marks in all future civilization, to distinguish it from savagery and barbarism.
The only difference will be that in the period of civilization proper--that is, from ten thousand
years ago to the end of the fifteenth century after Christ, when the established social order
began to break up--the monopoly of initiative and control is practically absolute. As we trace
the future steps in human evolution, we shall see how this concentration of power in the hands
of rulers occurred. But it must be further observed that it is not only rudimentary civilization
which we detect as ensuing upon the introduction of the use of fire: it is trade, socialized
wealth, the division of the community into the "haves" and the "have-nots," the introduction
of the working of the law, that to him that hath shall be given and that from him that hath
nothing but his labor to offer shall be taken with it his liberty also. It should likewise
be borne in mind that with the stealing of fire from heaven came also that coalition of government
with trade, of politics with commerce, of the monopolists of economic power with the dictators
of life and death, of peace and war, which is manifested to the highest conceivable degree
to-day in the states most assertive of their leadership in the vanguard of civilization. I
said that with the use of fire came the enslavement of men; but government and enslavement
were one and the same thing. Neither, however, was as yet dominant over social life.

XV. ARROWS AND EARTHENWARE

The talking, fire-using anthropoid in the course of time invented the bow and arrow. So great
and so enduring were the benefits of this new device that it is almost impossible for us, who
have profited by them, to imagine the state of human society when men could kill animals or
destroy enemies only by throwing stones or clubs, or by striking with the fist. But it is easy
to see that the chief of a tribe of men received an incalculable increase of power when, besides
the instruments of ignition, bows and arrows were in his possession to deal out at his will.
Whatever equality of initiative and diffused sovereignty had existed before the use of fire
was known, it now began to vanish, and the men of any tribe saw power concentrated in the will
and word of the chief and those nearest him, while submission to his command was the condition
of survival. And no doubt, with the loss of that individual liberty and that self-reliance
which characterize the lower animals, there also died away a certain joyousness and zest of
spontaneous self-fulfilment, such as we observe in wild creatures so long as they are free
from hunger and thirst and secure from the pursuit of enemies.

It was perhaps another ten thousand years before one more new link in the chain of man's mastery
over Nature and the chief's mastery over his men was forged. This time it was probably a woman
who--again by a happy chance or by necessity of maternal solicitude--noticed the effect of
heat upon clay and introduced the art of pottery. Until then men had no utensils that could
withstand the action of fire; they could not boil water except by dropping hot stones into
some receptacle of wood or skin. Now, by the new device of boiling, the food-supply was enormously
increased. The blessing of another mastery over matter was henceforth shared by all the members
of the tribe. But, at the same time, there was a corresponding force added to the chief's grip
upon his men. We see the law illustrated, that every new invention, owned by the few, becomes
one more trap for the many. The differentiation between the owner of the tribe's wealth and
the propertyless became with the introduction of pottery fixed and hopeless. The master dealt
out not only fire and arrows, but cooking-utensils; or he withheld all these if he saw fit;
and if you had been there, but not in command, you, too, would have tamely submitted or have died.

XVI. ANIMALS TAMED AND IRON SMELTED

The word "tamely" which I have just used, brings me to the next great event which moved mankind
perceptibly nearer to civilization proper. It is an event which was not only a literal fact
of prime importance, but which is eternally a symbol of man's own fate. It was probably first
the dog that lent himself to the imagination of the speaking, fire-making, arrow-shooting,
clay-baking, anthropoid ape, as a stimulus to the idea that captive animals might be of service
to human beings. Man began to tame not only the dog, but the sheep, the ox, the camel, the
goat, the horse, and the elephant. The gain to all the tribe was enormous. The men all shared
in the profit, but once more their master appropriated the new increment in power. He became
the owner of the domesticated animals as well as of the inanimate pot and arrow and flame.
But at this stage it must have seemed to all the other members of the tribe that they also
were owned, soul and body, by their chief. They could not help seeing, nor could he, that they
were his men. And how natural it was for them to rejoice in the fact that they belonged to
some one who was mightier than themselves, and who identified his own prosperity with that
of the tribe, and of every individual in it who served it according to his will. The old place
had seemed rather fine to him as a boy, but he saw now how bad it had really been. He sank
into one of the armchairs with that strange sense of angry resentment that he had felt before
in the street gaining hotly upon him.

"It's good, isn't it?" said Barbour, smiling with an almost personal satisfaction, as though
he had been largely responsible for the present improvements.

"The membership's going up like anything, and we're thinking of raising subscriptions. Very decent
set of fellows on it, too. Oh! we're getting along splendidly here. You must have noticed the
change in the place!"

"I should think I have," said Harry--the tone of his voice was a little regretful; "but it's
not only here--it's the whole town. It's smartened up beyond all knowing. But I must confess
that, dirty and dingy as they were, I regret the old club-rooms. There was something extraordinarily
homely and comfortable about them. Do you remember that old armchair with the hole in it? Gone long
ago, of course, but I shall never sit in anything as nice again."

"Ah, sentiment," said Barbour, smiling; "you won't find much of it in Pendragon nowadays. It
doesn't do. Sentimentalists are always Tories, you'll find; always
wanting to keep the old things, and all against progress. We're all
for progress now. We've got some capital men on the Town Council--Harding,
Belfast, Rogers, Snaith--you won't remember them. There's some talk
of pulling down the Cove and building new lodging-houses there. This time the something that happened did not
cause an increase of man's mastery over physical Nature. It was, instead, like that initial
invention which turned apes into men. And again, like spoken language, it was a device to facilitate
communication of mind with mind. In some one of the many groups of beings who had learned the
use of fire, arrows, pots, sheep, and swords, some genius hit upon the idea of written signs
as a medium of communication with those distant in space, and as a means of perpetuating a
knowledge of the will of the dead among his survivors. But be it observed that only the master,
never the man, only the owner of things, the controller of circumstances, was in a position
to embody and preserve his judgment and desire in written signs. The new art of writing enhanced
the power of rulers, of chiefs. The Pharaoh, not the fellah, dictated the inscription that
was to be engraved. Thus all the rulers of the past were now able to perpetuate their power
by adding their sanction to the word of the living chief, while no voice from the ranks of
the governed would be allowed to immortalize itself in written speech. This is the reason that
written language introduced civilization proper. There was no longer any chance for the wildness
of the beast to crop out. Here began the empire of the dead over the living; but it was the
empire of dead rulers over living slaves. The mastery over Nature and the monopoly of social
power thereby became practically infinite. The tamers were now omnipotent in comparison with
the tamed. It must be noticed that the process of transforming beasts into citizens was one
to which only the tamed, but not the tamers, were subjected. The ruler stood outside of and
above the rule he made. The law was for his subjects. This was the case with Henry VIII at
the acme of civilization as it had been with the first of the Pharaohs.

Not only the blond beast of prey, but the swarthy also dictated an ethic for his subjects in
order to keep himself in ascendancy. It was because Nietzsche admired all beasts of prey and
felt contempt for their victims that he hated Jesus Christ and proudly assumed the title of
Anti-Christ. For Christ had set up an ethic which encouraged the victims to protest and attempt
to win back their primeval initiative, to take over the sovereignty which had been concentrated
in the hands of the mighty and to diffuse it among the nobodies of the tribe. St. Luke goes
so far as to assert that even before Jesus was born his Mother entertained levelling ideas.
Into her lips he puts a song in which she magnifies the Lord because she believed her Son would
bring down the mighty and exalt them of low degree. But alas! civilization went on for fifteen
hundred years and succeeded in tying Christianity to the chariot-wheel of monopolized initiative.

XVIII. THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY AFTER CHRIST

Christianity had to wait for something to happen that would lend force to its Gospel. That
something did not occur until the middle of the fifteenth century. Then, as I have already
said without specifying what they were, a number of unforeseen events took place which opened
the door to the divine bridegroom of humanity.

I have said that in the fifteenth century after Christ a new principle began to work in society;
but I did not say that it was then for the first time promulgated. Civilization was the organization
of man's mastery over Nature on a basis of self-interest; it was the giving only so much of
wealth and power to the many as was compatible with the retention of one's own ascendancy.
To be civilized, then, is evidently not to be Christian any more than it is to be Buddhistic
or Judaic, socialistic or democratic. Everybody admits that one can be civilized and be none
of these things: just as one may be "cultured" without being kind. In other words, it is consistent
with being civilized to be highly selfish; one need only be rationalized in one's egoism. Indeed,
civilization is the incarnation of self-interest. If self-interest, its basic principle, should
give way to social interest; if the monopoly of social power should be broken and the power
transferred to the general will of the community; if the community should relegate its administration
to representatives, but should prevent these by some social device from ever usurping the power
entrusted to them, then something new--something as different from civilization as the airship
from the horse-cart--would have begun to establish itself. A new species of social order can
be nothing other than an order whose basic principle is totally new; and what greater difference
could exist in structuralizing tendencies than that between self-interest and the interest
of the community? Whenever the latter gets the upper hand, it will be because Fate, the Cosmos,
the Universe, the force within unconscious evolution, has caught up the song of the Magnificat.
No such consummation of humanity has taken place, but it is undeniable that in the fifteenth
century the Word entered like a seed into the soil of Fact. The Virgin's prophecy began to
fulfil itself.

Familiar to everybody, and quickly to be specified, are the wonderful events which turned the
vision into reality. One of these events was the invention of gunpowder; another was the mariner's
compass; a third was the invention of paper; a fourth, the printing-press; a fifth was the
discovery that the earth goes round the sun once a year, and whirls on its own axis once a
day; a sixth was that indiscretion of Christopher Columbus, whereby instead of over-populated
India he opened up a way to the vast and sparsely denizened Americas.

These events, each and severally and all together, produced in one particular the same sort
of effect as the use of fire and of the bow and arrow, of pottery, the domestication of animals,
and the smelting of iron: they enhanced incalculably the mastery of man over matter. But in
the other particular characteristic of civilization they acted in the very opposite direction
from all preceding inventions. Instead of entrenching the master in his monopoly of social
power, instead of furthering the differentiation of society into master and man, they all played
into the hands of the man. After all that it has been to us all our lives, to our people, to the whole
place, are you going to root it out and destroy it simply because the town isn't quite big enough
to put up all the trippers that burden it in the summer? Don't you see what you will lose
if you do? I suppose you think that I am sentimental, romantic, but upon my word I can't see that
you have improved Pendragon very much in all these twenty years. It was charming once--a place with
individuality, independence; now it is like anywhere else--a miniature Brighton."

He knew that he was wasting his words. There was a pause, and he felt that they were all three
laughing at him--yes, Robin as well.

He had only made a fool of himself; they could not understand how much he had expected during
those weary years of waiting--how much he had expected and how much he had missed.

Clare looked round the room and was relieved to find that only Beldam was present. If one of the
family was bent on being absurd, it was as well that there should only be one of the servants to hear
him.

"You know that you are to be on your trial this afternoon, Harry?" she said.

"My trial?" he repeated, bewildered.

"Yes--it's my at-home day, you know--first Thursdays--and, of course, they'll all come to see
you. We shall have the whole town----" She looked at him a little anxiously; so much depended on
how he behaved, and she wasn't completely reassured by his present manner.

If he astonished them all this afternoon by saying things about the Cove like that, it would
be too terrible!

"How horrible!" he said, laughing. "I'm very much afraid that I shan't do you justice, Clare.
I'm no good at small conversation."
His treating it so lightly made it worse, and she wondered how she
could force him to realise the seriousness of it.

"All the nicest
people in Pendragon," she said; "and they are rather ridiculously
critical, and of course they talk."

He looked at her and laughed.
"I wish they were Maories," he said, "I shouldn't be nearly so frightened!"

She
leant over the table to emphasise her words. "But it really does make
a difference, Harry. First impressions count a lot. You'll be nice
to them, won't you?"

The laugh had left his eyes. It was serious,
as he knew. He had had no idea that he would have, so to speak, "funked"
it so. It was partly, of course, because of Robin. He did not want
to make a fool of himself before the boy. He was already beginning
to realise what were the things that counted with Robin.
The new speed in transportation made it possible for thousands to escape from oppression where
scarcely one had been able to do so in former generations. The Irish peasants began to pour
into America; then followed the Germans; soon Russians and Latins were helped to leave the
Old World; sometimes in all came a million-odd in one year. Wealth was multiplied and scattered
to a degree that had never been dreamed to be possible. Not only in the United States, but
in France, Italy, Scandinavia, the British Empire, and South America, the diffusion of social
initiative was taking place. First, power spread from the few to the many severally; but now,
for a quarter of a century, the many, without surrendering, have been pooling their new power
in the general will of the nation. There, in the unified and unifying purpose of nations like
America, and of each of her federate States, the power is being safeguarded for the community
and for its members severally by political devices which render public servants incapable of
prolonged usurpation.

XIX. CIVILIZATION FACES ITS SUCCESSOR

Still, the new order is far from being in the ascendant. As civilization began with the introduction
of the use of fire, but was not triumphant until the invention of written language, so the
new order--call it what you will: Christianity, the Meaning of America, the Dream of California,
the Wisconsin Idea, Social Democracy, Humanity--this new order has only entered in as yeast
which has not yet had a chance to leaven the whole lump. But the fermentation now goes on apace.
The World-War is perhaps best understood when it is looked upon as a struggle of civilization
against its successor. Alarmed and armed to the teeth, civilization (applied science organized
on a basis of reasoned self-interest) is attempting to expand itself over territory which had
been preempted and mapped out by social democracy, and was being devoted, in the spirit of
the ideal commonwealth foreshadowed in Christian sentiment and Jewish prophecy, to the co-ordination
of wealth and power on the principle of deference to the humanity in every man.

But more significant than the World-War of the passing away of the old order and its supersession
by a new are the ten or twenty inventions, ideas, discoveries, and new social contacts which
marked the first decade of the present century. No doubt even the World-War has been precipitated
by the sudden inrush of these unprecedented forces, and the realization of their trend by the
self-centred leaders of civilization.

It would seem that the civilized, anticipating a move on the part of the humanized, and fearing
an appropriation of the benefits of new inventions, stole a march upon the unsuspecting. The
result is, that we saw at the outset of the war the latest appliances seized upon by the upholders
of arbitrary power, and only now, after the first shock of attack, are the builders of an earthly
paradise demonstrating their ability and intention to turn all the forces of Nature and devices
of reason to the service of each in the brotherhood of the common life. We are beginning to
see, also, that every one of the latest inventions is such in its nature that soon victory
must come to the cause of economic and political equality.

Even the cheapness of motor-cars will overtake the champions of industrial monopoly, who at
the first used them for the hoarding of social power. The submarine can at the first only be
turned against the freedom of the seas during times of peace. The aeroplane and the airship,
more than any other instruments of locomotion, will assist in the diffusion of initiative among
all the outlying and small nations of the earth. More than anything else they will assist the
weak and the meek of the earth to rush together to one another's rescue; and wireless telegraphy,
as soon as it is established universally, will sound to them the alarum in the twinkling of
an eye. All the new inventions are, as it were, God's detectives for the exposing of the subtle
and disguised crimes of the great; or they are God's captains for the mobilization of the scattered
forces of the meek when the plot of an oppressor has been unearthed. The people need only to
realize that the new inventions are by their very nature breakers of power-monopolies, in order
to find in them an irresistible incentive to rise and act in the cause of world-wide democratic
initiative. High explosives, the gas-engine, the giant gun, sheets of flame, deadly gases,
all these are within the reach of Christ's little ones to encircle their kingdom-that-is-coming
against the attacks of inhuman humans. The new inventions are humanity's destructors to annihilate
civilization's destroyers.

I have specified some of the twentieth century's inventions to show that, like the compass
and the printing-press, they will be scatterers of privileges to the masses. I might go on
indefinitely adding to the list, but I will cite only one more. It was only in the last decade
of the nineteenth century that a new way of making cheap paper was discovered--so cheap that
it became possible to sell great dailies for one cent. But this practice was not established
until the twentieth century. And it was only a few years ago that the greatest newspaper of
the world--and a very stronghold of upper-class monopoly--was able, or driven, to reduce its
price from threepence (six cents) to a penny. But I specify the case of the London Times because,
like a miracle of divine healing, but entirely due to the cheapness of paper, is the change
of its policy from that of brutal imperialism to the democratic one of transforming the British
Empire into a commonwealth of equal states. Now that the Times has been converted, we may be
sure that the universe itself has come round to the side of the right, and has taken up the
cause of the poor. By the pricking of my thumbs I know that something better than civilization
this way comes. Dull indeed must be that man whose blood does not tingle with anticipation.
Yet the physical inventions of the twentieth century are not to be compared in pregnancy of
good with its less palpable, its spiritual, novelties.

XX. AGAINST THE MATERIALISTIC VIEW OF HISTORY

Before passing, however, from the physical inventions to the new moral ideas and mental contacts,
I must interpolate a comment to save myself from misunderstanding. Generally, those who trace
to mechanical utilities new epochs in the development of mankind proceed upon the materialistic
theory of history. But this theory I have in no wise committed myself to, for I count it to
be false. It is true that I have traced all the great steps in human advancement to physical
inventions, but I have in no word implied that the inventions themselves were caused by anything
material whatsoever. And if they themselves were, as I believe, the result of man's mental
and spiritual activities reacting against events, then my tracing of human advancement to them
implies no belief in the materialistic theory of history. Every effect of the inventions must
be set down ultimately not to them, but to their causes; and their causes were mental. Casually
I have said as much, in remarking several times that they took place by a happy chance, or
by a stroke of insight on the part of some rare genius, or by the reaction of some mediocre
person's intelligent volition against some extraordinary experience which made the idea of
the invention so obtrusively evident that even a mind not unusually gifted could scarcely have
avoided lighting upon it. 

Love was worth everything, and she could but believe that he loved her. This strong conviction
went with the girl to the vestry, and made it easier to turn away when his name--his real name, which
she, though his wife, was not to know--was recorded by him in the book.

They parted from Torrance, Morello, and the Countess at the church door, an arrangement which
delighted Annesley. In the haste of making plans, she and Knight had forgotten to discuss what
they were to do after the wedding and before their departure; but Knight had found time to decide
the matter.

"These people were the best material I could get hold of at a moment's notice," he remarked, coolly,
when he and Annesley were in the motor-car he had hired for the journey to Devonshire. "We've
used them because we needed them. Now we don't need them any longer. It seems to me that a
newly married couple ought to keep only dear friends around them or no one. Later we can repay
these three for the favour they've done us, if you call it a favour. Meanwhile, we'll forget
them."

Knight had neglected no detail which could make for Annesley's comfort, or save her from any embarrassment
arising from the hurried wedding. Her luggage had been packed by a maid in the hotel, and--all
but the dressing-bag and a small box made for an automobile--sent
ahead by rail to Devonshire.

She and Knight were to travel in the comfortable limousine which
would protect them against weather.

It did not matter, Knight said, how long they were on the way.

At Exeter they would visit some good agency in search of a lady's maid. Annesley said that she
did not need a woman to wait on her, since she had been accustomed not only to taking care
of herself but Mrs. Ellsworth.

Knight, however, insisted that his wife must be looked after by a competent woman. It was "the
right thing"; but his idea was that, in the circumstances, it would be pleasanter to have a
country girl than a sharp, London-bred woman or a Parisienne.

In Exeter an ideal person was obtainable: a Devonshire girl who had been trained to a maid's duties
(as the agent boasted) by a "lady of title." She had accompanied "the Marchioness" to France,
and had had lessons in Cannes from a hair dresser, masseuse, and manicurist. Now her mistress
was dead, and Parker was in search of another place.

She was a gentle, sweet-looking girl, and though she asked for wages higher than Mrs. Ellsworth had
paid her companion, Knight pronounced them reasonable. She was directed to go by train to
the Knowle Hotel at Sidmouth (where a suite had been engaged by telegram for Mr. and Mrs. Nelson
Smith and maid) and to have all the luggage unpacked before their arrival.

Flung thus into intimate association with a man, almost a stranger, Annesley had been afraid in
the midst of her happiness. She felt as a young Christian maiden, a prisoner of Nero's day, might
have felt if told she was to be flung to a lion miraculously subdued by the influence of Christianity.
Such a maiden could not have been quite sure whether the story were
true or a fable; whether the lion would destroy her with a blow or
crouch at her feet.

But Annesley's lion neither struck nor crouched.
He stood by her side as a protector. "Knight" seemed more and more
appropriate as a name for him. Though there were roughnesses and crudenesses
in his manner and choice of words, all he did and said made Annesley
sure that she had been right in her first impression. Not a cultured
gentleman like Archdeacon Smith, or Annesley's dead father, and the
few men who had come near her in early childhood before her home fell
to pieces, he was a gentleman at heart, she told herself, and in all
essentials.

It struck her as beautiful and even pathetic, rather
than contemptible, that he should humbly wish to learn of her the
small refinements he had missed in the past--that mysterious past
which mattered less and less to Annesley as the present became dear
and vital. And where there is no one that will allow himself to be
preyed upon, even blond beasts take up the new enterprise of co-operation among equals. This
is an inevitable result of the contact of many varieties of unlikes, the unification, not of
equals, but of supplementary equivalents. When such psychic conditions have prevailed for a
century or more, it is inconceivable that trade can continue to consist of competition between
individuals and the permission of the successful to amass and hoard fortunes. Either production
and distribution will become communal, or the community will tax large fortunes into the state
and national treasury.

But there are three other distinguishing characteristics of the twentieth century which make
for the replacing of civilization by humanization, and for the transition of trade from the
harshness of the law into the abounding grace of the gospel.

XXII. THE POWER TO TRANSMIT HUMAN LIFE, ITS SOCIAL CONTROL

First, the limiting of population by the will of human individuals. In the beginning men stole
fire from the gods; but life they allowed the Almighty to continue to dispense at his own inscrutable
pleasure, while they remained his pleased but puzzled agents in its transmission. It was only
in the eighties of the last century, after a hundred thousand years, that man hit upon the
idea and the practice of controlling life as he had controlled fire. From the beginning, he
had planted the fire-seed according to his own purpose and social need. And now at last he
has come to look upon the life-seed as not simply in his keeping as a trust for another, but
as his own property to control in the interest of his own future. Can human audacity reach
higher? Can the assumption of divine and creative responsibility by man out-strip this latest
act of self-government? From beast to citizen, did we say? But have we not found the process
during the last four hundred years to be from citizenship to godship, from creature to creator?
It was one of your American reformers who entitled a book Man as Social Creator. From beast
to citizen seemed dull enough; but from citizen to God--what intoxication of zest does this
thought engender! Can the creature dare it? Is this the great venture? Is this the meaning
of the travail of the ages? Or is it only a process from citizen to man, from tamed beast to
free spirit feeling the Soul of All at the inmost centre of himself, and finding the means
at last of incarnating that soul in the community, in politics, trade, and domestic life? Howsoever
the new facts and the newer outlook are to be interpreted, it becomes quite clear that if civilization
was the taming of beasts, something that is not civilization has begun to assert itself. The
liberating of citizens, as it moves to triumphant attainment, must scrap many an institution,
many a habit, and set up the reverse of many a rule of conduct. We have indeed reached a new
era, one which is not that of taming animals, when young women can--and know that they can--as
war-brides strike against the labor of maternity and against the foreseen horror of a fate
for one's offspring such as they would never choose for the fruit of their love.

But, secondly, close upon the invention of means for controlling the transmission of life has
followed the idea that this control shall not rest with the individuals most intimately concerned,
but with the will of the community--of the nation--of federated humanity. If a man has no exclusive
right to do as he pleases with his power of labor, to withhold it or direct it irrespective
of the general welfare and the will of the commonweal, how much less, say the advocates of
eugenic marriage, shall men and women be permitted to follow their own whim and their selfish
pleasure as regards the use or waste of the power to communicate life? This new doctrine that
men are only trustees for the nation and posterity in their central power to control the future
quantity and quality of human beings whom they may bring into existence, recognizes no division
of society into the tamed and the tamers. There is no class suggested of monopolists of social
power who will regulate the rest of the community, as the owner of cattle controls the breeding
of them. The general will of the community, administered under diffused public opinion and
through the educated judgment of the individual himself, will decide. Only in cases of what
are agreed to be downright crimes will the law step in to condemn and prevent, and then only
through agents who are directly accountable to an enlightened and alert public opinion. The
retaining of this new mastery of man over the quantity and quality of human life, by the communal
conscience against all monopolists, is the transcendent feature of the new order. But if this
be so, then trade, our system of producing and distributing wealth, ceases to be merely a question
of the control of labor and becomes a question of the control of the transmission of human
life. Such control might have been accounted a possible privilege among Virginian breeders
of slaves. But so to regard it seems monstrous, now that chattel slavery has been universally
condemned, thanks to the triumphant levellers of the last hundred years. What is more, all
trade is beginning to be regarded as a question ultimately, not of the manufacture of machines
and their products, nor of the propagation of plants and animals, but of the begetting of spiritual
agents, who in their turn are to become the makers and masters of the universe in which they
are to live.

The third characteristic event of our century which is to help us to slough off civilization,
as our ancestors ten thousand years ago rid themselves of the wild-beast features of barbarism
and savagery, is the awakening of women. Their claim to social initiative and responsibility
is the extremest possible reach of democratic self-assertion. The remarkable peculiarity of
their entrance into trade is not, however, that they are women, but that they are the one half
of mankind who have never worked for hire, but always from love, and who have desired the wage
less than the approval of those they served. The morals of trade, as it has existed under the
relation of master to wage-earner, even the ethics of trades-unionism, cannot survive the censure
of women, who on other principles demand for themselves the right of maintenance by the state
to protect them in the bearing and rearing of children and the making of homes, and the nursing
of the wounded and the sick. Now that women no longer allow themselves as social agents to
be ignored, they will insist that not only the morals of marriage and of democratic relations
must become humane, but that all trade, as well as all legislation, must be guided by the eugenic
motive.

XXIII. FOREIGN TRADE THE BEGETTER OF WARS

I have presumed to say that modern trade discloses civilization in its acutest form. The strict
sobriety of this assertion we cannot, perhaps, appreciate to the full, unless we note the relation
of trade during the last three hundred years to aggressive warfare. There prevails in the public
mind the false notion that somehow peace and trade are akin in spirit and identical in their
interests. This notion has been assiduously foisted upon the public by kings of industry and
some professors of sociology, who possibly believe that it is true. But the facts of history
prove that every great war during the last three centuries has been undertaken in the service
of foreign traders, who call upon their government to back their claims. According to Sir John
Seeley, the greatest political historian of the British Empire, foreign trade and modern war
have always been one and the same thing. Some small nation-state resented the advent and methods
of the foreign traders, and began to prepare for self-defence, asserting that it wished to
be left alone, and that it meant to defend its own sacred traditions. This the government that
backed the traders would not permit, and a clash of arms ensued. Or two rival sets of foreigners
were jealous of each other in their effort to possess one and the same market and induced their
respective governments to spring at each other's throats. Under such circumstances war does
not always arise, because the mere show of vastly superior might is often sufficient to compel
immediate submission. Such was the case when the United States in 1853 exhibited in the harbors
of bewildered and terrified Japan a fleet of great steamships. The threatened nation, having
admitted no foreigners since the Jesuits in the seventeenth century plotted against its political
independence, and not knowing how to use steam to propel engines, saw that there was no alternative
to violent conquest by their uninvited guests but peaceful submission on their own part.

Such peace, however, is not the holy thing which some persons declare all peace to be. When
a man holds up his hands in answer to the challenge of a highway robber, bloodshed is avoided;
but the outrage is none the less detestable because perfect quiet prevails. Nor is it the kind
of social calm which the angels meant when they proclaimed peace on earth to men of good will.
On the contrary, it is that stillness of unchallenged iniquity of which our Lord expressed
his menacing hate when He declared that He came not to bring peace but a sword. Trade illustrates
civilization in its highest degree of intelligence and elaboration; and foreign trade is only
trade in its widest transactions. But foreign trade being the cause of all war, the only way
to end warfare is to displace civilization by a system of wealth produced and distributed under
communal control. Then commerce will no longer be inspired by the financial interest of private
investors, but by the total welfare of the whole people of the nation. But I have touched upon
the identity of war and trade only to show their vital connection with civilization as a whole.

XXIV. THE OPPOSITE OF A "RETURN TO NATURE"

Civilization is still advancing by leaps and bounds. Nevertheless, at the same time, with a
greater acceleration of development, the men are checkmating the master and transferring control
and initiative to the will of the commonwealth. At least, not otherwise am I able to interpret
the new deference for nationality which has been aroused in protest against aggressive militarism;
nor the kind of industrial legislation that has been enacted during the last decade in California
and other western states, in New Zealand and Australia, and even in Italy and England. It all
means that the new inventions, although at first seized upon by monopolists, are seen to be
such as to provide channels through which the pent-up instincts and hopes of the masses can
act with concerted power. It means that also political machinery is being devised for securing
the public welfare and protecting opportunities for individual genius and talent. No man asks
for more. The world over we have reached the threshold of collective democracy, wherein the
consuming of material wealth will be shared with approximate equality and wherein social control
will be retained by the collective will, to safeguard individual initiative, and will be administered
by public servants who have proved their superior ability, but who remain subject to almost
instantaneous recall.

Such a substitute for civilization, however, is the opposite of a return to the individualism
of Nature or to a primeval communism. It presupposes the highest mastery of man over matter
and social unity among all mankind co-operating as nation-states and federations of states.

As regards external government and law, it is the antithesis of Mr. Carpenter's proposal that
they should disappear, because they are the travesty of inward government and order. On the
contrary, I hope that external government, animated by the general will of a social democratic
commonwealth and vested in representatives sensitively accountable to an alert and intelligent
public opinion, will appear to my listeners not as a travesty, but as the very incarnation
of that inward government and order which every individual man must feel to be the law of his
own being unless he has lost his manhood's centrality. A crushing indictment of Mr. Carpenter's
modern movement back to Nature is to be found in the fact that it has declined instead of advancing
during the twenty-six years since he wrote. Probably fewer persons in England preach salvation
by sandals and sunbaths to-day than did a quarter of a century ago, while the sandals themselves
and sunbaths have become but items among the general products of industry and governmental
hygiene. The sunbath is only one of the many remedies prescribed to the poor by doctors impanelled
by the British state, and the sandals are better made by machinery than by the hands of poetic
hermits.

But while the vision of philosophical anarchy has been fading away, whole nations on a gigantic
scale have been subjecting the power of trusts and monopolies to the general will of the community.
In America you have changed your federal law and many of your state constitutions, in order
that the right of the common will to dictate may be unquestioned, and that no occasion for
lawless violence need ever arise through any legal barrier to the full assertion of the mind
of the common life.

So in every particular of his cure for civilization Mr. Carpenter's worship of savagery and
barbarism is being rejected as fantastic. We may return to uncooked fruits and grains. But
what a task for the most highly developed industrial state, to raise and distribute an adequate
supply of grapes, apples, and nuts the year round for the 1,000,000,000 inhabitants of the
globe! What a call for many wizards of California to produce new species of luscious edibles!
It would seem to me that the curse of civilization has lain in the direction of too little
of either cooked or uncooked food, instead of too much. If the common people are to come into
their own, trade in every necessity and luxury must be more highly integrated. The difference
of the new era as regards foreign commerce will chiefly be that nations as a whole by their
governments will conduct it instead of private traders. In other words, foreign trade will
be nationalized, in the way that social democrats have long demanded that land and capital
should be. The community will own and control it through state agents for the common welfare.
Nothing of good which civilization has brought forth will be lost, nor will the organization
of wealth be relaxed.

Machinery will be multiplied a thousandfold. Like the human body itself, social life must become
as complex as it can without losing its centrality. Be it remembered that the truly simple
life is not gained by meagreness of possessions and interests, but by singleness of aim controlling
a seemingly infinite number of detailed means. But this unity dominating a multiplicity of
interests is attainable only through the entire mechanism of external government. And again,
as the man resides in all the organs of the body, but is himself no organ, and as by the central
unity of his life-energy is able to rush the white corpuscles to any part that is wounded or
poisoned, so the general will, the community-self of the social democratic state, is beginning
to direct all the healing agencies in the body politic to the rescue of the unfortunate. Such
beneficence and benevolence, systematized and alert, is more than civilization. It is Christianity,
it is the doing unto the least of one's fellow-men what self-interest prompts one never to
do; but its power is equal to the redemptive goodness that inspires it. In motive and method
it is not business, it is different from trade; for it is a progeny of pity. But nevertheless,
it is socialized wealth and applied science and politics. It is government by the governed.

When civilization has been superseded by this democratic process, which in our century is advancing
at such rapid gait, there will surely be in the sphere of religion no more return to Nature
than in that of economics. There will be no more the worship of any one instinct or organ,
or any external object or agent. How could Carpenter have so far forgotten his own definition
of health as to applaud the primitive ritualistic worship of the glories of the human body
and the procession of the stars? That ritual was itself the symptom of the break-up of man's
character into multiplicity, and the insubordination of specific organs. Surely when man has
gained centrality of health, he will worship the unifying will which is dominant whenever health
prevails. He will adore the spirit which makes the many one. We may go where we please, and do what ever
we think necessary for our own safety and happiness; provided we do not trespass upon the rights
of others; for it must be remembered that others have the same rights as ourselves.
§3.

The Riverside Press CAMBRIDGE · MASSACHUSETTS U · S · A

