And standing with his hands on his sides, he glanced round from one to another. His own face
was flushed, partly from the effects of a crowded hall and bad air, but mostly with excitement.
All the men present indeed--though it was less evident in Bennett and Wharton than in the rest--had
the bright nervous look which belongs to leaders keenly conscious of standing well with the
led, and of having just emerged successfully from an agitating ordeal. As they stood together
they went over the speech to which they had been listening, and the scene which had followed
it, in a running stream of talk, laughter, and gossip. Wharton took little part, except to
make a joke occasionally at his own expense, but the pleasure on his smiling lip, and in his
roving, contented eye was not to be mistaken. The speech he had just delivered had been first
thought out as he paced the moonlit library and corridor at Mellor. After Marcella had left
him, and he was once more in his own room, he had had the extraordinary self-control to write
it out, and make two or three machine-copies of it for the press. Neither its range nor its
logical order had suffered for that intervening experience. The programme of labour for the
next five years had never been better presented, more boldly planned, more eloquently justified.
Hallin's presidential speech of the year before, as Casey said, rang flat in the memory when
compared with it. Wharton knew that he had made a mark, and knew also that his speech had given
him the whip-hand of some fellows who would otherwise have stood in his way.

Casey was the first man to cease talking about the speech. He had already betrayed himself
about it more than he meant. He belonged to the New Unionism, and affected a costume in character--fustian
trousers, flannel shirt, a full red tie and work-man's coat, all well calculated to set off
a fine lion-like head and broad shoulders. He had begun life as a bricklayer's labourer, and
was now the secretary of a recently formed Union. His influence had been considerable, but
was said to be already on the wane; though it was thought likely that he would win a seat in
the coming Parliament.

The other two men were Molloy, secretary to the congress, short, smooth-faced, and wiry, a
man whose pleasant eye and manner were often misleading, since he was in truth one of the hottest
fighting men of a fighting movement; and Wilkins, a friend of Casey's--ex-iron worker, Union
official, and Labour candidate for a Yorkshire division--an uneducated, passionate fellow,
speaking with a broad, Yorkshire accent, a bad man of affairs, but honest, and endowed with
the influence which comes of sincerity, together with a gift for speaking and superhuman powers
of physical endurance.

"Well, I'm glad it's over," said Wharton, throwing himself into a chair with a long breath,
and at the same time stretching out his hand to ring the bell. "Casey, some whisky? No? Nor
you, Wilkins? nor Molloy? As for you, Bennett, I know it's no good asking you. By George! our
grandfathers would have thought us a poor lot! Well, some coffee at any rate you must all of
you have before you go back. Waiter! coffee. By the way, I have been seeing something of Hallin,
Bennett, down in the country."

He took out his cigarette case as he spoke, and offered it to the others. All refused except
Molloy. Casey took his half-smoked pipe out of his pocket and lit up. He was not a teetotaler
as the others were, but he would have scorned to drink his whisky and water at the expense
of a "gentleman" like Wharton, or to smoke the "gentleman's" cigarettes. His class-pride was
irritably strong. Molloy, who was by nature anybody's equal, took the cigarette with an easy
good manners, which made Casey look at him askance.

Mr. Bennett drew his chair close to Wharton's. The mention of Hallin had roused a look of anxiety
in his quick dark eyes.

"How is he, Mr. Wharton? The last letter I had from him he made light of his health. But you
know he only just avoided a breakdown in that strike business. We only pulled him through by
the skin of his teeth--Mr. Raeburn and I."

"Oh, he's no constitution; never had, I suppose. But he seemed much as usual. He's staying
with Raeburn, you know, and I've been staying with the father of the young lady whom Raeburn
's going to marry."

"Ah! I've heard of that," said Bennett, with a look of interest. "Well, Mr. Raeburn isn't on
our side, but for judgment and fair dealing there are very few men of his class and circumstances
I would trust as I would him. The lady should be happy."

"Of course," said Wharton, drily. "However, neither she nor Raeburn are very happy just at
this moment. A horrible affair happened down there last night. One of Lord Maxwell's gamekeepers
and a 'helper,' a lad of seventeen, were killed last night in a fight with poachers. I only
just heard the outlines of it before I came away, but I got a telegram just before going into
congress, asking me to defend the man charged with the murder."

A quick expression of repulsion and disgust crossed Bennett's face.

"There have been a whole crop of such cases lately," he said. "How shall we ever escape from
the curse of this game system?"

"We shan't escape it," said Wharton, quietly, knocking the end off his cigarette, "not in your
lifetime or mine. When we get more Radicals on the bench we shall lighten the sentences; but
that will only exasperate the sporting class into finding new ways of protecting themselves.
Oh! the man will be hung--that's quite clear to me. But it will be a good case--from the public
point of view--will work up well--"

He ran his hand through his curls, considering.

"Will work up admirably," he added in a lower tone of voice, as though to himself, his eyes
keen and brilliant as ever, in spite of the marks of sleeplessness and fatigue visible in the
rest of the face, though only visible there since he had allowed himself the repose of his
cigarette and arm-chair. 

The piece itself is admitted to be a masterpiece in the kind. Tacitus was son- in-law to Agricola;
and while filial piety breathes through his work, he never departs
from the integrity of his own character.

He has left an historical monument highly interesting to every Briton, who wishes to know the
manners of his ancestors, and the spirit of liberty that from the earliest time distinguished
the natives of Britain.

"Agricola," as Hume observes, "was the general who finally established the dominion of the Romans
in this island. He governed, it in the reigns of Vespasian, Titus, and Domitian. (Hume's Hist.
vol. i. p. 9.) In this passage Mr. Hume has given a summary of the Life of Agricola. It is
extended by Tacitus in a style more open than the didactic form of the essay on the German Manners
required, but still with the precision, both in sentiment and diction,
peculiar to the author.

In rich but subdued colors he gives a striking picture of Agricola, leaving to posterity a
portion of history which it would be in vain to seek in the dry gazette style of Suetonius, or in the
page of any writer of that period.]

1. The ancient custom of transmitting to posterity the actions and manners of famous men, has not
been neglected even by the present age, incurious though it be about those belonging to it,
whenever any exalted and noble degree of virtue has triumphed over
that false estimation of merit, and that ill-will to it, by which
small and great states are equally infested. A day
would soon come when the labour movement would be able to show these young aristocrats the
door. Not yet, however.

"Well, I thowt you wouldn't dine with us," he said, turning away with a blunt laugh.

Bennett's mild eye showed annoyance. "Mr. Wharton has explained himself very fully, I think,"
he said, turning to the others. "We shall miss him at dinner--but this matter seems to be one
of life and death. And we mustn't forget anyway that Mr. Wharton is fulfilling this engagement
at great inconvenience to himself. We none of us knew when we elected him last year that he
would have to be fighting his election at the same time. Next Saturday, isn't it?"

Bennett rose as he spoke and carefully buttoned his coat. It was curious to contrast his position
among his fellows--one of marked ascendency and authority--with his small insignificant physique.
He had a gentle deprecating eye, and the heart of a poet. He played the flute and possessed
the gift of repeating verse--especially Ebenezer Eliot's Corn Law Rhymes--so as to stir a great
audience to enthusiasm or tears. The Wesleyan community of his native Cheshire village owned
no more successful class-leader, and no humbler Christian. At the same time he could hold a
large business meeting sternly in check, was the secretary of one of the largest and oldest
Unions in the country, had been in Parliament for years, and was generally looked upon even
by the men who hated his "moderate" policy, as a power not to be ignored.

"Next Saturday. Yes!" said Wharton, nodding in answer to his inquiry.

"Well, are you going to do it?" said Casey, looking round at him.

"Oh, yes!" said Wharton, cheerfully; "oh, yes! we shall do it. We shall settle old Dodgson,
I think."

"Are the Raeburns as strong as they were?" asked Molloy, who knew Brookshire.

"What landlord is? Since '84 the ground is mined for them all--good and bad--and they know it."

"The mine takes a long time blowing up--too long for my patience," said Wilkins, gruffly. "How
the country can go on year after year paying its tribute to these plunderers passes my comprehension.
But you may attack them as you please. You will never get any forrarder so long as Parliament
and the Cabinet is made up of them and their hangers on."

Wharton looked at him brightly, but silently, making a little assenting inclination of the
head. He was not surprised that anything should pass Wilkins's comprehension, and he was determined
to give him no opening for holding forth.

"Well, we'll let you alone," said Bennett. "You'll have very little time to get off in. We'll
make your excuses, Mr. Wharton. You may be sure everybody is so pleased with your speech we
shall find them all in a good temper. It was grand!--let me congratulate you again. Good-night--I
hope you'll get your poacher off!"

The others followed suit, and they all took leave in character;--Molloy, with an eager business
reference to the order of the day for Saturday,--"Give me your address at Widrington; I'll
post you everything to-night, so that you may have it all under your eye"--Casey, with the
off-hand patronage of the man who would not for the world have his benevolence mistaken for
servility,--and Wilkins with as gruff a nod and as limp a shake of the hand as possible. It
might perhaps have been read in the manner of the last two, that although this young man had
just made a most remarkable impression, and was clearly destined to go far, they were determined
not to yield themselves to him a moment before they must. In truth, both were already jealous
of him; whereas Molloy, absorbed in the business of the congress, cared for nothing except
to know whether in the next two days' debates Wharton would show himself as good a chairman
as he was an orator; and Bennett, while saying no word that he did not mean, was fully conscious
of an inner judgment, which pronounced five minutes of Edward Hallin's company to be worth
more to him than anything which this brilliant young fellow could do or say.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wharton saw them out, then came back and threw himself again into his chair by the window.
The venetian blinds were not closed, and he looked out on a wide and handsome street of tall
red-brick houses and shops, crowded with people and carriages, and lit with a lavishness of
gas which overcame even the February dark and damp. But he noticed nothing, and even the sensation
of his triumph was passing off. He was once more in the Mellor drive; Aldous Raeburn and Marcella
stood in front of him; the thrill of the moment beat once more in his pulse.

He buried his head in his hands and thought. The news of the murder had reached him from Mr.
Boyce. The master of Mellor had heard the news from William, the man-servant, at half-past
seven, and had instantly knocked up his guest, by way of sharing the excitement with which
his own feeble frame was throbbing.

"By Gad! I never heard such an atrocious business," said the invalid, his thin hand shaking
against his dressing-gown. "That's what your Radical notions bring us to! We shall have them
plundering and burning the country houses next."

"I don't think my Radical notions have much to do with it," said Wharton, composedly.

But there was a red spot in his cheeks which belied his manner. So when he--they--saw Hurd
cross the avenue he was on his way to this deed of blood. The shot that he, Wharton, had heard
had been the shot which slew Westall? Probably. Well, what was the bearing of it? Could she
keep her own counsel or would they find themselves in the witness box? The idea quickened his
pulse amazingly.

"Any clue? Any arrests?" he asked of his host. "Why, I told you," said Boyce, testily, though
as a matter of fact he had said nothing. "They have got that man Hurd. The ruffian has been
a marked man by the keepers and police, they tell me, for the last year or more. And there's
my daughter has been pampering him and his wife all the time, and preaching to me about them! [42]
As far as the meaning of this passage can be elucidated, it would
appear as if the first circumnavigators of Britain, to enhance the
idea of their dangers and hardships, had represented the Northern
sea as in such a thickened half solid state, that the oars could scarcely
be worked, or the water agitated by winds.

Tacitus, however, rather chooses to explain its stagnant condition from the want of winds, and
the difficulty of moving so great a body of waters.
 The
situation absorbed him. Miss Boyce's friend was now in imminent danger of his neck, and Miss
Boyce's thoughts must be of necessity concentrated upon his plight and that of his family.
He foresaw the passion, the saeva indignatio, that she must ultimately throw--the general situation
being what it was--into the struggle for Hurd's life. Whatever the evidence might be, he would
be to her either victim or champion--and Westall, of course, merely the Holofernes of the piece.

How would Raeburn take it? Ah, well! the situation must develop. It occurred to him, however,
that he would catch an earlier train to Widrington than the one he had fixed on, and have half
an hour's talk with a solicitor who was a good friend of his before going on to Birmingham.
Accordingly, he rang for William--who came, all staring and dishevelled, fresh from the agitation
of the servants' hall--gave orders for his luggage to be sent after him, got as much fresh
information as he could from the excited lad, plunged into his bath, and finally emerged, fresh
and vigorous in every nerve, showing no trace whatever of the fact that two hours of broken
sleep had been his sole portion for a night, in which he had gone through emotions and sustained
a travail of brain either of which would have left their mark on most men.

       *       *       *       *       *

