The General in glowing terms paints his efforts to run down the Lespinasse conspirators. Although
suffering horribly from his fractured tibia (when he fell into the "hole"), and from other
dire ills, he has "not taken the slightest rest." He has been everywhere--"New Orleans, Florida,
to the city of Coney Island"--to corner the villains, who "flee in all directions." The daughter,
Marie Louise, through whom the General expects to secure a compromise, has left for New Orleans.
"Wonderful coincidence," he writes, "they were all living quietly and I believe had no intention
whatever to travel, and two days after my arrival in New York they all disappeared. The most
suspicious of it all is that the banker, his wife and children had left for Coney Island for
the summer and to spend their holidays, and certainly they disappeared without saying good-by
to their intimate friends.... I have the whole history of Tessier's life and how he made his
fortune. There is a family for the use of whom we must give at least a million, for the fortune
of Tessier was not his alone. He had a companion who shared his troubles and his work. According
to the will they were to inherit one from the other; the companion died, and Tessier inherited
everything. I do not see the necessity of your trip to New York; that might make noise and
perhaps delay my negotiations." Then follows the list of properties embraced in the inheritance:

PROPERTY AND PERSONAL ESTATE OF THE HEIRS

1   The land of Central Park ceded to the
    city of New York, of the value of             $5,000,000.00

2   He had at the National Bank--United
    States Bank--deposited in gold--twenty
    to thirty million dollars. He
    never withdrew anything; on the
    contrary, he always deposited his income
    there                                         25,000,000.00

3   The big house on Broadway, Nos. 100
    to 118, of twenty-five stories, to-day
    the largest bank in New York                   5,000,000.00

4   The house on Fifth Avenue, No. 765,
    facing Central Park, to-day one of
    the first hotels of New York--Hotel
    Savoy                                          8,000,000.00

5   House on Fifth Avenue, No. 767, facing
    Central Park, to-day the biggest
    and most handsomest of American
    hotels, where the greatest people and
    millionaires stop--Hotel Netherland           20,000,000.00

6   Two coal mines at Folkustung in Texas          9,000,000.00

7   A petroleum mine in Pennsylvania
    (Mexican frontier)                             6,000,000.00

8   Shares of silver mine at Tuxpan,
    Mexico                                        10,000,000.00

9   The house at Tuxpan and its grounds,
    Mexico                                            15,000.00

10  The pleasure home and grounds in
    Florida (New Orleans) in the city of
    Coney Island                                     500,000.00

11  The house which covers all the Esquare
    Plaza (no number because it is all
    alone). It is an immense palace,
    with a park and gardens, and waters
    forming cascades and labyrinths,
    facing Central Park                           12,000,000.00

12  The block of houses on Fifth and Sixth
    Avenues, facing on this same Central
    Park, which, as all these grounds belong
    to him, he had put up. We dwell
    in the city of God now--in the suburbs,
    as it were--but we shall "have a right" to it in the future state
when we are ushered into the very heart of the great metropolis and
stand before the actual throne of the Deity, in the presence of his
August Majesty.

    
    In the New Testament dispensation the heavenly elements of the New
Jerusalem have descended to earth in the form of the new covenant,
and God's people obtain a foretaste of heaven's glory and are made
pure even as Christ is pure, and are therefore represented as having
"come unto Mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem"

(Heb. 12:22, 23); and God dwells with them in
    a very important sense. 2 Cor. 6:16.
    They are one with the redeemed above, and together they constitute
one "family in heaven and earth," all loving the same Father, adoring
the same King, drinking from the same fountain of life eternal, and
all basking in the same divine light that beams from the throne of
God.

In another sense, however, there is a
    difference between them; for they
    are separated by the line of mortality, one phase being located on
earth and the other in heaven.

But when at the last day the redeemed of
    earth have access to the tree of life in its perfect sense,
                                               there will be henceforth
                                                only one phase to the New Jerusalem, or church of God, which will
be in its relation to the new earth, as specially described in the
prophecy under consideration, when "all things" are made new and "the
former things are passed away."

    
    
                                       5. And he that
    sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new.

And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful.

6. And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will
give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely.

7. He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son.

8.

The declarations contained in these verses proceed from God himself and announce the fact that
he hath now fulfilled all that he designed. His promises to his faithful children are brought
to pass, as well as his threatening to his foes.

All things are made new and the former things are passed away. Not only has the strife, the
commotion, and the sin in the old order of things passed away, but
the new creation, wherein dwelleth righteousness, has been introduced,
the grand long-looked-for era of eternal blessedness to the saints.

Oh, halleluiah! "And he said unto me, Write: for these words are true and faithful."

"And he said unto me, It is done.

I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end." When the seventh angel of chap. 16:17 poured
out his vial, the voice of God from the throne said, "It is done," signifying that the last
judgments were complete. Here again the same voice is heard as before, referring to the same thing--the
accomplishment of God's great purposes. The enemies of the church have been overthrown, her
long period of warfare has ended, and the eternal day of Zion's glory
has come.

Then follow his blessed promises held out to the faithful, and also the reward to the wicked.
These are to be understood as referring to these classes, not at the day of judgment, but when
the Revelation was given to John and therefore to us.
 This,
when unfolded, stretches entirely across the room and is seen to be composed of hundreds of
typewritten items, of which the following may serve as illustrations:

            EXPENSES IN NEW YORK

July 12, Train to New Orleans   ..........   $25.50
"    16, Train to Florida       ...........  $ 2.50
"     "  Dinner on train        ...........  $ 2.00
"    17, Hotel in Florida       ...........  $ 2.00
"    18, Trip to Coney Island   ...........  $  .50
"    19, Return to Florida      ...........  $  .50
"    21, Return from Florida to New Orleans  $ 2.50
"     "    Laundry              ...........  $ 1.15
Dec.  3, Return to New York     ...........  $ 6.50
"    24, Train to Vera Cruz     ...........  $57.50
Jan.  4, Trip to Tuxpan         ...........  $ 2.50
"     5, Return to Vera Cruz    ...........  $ 2.50
"     6, Sudden night trip to Halifax,
         Nova Scotia, via Buffalo and
         Niagara Falls          ...........  $50.50
"    18, Laundry for three months .........  $ 5.00
          Etc., etc.

            EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES

To Agent Pushyt John, a meerschaum and amber
    cigar-holder and pipe       ...........  $ 7.00
Tobacco jar of shell and silver ...........  $ 4.00
To Indian Peter South-Go, a watch, a suit,
    and a pair of shoes         ...........  $16.50
To my general agent of confidential reports
    for his daughter, a gold ring and a
    feather fan                 ...........  $ 7.00
A necktie for himself and scarf pin in
    gold and with stone for the necktie ...  $ 8.60
To the letter-carrier to bring me my
    correspondence and not give it to any
    one else when I should change address .  $ 4.00
Invitation to the Consul and his two
    agents in Washington hotel  ...........  $12.00
Several invitations to cafés and saloons
    to the Police Agents        ...........  $ 2.00
Invitations to old employees of Jean
    Tessier, to tear from them the
    declarations                ...........  $ 1.50
Barber expenses                 ...........  $11.50
Tobacco and matches, July to December,
    three packages each week, ten cents
    each                        ...........  $ 7.80
Changing hotels to lead astray the agents
    of the impostors            ...........  $ 9.50
          Etc., etc.

"To obtain a collossal fortune as yours will be, it is necessary to spend money unstintingly
and to have lots of patience. Court proceedings will be useless, as trickery and lies are necessary
to get the best of the scoundrels. It is necessary also to be a scoundrel."

"That he might well say," interpolates Lapierre. "He succeed, c'est sure."

I rapidly glanced over the remaining letters. The General seems always to be upon the verge
of compelling a compromise. "I have already prepared my net and the meshes are tightly drawn
so that the fish will not be able to escape.... For an office like this one needs money--money
to go quickly from one place to another, prosecute the usurpers, not allow them an instant's
rest. If they go to some city run after them at once, tire them with my presence and constantly
harass them, and by this means compel them to hasten a compromise--"

The General is meeting with superhuman obstacles. In addition to his enemies he suffers all
sorts of terrible bodily afflictions. Whenever the remittances from the Lapierres do not arrive
the difficulties and diseases increase.

At last, however, after an interval of two years, things took a turn for the better. A "confidential
representative" of the conspirators--one "Mr. Benedict-Smith"--arrived to make a bona fide
offer of one hundred and fifty million dollars in settlement of the case. The General writes
at great length as to exactly in what proportion the money should be divided among the heirs.
The thing is so near a culmination that he is greatly exercised over his shabby appearance.

    I am without a son and too badly dressed to go before the banker in
    the very likely case of his arrival here. Send me my baggage at once
    with the first steamer, and mark each piece "fragile." This is all.
    My regards to Madame Lapierre and your son. I am cordially yours,
    squeezing your hand.

    PEDRO S. DE MORENO.

But the Lapierres and Tessiers, while not for an instant distrusting the honesty of the General,
had become extremely weary of sending him money. Each heir felt that he had contributed enough
toward the General's "expenses and invitations." Even the one hundred and fifty millions within
easy reach did not prompt immediate response.

About the same time an extraordinary messenger arrived at the Lapierre farm, purporting to
come from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and instructing Lapierre to repair immediately to
Paris. The messenger explained that the presence of Lapierre was desired at the Ministry in
connection with some investigation then in progress into the affairs of one Jean Tessier. Then
the messenger departed as mysteriously as he had arrived.

Good M. Lapierre was highly excited. Here was indubitable evidence of the truth of the General's
assertions. But, just as the latter had intended, perhaps, the worthy farmer jumped to the
conclusion that probably the messenger from Paris had been sent by the conspirators.

"At the last moment," wrote Lapierre to Moreno, "I received from Paris a letter commanding
me to go to the Ministry, and at the same time a telegram recommending that I leave at once.
I shall write you from Paris all that I learn to your interest. If this letter should not reach
you sealed in red wax, with small indentations made with a sewing thimble and my initials,
which I always sign, it is that our correspondence is seized and read."

Events followed in rapid succession. Lapierre, the Tessiers, including the little blacksmith,
became almost hysterical with excitement. A gentleman, by name "Mr. Francis Delas," called
upon Lapierre and offered him twenty-five million dollars spot cash for his wife's share in
the Tessier inheritance. This person also claimed that he had a power of attorney from all
the other heirs, with the exception of Pettit and Rozier, and asserted that he was on the point
of embarking for New York in their interest. He urged Lapierre to substitute him for Moreno.
But Lapierre, now convinced that everything was as the General had claimed it to be, indignantly
rejected any such proposition aimed at his old friend, and sent Mr. Francis Delas packing about
his business.

    "This is what my answer has been to him: 'Sir, we have already an
    agent with whom we can only have cause to be satisfied, so that your
    services are not acceptable or needed.' He left me most dissatisfied
    and scolding."

The sending of this confederate on the part of the wily General had precisely the effect hoped
for. Lapierre and his friends were now convinced that the inheritance Tessier was a reality,
and that powerful personages were not only exerting their influence to prevent the rightful
heirs from obtaining their property, but had also in some way secured the cooperation of government
officials. It was agreed, on all hands, that the worthy landowner, accompanied by Madame Reddon,
had better proceed at once to the scene of operations and unite with the General in their common
purpose. Once on the ground Lapierre could assume direction of his own campaign.

Lapierre and Madame Reddon accordingly sailed for America and arrived in New York on the fourth
of December, 1904, where they were met on the dock by the General, who, freshly barbered, and
with a rose in his buttonhole, invited them, as soon as they had recovered from the fatigue
of landing, to make a personal inspection of their properties. 

There will be but one literal resurrection then, as is clearly shown by the account given of
the judgment in this chapter, verses 11-15. Chap. 1:7. If this does not prove that there is
but one literal resurrection when Christ comes, then I would not know how to state such a fact if
I desired. Furthermore, Jesus himself, in the same chapter in which he described "the first
resurrection," says most positively that all the literal dead shall be resurrected at the same
time. John 5:28, 29. This hour certainly can not signify more than a short period of time.
In their efforts to prove two literal resurrections, millenarians always quote with emphasis,
"The dead in Christ shall rise first." 1 Thes. 4:16. In doing so they, either ignorantly or wilfully,
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; for any one can see at a glance that no such thing
as two resurrections is even hinted at. Verses 15-17 simply teach this, that the righteous who
are living on the earth at the time Christ appears will not ascend
to heaven before the righteous dead are resurrected, but the dead
will rise first, then they will all be caught up together at one and
the same time.

The wicked are not mentioned in this connection; for, as stated, Paul was writing this only
for the comfort and the edification of the church. In the following chapter, however, their "sudden destruction"
at the second coming of Christ is mentioned as a warning to the church.

It is evident that the first resurrection as applied in this connection specified particularly
that phase of the church which, as symbolized by the man-child, was
caught up to God through martyrdom and there "lived and reigned with
Christ."

The other phase of the church, symbolized by the woman, is not said to reign with Christ a thousand
years, but, on the other hand, is represented as driven into the wilderness, her public reign
on earth being ended by the holy city being trodden under foot of a profane multitude of apostate
beast-worshipers; and the two witnesses, clothed in sackcloth, were prophesying only in a few isolated,
individual hearts.

A careful study of this scripture, taken in connection with others in the Revelation applying to the
same object, will show that all God's people, both those here brought to view during the thousand
years and those following that period, are spoken of as dead people resurrected and reigning.
The first phase were "priests of God and of Christ" and reigned with
him in Paradise (chap.

 This villain m'sieu! He has
taken our money and made fools of us. Surely you will give us justice!"

"Yes," echoed Lapierre stubbornly, "and the money was my own money, which I had made from the
products of my farming."

But the real trial began only when he arose to take the witness chair in his own behalf. Apparently
racked with pain, and laboring under the most frightful physical infirmities, the General,
through an interpreter, introduced himself to the jury by all his titles, asserting that he
had inherited his patents of nobility from the "Prince of Arras," from whom he was descended,
and that he was in very truth "General-in-Chief of the Armies of the King of Spain, General
Secretary of War, and Custodian of the Royal Seal." He admitted telling the Lapierres that
they were the heirs of five hundred million dollars, but he had himself honestly believed it.
When he and the rest of them had discovered their common error they had turned upon him and
were now hounding him out of revenge. The courtly General was as distingué as ever as he addressed
the hard-headed jury of tradesmen before him. As what canaille he must have regarded them!
What a position for the "Count de Tinoco"!

Then two officers entered the courtroom bearing the famous trunk of the General between them.
The top tray proved to contain thousands of railroad tickets. The prosecutor requested the
defendant to explain their possession.

"Ah!" exclaimed Moreno, twirling his mustaches, "when I was General under my King Don Carlos,
in the Seven Years' War of '75 and also in Catalonia in '80, I issued these tickets to wounded
soldiers for their return home. 38 and 39 also. In the Revelation, however, it is clear that these
terms are applied to Romanism and Protestantism, and under the special
leadership of this spirit of antichrist they are gathered together
to battle against the saints of the most High.

Chap. 16:13-16. It will be noticed that the field of operations under this grand confederation
of the three unclean spirits is enlarged so that it includes not merely the Apocalyptic earth,
but "the whole world."


Beneath the tickets were found sheaves of blank orders of nobility and blank commissions in
the army of Spain, bearing what appeared to be the royal seal. These the General asserted that
he had the right to confer, by proxy, for his "King Don Carlos." Hundreds of other documents
bearing various arms and crests lay interspersed among them. The prisoner drew himself up magnificently.

