Dick Lancaster sprang up, and stood before her. "Then let me love you" he cried. "Do not deny
me that! Do not take the life out of me! the soul out of me! Do not turn me away into utter
blackness! Do not say I shall not love you!"

Olive's clear, thoughtful eyes were looking into his. "I believe you love me," she answered
slowly. "I believe every word you say. But what I say is also true. I will admit that I have
asked myself if I could love you. There was a time when I was in great trouble, when I believed
that it might be possible for me to marry some one without loving him, but I never thought
that about you. You were different. I could not have married you without loving you. I believe
you knew that, and so you did not ask me."

His voice was husky when he spoke again.

"But you do not answer me," he said. "You have seen into my very soul. May I love you?"

She still looked into his glowing eyes, but she did not speak. It was with herself she was
communing, not with him.

But there was something in the eyes which looked into his which made his heart leap, and he
leaned forward.

"Olive," he whispered, "can you not love me?"

Her lips appeared as if they were about to move, but they did not, and in the next moment they
could not. He had her in his arms.

Poor foolish, lovely Olive! She thought she was so strong. She imagined that she knew herself
so well. She had seen so much; she had been so far; she had known so many things and people
that she had come to look upon herself as the decider of her own destiny. She had come to believe
so much in herself and in her cold heart that she was not afraid to listen to the words of
a burning heart! Her heart could keep so cool!

And now, in a flash, the fire had spread! The coolest hearts are often made of tinder.

Poor foolish, lovely, happy Olive! She scarcely understood what had happened to her. She only
knew that she had been born and had lived, and had grown, that he might come to her and say
he loved her. What had she been thinking of all this time?

"You are so quick," she said, as she put back some of her disheveled hair.

"Dearest," he whispered, "it seems to me as if I had been so slow, so slow, so very slow!"

It was a long time before Captain Asher returned, and when he entered the parlor he found these
two still there. They had been sitting by the window, and when they came forward to meet him
Dick's arm was around the waist of Olive. The captain looked at them for a moment, and then
he gave a shout, and encircled them both in his great arms.

When they were cool enough to sit down and Olive and Dick had ceased trying to persuade the
captain that he was not the happiest of the three, Olive said to him: "I have told Dick everything--about
the air-gun and all. Of course, he must know it."

"And I have been looking at you," said Dick, putting his hand upon the captain's shoulder,
"as the only hero I have ever met. Not only for what you have done, but for what you have refrained
from doing."

"Nonsense!" said the captain. "Olive now--"

"Oh! Olive is Olive!" said Dick. And he did not mind in the least that the captain was present.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on the next afternoon that the Broadstone carriage stopped at the toll-gate. Mrs. Easterfield
sprang out of it, asking for nobody, for she had spied Olive in the arbor.

"It seems to me," she said, as she burst into tears and took the girl into her arms, "it does
seem to me as if I were your own mother!"

"The only one I have," said Olive, "and very dear!"

It was some time after this that Mrs. Easterfield was calm enough to stop the flow of exciting
conversation and to say to Olive, taking both her hands tenderly within her own: "My dear,
we have been talking a great deal of sentiment, and now I want seriously to speak to you on
a matter of business."

"Business!" asked Olive in surprise.

"Yes, it is really business from your point of view; and I have come round to that point of
view myself. Olive, I want you to marry!"

"Oh," said Olive, "that is it, is it? That is what you call business?"

"Yes, dear; I am now looking at your future, and at marriage in the very sensible way you regarded
those matters when you were staying with me."

"But," said Olive, who could scarcely help laughing, "there was a good reason then for my being
so sensible, and that reason no longer exists. I can now afford single-blessedness."

"No, Olive, dear, you can not. Circumstances are all against that consummation. You are not
made for that sort of thing. And your uncle is an old man, and even with him you need a young
protector. I want you to marry Richard Lancaster. You know my heart has been set on it for
some time, and now I urge it. You could never bring forth a single objection to him."

"Except that I did not love him."

"Neither did you love the young men you were considering as eligible. Now, do try to be a sensible
girl."

"Mrs. Easterfield, are you laughing at me?" asked Olive.

"Far from it, my dear. I am desperately in earnest. You see, recent events--"

"Dick Lancaster and I are engaged to be married," said Olive demurely, not waiting for the
end of that sentence. "And," she added, laughing at Mrs. Easterfield's astonished countenance,
"I have not yet considered whether or not it is sensible."

After Mrs. Easterfield had given a half dozen kisses to partly express her pleasure, she said:
"And where is he now? I must see him!"

"He went back to his college late last night; it was impossible for him to stay here any longer
at present."

As Mrs. Easterfield was going away--she had waited and waited for the captain who had not come--Olive
detained her.

"You are so dear," she said, "that I must tell you a great thing." And then she told the story
of the two men in the barouche.

Mrs. Easterfield turned pale, and sat down again. She had actually lost her self-possession.
She made Olive tell her the story over and over again. "It is too much," she said, "for one
day. I am glad the captain is not here, I would not know what to say to him. I may tell Tom?"
she said. "I must tell him; he will be silent as a rock."

Olive smiled. "Yes, you may tell Tom," she said.

"I have told Dick, but on no account must Harry ever know anything about it."

Mrs. Easterfield looked at her in amazement. That the girl could joke at such a moment!

When the captain came home Olive told him how she had entrusted the great secret to Mrs. Easterfield
and her husband.

"Well," said he, "I intended to tell you, but haven't had a chance yet, that I spoke of the
matter to Mrs. Faulkner. So I have told two persons and you have told three, and I suppose
that is about the proportion in which men and women keep secrets."

CHAPTER XXXVII

In which Some Great Changes are Recorded.

A few days after his return to his college Prof. Richard Lancaster found among his letters
one signed "Your backer, Claude Locker."

The letter began:

     "You owe her to me. You should never forget that. If I had done
     better no one can say what might have been the result. This
     proposition can not be gainsaid, for as no one ever saw me do
     better, how should anybody know? I knew I was leaving her to you.
     She might not have known it, but I did. I did not suppose it would
     come so soon, but I was sure it would ultimately come to pass. It
     has come to pass, and I feel triumphant. In the great race in which
     I had the honor to run, you made a most admirable second. The best
     second is he who comes in first. In order for a second to take
     first place it is necessary that the leader in the race, be that
     leader horse, man, or boat, should experience a change in
     conditions. I experienced such a change, voluntary or involuntary
     it is unnecessary to say. You came in first, and I congratulate you
     as no living being can congratulate you who has not felt for a
     moment or two that it was barely possible that he might, in some
     period of existence, occupy the position which you now hold.

    "Do not be surprised if you hear of my early marriage. Some woman no
    better-looking than I am may seek me out. If this should happen, and
    you know of it, please think of me with gratitude, and remember that
    I was once

    "Your backer,

    "CLAUDE LOCKER."

Olive also received a letter from Mr. Locker, which ran thus:

     "Mrs. Easterfield told me. She wrote me a letter about it, and I
     think her purpose was to make me thoroughly understand that I was
     not in this matter at all. She did not say anything of the kind,
     but I think she thought it would be a dreadful thing, if by any act
     of mine, I should cause you to reconsider your arrangement with
     Professor Lancaster. I have written to the said professor, and have
     told him that it is not improbable that I shall soon marry. I don't
     know yet to what lady I shall be united, but I believe in the truth
     of the adage, 'that all things come to those who can not wait.'
     They are in such a hurry that they take what they can get.

    "If you do not think that this is a good letter, please send it back
    and I will write another. What I am trying to say is, that I would
    sacrifice my future wife, no matter who she may be, to see you
    happy. And now believe me always

    "Your most devoted acquaintance,

    "CLAUDE LOCKER.

    "P.S.--Wouldn't it be a glorious thing if you were to be married in
    church with all the rejected suitors as groomsmen and Lancaster as
    an old Roman conqueror with the captive princess tied behind!"

Now that all the turmoil of her life was over, and Olive at peace with herself, her thoughts
dwelt with some persistency upon two of her rejected suitors. Until now she had had but little
comprehension of the love a man may feel for a woman--perhaps because she herself never loved--but
now she looked back upon that period of her life at Broadstone with a good deal of compunction.
At that time it had seemed to her that it really made very little difference to her three lovers
which one she accepted, or if she rejected them all. But now she asked herself if it could
be possible that Du Brant and Hemphill had for her anything of the feeling she now had for
Dick Lancaster. (Locker did not trouble her mind at all.) If so, she had treated them with
a cruel and shameful carelessness. She had really intended to marry one of them, but not from
any good and kind feeling; she was actuated solely by pique and self-interest; and she had,
perhaps, sacrificed honest love to her selfishness; and, what was worse, had treated it with
what certainly appeared like contempt, although she certainly had not intended that.

She felt truly sorry, and cast about in her mind for some means of reparation. She could think
of but one way: to find for each of them a very nice girl--a great deal nicer than herself--and
to marry them all with her blessing. But, unfortunately for this scheme, Olive had no girl
friends. She had acquaintances "picked up here and there," as she said, but she knew very little
about any of them, and not one of them had ever struck her as being at all angelic or superior
in any way. Neither of the young men who were lying so heavily on her mind had written to any
one, either at the toll-gate or at Broadstone, since the very public affair in which she had
played a conspicuous part; and her consolation was that as each one had read that account he
had said to himself: "I am thankful that girl did not accept me! What a fortunate escape!"
But still she wished that she had behaved differently at Broadstone.

She said nothing to any one of these musings, but she ventured one day to ask Mr. Easterfield
how Mr. Hemphill was faring. His reply was only half satisfactory. He reported the young man
as doing very well, and being well; he was growing fat, and that did not improve his looks;
and he was getting more and more taciturn and self-absorbed. "Why was he taciturn?" Olive asked
herself. "Was he brooding and melancholy?" She did not know anything about the fat, and what
might be its primal cause; but her mind was not set at ease about him.

Things went on quietly and pleasantly at the toll-gate, and at Broadstone. Dick came down as
often as he could and spent a day or two (usually including a Sunday) with Olive and her uncle.
It was now October, and colleges were in full tide. It was also the hunting season, and that
meant that Mr. Tom would be at Broadstone for a couple of weeks, and Mrs. Easterfield said
she must have Olive at that time. And, in order to make the house lively, she invited Lieutenant
Asher and his wife at the same time, as Olive and her young stepmother were now very good friends.
Then the captain invited his old friend Captain Lancaster, Dick's father, to visit him at the
toll-gate.

These were bright days for these old shipmates; and, strange to say, as they sat and puffed,
they did not talk so much of things that had been, as they puffed and made plans of things
which were to be. And these plans always concerned the niece of one, and the son of the other.
Captain Asher was not at all satisfied with Dick's position in the college. He could not see
how eminence awaited any young man who taught theories; he would like Dick's future to depend
on facts.

"Two and two make four," said he; "there is no need of any theory about that, and that's the
sort of thing that suits me."

Captain Lancaster smiled. He was a dry old salt, and listened more than he talked.

"Just now," he remarked, "I guess Dick will stick to his theories, and for a while he won't
be apt to give his mind to mathematics very much, except to that kind of figuring which makes
him understand that one and one makes one."

There was a thing the two old mates were agreed upon. No matter-what Dick's position might
be in the college, his salary should be as large as that of any other professor. They could
do it, and they would do it. They liked the idea, and they shook hands over it.

Olive was greatly pleased with Captain Lancaster. "There is the scent of the sea about him,"
she wrote to Dick, "as there is about Uncle John and father, but it is different. It is constant
and fixed, like the smell of salt mackerel. He would never keep a toll-gate; nor would he marry
a young wife. Not that I object to either of these things, for if the one had not happened
I would never have known you; and if the other had not happened, I might not have become engaged
to you."

The two captains dined at Broadstone while Olive was there, and Captain Lancaster highly approved
of Mrs. Easterfield. All seafaring men did--as well as most other men.

"It is a shame she had to marry a landsman," said Captain Lancaster, when he and Captain John
had gone home. "It seems to me she would have suited you."

"You might mention that the next time you go to her house," said Captain Asher. "I don't believe
it has ever been properly considered."

It was at this time that Olive's mind was set at rest about one of her discarded lovers. Mr.
Du Brant wrote her a letter.

     "MY DEAR MISS ASHER--It is very long since I have had any
     communication with you, but this silence on my part has been the
     result of circumstances, and not owing, I assure you upon my honor,
     to any diminution of the great regard (to use a moderate term)
     which I feel for you. I had not the pleasure of seeing you when I
     left Broadstone, but our mutual friend, Mrs. Easterfield, told me
     you had sent to me a message. I firmly (but I trust politely)
     declined to receive it. And so, my dear Miss Asher, as the offer I
     made you then has never received any acknowledgment, I write now
     to renew it. I lay my heart at your feet, and entreat you to do me
     the honor of accepting my hand in marriage.

    "And let me here frankly state that when first I read of your great
    deed--you are aware, of course, to what I refer--I felt I must
    banish all thought of you from my heart. Let me explain my position,
    I had just received news of the death of my uncle, Count Rosetra,
    and that I had inherited his title and estates. It is a noble name,
    and the estates are great. Could I confer these upon one who was
    being so publicly discussed--the actor in so terrible a drama? I
    owed more to society, and to my noble race, and to my country than I
    had done before becoming a noble. But ah, my torn heart! O Miss
    Asher, that heart was true to you through all, and has asserted
    itself in a vehement way. I recognized your deed as noble; I thought
    of your beauty and your intellect; of your attractive vivacity; of
    your manner and bearing, all so fine; and I realized how you would
    grace my title and my home; how you would help me to carry out the
    great ambitions I have.

    "Will you, lady, deign to accept my homage and my love? A favorable
    answer will bring me to make my personal solicitations.

    "Your most loving and faithful servant,

    "CHRISTIAN DU BRANT.

    "(Now Count Rosetra.)"

"What a bombastic mixture!" thought Olive, as she read this effusion. "I wonder if there is
any real love in it! If there is, it is so smothered it is easily extinguished."

And she extinguished it; and thoughts of Count Rosetra troubled her no more.

She did not show Dick this letter, but she thought it due to Mrs. Easterfield to read it to
her. "He has got it into his head that an American woman, such as you, will make his house
attractive to people he wants there," commented that lady. "You have not considered me at all,
you ungrateful girl! Only think how I could have exploited 'my friend, the countess'! And what
a fine place for me to visit!"

It had been arranged by the two houses that Dick and Olive should be married in the early summer
when the college closed; and Mrs. Easterfield had arranged in her own mind that the wedding
should be in her city house. It would not be too late in the season for a stylish wedding--a
thing Mrs. Easterfield had often wished she could arrange, and it was hopeless to think of
waiting until her little ones could help her to this desire of her heart. She held this great
secret in reserve, however, for a delightful surprise at the proper time.

But she and Olive both had a wedding surprise before Olive's visit was finished. It was, in
fact, the day before Olive's return to the toll-gate that Mr. Easterfield walked in upon them
as they were sitting at work in Mrs. Easterfield's room. He had been unexpectedly summoned
to the city three days before, and had gone with no explanation to his wife. She did not think
much about it, as he was accustomed to going and coming in a somewhat erratic manner.

"It seems to me," she said, looking at him critically after the first greetings, "that you
have an important air."

"I am the bearer of important news," he said, puffing out his cheeks.

In answer to the battery of excited inquiries which opened upon him he finally said: "I was
solemnly invited to town to attend a solemn function, and I solemnly went, and am now solemnly
returned."

"Pshaw!" said Mrs. Easterfield. "I don't believe it's anything."

"A wedding is something. A very great something. It is a solemn thing; and made more solemn
by the loss of my secretary."

"What!" almost screamed his wife. "Mr. Hemphill?"

"The very man. And, O Miss Olive, if you could but have seen him in his wedding-clothes your
heart would have broken to think that you had lost the opportunity of standing by them at the
altar."

"But who was the bride?" asked Mrs. Easterfield impatiently.

"Miss Eliza Grogworthy."

"Now, Tom, I know you are joking! Why can't you be serious?"

"I am as serious as were that couple. I have known her for some time, and she was very visible."

"Why, she is old enough to be his mother!"

"Not quite, my dear. In such a case as this, one must be particular about ages. She is a few
years older than he is probably, but she is not bad looking, and a good woman with a nice big
house and lots of money. He has walked out of my office into a fine position, and I unselfishly
congratulated him with all my heart."

"Poor Mr. Hemphill!" sighed Olive. She was thinking of the very young man she had sighed for
when a very young girl.

"He needs no pity," said Mr. Easterfield seriously. "I should not be surprised if he feels
glad that he was not--well, we won't say what," he added, looking mischievously at Olive. "This
is really a great deal better thing for him. He is not a favorite of my wife, but he is a thoroughly
good fellow in his way, and I have always liked him. There were certain things necessary to
him in this life, and he has got them. That can not be said about everybody by a long shot!
No, he is to be congratulated."

Olive was silent. She was trying to make up her mind that he was really to be congratulated,
and to get rid of a lingering doubt.

"Well, that is the end of him in our affairs!" exclaimed Mrs. Easterfield. "Why didn't you
tell us what you were going to town for?"

"Because he asked me not to mention it to any one. And, besides, that is not all I went to
town for."

"Oh," said his wife, "any more weddings?"

"No," said Mr. Easterfield, helping himself to an easy chair. "You know I have lately been
so much with nautical people I have acquired a taste for the sea."

"I did not know it," said his wife; "but what of it?"

"Well, as Lieutenant Asher and his wife are here yet, and have no earthly reason for being
anywhere in particular; and as Captain Asher seems to be tired of the toll-gate; and as Captain
Lancaster doesn't care where he is; and as Miss Olive doesn't know what to do with herself
until it is time for her to get married; and as you are always ready to go gadding; and as
the children need bracing up; and as you can not get along without Miss Raleigh; and as Mrs.
Blynn is a good housekeeper; and as I have an offer for renting our town house; I propose that
we all go to sea together."

The two ladies had listened breathlessly to these words, and now Olive sprang up in great excitement,
and Mrs. Easterfield clapped her hands in delight.

"How clever you are, Tom!" she exclaimed. "What a splendid idea! How can we go?"

"I have leased a yacht, and we are going to the Mediterranean."

CHAPTER XXXVIII

"It has just Begun!"

This wonderful scheme which Mr. Easterfield had planned and carried out met with general favor.
Perhaps if they had all been consulted before he made the plan there would have been many alterations,
and discussions, and doubts. But the thing was done, and there was nothing to say but "Yes"
or "No." The time had come for the house party at Broadstone to break up, and the lieutenant
and Mrs. Asher had arranged to spend the next few months in the city, but they gladly accepted
Mr. Easterfield's generous invitation and would return to the toll-gate alter a few weeks preparatory
to sailing, that the party might get together, for Captain Lancaster was to remain at the tollhouse.
Mr. Easterfield also invited Claude Locker "to make things lively in rough weather," and that
young man accepted with much alacrity.

