Our offis has got wot is called a xchange fyend wot comes in every mornin wen we get the male
and looks over all the papers, cos he's too meen to buy his own readin matter. I knovv'd by
the way the edittur looks at him, he'd like to kick him down 3 flites of steep steps, but I
guess he borrowed a dime from him, bout ten years ago, and he's 'frade he'll 'tach the offis
furniture for it. I alwus like to help my 'mployers outer a tite place, so, this mornin, I
run 'cross a paper that was printed this day sevral yares ago, so I lade it down on the tabil
where the Fyend'd strike it the first thing, and then I got orful busy dustin the book-case.
Wen he cum in, he picked up the paper and looked down the hed-lines. I seen he was gettin orful
xcited, then he snatched up his hat and segar stump, and run like he was chased by litenin.
Purty soon, there was more an 5,000 peepel on the street in front of the offis, and the edittur
got orful scared, cos he thought they was goin to run him outer town, on account of the big
soshill scandell wot he published yesterday, so he sent me to the door to see wot they all
wanted. Wen I got there the peeple was most crazey for noose from the Sheecargo fire. I told
em to hold on and we'd hav out an xtra in a few minits, and then I showed the edittur the paper
wot the Fyend was reedin, wot gave a big account of the Sheecargo fire. Wen we got out our
extra, we sold 'bout 10,000 coppies, with a artickel, wot red like this:

"The latest despaches from that city report Sheecargo all quiett, thanks to the forethort of
the Mayor, in swarein in a large number of extra perlice, for service durin the sittin of the
Youmorists Conven-shun, and the grate precaushuns taken by Common Counsil to see that no lickher
was sold to delergates!" You bet there was a mad crowd, wen they found out there warnt no fire
a tall in Sheecargo. The 'xchange fyend's gone to New Jersey, cos it'll have time to blow over,
'fore Congres can promulgait a xtrodishun treety, with that government.

This afternoon, I was appalled, my grate big spirit fell down into my shoes, like a Jump of
led. Alass how grate the breech is, tween the orthor, and the columns of a noospaper, and how
short the rode, wot leeds to the waist basket, espeschially the one, in a printin offis like
the Daily "Buster," were the basket covers bout a square akrc of flore. I was put to cleenin
up the waste basket, so as we'd hav the paper reddy, for the junk man, wot calls round with
his six horse teem of goverment muels, once a week, I coldn't help lingerin over the contents,
and sying, wen I thought, of the hopes wot lied burried thare. There was one littel peece of
poultry, rittin on a sheet of 'lectric blue paper, and sented with otto of roses, and indited
to "My dare George." I wunder if the poultryess ment me, wen she rote it, cos if she did, she
struck it jest rite, for Ive got it stowed away, in my pants pocket next my hart.

There was a nother roll of manerskript, wot wayed a pound, and come by xpress, without bein
pade. I guess the edittur was mad, wen he paid 50 sents charges, and found out it warnt no
berthday present. A note with it, red like this:

      My dare Edittur Buster--

      The enclosed storie entitled "Dudish Dick, the Flirtin
      Corn-Doctor of Horse-car No. 36," is wurth $500, but in
      complerment of the high standin of your valewbel jurnal, I
      will allow you to publish it for notthin, if you will send
      me papers containin it.

      Yours trooly,

      Sammy Lane, Author.

Wat unappreciatin beins editturs are! Wen they wuld let a geneyus wot was capable of pennin
the follerin lines go unrewarded:

          A big politishun named Kelley,
          Had a gripin pane in his belly.
          He used St. Jacobs oil,
          And now he's nussin a boil,
          But his pane has left him by golly.

CHAPTER IV.

     HE AIN'T NO TYPERGRAFFICKAL CYCLOPEEDA.--SERIUS
     COMPLERCASHUNS, WITH A TEMPORY ABBERASHUN.--A PRINTIN' OFFIS
     FEED.

I'm in a peck of troubel to-day, wot I'll have ter trust ter Providence to get me outer. A
typergraffickal devil ain't s'posed to know everything, enyway. Now the hull offis is mad at
me, 'cos I ain't a walk-in' cyclopeeda of typograffickal turm.

In the fust place, the foreman of the composin' room's mad, 'cos wen he tole me to fech him
a long stick, I went down street and hunted round till I struck a house wot was bein plasturd,
and brot him back a good lath. Wen I giv it to him I thot there was a erupshun from a volcano,
the way he swared at me. He sed he'd a noshun to brake it over my back, for not havin cents
enuff to kno that he bot his fire wood by the cord. Y didn't he tell me in the fust place he
wanted that thing wot printers use to set type in.

Now the casheer's on his ear, cos he sent me out ter buy a wooden galley. I know'd very well
I couldn't make no mistake there, cos I'm posted on ship's kichens,

so I arst him how big a one he wanted. He sed medeyum, so I went up to Johnny Roache's ship-yard
and had them send a galley down to the offis, wot would be big enuf for a good sized skooner.
You orter seen the casheer's face, wen the six-horse teem stopped in frunt of the dore. The
driver was goin to leeve the galley enyway, but the Casheer pade him to hawl it back, and rote
Mr. Roache that there boy was laberin under a slite abberashun of the mind wen he ordered it.
But I think its his mind wots got the abberashuns instead, from sittin up so late with the
red-hedded grass widder wot keeps the bordin house crost the street from our house. If it hadn't,
y didn't he tell me he warnted a galley for keepin type in, wen the composin stick's full.
Fellers like him orter be put on ice, cos there too fresh to keep long. He only needs a tale
to be a thorobred dude, cos he's got everything else wat blongs to one.

On my way home, at noon, I stopped to see a feller wot was sellin prize packits, at the corner
of Nassau street, so I didn't get time to ete much dinner. I was gettin orful hungry bout 4
'clock, wen the edittur arst me if I thot I culd clere up the pie wot was on the imposin ston.
I didn't warnt to let him see I was so orful hungery, so I told him I didn't kno. "Well," sed
he, "there's nothin like tryin; the fore-man'll sho you wear it is." I couldn't keep back my
grattyfycashun, so I thanked him three or four times. You bet I was mad, wen I fownd out there
warnt no cherry or mince pie, not even dryed appel, but only a lot of type wot had got mixed
up. I think its reel mene to make a littel boy like me think hes goin to get a big feed, and
then not give him enything but a lot of led wot nobodie else wuld try to ete.

You orter see our imposin stone; it must be orful valewble. Its a grate flat peece of marbel,
tattooed, all over, with funny hyroglifficks. I guess its one of the old toombstones wot come
from anshunt Troy. Its a wunder the edittur dont sell it to the Smithsoyun institute, sted
of using it for layin forms on, its so orful imposin.

CHAPTER V.

     A VISIT FROM A DISTINGUSHED ANTY-MONOPERLIST TYPERGRAFFICAL
     TOREWRIST.--HE EXPOSES A MURDERUS CONSPIRACY.--A THRETEND
     RESIGNASHUN.

