THIRTY YEARS A SLAVE

From Bondage to Freedom.

THE INSTITUTION OF SLAVERY AS SEEN ON THE PLANTATION AND IN THE HOME OF THE PLANTER.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF LOUIS HUGHES.

PREFACE.

The institution of human slavery, as it existed in this country, has long been dead; and, happily
for all the sacred interests which it assailed, there is for it no resurrection. It may, therefore,
be asked to what purpose is the story which follows, of the experiences of one person under
that dead and accursed institution? To such question, if it be asked, it may be answered that
the narrator presents his story in compliance with the suggestion of friends, and in the hope
that it may add something of accurate information regarding the character and influence of
an institution which for two hundred years dominated the country--exercising a potent but baneful
influence in the formation of its social, civil and industrial structures, and which finally
plunged it into the most stupendous civil war which the world has ever known. As the enlightenment
of each generation depends upon the thoughtful study of the history of those that have gone
before, everything which tends to fullness and accuracy in that history is of value, even though
it be not presented with the adjuncts of literary adornment, or thrilling scenic effects.

CHAPTER I.

LIFE ON A COTTON PLANTATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

BIRTH--SOLD IN A RICHMOND SLAVE PEN.

I was born in Virginia, in 1832, near Charlottesville, in the beautiful valley of the Rivanna
river. My father was a white man and my mother a negress, the slave of one John Martin. I was
a mere child, probably not more than six years of age, as I remember, when my mother, two brothers
and myself were sold to Dr. Louis, a practicing physician in the village of Scottsville. We
remained with him about five years, when he died, and, in the settlement of his estate, I was
sold to one Washington Fitzpatrick, a merchant of the village. He kept me a short time when
he took me to Richmond, by way of canal-boat, expecting to sell me; but as the market was dull,
he brought me back and kept me some three months longer, when he told me he had hired me out
to work on a canal-boat running to Richmond, and to go to my mother and get my clothes ready
to start on the trip. I went to her as directed, and, when she had made ready my bundle, she
bade me good-by with tears in her eyes, saying: "My son, be a good boy; be polite to every
one, and always behave yourself properly." It was sad to her to part with me, though she did
not know that she was never to see me again, for my master had said nothing to her regarding
his purpose and she only thought, as I did, that I was hired to work on the canal-boat, and
that she should see me occasionally. But alas! We never met again. I can see her form still
as when she bade me good-bye. That parting I can never forget. I ran off from her as quickly
as I could after her parting words, for I did not want her to see me crying. I went to my master
at the store, and he again told me that he had hired me to work on the canal-boat, and to go
aboard immediately. Of the boat and the trip and the scenes along the route I remember little--I
only thought of my mother and my leaving her.

When we arrived at Richmond, George Pullan, a "nigger-trader," as he was called, came to the
boat and began to question me, asking me first if I could remember having had the chickenpox,
measles or whooping-cough. I answered, yes. Then he asked me if I did not want to take a little
walk with him. I said, no. "Well," said he, "you have got to go. Your master sent you down
here to be sold, and told me to come and get you and take you to the trader's yard, ready to
be sold." I saw that to hesitate was useless; so I at once obeyed him and went.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SLAVE MARKET.

The trader's establishment consisted of an office, a large show-room and a yard in the rear
enclosed with a wall of brick fifteen feet high. The principal men of the establishment were
the proprietor and the foreman. When slaves were to be exhibited for sale, the foreman was
called to the office by means of a bell, and an order given him to bring into the show-room
all the slaves in the establishment. This was the work of but a few minutes, and the women
were placed in a row on one side of the room and the men on the other. Persons desirous of
purchasing them passed up and down between the lines looking the poor creatures over, and questioning
them in about the following manner: "What can you do?" "Are you a good cook? seamstress? dairymaid?"--this
to the women, while the men would be questioned as to their line of work: "Can you plow? Are
you a blacksmith? Have you ever cared for horses? Can you pick cotton rapidly?" Sometimes the
slave would be required to open his mouth that the purchaser might examine the teeth and form
some opinion as to his age and physical soundness; and if it was suspected that a slave had
been beaten a good deal he would be required to step into another room and undress. If the
person desiring to buy found the slave badly scarred by the common usage of whipping, he would
say at once to the foreman; "Why! this slave is not worth much, he is all scarred up. No, I
don't want him; bring me in another to look at." Slaves without scars from whipping and looking
well physically always sold readily. They were never left long in the yard. It was expected
that all the slaves in the yard for sale would be neatly dressed and clean before being brought
into the show-room. It was the foreman's business to see that each one was presentable.

       *       *       *       *       *

SLAVE WHIPPING AS A BUSINESS.

Whipping was done at these markets, or trader's yards, all the time. People who lived in the
city of Richmond would send their slaves here for punishment. When any one wanted a slave whipped
he would send a note to that effect with the servant to the trader. Any petty offense on the
part of a slave was sufficient to subject the offender to this brutal treatment. Owners who
affected culture and refinement preferred to send a servant to the yard for punishment to inflicting
it themselves. It saved them trouble, they said, and possibly a slight wear and tear of feeling.
For this service the owner was charged a certain sum for each slave, and the earnings of the
traders from this source formed a very large part of the profits of his business. The yard
I was in had a regular whipping post to which they tied the slave, and gave him "nine-and-thirty,"
as it was called, meaning thirty-nine lashes as hard as they could lay it on. Men were stripped
of their shirts in preparation for the whipping, and women had to take off their dresses from
the shoulders to the waist. These whippings were not so severe as when the slaves were stripped
entirely of their clothes, as was generally the case on the plantations where slaves were owned
by the dozen. I saw many cases of whipping while I was in the yard. Sometimes I was so frightened
that I trembled violently, for I had never seen anything like it before.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOLD IN THE MARKET.

I was only in the yard a short time before I was bought by one George Reid who lived in Richmond.
He had no wife, but an old lady kept house for him and his three sons. At this time he had
a place in the postoffice, but soon after I came there he lost it. He then moved into the country
upon a farm of about one thousand acres, enclosed by a cedar hedge. The house was a plain frame
structure upon a stone basement and contained four rooms. It was surrounded with shrubbery,
and was a pleasant country seat. But I did not like it here. I grieved continually about my
mother. It came to me, more and more plainly, that I would never see her again. Young and lonely
as I was, I could not help crying, oftentimes for hours together. It was hard to get used to
being away from my mother. I remember well "Aunt Sylvia," who was the cook in the Reid household.
She was very kind to me and always spoke consolingly to me, especially if I had been blue,
and had had one of my fits of crying. At these times she would always bake me an ash cake for
supper, saying to me; "My child, don't cry; 'Aunt Sylvia' will look after you." This ash cake
was made of corn meal and water, a little salt to make it palatable, and was baked by putting
it between cabbage leaves and covering it with hot ashes. A sweeter or more delicious cake
one could not desire, and it was common upon the tables of all the Virginia farmers. I always
considered it a great treat to get one of these cakes from "Aunt Sylvia."

The appellations of "aunt" and "uncle" for the older slaves were not only common among the
blacks, but the whites also addressed them in the same way.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE AUCTION BLOCK

I was sick a great deal--in fact, I had suffered with chills and fever ever since Mr. Reid
bought me. He, therefore, concluded to sell me, and, in November, 1844, he took me back to
Richmond, placing me in the Exchange building, or auction rooms, for the sale of slaves. The
sales were carried on in a large hall where those interested in the business sat around a large
block or stand, upon which the slave to be sold was placed, the auctioneer standing beside
him. When I was placed upon the block, a Mr. McGee came up and felt of me and asked me what
I could do. "You look like a right smart nigger," said he, "Virginia always produces good darkies."
Virginia was the mother of slavery, and it was held by many that she had the best slaves. So
when Mr. McGee found I was born and bred in that state he seemed satisfied. The bidding commenced,
and I remember well when the auctioneer said; "Three hundred eighty dollars--once, twice and
sold to Mr. Edward McGee." He was a rich cotton planter of Pontotoc, Miss. As near as I can
recollect, I was not more than twelve years of age, so did not sell for very much.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRICE OF SLAVES.

Servant women sold for $500 to $700, and sometimes as high as $800 when possessing extra qualifications.
A house maid, bright in looks, strong and well formed, would sell for $1,000 to $1,200. Bright
mulatto girls, well versed in sewing and knitting, would sometimes bring as high as $1,800,
especially if a Virginian or a Kentuckian. Good blacksmiths sold for $1,600 to $1,800. When
the slaves were put upon the block they were always sold to the highest bidder. Mr. McGee,
or "Boss," as I soon learned to call him, bought sixty other slaves before he bought me, and
they were started in a herd for Atlanta, Ga., on foot.

       *       *       *       *       *

STARTED FOR A COTTON PLANTATION.

Boss, myself and ten others met them there. We then started for Pontotoc, Miss. On our way
we stopped at Edenton, Ga., where Boss sold twenty-one of the sixty slaves. We then proceeded
on our way, Boss by rail and we on foot, or in the wagon. We went about twenty miles a day.
I remember, as we passed along, every white man we met was yelling, "Hurrah for Polk and Dallas!"
They were feeling good, for election had given them the men that they wanted. The man who had
us in charge joined with those we met in the hurrahing. We were afraid to ask them the reason
for their yelling, as that would have been regarded as an impertinence, and probably would
have caused us all to be whipped.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY MISSISSIPPI HOME.

At length, after a long and wearisome journey, we reached Pontotoc, McGee's home, on Christmas
eve. Boss took me into the house and into the sitting room, where all the family were assembled,
and presented me as a Christmas gift to the madam, his wife.

My boss, as I remember him, was a tall, raw-boned man, but rather distinguished in looks, with
a fine carriage, brilliant in intellect, and considered one of the wealthiest and most successful
planters of his time. Mrs. McGee was a handsome, stately lady, about thirty years of age, brunette
in complexion, faultless in figure and imperious in manner. I think that they were of Scotch
descent. There were four children, Emma, Willie, Johnnie and Jimmie. All looked at me, and
thought I was "a spry little fellow." I was very shy and did not say much, as everything was
strange to me. I was put to sleep that night on a pallet on the floor in the dining room, using
an old quilt as a covering. The next morning was Christmas, and it seemed to be a custom to
have egg-nog before breakfast. The process of making this was new and interesting to me. I
saw them whip the whites of eggs, on a platter, to a stiff froth; the yolks were thoroughly
beaten in a large bowl, sugar and plenty of good brandy were added, and the whites of the eggs
and cream were then stirred in, a little nutmeg grated on top of each glass when filled for
serving. This was a delicious drink, and the best of all was, there was plenty of it. I served
this to all the family, and, as there were also visiting relatives present, many glasses were
required, and I found the tray so heavy I could hardly carry it. I helped myself, after the
service was finished, and I was delighted, for I had never tasted anything so fine before.

My boss told me I was to wait on the madam, do any errand necessary, attend to the dining room--in
fact I was installed as general utility boy. It was different from the quiet manner of life
I had seen before coming here--it kept my spirits up for some time. I thought of my mother
often, but I was gradually growing to the idea that it was useless to cry, and I tried hard
to overcome my feelings.

       *       *       *       *       *

PLANTATION LIFE.

As already stated, it was Christmas morning, and, after breakfast, I saw the cook hurrying,
and when I went out into the yard, everywhere I looked slaves met my view. I never saw so many
slaves at one time before. In Virginia we did not have such large farms. There were no extensive
cotton plantations, as in Mississippi. I shall never forget the dinner that day--it was a feast
fit for a king, so varied and lavish was the bill of fare. The next attraction for me was the
farm hands getting their Christmas rations. Each was given a pint of flour of which they made
biscuit, which were called "Billy Seldom," because biscuit were very rare with them. Their
daily food was corn bread, which they called "Johnny Constant," as they had it constantly.
In addition to the flour each received a piece of bacon or fat meat, from which they got the
shortening for their biscuit. The cracklings from the rendering of lard were also used by the
slaves for shortening. The hands were allowed four days off at Christmas, and if they worked
on these days, as some of them did, they got fifty cents a day for chopping. It was not common
to have chopping done during the holidays; some planters, however, found it convenient thus
to get it out of the way for the work which came after Christmas.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GREAT HOUSE.

I soon became familiar with my work in the house and with the neighborhood, as I often had
to carry notes for Boss to neighboring farmers, as well as to carry the mail to and from the
postoffice. The "great house," as the dwelling of the master was called, was two stories high,
built of huge logs, chinked and daubed and whitewashed. It was divided, from front to rear,
by a hall twenty-five feet long and twelve feet wide, and on each side of the hall, in each
story, was one large room with a large fire-place. There were but four rooms in all, yet these
were so large that they were equal to at least six of our modern rooms. The kitchen was not
attached to the main building, but was about thirty feet to the rear. This was the common mode
of building in the south in those days. The two bedrooms upstairs were very plain in furnishings,
but neat and comfortable, judged by the standard of the times. A wing was added to the main
building for dining room. In rear of the kitchen was the milk or dairy house, and beyond this
the smoke house for curing the meat. In line with these buildings, and still further to the
rear, was the overseer's house. Near the milk house was a large tree, and attached to the trunk
was a lever; and here was where the churning was done, in which I had always to assist. This
establishment will serve as a sample of many of those on the large plantations in the south.
The main road from Pontotoc to Holly Springs, one of the great thoroughfares of the state and
a stage route, passed near the house, and through the center of the farm. On each side of this
road was a fence, and in the corners of both fences, extending for a mile, were planted peach
trees, which bore excellent fruit in great profusion.

       *       *       *       *       *

HOUSE SERVANT AND ERRAND BOY.

My first work in the morning was to dust the parlor and hall and arrange the dining room. It
came awkward to me at first, but, after the madam told me how, I soon learned to do it satisfactorily.
Then I had to wait on the table, sweep the large yard every morning with a brush broom and
go for the mail once a week. I used to get very tired, for I was young and consequently not
strong. Aside from these things which came regularly, I had to help the madam in warping the
cloth. I dreaded this work, for I always got my ears boxed if I did not or could not do the
work to suit her. She always made the warp herself and put it in, and I had to hand her the
thread as she put it through the harness. I would get very tired at this work and, like any
child, wanted to be at play, but I could not remember that the madam ever gave me that privilege.
Saddling the horse at first was troublesome to me, but Boss was constant in his efforts to
teach me, and, after many trials, I learned the task satisfactorily to the master and to bring
the horse to the door when he wished to go out for business or pleasure. Riding horseback was
common for both ladies and gentlemen, and sometimes I would have to saddle three or more horses
when Boss, the madam, a friend or friends desired a ride. Bird hunting parties were common
and were greatly enjoyed, by the young people especially. Boss always invited some of the young
people of the neighborhood to these parties and they never failed to put in an appearance.
Williams, Bradford and Freeman were the sons of rich planters, and were always participants
in this sport, and their young lady friends joined in it as on-lookers. The young men singing
and whistling to the birds, I in the meantime setting the net. As soon as I had got the net
in order they would approach the birds slowly, driving them into it. There was great laughter
and excitement if they were successful in catching a fine flock.

       *       *       *       *       *

CRUEL TREATMENT.

I was but a lad, yet I can remember well the cruel treatment I received. Some weeks it seemed
I was whipped for nothing, just to please my mistress' fancy. Once, when I was sent to town
for the mail and had started back, it was so dark and rainy my horse got away from me and I
had to stay all night in town. The next morning when I got back home I had a severe whipping,
because the master was expecting a letter containing money and was disappointed in not receiving
it that night, as he was going to Panola to spend Christmas. However, the day came and all
the family went except me. During the time they were gone the overseer whipped a man so terribly
with the "bull whip" that I had to go for the doctor, and when Dr. Heningford, the regular
family physician, came, he said it was awful--such cruel treatment, and he complained about
it. It was common for a slave to get an "over-threshing," that is, to be whipped too much.
The poor man was cut up so badly all over that the doctor made a bran poultice and wrapped
his entire body in it. This was done to draw out the inflammation. It seems the slave had been
sick, and had killed a little pig when he became well enough to go to work, as his appetite
craved hearty food, and he needed it to give him strength for his tasks. For this one act,
comparatively trivial, he was almost killed. The idea never seemed to occur to the slave holders
that these slaves were getting no wages for their work and, therefore, had nothing with which
to procure what, at times, was necessary for their health and strength--palatable and nourishing
food. When the slaves took anything the masters called it stealing, yet they were stealing
the slaves' time year after year. When Boss came home he was called on by the town officials,
for the case had been reported to them. Boss, however, got out of it by saying that he was
not at home when the trouble occurred. The poor slave was sick from his ill treatment some
four or five months, and when he recovered there was a running sore left on his body, from
the deep cuts of the whip, which never healed. I can not forget how he looked, the sore was
a sickening sight; yet, when he was able to walk he had to return to work in the field.

I had not been at Pontotoc very long when I saw the hounds run a slave, by name Ben Lyon. "Old
Ben," as he was called, ran away and had been gone a week when he was seen by a woman who "told
on him," and then I was sent to get the man who had trained dogs, or hounds as they were called.
The dogs ran the slave about ten miles when they lost track at a creek, but he was caught that
night in a farmer's house getting something to eat.

       *       *       *       *       *

INSTRUCTIONS IN MEDICINE.

After some time, Boss began to tell me the names of medicines and their properties. I liked
this and seemed to grasp the idea very well. After giving me a number of names he would make
me repeat them. Then he would tell me the properties of each medicine named, how it was used
and for what purpose and how much constituted a dose. He would drill me in all this until I
knew it and, in a short time, he would add other names to the list. He always showed me each
medicine named and had me smell and carefully examine it that I might know it when seen again.
I liked this, and used to wish that I was as wise as my master. He was very precise, steady
and gentle in any case of sickness, and, although he had long retired from the medical world,
all recognized his merit wherever he went. I used to go to the woods and gather slippery elm,
alum root and the roots of wild cherry and poplar, for we used all these in compounding medicines
for the servants.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE OVERSEER--WHIPPINGS AND OTHER CRUELTIES.

The overseer was a man hired to look after the farm and whip the slaves. Very often they were
not only cruel, but barbarous. Every farmer or planter considered an overseer a necessity.
As a rule, there was also on each plantation, a foreman--one of the brighter slaves, who was
held responsible for the slaves under him, and whipped if they did not come up to the required
task. There was, too, a forewoman, who, in like manner, had charge of the female slaves, and
also the boys and girls from twelve to sixteen years of age, and all the old people that were
feeble. This was called the trash gang. Ah! it would make one's heart ache to see those children
and how they were worked. Cold, frosty mornings, the little ones would be crying from cold;
but they had to keep on. Aunt Polly, our forewoman, was afraid to allow them to run to get
warm, for fear the overseer would see them. Then she would be whipped, and he would make her
whip all of the gang. At length, I became used to severe treatment of the slaves; but, every
little while something would happen to make me wish I were dead. Everything was in a bustle--always
there was slashing and whipping. I remember when Boss made a change in our overseer. It was
the beginning of the year. Riley, one of the slaves, who was a principal plower, was not on
hand for work one Monday morning, having been delayed in fixing the bridle of his mule, which
the animal, for lack of something better, perhaps, had been vigorously chewing and rendered
nearly useless. He was, therefore, considerably behind time, when he reached the field. Without
waiting to learn what was the reason for the delay, the overseer sprang upon him with his bull
whip, which was about seven feet long, lashing him with all his strength, every stroke leaving
its mark upon the poor man's body, and finally the knot at the end of the whip buried itself
in the fleshy part of the arm, and there came around it a festering sore. He suffered greatly
with it, until one night his brother took out the knot, when the poor fellow was asleep, for
he could not bear any one to touch it when he was awake. It was awful to hear the cracking
of that whip as it was laid about Riley--one would have thought that an ox team had gotten
into the mire, and was being whipped out, so loud and sharp was the noise!

I usually slept in the dining room on the floor. Early one morning an old slave, by name of
"Uncle Jim," came and knocked at the window, and upon my jumping up and going to him, he told
me to tell Boss that Uncle Jim was there. He had run away, some time before, and, for some
reason, had returned. Boss, upon hearing the news, got up and sent me to tell the overseer
to come at once. He came, and, taking the bull whip, a cowhide and a lot of peach-tree switches,
he and Boss led Uncle Jim back into the cow lot, on the side of the hill, where they drove
four stakes in the ground, and, laying him flat on his face, tied his hands and feet to these
stakes. After whipping him, in this position, all they wanted to, a pail of strong salt and
water was brought, and the poor fellow was "washed down." This washing was customary, after
whippings, as the planters claimed it drew out all the soreness, and healed the lacerated flesh.

Upon one occasion, the family being away, I was left extra work to do, being set to help three
fellow slaves lay off the rows for planting corn. We did not get them quite straight. The deviation
we made from the line was very little, and could scarcely be seen, even by an expert; but the
least thing wrong about the work would cause any slave to be whipped, and so all four of us
were flogged.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SLAVE CABIN.

There was a section of the plantation known as "the quarters," where were situated the cabins
of the slaves. These cabins were built of rough logs, and daubed with the red clay or mud of
the region. No attempt was made to give them a neat appearance--they were not even whitewashed.
Each cabin was about fourteen feet square, containing but one room, and was covered with oak
boards, three feet in length, split out of logs by hand. These boards were not nailed on, but
held in their places by what were termed weight-poles laid across them at right angles. There
were in each room two windows, a door and a large, rude fire-place. The door and window frames,
or facings, were held in their places by wooden pins, nails being used only in putting the
doors together. The interior of the cabins had nothing more attractive than the outside--there
was no plastering and only a dirt floor. The furniture consisted of one bed, a plain board
table and some benches made by the slaves themselves. Sometimes a cabin was occupied by two
or more families, in which case the number of beds was increased proportionately. For light
a grease lamp was used, which was made of iron, bowl shaped, by a blacksmith. The bowl was
filled with grease and a rag or wick placed in it, one end resting on the edge for lighting.
These lamps gave a good light, and were in general use among the slaves. Tallow candles were
a luxury, never seen except in the "great houses" of the planters. The only light for outdoors
used by the slaves was a torch made by binding together a bundle of small sticks or splinters.

       *       *       *       *       *

COTTON RAISING.

After the selection of the soil most suitable for cotton, the preparation of it was of vital
importance. The land was deeply plowed, long enough before the time for planting to allow the
spring rains to settle it. Then it was thrown into beds or ridges by turning furrows both ways
toward a given center. The seed was planted at the rate of one hundred pounds per acre. The
plant made its appearance in about ten days after planting, if the weather was favorable. Early
planting, however, followed by cold, stormy weather frequently caused the seed to rot. As soon
as the third leaf appeared the process of scraping commenced, which consisted of cleaning the
ridge with hoes of all superfluous plants and all weeds and grass. After this a narrow plow
known as a "bull tongue," was used to turn the loose earth around the plant and cover up any
grass not totally destroyed by the hoes. If the surface was very rough the hoes followed, instead
of preceding, the plow to unearth those plants that may have been partially covered. The slaves
often acquired great skill in these operations, running plows within two inches of the stalks,
and striking down weeds within half an inch with their hoes, rarely touching a leaf of the
cotton. Subsequent plowing, alternating with hoeing, usually occurred once in twenty days.
There was danger in deep plowing of injuring the roots, and this was avoided, except in the
middle of rows in wet seasons when it was necessary to bury and more effectually kill the grass.
The implements used in the culture of cotton were shovels, hoes, sweeps, cultivators, harrows
and two kinds of plows. It required four months, under the most favorable circumstances, for
cotton to attain its full growth. It was usually planted about the 1st of April, or from March
20th to April 10th, bloomed about the 1st of June and the first balls opened about August 15th,
when picking commenced. The blooms come out in the morning and are fully developed by noon,
when they are a pure white. Soon after meridian they begin to exhibit reddish streaks, and
next morning are a clear pink. They fall off by noon of the second day.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE COTTON WORM.

A cut worm was troublesome sometimes; but the plants were watched very carefully, and as soon
as any signs of worms were seen work for their destruction was commenced. The majority of the
eggs were laid upon the calyx and involucre. The worm, after gnawing through its enclosed shell,
makes its first meal upon the part of the plant upon which the egg was laid, be it leaf, stem
or involucre. If it were laid upon the leaf, as was usually the case, it might be three days
before the worm reached the boll; but were the eggs laid upon the involucre the worm pierced
through within twenty-four hours after hatching. The newly hatched boll worm walks like a geometrical
larva or looper, a measuring worm as it was called. This is easily explained by the fact that
while in the full grown worm the abdominal legs, or pro legs, are nearly equal in length, in
the newly hatched worm the second pair are slightly shorter than the third, and the first pair
are shorter and slenderer than the second--a state of things approaching that in the full grown
cotton worm, though the difference in size in the former case is not nearly so marked as in
the latter. This method of walking is lost with the first or second molt. There is nothing
remarkable about these young larvae. They seem to be thicker in proportion to their length
than the young cotton worms, and they have not so delicate and transparent an appearance. Their
heads are black and their bodies seem already to have begun to vary in color. The body above
is furnished with sparse, stiff hairs, each arising from a tubercle. I have often watched the
newly hatched boll while in the cotton fields. When hatched from an egg which had been deposited
upon a leaf, they invariably made their first meal on the substance of the leaf, and then wandered
about for a longer or shorter space of time, evidently seeking a boll or flower bud. It was
always interesting to watch this seemingly aimless search of the young worm, crawling first
down the leaf stem and then back, then dropping a few inches by a silken thread and then painfully
working its way back again, until, at last, it found the object of its search, or fell to the
ground where it was destroyed by ants. As the boll worms increase in size a most wonderful
diversity of color and marking becomes apparent. In color different worms will vary from a
brilliant green to a deep pink or dark brown, exhibiting almost every conceivable intermediate
stage from an immaculate, unstriped specimen to one with regular spots and many stripes. The
green worms were more common than those of any other color--a common variety was a very light
green. When these worms put in an appearance it raised a great excitement among the planters.
We did not use any poison to destroy them, as I learn is the method now employed.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE COTTON HARVEST.

The cotton harvest, or picking season, began about the latter part of August or first of September,
and lasted till Christmas or after, but in the latter part of July picking commenced for "the
first bale" to go into the market at Memphis. This picking was done by children from nine to
twelve years of age and by women who were known as "sucklers," that is, women with infants.
The pickers would pass through the rows getting very little, as the cotton was not yet in full
bloom. From the lower part of the stalk where it opened first is where they got the first pickings.
The season of first picking was always a great time, for the planter who brought the first
bale of cotton into market at Memphis was presented with a basket of champagne by the commission
merchants. This was a custom established throughout Mississippi. After the first pickings were
secured the cotton developed very fast, continuing to bud and bloom all over the stalk until
the frost falls. The season of picking was exciting to all planters, every one was zealous
in pushing his slaves in order that he might reap the greatest possible harvest. The planters
talked about their prospects, discussed the cotton markets, just as the farmers of the north
discuss the markets for their products. I often saw Boss so excited and nervous during the
season he scarcely ate. The daily task of each able-bodied slave during the cotton picking
season war 250 pounds or more, and all those who did not come up to the required amount would
get a whipping. When the planter wanted more cotton picked than usual, the overseer would arrange
a race. The slaves would be divided into two parties, with, a leader for each party. The first
leader would choose a slave for his side, then the second leader one for his, and so on alternately
until all were chosen. Each leader tried to get the best on his side. They would all work like
good fellows for the prize, which was a tin cup of sugar for each slave on the winning side.
The contest was kept up for three days whenever the planter desired an extra amount picked.
The slaves were just as interested in the races as if they were going to get a five dollar bill.

       *       *       *       *       *

PREPARING COTTON FOR MARKET.

The gin-house was situated about four hundred yards from "the great house" on the main road.
It was a large shed built upon square timbers, and was similar to a barn, only it stood some
six feet from the ground, and underneath was located the machinery for running the gin. The
cotton was put into the loft after it was dried, ready for ginning. In this process the cotton
was dropped from the loft to the man who fed the machine. As it was ginned the lint would go
into the lint room, and the seed would drop at the feeder's feet. The baskets used for holding
lint were twice as large as those used in the picking process, and they were never taken from
the gin house. These lint baskets were used in removing the lint from the lint room to the
place where the cotton was baled. A bale contained 250 pounds, and the man who did the treading
of the cotton into the bales would not vary ten pounds in the bale, so accustomed was he to
the packing. Generally from fourteen to fifteen bales of cotton were in the lint room at a time.

       *       *       *       *       *

OTHER FARM PRODUCTS.

Cotton was the chief product of the Mississippi farms and nothing else was raised to sell.
Wheat, oats and rye were raised in limited quantities, but only for the slaves and the stock.
All the fine flour for the master's family was bought in St. Louis. Corn was raised in abundance,
as it was a staple article of food for the slaves. It was planted about the 1st of March, or
about a month earlier than the cotton. It was, therefore, up and partially worked before the
cotton was planted and fully tilled before the cotton was ready for cultivation. Peas were
planted between the rows of corn, and hundreds of bushels were raised. These peas after being
harvested, dried and beaten out of the shell, were of a reddish brown tint, not like those
raised for the master's family, but they were considered a wholesome and nutritious food for
the slaves. Cabbage and yams, a large sweet potato, coarser than the kind generally used by
the whites and not so delicate in flavor, were also raised for the servants in liberal quantities.
No hay was raised, but the leaves of the corn, stripped from the stalks while yet green, cured
and bound in bundles, were used as a substitute for it in feeding horses.

       *       *       *       *       *

FARM IMPLEMENTS.

Almost all the implements used on the plantation were made by the slaves. Very few things were
bought. Boss had a skilled blacksmith, uncle Ben, for whom he paid $1,800, and there were slaves
who were carpenters and workers in wood who could turn their hands to almost anything. Wagons,
plows, harrows, grubbing hoes, hames, collars, baskets, bridle bits and hoe handles were all
made on the farm and from the material which it produced, except the iron. The timber used
in these implements was generally white or red oak, and was cut and thoroughly seasoned long
before it was needed. General Lewis Wallace's division, which had been reorganized after the battle
of Fort Donelson, now consisted of three brigades. The first was commanded by Colonel Morgan
L. Smith, and consisted of the Eighth Missouri, Eleventh and Twenty-fourth Indiana, and Thurber's
Missouri battery. The second brigade was commanded by Colonel Thayer, and contained the same
regiments that checked the Rebels at the brook west of Fort Donelson,--the First Nebraska,
Twenty-third and Sixty-eighth Ohio, with Thompson's Indiana battery.

Two brigades of General Wood's division arrived during the day, but not in season to take part
in the battle.

Beauregard's brigades were scattered during the night. They had retired in confusion before
the terrible fire at the ravine from the gunboats. Officers were hunting for their troops,
and soldiers were searching for their regiments, through the night.

       The work of reorganizing was going on when the pickets at daylight
were driven in by the advance of the Union line.

Beauregard, Bragg, Hardee, and Polk all slept near the church. There was no regularity of divisions,
brigades, or regiments. Ruggles was west of the church with two of his brigades. Trabue's brigade
of Breckenridge's reserves was there. Breckenridge, with his other brigades, or what was left
of them, was east of the church, also the shattered fragments of Withers's division. Gladden's
brigade had crumbled to pieces, and Colonel Deas, commanding it, was obliged to pick up stragglers
of all regiments. Russell and Stewart were near Prentiss's camp. Cheatham was in the vicinity,
but his regiments were dwindled to companies, and scattered over all the ground.

Beauregard had established a strong rear-guard, and had issued orders to shoot all stragglers.
The order was rigidly enforced, and the runaways were brought back and placed in line. Although
exhausted, disorganized, and checked, the Rebels had not lost heart. They were confident of victory,
and at once rallied when they found the Union army was advancing.

Look once more at the position of the divisions. Nelson is on the ground over which Stuart
and Hurlburt retreated.

Crittenden is where Prentiss was captured, McCook where McClernand made his desperate stand, and
Lewis Wallace where Sherman's line gave way.

The gunboats, by their constant fire during the night, had compelled the Rebels to fall back in
front of Nelson. It was a little after five o'clock when Nelson threw forward his skirmishers,
and advanced his line. He came upon the Rebels half-way out to Lick
Creek, near the peach-orchard.

       The fight commenced furiously.

Beauregard was marching brigades from his left, and placing them
in position for a concentrated attack to gain the Landing.

General Crittenden had not advanced, and Nelson was assailed by a superior force. He held his
ground an hour, but he had no battery. He had been compelled to leave it at Savannah. He sent
an aid to General Buell requesting artillery. Mendenhall was sent. He arrived just in time to
save the brigade from an overwhelming onset. The Rebels were advancing when he unlimbered
his guns, but his quick discharges of grape at short range threw them into confusion.

It astonished General Beauregard. He had not expected it. He was to attack and annihilate Grant,
not be attacked and driven.[20] He ordered up fresh troops from his reserves, and the contest
raged with increased fury.

[Footnote 20: Beauregard's Report.]

Nelson, seeing the effect of Mendenhall's fire, threw Hazen's brigade forward. It came upon the battery
which had been cutting them to pieces. With a cheer they sprang upon the guns, seized them, commenced
turning them upon the fleeing enemy. The Rebel line rallied and came back, followed by fresh
troops. There was a short, severe struggle, and Hazen was forced to leave the pieces and fall back.
Then the thunders rolled again. The woods were sheets of flame.[21] The Rebels brought up
more of their reserves, and forced Nelson to yield his position.

       He fell back a short distance, and again came into position.

He was a stubborn man,--a Kentuckian, a sailor, who had been round
the world.

His discipline was severe. His men had been well drilled, and were as stubborn as their leader.

[Footnote
21: Nelson's Report.]

"Send me another battery, quick!" was his request, made to General Buell.

Tirrell's battery, which had just landed from a steamer, went up the hill, through the woods,
over stumps and trees, the horses leaping as if they had caught the enthusiasm of the commander
of the battery. Captain Tirrell had a quick eye.

"Into position there. Lively, men! Caissons to the rear!" were his words of command. The gunners
sprang from the carriages to the ground. The caissons wheeled, bringing the heads of the horses towards
the Landing, trotted off eight or ten rods and took position sheltered by a ridge of land.
Captain Tirrell rode from gun to gun.

"Fire with shell, two-second fuses," he said to the lieutenants commanding
his two ten-pounder Parrott guns.

       

"Grape and canister," he said to the officers commanding the four brass twelve-pounders. Its fire
was terrific. Wherever his guns were turned there was silence along the Rebel lines. Their musketry
ceased. Their columns staggered back. All the while Mendenhall was pounding them. The Nineteenth
Ohio, from Crittenden's division, came down upon the run, joined the brigade, and the contest
went on again. The Rebels, instead of advancing, began to lose the ground they had already won.

Crittenden
and McCook advanced a little later. They came upon the enemy, which had quiet possession of McClernand's
and Sherman's camps. Beauregard's head-quarters were there. The Rebels, finding themselves
assailed, made a desperate effort to drive back the advancing columns. Rousseau advanced across
the open field, over the ground so hotly contested by McClernand the day before. This movement
made a gap between McCook and Crittenden. Beauregard saw it, threw Cheatham and Withers into the
open space.

They swung round square against Rousseau's left, pouring in a volley which staggered the advancing
regiments. The Thirty-second Indiana regiment, Colonel Willich commanding, was on the extreme
right of McCook's division. They had been in battle before, and were ordered across to meet the
enemy. You see them fly through the woods in rear of Rousseau's brigade. They are upon the
run. They halt, dress their ranks as if upon parade, and charge upon the Rebels. Colonel Stambough's
Seventy-seventh Pennsylvania follows. Then all of Kirk's brigade. It is a change of position and
a change of front, admirably executed, just at the right time, for Rousseau is out of ammunition,
and is obliged to fall back. McCook's third brigade, General Gibson, comes up. Rousseau is
ready again, and at eleven o'clock you see every available man of that division contending
for the ground around the church. Meanwhile Wallace is moving over the ground on the extreme
right, where Sherman fought so bravely. Sherman, Hurlburt, and the shattered regiments of W. H.
L. Wallace's division, now commanded by McArthur, follow in reserve. Driven back by Nelson,
the Rebel forces concentrate once more around the church for a final struggle. Wallace watches
his opportunities. He gains a ridge.

His men drop upon the ground, deliver volley after volley, rise, rush nearer to the enemy, drop
once more, while the grape and canister sweep over them. Thus they come to close quarters,
and then regiment after regiment rises, and delivers its fire. It is like the broadsides of
a man-of-war.

The time had come for a general advance. Nelson, Crittenden, McCook, Wallace, almost simultaneously
charged upon the enemy. It was too powerful to be resisted. The Rebels gave way, retreated
from the camps which they had occupied a single night, fled past the church, across the brook,
up through the old cotton-field on the south side, to the shelter of the forest on the top of
the ridge beyond. The battle was lost to them. Exultant cheers rang through the forest for the
victory won.

       If I were to go through all the details, as I might, and write how
Crittenden's brigades pressed on, and captured Rebel batteries; how
the Rebels tried to overwhelm him; how the tide of battle surged from
hill to hill; how the Rebels tried to cut McCook to pieces; how Wallace's
division flanked the enemy at Owl Creek; how Rousseau's brigade fought
in front of McClernand's camp; how the Fifth Kentucky charged upon
a battery, and captured two guns which were cutting them up with grape
and canister, and four more which were disabled and could not be dragged
off by the enemy; how Colonel Willich, commanding the Thirty-second
Indiana, finding some of his men were getting excited, stopped firing,
and drilled them, ordering, presenting, and supporting arms, with
the balls whistling through his ranks; how the men became cool and
steady, and went in upon a charge at last with a wild hurrah, and
a plunge of the bayonet that forced the Rebels to give up McClernand's
camp; how Colonel Ammen coolly husked ears of corn for his horse,
while watching the fight, with the shells falling all around him;
how Colonel Kirk seized a flag and bore it in advance of his brigade;
how Color-Sergeant William Ferguson of the Thirteenth Missouri was
shot down, how Sergeant Beem of Company C seized the flag before it
touched the ground, and advanced it still farther; how Beauregard
was riding madly along the lines by the church, trying to rally his
men, when Thurber's battery opened, and broke them up again; how,
at noon, he saw it was no use; how he drew off his men, burned his
own camp, and went back to Corinth, defeated, his troops disheartened,
leaving his killed and hundreds of his wounded on the field; how the
Union army recovered all the cannon lost on Sunday;--if I were to
write it all out, I should have no room to tell you what Commodore
Foote was doing all this time on the Mississippi.

It was a terrible fight. The loss on each side was nearly equal,--about thirteen thousand killed,
wounded, and missing, or twenty-six thousand in all.

I had a friend killed in the fight on Sunday,--Captain Carson, commanding General Grant's scouts.
He was tall and slim, and had sparkling black eyes. He had travelled all over Missouri, Kentucky,
and Tennessee, had often been in the Rebel camps. He was brave, almost fearless, and very adroit.
He said to a friend, when the battle began in the morning, that he should not live through
the day. But he was very active, riding recklessly through showers of bullets. It was just at
sunset when he rode up to General Grant with a despatch from General Buell. He dismounted, and
sat down upon a log to rest, but the next moment his head was carried
away by a cannon-ball.

He performed his duties faithfully, and gave his life willingly to his country.

You have seen how the army was surprised, how desperately it fought, how the battle was almost lost,
how the gunboats beat back the exultant Rebels, how the victory was won. Beauregard was completely
defeated; but he telegraphed to Jefferson Davis that he had won a great victory.

You see that, having forsworn himself to his country, he did not hesitate to send a false despatch,
to mislead the Southern people and cover up his mortifying defeat.

The Rebel newspapers believed Beauregard's report. One began its account thus:--

"Glory! glory! glory! victory! victory! I write from Yankee papers. Of all the victories that
have ever been on record, ours is the most complete. Bull Run was nothing in comparison to our
victory at Shiloh. General Buell is killed, General Grant wounded and taken prisoner. Soon we will
prove too much for them, and they will be compelled to let us alone.

       Our brave boys have driven them to the river, and compelled them
to flee to their gunboats.

The day is ours."[22]

[Footnote 22: Captain Geer.]

The people of
the South believed all this; but when the truth was known their hopes
went down lower than ever, for they saw it was a disastrous defeat.

On the Sabbath after the battle, the chaplains of the regiments had religious exercises. How
different the scene! Instead of the cannonade, there were prayers to God. Instead of the musketry,
there were songs of praise. There were tears shed for those who had fallen, but there were devout
thanksgivings that they had given their lives so freely for their country and for the victory they
had achieved by their sacrifice.

One of the chaplains, in conducting the service, read a hymn, commencing:

"Look down, O Lord, O Lord forgive; Let a repenting rebel live."

But he was suddenly interrupted by a patriotic soldier, who cried, "No sir, not unless they
lay down their arms, every one of them."

He thought the chaplain had reference to the Rebels who had been defeated.

After the battle, a great many men and women visited the ground, searching for the bodies of
friends who had fallen. Lieutenant Pfieff, an officer of an Illinois regiment, was killed,
and his wife came to obtain his body.

       No one knew where he was buried.

The poor woman wandered through the forest, examining all the graves.

Suddenly a dog, poor and emaciated, bounded towards her, his eyes sparkling with pleasure,
and barking his joy to see his mistress. When her husband went to the army, the dog followed
him, and was with him through the battle, watched over his dead body through the terrible contest,
and after he was buried, remained day and night a mourner! He led his mistress to the spot. The
body was disinterred. The two sorrowful ones, the devoted wife and the faithful brute, watched
beside the precious dust till it was laid in its final resting-place beneath the prairie-flowers.

CHAPTER
IX.

EVACUATION OF COLUMBUS.

The Rebels, at the beginning of the war fortified Columbus, in Kentucky, which is twenty miles
below Cairo on the Mississippi River. There the bluffs are very high, and are washed at their
base by the mighty stream. Cannon placed on the summit have long range. A great deal of labor
was expended to make it an impregnable place. There were batteries close down to the water under
the hill, with heavy guns. A gallery was cut along the side of the bluff, a winding, zigzag
passage, which, with many crooks and turns, led to the top of the hill. They had numerous guns in
position on the top, to send shot and shell down upon Commodore Foote, should he attempt to
descend the river. They built a long line of earthworks to protect the rear, intrenchments and
stockades,--which are strong posts set in the ground, making a close fence, with holes here
and there through which the riflemen and sharpshooters could fire.

They cut down the trees and made abatis. There were several lines of defence. They stretched a
great iron chain across the river, supporting it by barges which
were anchored in the stream.

They gave out word that the river was effectually closed against commerce till the independence of
the Confederacy was recognized.

When the war commenced, there was a man named Maury, a lieutenant in the United States service,
and who was connected with the National Observatory in Washington. He was thought to be a scientific,
practical man. He had been educated by the government, had received great pay, and was in
a high position; but he forgot all that, and joined the Rebels. He imitated General Floyd, and
stole public property, carrying off from the National Observatory valuable scientific papers which
did not belong to him. He was employed by the Rebel government to construct torpedoes and infernal
machines for blowing up Commodore Foote's gunboats. He had several thousand made,--some for
the land, which were planted around Columbus in rear of the town, and which were connected with
a galvanic battery by a telegraph wire, to be exploded at the right moment, by which he hoped to
destroy thousands of the Union troops. He sunk several hundred in the river opposite Columbus.
They were oblong cylinders of wrought iron, four or five feet in length; inside were two or three
hundred pounds of powder. Two small anchors held the cylinder in its proper place. It was air
tight, and therefore floated in the water. At the upper end there was a projecting iron rod,
which was connected with a percussion gun-lock. If anything struck the rod with much force, it
would trip the lock, and explode the powder. At least, Mr. Maury thought so. The above engraving
will show the construction of the torpedoes, and how they were placed in the water. The letter
A represents the iron rod reaching up almost to the surface of the water. At B it is connected
with the lock, which is inside the cylinder, and not represented. C represents the powder.
The arrows show the direction of the current.

One day he tried an experiment. He sunk a torpedo, and let loose a flat-boat, which came down with
the current and struck the iron rod. The powder exploded and sent the flat high into the air.
Thousands of Rebel soldiers stood on the bluffs and saw it. They hurrahed and swung their hats.
Mr. Maury was so well pleased that the river was planted with them, above, in front, and below
the town. He thought that Commodore Foote and all his gunboats would be blown out of the water if
they attempted to descend the stream.

But the workmanship was rude. The parts were not put together with much skill. Mr. Maury showed
that his science was not practical. He forgot that the river was constantly rising and falling,
that sometimes the water would be so high the gunboats could glide over the iron rods with several
feet between, he forgot that the powder would gather moisture and the locks become rusty.

It was discovered, after a while, that the torpedoes leaked, that
the powder became damp, and changed to an inky mass, and that the
hundreds of thousands of dollars which Mr. Maury had spent was all
wasted.

       Then they who had supposed him to be a scientific man said he was
a humbug.

The taking of Fort Donelson compelled the Rebels to evacuate Columbus,--the Gibraltar of the Mississippi,
as they called it,--and all the work which had been done was of no benefit. Nashville was evacuated
on the 27th of February. On the 4th of March Commodore Foote, having seen signs that the Rebels
were leaving Columbus, went down the river, with six gunboats, accompanied by several transports,
with troops, under General Sherman, to see about it. The Cincinnati, having been repaired, was
the flag-ship. Commodore Foote requested me to accompany him, if I desired to.

"Perhaps we shall have hot work," he said, as I stepped on board in the evening of the 3d.

       "We shall move at four o'clock," said Captain Stemble, commanding
the ship, "and shall be at Columbus at daybreak."

It was a new and strange experience, that first night on a gunboat, with some probability that
at daybreak I might be under a hot fire from a hundred Rebel guns. By the dim light of the
lamp I could see the great gun within six feet of me, and shining cutlasses and gleaming muskets.
Looking out of the ward-room, I could see the men in their hammocks asleep, like orioles in
their hanging nests. The sentinels paced the deck above, and all was silent but the sound of
the great wheel of the steamer turning lazily in the stream, and the gurgling of the water around the
bow.

"We are approaching Columbus," said an officer. It was still some time to sunrise, but the men were
all astir. Their hammocks were packed away. They were clearing the decks for action, running
out the guns, bringing up shot and shell, tugging and pulling at the ropes. Going on deck, I
could see in the dim light the outline of the bluff at Columbus. Far up stream were dark clouds
of smoke from the other steamers.

Commodore Foote was on the upper deck, walking with crutches, still lame from the wound received at
Donelson.

"I always feel an exhilaration of spirits before going into a fight. I don't like to see men killed;
but when I have a duty to perform for my country, like this, all of my energies are engaged,"
said the Commodore.

Right opposite, on the Missouri shore, was the Belmont battle-ground, where General Grant fought his
first battle, and where the gunboats saved the army.

There was a house riddled with cannon-shot; there was a hole in the roof as big as a bushel-basket,
where the shell went in, and in the gable an opening large enough for the passage of a cart
and oxen, where it came out. It exploded, and tore the end of the building to pieces.

One by one the boats came down. The morning brightened. We could see men on the bluff, and a
flag flying. Were the Rebels there? We could not make out the flag. We dropped a little nearer.
More men came in sight.

       "Four companies of cavalry were sent out from Paducah on a reconnoissance
day before yesterday.

Perhaps the Rebels have all gone, and they are in possession of the
place," said General Sherman.

"I will make a reconnoissance with a party of soldiers," he added. He jumped on board his tug,
and went off to get his soldiers.

"Captain Phelps, you will please to take my tug and drop down also," said Commodore Foote. "If
you are willing to run the risk, you are at liberty to accompany Captain Phelps," were his words
to me. What is a thing worth that costs nothing?
We drop down the stream slowly and cautiously.

"We are in easy range.
If the Rebels are there, they could trouble us," says Captain Phelps.

We
drop nearer. The flag is still waving. The man holding it swings his
hat.

They are not Rebels, but Union cavalry! Away we dash. The other
tug, with General Sherman, is close behind.

"A little more steam!
Lay her in quick!" says Captain Phelps.

He is not to be beaten. We
jump ashore, scramble up the bank ahead of all the soldiers, reach
the upper works, and fling out the Stars and Stripes to the bright
morning sunshine on the abandoned works of the Rebel Gibraltar!

The
crews of the boats crowd the upper decks, and send up their joyous
shouts. The soldiers farther up stream give their wild hurrahs. Around
us are smoking ruins,--burned barracks and storehouses, barrels of
flour and bacon simmering in the fire. There are piles of shot and
shell. The great chain has broken by its own weight. At the landing
are hundreds of Mr. Maury's torpedoes,--old iron now. We wander over
the town, along the fortifications, view the strong defences, and
wonder that the Rebels gave it up,--defended as it was by one hundred
and twenty guns,--without a struggle, but the fall of Fort Donelson
compelled them to evacuate the place. They carried off about half
of the guns, and tumbled many of those they left behind down the embankment
into the river. The force which had fled numbered about sixteen thousand.
Five thousand went down the river on steamboats, and the others were
sent to Corinth on the cars.

This abandonment of Columbus freed Kentucky
of Rebel troops. It had been invaded about six months, and Jeff Davis
hoped to secure it as one of the Confederate States, but he was disappointed
in his expectations. The majority of the people in that noble State
could not be induced to go out of the Union.

CHAPTER X

OPERATIONS
AT NEW MADRID.

There are many islands in the Mississippi, so many
that the river pilots have numbered them from Cairo to New Orleans.
The first is just below Cairo. No. 10 is about sixty miles below,
where the river makes a sharp curve, sweeping round a tongue of land
towards the west and northwest, then turning again at New Madrid,
making a great bend towards the southeast, as you will see by the
map. The island is less than a mile long, and not more than a fourth
of a mile wide. It is ten or fifteen feet above high-water mark. The
line between Kentucky and Tennessee strikes the river here. The current
runs swiftly past the island, and steamboats descending the stream
are carried within a stone's throw of the Tennessee shore. The bank
on that side of the stream is also about fifteen or twenty feet above
high water.

The Rebels, before commencing their works at Columbus,
saw that Island No. 10 was a very strong position, and commenced fortifications
there. When they evacuated Columbus, they retired to that place, and
remounted the guns which they had brought away on the island and on
the Tennessee shore. They thought it was a place which could not be
taken. They held New Madrid, eight miles below, on the Missouri side,
which was defended by two forts. They held the island and the Tennessee
shore. The
latter said nothing about the matter until spring, when he wrote McGee a letter, asking him
to remove the rails from his land. McGee paid no attention to the request, and he soon received
a second note, when he said to his wife: "That fellow is about to turn himself a fool--I'll
give him a cow-hiding." A third and more emphatic note followed, in which White told the Boss
that the rails must be removed within twenty-four hours. He grew indignant, and, in true Southern
style, he went immediately to town and bought arms, and prepared himself for the fray. When
he returned he had every hand on the plantation stop regular work, and put them all to building
the fence. I was of the number. Boss and the overseer came out to overlook the work and hurry
it on. About four o'clock in the afternoon White put in an appearance, and came face to face
with McGee, sitting on his horse and having a double barreled shot gun lying across the pummel
of his saddle. White passed on without saying a word, but Boss yelled at him; "Hello! I see
you are about to turn yourself a d--d fool." White checked up and began to swear, saying: "You
are a coward to attack an unarmed man." He grew furious, took off his hat, ran his fingers
through his hair, saying: "Here I am, blow me to h--l, and I'll have some one blow you there
before night." During White's rage he said: "I'll fight you anywhere--bowie-knife fight, shot
gun fight or any other." He called, in his excitement, for his nephew, who was working on his
farm, to come, and immediately sent him to Billy Duncan's to get him a double barreled shot
gun. Meantime, Mrs. McGee appeared on the scene, and began to cry, begging White to stop and
allow her to speak to him. But he replied: "Go off, go off, I don't want to speak to you."
Boss grew weak and sick, and through his excitement, was taken violently ill, vomiting as if
he had taken an emetic. He said to White; "I'll return as soon as I take my wife home," but
he never came back. As Boss and the madam rode off, White came galloping back, and said to
Brooks, our overseer: "If I am shot down on foul play would you speak of it?" Brooks replied:
"No, I don't care to interfere--I don't wish to have anything to do with it." White was bloodthirsty,
and came back at intervals during the entire night, where we were working, to see if he could
find Boss. It is quite probable that White may have long cherished a secret grudge against
Boss, because he had robbed him of his first love; and, brooding over these offenses, he became
so excited as to be almost insane. Had McGee returned that night, White would certainly have
shot him. Boss became so uneasy over the situation that he sent one of his slaves, a foreman,
to Panola county, some seventy-five miles distant, to Mrs. McGee's father, to get her brother,
a lawyer, to come and endeavor to effect a settlement. He came, but all his efforts were unavailing.
The men met at a magistrate's office, but they came to no understanding. Our folks became dissatisfied,
and did not care to remain longer in the place, so they began to look out for other quarters.
Boss finally decided to buy a farm in Bolivar, Miss., and to remove his family to Memphis,
where he secured a fine place, just outside of the city.

CHAPTER II.

SOCIAL AND OTHER ASPECTS OF SLAVERY.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMOVAL TO MEMPHIS, TENNESSEE.

McGee had decided to build a new house upon the property which he had purchased at Memphis;
and, in August 1850, he sent twenty-five of his slaves to the city, to make brick for the structure,
and I went along as cook. After the bricks were burned, the work of clearing the ground for
the buildings was commenced. There were many large and beautiful trees that had to be taken
up and removed; and, when this work was completed, the excavations for the foundations and
the cellar were undertaken. All of this work was done by the slaves. The site was a beautiful
one, embracing fourteen acres, situated two miles southeast from the city, on the Memphis and
Charleston railroad. The road ran in front of the place and the Boss built a flag-station there,
for the accommodation of himself and his neighbors, which was named McGee Station.

       *       *       *       *       *

A NEW AND SPLENDID HOUSE.

The house was one of the most pretentious in that region, and was a year and a half in building.
It was two stories in height, and built of brick, the exterior surface being coated with cement
and marked off in blocks, about two feet square, to represent stone. It was then whitewashed.
There was a veranda in front with six large columns, and, above, a balcony. On the back there
were also a veranda and a balcony, extending across that end to the servants' wing. A large
hall led from front to rear, on one side of which were double parlors, and on the other a sitting
room, a bedroom and a dining room. In the second story were a hall and four rooms, similar
in all respects to those below, and above these was a large attic. The interior woodwork was
of black walnut. The walls were white, and the centerpieces in the ceilings of all the rooms
were very fine, being the work of an English artisan, who had been only a short time in this
country. This work was so superior, in design and finish, to anything before seen in that region
that local artisans were much excited over it; and some offered to purchase the right to reproduce
it, but Boss refused the offer. However, some one, while the house was finishing, helped himself
to the design, and it was reproduced, in whole or in part, in other buildings in the city.
This employment of a foreign artist was unusual there and caused much comment. The parlors
were furnished with mahogany sets, the upholstering being in red brocade satin. The dining
room was also furnished in mahogany. The bedrooms had mahogany bedsteads of the old-fashioned
pattern with canopies. Costly bric-a-brac, which Boss and the madam had purchased while traveling
in foreign countries, was in great profusion. Money was no object to Edmund McGee, and he added
every modern improvement and luxury to his home; the decorations and furnishings were throughout
of the most costly and elegant; and in the whole of Tennessee there was not a mansion more
sumptuously complete in all its appointments, or more palatial in its general appearance. When
all was finished--pictures, bric-a-brac, statuary and flowers all in their places, Mrs. McGee
was brought home.

In this new house Boss opened up in grand style; everything was changed, and the family entered
upon a new, more formal and more pretentious manner of living. I was known no longer as errand
boy, but installed as butler and body-servant to my master. I had the same routine of morning
work, only it was more extensive. There was a great deal to be done in so spacious a mansion.
Looking after the parlors, halls and dining rooms, arranging flowers in the rooms, waiting
on the table, and going after the mail was my regular morning work, the year round. Then there
were my duties to perform, night and morning, for my master; these were to brush his clothes,
black his shoes, assist him to arrange his toilet, and do any little thing that he wanted me
to. Aside from these regular duties, there were windows to wash, silver to polish and steps
to stone on certain days in the week. I was called to do any errand necessary, and sometimes
to assist in the garden. A new staff of house servants was installed, as follows: Aunt Delia,
cook; Louisa, chambermaid; Puss, lady's maid to wait on the madam; Celia, nurse; Lethia, wet
nurse; Sarah, dairymaid; Julia, laundress; Uncle Gooden, gardener; Thomas, coachman.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NEW STYLE OF LIVING.

The servants, at first, were dazed with the splendor of the new house, and laughed and chuckled
to themselves a good deal about mars' fine house, and really seemed pleased; for, strange to
say, the slaves of rich people always rejoiced in that fact. A servant owned by a man in moderate
circumstances was hooted at by rich men's slaves. It was common for them to say: "Oh! don't
mind that darkey, he belongs to po'r white trash." So, as I said, our slaves rejoiced in master's
good luck. Each of the women servants wore a new, gay colored turban, which was tied differently
from that of the ordinary servant, in some fancy knot. Their frocks and aprons were new, and
really the servants themselves looked new. My outfit was a new cloth suit, and my aprons for
wearing when waiting on the table were of snowy white linen, the style being copied from that
of the New York waiters. I felt big, for I never knew what a white bosom shirt was before;
and even though the grief at the separation from my dear mother was almost unbearable at times,
and my sense of loneliness in having no relative near me often made me sad, there was consolation,
if not compensation, in this little change. I had known no comforts, and had been so cowed
and broken in spirits, by cruel lashings, that I really felt light-hearted at this improvement
in my personal appearance, although it was merely for the gratification of my master's pride;
and I thought I would do all I could to please Boss.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ADORNMENT OF THE GROUNDS.

For some time before all the appointments of the new home were completed, a great number of
mechanics and workmen, besides our own servants, were employed; and there was much bustle and
stir about the premises. Considerable out-door work was yet to be done--fences to be made,
gardens and orchards to be arranged and planted, and the grounds about the house to be laid
out and adorned with shrubbery and flower beds. When this work was finally accomplished, the
grounds were indeed beautiful. The walks were graveled, and led through a profusion of shrubbery
and flower beds. There was almost every variety of roses; while, scattered over the grounds,
there were spruce, pine and juniper trees, and some rare varieties, seldom seen in this northern
climate. Around the grounds was set a cedar hedge, and, in time, the place became noted for
the beauty of its shrubbery; the roses especially were marvelous in the richness and variety
of their colors, their fragrance and the luxuriousness of their growth. People who have never
traveled in the South have little idea of the richness and profusion of its flowers, especially
of its roses. Among the climbing plants, which adorned the house, the most beautiful and fragrant
was the African honeysuckle--its odor was indeed delightful.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE GARDEN.

One of the institutions of the place was the vegetable garden. This was established not only
for the convenience and comfort of the family, but to furnish employment for the slaves. Under
the care of Uncle Gooden, the gardener, it flourished greatly; and there was so much more produced
than the family could use, Boss concluded to sell the surplus. The gardener, therefore, went
to the city, every morning, with a load of vegetables, which brought from eight to ten dollars
daily, and this the madam took for "pin money." In the spring I had always to help the gardener
in setting out plants and preparing beds; and, as this was in connection with my other work,
I became so tired sometimes that I could hardly stand. All the vegetables raised were fine,
and at that time brought a good price. The first cabbage that we sold in the markets brought
twenty-five cents a head. The first sweet potatoes marketed always brought a dollar a peck,
or four dollars a bushel. The Memphis market regulations required that all vegetables be washed
before being exposed for sale. Corn was husked, and everything was clean and inviting. Any
one found guilty of selling, or exhibiting for sale, vegetables of a previous day was fined,
at once, by the market master. This rule was carried out to the letter. Nothing stale could
be sold, or even come into market. The rules required that all poultry be dressed before being
brought to market. The entrails were cleaned and strung and sold separately--usually for about
ten cents a string.

       *       *       *       *       *

PROFUSION OF FLOWERS.

Flowers grew in profusion everywhere through the south, and it has, properly, been called the
land of flowers. But flowers had no such sale there as have our flowers here in the north.
The pansy and many of our highly prized plants and flowers grew wild in the south. The people
there did not seem to care for flowers as we do. I have sold many bouquets for a dime, and
very beautiful ones for fifteen and twenty cents, that would sell in the north for fifty to
seventy-five cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FRUIT ORCHARD.

The new place had an orchard of about four acres, consisting of a variety of apple, peach,
pear and plum trees. Boss hired an expert gardener to teach me the art of grafting, and, after
some practice, I became quite skilled in this work. Some of the pear trees that had been grafted
had three different kinds of fruit on them, and others had three kinds of apples on them besides
the pears. This grafting I did myself, and the trees were considered very fine by Boss. Another
part of my work was the trimming of the hedge and the care of all the shrubbery.

       *       *       *       *       *

I PRACTICE MEDICINE AMONG THE SLAVES.

McGee had a medicine chest built into the wall of the new house. The shelves for medicine were
of wood, and the arrangement was very convenient. It was really a small drug store. It contained
everything in the way of drugs that was necessary to use in doctoring the slaves. We had quinine,
castor-oil, alcohol and ipecac in great quantities, as these were the principal drugs used
in the limited practice in the home establishment. If a servant came from the field to the
house with a chill, which was frequent, the first thing we did was to give him a dose of ipecac
to vomit him. On the evening after, we would give him two or three of Cook's pills. These pills
we made at home, I always had to prepare the medicines, and give the dose, the Boss standing
by dictating. Working with medicine, giving it and caring for the sick were the parts of my
work that I liked best. Boss used Dr. Gunn's book altogether for recipes in putting up medicines.
He read me the recipe, while I compounded it.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SWELL RECEPTION.

In celebration of the opening of the new house, McGee gave an elaborate reception and dinner.
The menu embraced nearly everything that one could think of or desire, and all in the greatest
profusion. It was a custom, not only with the McGees but among the southern people generally,
to make much of eating--it was one of their hobbies. Everything was cooked well, and highly
seasoned. Scarcity was foreign to the homes of the wealthy southerners.

       *       *       *       *       *

RELATIVES VISIT AT THE MANSION.

After the family had been settled about a month in the new home, their relatives in Panola
Co., Miss., Mr. Jack McGee, known among the servants as "Old Jack," Mrs. Melinda McGee, his
wife, Mrs. Farrington, their daughter who was a widow, and their other children Louisa, Ella
and William, all came up for a visit, and to see the wonderful house. Mr. Jack McGee was the
father of madam and the uncle of Boss. My master and mistress were therefore first cousins,
and Boss sometimes called the old man father and at other times, uncle. Old Master Jack, as
he alighted, said to those behind him: "Now be careful, step lightly, Louisa, this is the finest
house you ever set foot in." When all had come into the house, and the old man had begun to
look around, he said: "I don't know what Edmund is thinking about-out to build such a house-house."
He was very old, and had never lost all of his Scotch dialect, and he had a habit of repeating
a part or all of some words, as in the foregoing quotation. The other members of the visiting
family were well pleased with the house, and said it was grand. They laughed and talked merrily
over the many novel things which they saw. Mrs. Farrington, who was a gay widow, was naturally
interested in everything. I busied myself waiting upon them, and it was late that night before
I was through. So many made extra work for me.

       *       *       *       *       *

ONE OF THE VISITORS DISTRUSTS ME.

The next morning, after breakfast, Boss and old Master Jack went out to view the grounds. They
took me along so that if anything was wanted I could do it. Boss would have me drive a stake
in some place to mark where he desired to put something, perhaps some flowers, or a tree. He
went on through the grounds, showing his father how everything was to be arranged. The old
man shook his head, and said: "Well, it's good, but I am afraid you'll spoil these niggers-niggers.
Keep you eye on that boy Lou, (meaning me) he is slippery-slippery, too smart-art." "Oh! I'll
manage that, Father," said Boss. "Well, see that you do-oo, for I see running away in his eyes."
One of the things that interested old Master Jack was the ringing of the dinner bell. "Well,
I do think," said the old man, "that boy can ring a bell better than anybody I ever heard.
Why, its got a regular tune." I used to try to see how near I could come to making it say,
come to dinner.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MADAM IN A RAGE.

The four days soon passed, and all the company gone, we were once more at our regular work.
Delia, the cook, seemingly had not pleased the madam in her cooking while the company were
there; so, the morning after they left, she went toward the kitchen, calling: "Delia, Delia."
Delia said: "Dah! I wonder what she wants now." By this time she was in the kitchen, confronting
Delia. Her face was flushed as she screamed out: "What kind of biscuits were those you baked
this week?" "I think they were all right, Mis Sarh." "Hush!" screamed out the madam, stamping
her foot to make it more emphatic. "You did not half cook them," said she; "they were not beat
enough. Those waffles were ridiculous," said the madam. "Well, Mis Sarh, I tried." "Stop!"
cried Madam in a rage, "I'll give you thunder if you dictate to me." Not a very elegant display
in language or manner for a great lady! Old Aunt Delia, who was used to these occurrences,
said: "My Lord! dat woman dunno what she wants. Ah! Lou, there is nothing but the devil up
here, (meaning the new home); can't do nothin to please her up here in dis fine house. I tell
you Satan neber git his own til he git her." They did not use baking powder, as we do now,
but the biscuits were beaten until light enough. Twenty minutes was the time allotted for this
work; but when company came there was so much to be done--so many more dishes to prepare, that
Delia would, perhaps, not have so much time for each meal. But there was no allowance made.
It was never thought reasonable that a servant should make a mistake--things must always be
the same. I was listening to this quarrel between madam and Delia, supposing my time would
come next; but for that once she said nothing to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MADAM'S SEVERITY.

Mrs. McGee was naturally irritable. Servants always got an extra whipping when she had any
personal trouble, as though they could help it. Every morning little Kate, Aunt Delia's little
girl, would have to go with the madam on her rounds to the different buildings of the establishment,
to carry the key basket. So many were the keys that they were kept in a basket especially provided
for them, and the child was its regular bearer. The madam, with this little attendant, was
everywhere--in the barn, in the hennery, in the smokehouse--and she always made trouble with
the servants wherever she went. Indeed, she rarely returned to the house from these rounds
without having whipped two or three servants, whether there was really any cause for the punishment
or not. She seldom let a day pass without beating some poor woman unmercifully. The number
and severity of these whippings depended more upon the humor of the madam than upon the conduct
of the slaves. Of course, I always came in for a share in this brutal treatment. She continued
her old habit of boxing my jaws, pinching my ears: no day ever passing without her indulging
in this exercise of her physical powers. So long had I endured this, I came to expect it, no
matter how well I did my duties; and it had its natural effect upon me, making me a coward,
even though I was now growing into manhood. I remember once, in particular, when I had tried
to please her by arranging the parlor, I overheard her say: "They soon get spirit--it don't
do to praise servants." My heart sank within me. What good was it for me to try to please?
She would find fault anyway. Her usual morning greeting was: "Well, Lou, have you dusted the
parlors?" "Oh, yes," I would answer. "Have the flowers been arranged?" "Yes, all is in readiness,"
I would say. Once I had stoned the steps as usual, but the madam grew angry as soon as she
saw them. I had labored hard, and thought she would be pleased. The result, however, was very
far from that. She took me out, stripped me of my shirt and began thrashing me, saying I was
spoiled. I was no longer a child, but old enough to be treated differently. I began to cry,
for it seemed to me my heart would break. But, after the first burst of tears, the feeling
came over me that I was a man, and it was an outrage to treat me so--to keep me under the lash
day after day.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SHOCKING ACCIDENT.

Not long after Mrs. Farrington had made her first visit to our house, she came there to live.
Celia had been acting as her maid. When Mrs. Farrington had been up some months, it was decided
that all the family should go down to old Master Jack's for a visit. Celia, the maid, had been
so hurried in the preparations for this visit that she had done nothing for herself. The night
before the family was to leave, therefore, she was getting ready a garment for herself to wear
on the trip; and it was supposed that she sewed until midnight, or after, when she fell asleep,
letting the goods fall into the candle. All at once, a little after twelve o'clock, I heard
a scream, then a cry of "fire! fire!" and Boss yelling: "Louis! Louis!" I jumped up, throwing
an old coat over me, and ran up stairs, in the direction of Mrs. Farrington's room, I encountered
Boss in the hall; and, as it was dark and the smoke stifling, I could hardly make any headway.
At this moment Mrs. Farrington threw her door open, and screamed for "Cousin Eddie," meaning
McGee. He hurriedly called to me to get a pitcher of water quick. I grasped the pitcher from
the stand, and he attempted to throw the water on Celia, who was all in a blaze, running around
like a mad woman; but the pitcher slipped from his hand and broke, very little of the water
reaching her. She was at last wrapped in an old blanket, to extinguish the flames; but she
was burned too badly to recover. Boss, being a physician, said at once: "Poor girl, poor girl!
she is burned to death." He did all he could for her, wrapped her in linen sheets, and endeavored
to relieve her sufferings, but all was of no avail--she had inhaled the flame, injuring her
internally, and lived only a few days.

       *       *       *       *       *

MASTER'S NEW COTTON PLANTATION.

Shortly after Boss bought his home in Memphis, he bought a large farm in Bolivar, Miss. It
was a regular cotton farm, on the Mississippi river, embracing 200 acres. The houses built
for the slaves were frame, eighteen in number, each to contain three or four families, and
arranged on each side of a street that ran through the farm. This street was all grassed over,
but there were no sidewalks. All the buildings--the barn, gin-house, slaves' quarters and overseers'
house--were whitewashed, and on this grass-grown street they made a neat and pretty appearance.
The house where the Boss and the madam staid, when they went down to the farm, was about two
hundred yards from the slaves' quarters. It was arranged in two apartments, one for the overseer
and wife, and the other for the master and mistress upon the occasion of their visits. This
building was separated from the other buildings by a fence. There was what was called the cook
house, where was cooked all the food for the hands. Aunt Matilda was cook in charge. Besides
the buildings already named, there were stables, a blacksmith shop and sawmill; and the general
order of arrangement was carried out with respect to all--the appearance was that of a village.
Everything was raised in abundance, to last from one crop to the next. Vegetables and meat
were provided from the farm, and a dairy of fifty cows furnished all the milk and butter needed.

The cane brakes were so heavy that it was common for bears to hide there, and, at night, come
out and carry off hogs. Wolves were plenty in the woods behind the farm, and could be heard
at any time. The cane was so thick that when they were clearing up new ground, it would have
to be set on fire, and the cracking that would ensue was like the continuous explosion of small
fire crackers.

About one hundred and sixty slaves, besides children, all owned by McGee, were worked on the
farm. Instead of ginning two or three bales of cotton a day, as at Pontotoc, they ginned six
to seven bales here.

       *       *       *       *       *

INCIDENTS.

I remember well the time when the great Swedish singer, Jenny Lind, came to Memphis. It was
during her famous tour through America, in 1851. Our folks were all enthused over her. Boss
went in and secured tickets to her concert, and I was summoned to drive them to the hall. It
was a great event. People swarmed the streets like bees. The carriages and hacks were stacked
back from the hall as far as the eye could reach.

On another occasion, when the great prodigy, Blind Tom, came to Memphis, there was a similar
stir among the people. Tom was very young then, and he was called the Blind Boy. People came
from far and near to hear him. Those coming from the villages and small towns, who could not
get passage on the regular trains, came in freight or on flat bottom cars. The tickets were
$5.00 each, as I remember, Boss said it was expensive, but all must hear this boy pianist.
Many were the comments on this boy of such wonderful talents. As I drove our people home they
seemed to talk of nothing else. They declared that he was indeed a wonder.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONGING FOR FREEDOM.

Sometimes when the farm hands were at work, peddlers would come along; and, as they were treated
badly by the rich planters, they hated them, and talked to the slaves in a way to excite them
and set them thinking of freedom. They would say encouragingly to them: "Ah! You will be free
some day." But the down-trodden slaves, some of whom were bowed with age, with frosted hair
and furrowed cheek, would answer, looking up from their work: "We don't blieve dat; my grandfather
said we was to be free, but we aint free yet." It had been talked of (this freedom) from generation
to generation. Perhaps they would not have thought of freedom, if their owners had not been
so cruel. Had my mistress been more kind to me, I should have thought less of liberty. I know
the cruel treatment which I received was the main thing that made me wish to be free. Besides
this, it was inhuman to separate families as they did. Think of a mother being sold from all
her children--separated for life! This separation was common, and many died heart-broken, by
reason of it. Ah! I cannot forget the cruel separation from my mother. I know not what became
of her, but I have always believed her dead many years ago. Hundreds were separated, as my
mother and I were, and never met again. Though freedom was yearned for by some because the
treatment was so bad, others, who were bright and had looked into the matter, knew it was a
curse to be held a slave--they longed to stand out in true manhood--allowed to express their
opinions as were white men. Others still desired freedom, thinking they could then reclaim
a wife, or husband, or children. The mother would again see her child. All these promptings
of the heart made them yearn for freedom. New Year's was always a heart-rending time, for it
was then the slaves were bought and sold; and they stood in constant fear of losing some one
dear to them--a child, a husband, or wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY FIRST BREAK FOR FREEDOM.

In the new home my duties were harder than ever. The McGees held me with tighter grip, and
it was nothing but cruel abuse, from morning till night. So I made up my mind to try and run
away to a free country. I used to hear Boss read sometimes, in the papers, about runaway slaves
who had gone to Canada, and it always made me long to go; yet I never appeared as if I paid
the slightest attention to what the family read or said on such matters; but I felt that I
could be like others, and try at least to get away. One morning, when Boss had gone to town,
Madam had threatened to whip me, and told me to come to the house. When she called me I did
not go, but went off down through the garden and through the woods, and made my way for the
city. When I got into Memphis, I found at the landing a boat called the Statesman, and I sneaked
aboard. It was not expected that the boat would stay more than a few hours, but, for some reason,
it stayed all night. The boat was loaded with sugar, and I hid myself behind four hogsheads.
I could see both engineers, one each side of me. When night came on, I crept out from my hiding
place, and went forward to search for food and water, for I was thirsty and very hungry. I
found the table where the deck hands had been eating, and managed to get a little food, left
from their meal, and some water. This was by no means enough, but I had to be content, and
went back to my place of concealment. I had been on board the boat three days; and, on the
third night, when I came out to hunt food, the second mate saw me. In a minute he eyed me over
and said: "Why, I have a reward for you." In a second he had me go up stairs to the captain.
This raised a great excitement among the passengers; and, in a minute, I was besieged with
numerous questions. Some spoke as if they were sorry for me, and said if they had known I was
a poor runaway slave they would have slipped me ashore. The whole boat was in alarm. It seemed
to me they were consulting slips of paper. One said: "Yes, he is the same. Listen how this reads:"

"Ran away from Edmund McGee, my mulatto boy Louis, 5 feet 6 inches in height, black hair, is
very bright and intelligent. Will give $500 for him alive, and half of this amount for knowledge
that he has been killed."

My heart sprang into my throat when I heard two men read this advertisement. I knew, at once,
what it all meant, remembering how often I had heard Boss read such articles from the papers
and from the handbills that were distributed through the city. The captain asked me if I could
dance. It seemed he felt sorry for me, for he said: "That's a bright boy to be a slave." Then
turning to me he said: "Come, give us a dance." I was young and nimble, so I danced a few of
the old southern clog dances, and sang one or two songs, like this:

    "Come along, Sam, the fifer's son,
    Aint you mighty glad your day's work's done?"

After I finished singing and dancing, the captain took up a collection for me and got about
two dollars. This cheered me a good deal. I knew that I would need money if I should ever succeed
in getting on.

On the following evening, when we reached West Franklin, Indiana, while the passengers were
at tea, another boat pushed into port right after ours. Immediately a gentleman passenger came
to me hurriedly, and whispered to me to go down stairs, jump out on the bow of the other boat,
and go ashore. I was alarmed, but obeyed, for I felt that he was a friend to slaves. I went
out as quietly as I could, and was not missed until I had gotten on shore. Then I heard the
alarm given that the boy was gone--that the runaway was gone. But I sped on, and did not stop
until I had run through the village, and had come to a road that led right into the country.
I took this road and went on until I had gone four or five miles, when I came to a farm house.
Before reaching it, however, I met two men on horseback, on their way to the village. They
passed on without specially noticing me, and I kept on my way until reaching the farmhouse.
I was so hungry, I went in and asked for food. While I was eating, the men whom I had met rode
up. They had been to the village, and, learning that a runaway slave was wanted, and remembering
meeting me, they returned in hot haste, in hope of finding me and securing the reward. They
hallooed to the people in the house, an old woman and her daughter, whom they seemed to know,
saying: "There is a runaway nigger out, who stole off a boat this evening." The old lady said,
"Come," becoming frightened at once. When they came in they began to question me. I trembled
all over but answered them. They said: "You are the fellow we want, who ran off the boat."
I was too scared to deny it; so I owned I was on the boat, and stole off. They did not tarry
long, but, taking me with them, they went, about a mile and a half, to their house. They planned
and talked all the way, and one said: "We are good for $75.00 for him any way." The next morning
they took me into the village. They soon found out that the engineer, by order of the captain,
had stayed over to search for me. A lawsuit followed, and I was taken before the magistrate
before the engineer could get possession of me. There was a legal course that had to be gone
through with. A lawyer, Fox by name, furnished the $75.00 for the men who had caught me. That
part of the case being settled, Fox and the engineer started for Evansville, Ind., that same
night. Upon arriving there, Fox received from the captain of the boat the money he had advanced
to the men who caught me; and we went on, arriving at Louisville, Ky., the next day. I was
then taken again before a magistrate, by the captain, when the following statement was read
by that official:

"Captain Montgomery brought forth a boy, and said he is the property of Edmund McGee, of Memphis,
Tenn. Come forth owner, and prove property, for after the boy shall remain in jail six months
he shall be sold to pay jail feed."

Mr. McGee was informed of my whereabouts, and it was not long before he and his cousin came
to get me. When they came, I was called up by the nickname they had given me, "Memphis." "Come
out here, 'Memphis,'" said the turnkey, "your master has come for you." I went down stairs
to the office, and found Boss waiting for me. "Hello, Lou!" said he, "what are you doing here,
you dog?" I was so frightened I said nothing. Of course, some few words were passed between
him and the officers. I heard him say that I was a smart fellow, and he could not tell why
I had run away; that he had always treated me well. This was to impress the officers with the
idea that he was not unkind to his slaves. The slave-holders all hated to be classed as bad
taskmasters. Yet nearly all of them were. The clothes I wore were jail property, and he could
not take me away in them; so we started to go up town to get others. As we passed out the jailer,
Buckhanon, said: "Ain't you going to put hand-cuffs on him?" "Oh, no!" said Boss. After I was
taken to the store and fitted with a new suit of clothes, he brought me back to the jail, where
I washed myself and put on the new garments. When all was complete, and I seemed to suit master's
fastidious eye, he took me to the Gault House, where he was stopping. In the evening we started
for home, and reached Memphis the following day. Boss did not flog me, as I expected, but sent
me to my regular routine work. We had been in this new home so short a time he did not want
it to be rumored that he whipped his slaves, he was so stylish and rich. But the madam was
filled with rage, although she did not say much. I think they saw that I was no longer a child--they
feared I would go again. But after I had been home some three or four weeks, Madam Sarah commenced
her old tricks--attempting to whip me, box my jaws and pinch me. If any little thing was not
pleasing to her at meal time, it was a special delight for her to reach out, when I drew near
to her to pass something, and give me a blow with her hand. Truly it was a monstrous domestic
institution that not only tolerated, but fostered, such an exhibition of table manners by a
would-be fine lady--such vulgar spite and cruelty!

       *       *       *       *       *

MY SECOND RUNAWAY TRIP.

About three months after my first attempt to get away, I thought I would try it again. I went
to Memphis, and saw a boat at the landing, called the John Lirozey, a Cincinnati packet. This
boat carried the mail. She had come into port in the morning, and was being unloaded. I went
aboard in the afternoon and jumped down into the hull. Boss had been there in the fore part
of the afternoon inquiring for me, but I did not know it then. After I had been in the boat
some time, the men commenced loading it. I crept up in the corner and hid myself. At first
two or three hundred dry and green hides were thrown in, and these hid me; but later on two
or three tiers of cotton bales were put in the center of the hull, and, when the boat started,
I got upon the top of these, and lay there. I could hear the people talking above me, but it
was so dark I could not see anything--it was dark as a dungeon. I had lain there two nights
and began to get so weak and faint I could stand it no longer. For some reason the boat did
not start the day I went aboard, consequently, I had not gotten as far from home as I expected,
and my privations had largely been in vain. Despairing and hungry, on the third day, I commenced
howling and screaming, hoping that some one would hear me, and come to my relief, for almost
anything else would have been preferable to the privation and hunger from which I was suffering.
But I could make no one hear, at least no one paid any attention to my screams, if they did
hear. In the evening, however, one of the deck hands came in with a lantern to look around
and see everything was all right. I saw the light and followed him out, but I had been out
of my hiding only a short time when I was discovered by a man who took me up stairs to the
captain. It was an effort for me to walk up stairs, as I was weak and faint, having neither
eaten nor drank anything for three days. This boat was crowded with passengers, and it was
soon a scene of confusion. I was placed in the pilot's room for safety, until we arrived at
a small town in Kentucky called Monroe. I was put off here to be kept until the packet came
back from Cincinnati. Then I was carried back to Memphis, arriving about one o'clock at night,
and, for safe keeping, was put into what was called the calaboose. This was especially for
the keeping of slaves who had run away and been caught. Word was sent to Boss of my capture;
and the next morning Thomas Bland, a fellow servant of mine, was sent to take me home. I can
not tell how I felt, for the only thought that came to me was that I should get killed. The
madam met us as we drove into the yard. "Ah!" she said to me, "you put up at the wrong hotel,
sir." I was taken to the barn where stocks had been prepared, beside which were a cowhide and
a pail of salt water, all prepared for me. It was terrible, but there was no escape. I was
fastened in the stocks, my clothing removed, and the whipping began. Boss whipped me a while,
then he sat down and read his paper, after which the whipping was resumed. This continued for
two hours. Fastened as I was in the stocks, I could only stand and take lash after lash, as
long as he desired, the terrible rawhide cutting into my flesh at every stroke. Then he used
peach tree switches, which cracked the flesh so the blood oozed out. After this came the paddle,
two and a half feet long and three inches wide. Salt and water was at once applied to wash
the wounds, and the smarting was maddening. This torture was common among the southern planters. The
American Guest.

Chapter XVII. The Dream of all Nations.

       

LITTLE LUCY'S WONDERFUL GLOBE

CHAPTER I.

MOTHER BUNCH.

There was once a wonderful fortnight in little Lucy's life. One evening she went to bed very tired
and cross and hot, and in the morning when she looked at her arms and legs they were all covered
with red spots, rather pretty to look at, only they were dry and prickly.

Nurse was frightened when she looked at them. She turned all the little sisters out of the night
nursery, covered Lucy up close, and ordered her not to stir, certainly not to go into her
bath. Then there was a whispering and a running about, and Lucy was half alarmed, but more
pleased at being so important, for she did not feel at all ill, and quite enjoyed the tea and
toast that Nurse brought up to her. Just as she was beginning to think it rather tiresome to
lie there with nothing to do, except to watch the flies buzzing about, there was a step on the stairs
and up came the doctor. He was an old friend, very good-natured, and he made fun with Lucy
about having turned into a spotted leopard, just like the cowry shell on Mrs. Bunker's mantel-piece.
Indeed, he said he thought she was such a curiosity that Mrs. Bunker
would come for her and set her up in the museum, and then he went
away.

       Suppose, oh, suppose she did!

Mrs. Bunker, or Mother Bunch, as Lucy and her brothers and sisters called her, was housekeeper to
their Uncle Joseph. He was really their great uncle, and they thought him any age you can
imagine. They would not have been much surprised to hear that he sailed with Christopher Columbus,
though he was a strong, hale, active man, much less easily tired than their own papa. He had
been a ship's surgeon in his younger days, and had sailed all over the world, and collected all
sorts of curious things, besides which he was a very wise and learned man, and had made some
great discovery. It was not America. Lucy knew that her elderly brother understood what it
was, but it was not worth troubling her head about, only somehow it made ships go safer, and
so he had had a pension given him as a reward. He had come home and bought a house about a
mile out of town, and built up a high room from which to look at the stars with his telescope,
and to try his experiments in, and a long one besides for his museum; yet, after all, he was
not much there, for whenever there was anything wonderful to be seen,
he always went off to look at it, and, whenever there was a meeting
of learned men--scientific men was the right word--they always wanted
him to help them make speeches and show wonders. He was away now.
He had gone away to wear a red cross on his arm, and help to take
care of the wounded in the sad war between the French and the Germans. My wife's mother was born free, her mother, having passed the allotted
time under a law, had been free for many years. Yet they kept her children as slaves, in plain
violation of law as well as justice. The children of free persons under southern laws were
free--this was always admitted. The course of Logan in putting the family in jail, for safe
keeping until they could be sent to the southern market, was a tacit admission that he had
no legal hold upon them. Woods and Collins, a couple of "nigger traders," were collecting a
"drove" of slaves for Memphis, about this time, and, when they were ready to start, all the
family were sent off with the gang; and, when they arrived in Memphis, they were put in the
traders' yard of Nathan Bedford Forrest. This Forrest afterward became a general in the rebel
army, and commanded at the capture of Fort Pillow; and, in harmony with the debasing influences
of his early business, he was responsible for the fiendish massacre of negroes after the capture
of the fort--an act which will make his name forever infamous. None of this family were sold
to the same person except my wife and one sister. All the rest were sold to different persons.
The elder daughter was sold seven times in one day. The reason of this was that the parties
that bought her, finding that she was not legally a slave, and that they could get no written
guarantee that she was, got rid of her as soon as possible. It seems that those who bought
the other members of the family were not so particular, and were willing to run the risk. They
knew that such things--such outrages upon law and justice--were common. Among these was my
Boss, who bought two of the girls, Matilda and her sister Mary Ellen. Matilda was bought for
a cook; her sister was a present to Mrs. Farrington, his wife's sister, to act as her maid
and seamstress. Aunt Delia, who had been cook, was given another branch of work to do, and
Matilda was installed as cook. I remember well the day she came. The madam greeted her, and
said: "Well, what can you do, girl? Have you ever done any cooking? Where are you from?" Matilda
was, as I remember her, a sad picture to look at. She had been a slave, it is true, but had
seen good days to what the slaves down the river saw. Any one could see she was almost heart-broken--she
never seemed happy. Days grew into weeks and weeks into months, but the same routine of work
went on.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY MARRIAGE--BIRTH OF TWINS.

Matilda had been there three years when I married her. The Boss had always promised that he
would give me a nice wedding, and he kept his word. He was very proud, and liked praise. The
wedding that he gave us was indeed a pleasant one. All the slaves from their neighbor acquaintances
were invited. One thing Boss did was a credit to him, but it was rare among slave-holders--he
had me married by their parish minister. It was a beautiful evening, the 30th of November,
1858, when Matilda and I stood in the parlor of the McGee house and were solemnly made man
and wife. Old Master Jack came up from Panola at that time, and was there when the ceremony
was performed. As he looked through his fingers at us, he was overheard saying: "It will ruin
them, givin wedins-wedins." Things went on as usual after this. The madam grew more irritable
and exacting, always finding fault with the servants, whipping them, or threatening to do so,
upon the slightest provocation, or none at all. There was something in my wife's manner, however,
which kept the madam from whipping her--an open or implied threat perhaps that such treatment
would not be endured without resistance or protest of some kind. This the madam regarded as
a great indignity, and she hated my wife for it, and, at times, was ready to crush her, so
great was her anger. In a year there were born to us twin babies; and the madam now thought
she had my wife tied, as the babies would be a barrier to anything like resistance on her part,
and there would be no danger of her running away. She, therefore, thought that she could enjoy,
without hindrance, the privilege of beating the woman of whose womanhood she had theretofore
stood somewhat in fear.

       *       *       *       *       *

MADAM'S CRUELTY TO MY WIFE AND CHILDREN.

Boss said from the first that I should give my wife assistance, as she needed time to care
for the babies. Really he was not as bad as the madam at heart, for she tried to see how hard
she could be on us. She gave me all the extra work to do that she could think of, apparently
to keep me from helping my wife in the kitchen. She had all the cooking to do for three heavy
meals each day, all the washing and ironing of the finest clothes, besides caring for the babies
between times. In the morning she would nurse the babies, then hurry off to the kitchen to
get breakfast while they were left in charge of a little girl. Again at noon she repeated her
visit to the babies, after cooking the dinner, then in the evening, after supper, she would
go to nurse them again. After supper was over, dishes all washed and kitchen in order, she
would then go to the little ones for the night. One can see that she had very little time with
the children. My heart was sore and heavy, for my wife was almost run to death with work. The
children grew puny and sickly for want of proper care. The doctor said it was because the milk
the mother nursed to them was so heated by her constant and excessive labors as to be unwholesome,
and she never had time to cool before ministering to them. So the little things, instead of
thriving and developing, as was their right, dwindled toward the inevitable end. Oh! we were
wretched--our hearts ached for a day which we could call our own. My wife was a Christian,
and had learned to know the worth of prayer, so would always speak consolingly. "God will help
us," she said: "let us try and be patient." Our trial went on, until one morning I heard a
great fuss in the house, the madam calling for the yard man to come and tie my wife, as she
could not manage her. My wife had always refused to allow the madam to whip her; but now, as
the babies were here, mistress thought she would try it once more. Matilda resisted, and madam
called for Boss. In a minute he came, and, grabbing my wife, commenced choking her, saying
to her: "What do you mean? Is that the way you talk to ladies?" My wife had only said to her
mistress: "You shall not whip me." This made her furious, hence her call for Boss. I was in
the dining room, and could hear everything. My blood boiled in my veins to see my wife so abused;
yet I dare not open my mouth. After the fuss, my wife went straight to the laundry. I followed
her there, and found her bundling up her babies' clothes, which were washed but not ironed.
I knew at a glance that she was going away. Boss had just gone to the city; and I did not know
what to say, but I told her to do the best she could. Often when company came and I held the
horses, or did an errand for them, they would tip me to a quarter or half a dollar. This money
I always saved, and so had a little change, which I now gave to Matilda, for her use in her
effort to get away from her cruel treatment. She started at once for Forrest's trader's yards,
with the babies in her arms and, after she got into Memphis, she stopped outside the yard to
rest. While she was sitting on the curb stone, Forrest came out of the yard by the back gate
and saw her. Coming up to her he said: "My God! Matilda, what are you doing here? You have
changed so I would not have known you. Why have you come here?" Matilda said: "I came back
here to be sold again." He stepped back and called another "nigger trader," Collins by name,
from Kentucky. "Look here," said Forrest, pointing to my wife. Collins took in the situation
at once and said he would buy her and the children. "That woman is of a good family," said
he, "and was only sold to prevent her from getting her freedom." She was then taken into the
yard. "Oh!" said Forrest, "I know these McGees, they are hard colts." Word was then sent McGee
that his cook was in the yard and had come to be sold. He went in haste to the yard. Collins
offered to buy her, but McGee said no man's money could buy that woman and her children. I
raised her husband and I would not separate them. She was brought back, and as they rode along
in the rockaway, Boss said: "When I am through with you I guess you won't run away again."
As they drove up I saw the madam go running out to meet them. She shouted to Matilda: "Ah!
madam, you put up at the wrong hotel." They at once went to the barn where my wife was tied
to the joist, and Boss and the madam beat her by turns. After they had finished the whipping,
Boss said, tauntingly: "Now I am buying you and selling you--I want you to know that I never
shall sell you while my head and yours is hot." I was trembling from head to foot, for I was
powerless to do anything for her. My twin babies lived only six months after that, not having
had the care they needed, and which it was impossible for their mother to give them while performing
the almost endless labor required of her, under threats of cruel beatings. One day not long
after our babies were buried the madam followed my wife to the smoke house and said: "I am
tempted to take that knife from you, Matilda, and cut you in two. You and old Ruben (one of
the slaves) went all around the neighborhood and told the people that I killed your babies,
and almost whipped you to death." Of course, when the slaves were accused falsely, as in this
case, they were not allowed to make any reply--they just had to endure in silence whatever
was said.

       *       *       *       *       *

EFFORTS TO LEARN TO READ AND WRITE.

Thomas, the coachman, and I were fast friends. We used to get together every time we had a
chance and talk about freedom. "Oh!" Tom would say, "if I could only write." I remember when
Tom first began to take lessons at night from some plasterers, workmen of the neighborhood.
They saw that he was so anxious to learn that they promised to teach him every evening if he
would slip out to their house. I, too, was eager to learn to read and write, but did not have
the opportunity which Tom had of getting out at night. I had to sleep in the house where the
folks were, and could not go out without being observed, while Tom had quarters in another
part of the establishment, and could slip out unobserved. Tom, however, consoled me by saying
that he would teach me as soon as he knew how. So Tom one night put a copy of some figures
on the side of the barn for me to practice from. I took the chalk and imitated him as near
as I could, but my work was poor beside his, as he had been learning for some months, and could
make the figures quite well and write a little. Still I kept trying. Tom encouraging me and
telling me that I would learn in time. "Just keep trying," said he. When this first lesson
was over, I forgot to rub out the marks on the barn, and the next morning when Old Master Jack,
who happened to be at our home just at that time, went out there and saw the copy and my imitation
of it, he at once raised great excitement by calling attention to the rude characters and wanting
to know who had done that. I was afraid to own that I had done it; but old Master Jack somehow
surmised that it was Tom or I, for he said to Boss: "Edmund, you must watch those fellows,
Louis and Thomas, if you don't they will get spoilt--spoilt. They are pretty close to town
here--here." Tom and I laughed over this a good deal and how easily we slipped out of it, but
concluded not to stop trying to learn all we could. Tom always said: "Lou, I am going to be
a free man yet, then we will need some education; no, let us never stop trying to learn." Tom
was a Virginian, as I was, and was sold from his parents when a mere lad. Boss used to write
to his parents (owners) occasionally, that his people might hear from him. The letters were
to his mother, but sent in care of the white folks. Tom had progressed very fast in his secret
studies, and could write enough to frame a letter. It seems it had been over a year since Boss
had written for him, but nothing was said until one morning I heard Boss telling Tom to come
to the barn to be whipped. He showed Tom three letters which he had written to his mother,
and this so startled him that he said nothing. I listened breathlessly to each word Boss said:
"Where did you learn to write?" asked he, "and when did you learn? How long have you been writing
to your mother?" At that moment he produced the three letters which Tom had written. Boss,
it seems, had mistrusted something, and spoke to the postmaster, telling him to stop any letters
which Tom might mail for Virginia to his mother. The postmaster did as directed, for slaves
had no rights which postmasters were bound to respect; hence, the letters fell into the master's
hands instead of going to their destination. Tom, not hearing from his first letter, wrote
a second, then a third, never dreaming that they had been intercepted. Boss raged and Tom was
severely whipped. After this nothing Tom did pleased any of the family--it was a continual
pick on him. Everything was wrong with both of us, for they were equally hard on me. They mistrusted,
I think, that I could write; yet I could not find out just what they did think.

       *       *       *       *       *

TOM STRIKES FOR LIBERTY AND GAINS IT.

Tom stayed only a few weeks after this. He said to me, one morning: "Lou, I am going away.
If I can get a boat to-night that is starting off, why, I am gone from this place." I was sad
to see him go, for he was like a brother to me--he was my companion and friend. He went, and
was just in time to catch the boat at the Memphis dock. He succeeded in getting on, and made
an application to the captain to work on the boat. The captain did not hesitate to employ him,
as it was common for slaves to be permitted to hire themselves out for wages which they were
required to return, in whole or in part, to their masters. Of course all such slaves carried
a written pass to this effect. Tom was shrewd; and, having learned to write fairly well, he
wrote himself a pass, which was of the usual kind, stating his name, to whom he belonged, and
that he was privileged to hire himself out wherever he could, coming and going as he pleased.
Where the slave was an exceptional one, and where the owner had only two or three slaves, a
pass would readily be given to hire himself out, or hire his own time, as it was generally
called, he being required to turn over to his master a certain amount of his earnings, each
month or week, and to make a report to his master of his whereabouts and receipts. Sometimes
the slave would be required to turn in to his master a certain sum, as, for instance, fifty
or one hundred dollars a year; and he would have to earn that before he could use any of his
earnings for himself. If he was a mechanic he would have little trouble in doing this, as the
wages of such were often quite liberal. This kind of a pass was rarely, if ever, given by the
planters having large numbers of slaves. Another kind of pass read something like this: "Pass
my boy or my girl," as the case might be, the name being attached. These were only given to
permit the slave to go from the farm of his own master to that of another. Some men had wives
or children belonging on neighboring farms, and would be given passes to visit them. Without
such a pass they were liable to be stopped and turned back to their homes. There was, however,
a good deal of visiting without passes, but it was against the general rule which required
them; and any slave leaving home without a pass was liable to punishment if discovered. On
our plantation passes were never given, but the slaves did visit in the neighborhood, notwithstanding,
and would sometimes slip into town at night. Tom had in this way seen the pass of a neighboring
slave to hire out; and it was from this he learned the form from which he wrote his, and which
opened his way to freedom. Upon reading Tom's pass, the captain did not hesitate, but hired
him at once; and Tom worked his way to New Orleans, to which city the boat was bound. In the
meantime Boss took me and we drove to numerous stations, where he telegraphed ahead for his
run-away boy Tom. But Tom reached New Orleans without hindrance, and there fell in with the
steward of a Boston steamer, and, getting aboard of it, was soon on the ocean, on his way to
that city where were so many friends of the slave. Arriving there he made his way to Canada;
which was, for so many generations, the only land of freedom attainable to American slaves.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEWS OF TOM'S REACHING CANADA.

Now that Tom was gone, excitement prevailed at the house among the white folks--nothing had
been heard of him or the method of his escape. All the servants expected that he would be caught,
and I was alarmed every time Boss came from the city, fearing that he had news that Tom was
caught. He had been gone about six months, when, one morning, I went to the postoffice and
brought back a letter. It seemed to me that I felt that it contained something unusual, but
I did not know what it was. It proved to be a letter from Tom to Boss. They did not intend
that the servants should know it was from Tom, but one of the house maids heard them reading
it, and came out and told us. She whispered: "Tom is free; he has gone to Canada; Boss read
it in the letter Lou brought." This news cheered me, and made me eager to get away; but I never
heard from him any more until after the rebellion. Tom gone made my duties more. I now had
to drive the carriage, but Uncle Madison was kept at the barn to do the work there, and hitch
up the team--I only had to drive when the family went out.

       *       *       *       *       *

M'GEE EXPECTS TO CAPTURE TOM.

In the summer the McGees made up their minds to go down east, and come around by Niagara Falls,
for this was the place from which Tom had written them. Boss had great confidence in himself,
and did not doubt his ability to take Tom home with him if he should meet him, even though
it should be in Canada. So he took a pair of handcuffs with him as a preparation for the enterprise.
His young nephew had been to Niagara Falls, and seen and talked with Tom; but Boss said if
he had seen him anywhere he would have laid hands on him, at once, and taken him home, at all
hazards.

       *       *       *       *       *

MAKING CLOTHES.

When the family went on this visit down east I was left in charge of the house, and was expected
to keep everything in order, and also to make the winter clothes for the farm hands. The madam
and I had cut out these clothes before she left, and it was my principal duty to run the sewing
machine in their manufacture. Many whole days I spent in this work. My wife made the button
holes and sewed on the buttons. I made hundreds of sacks for use in picking cotton. This work
was always done in summer. When the garments were all finished they were shipped to the farm
at Bolivar, to be ready for the fall and winter wear. In like manner the clothes for summer
use were made in winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

A SUPERSTITION.

It was the custom in those days for slaves to carry voo-doo bags. It was handed down from generation
to generation; and, though it was one of the superstitions of a barbarous ancestry, it was
still very generally and tenaciously held to by all classes. I carried a little bag, which
I got from an old slave who claimed that it had power to prevent any one who carried it from
being whipped. It was made of leather, and contained roots, nuts, pins and some other things.
The claim that it would prevent the folks from whipping me so much, I found, was not sustained
by my experience--my whippings came just the same. Many of the servants were thorough believers
in it, though, and carried these bags all the time.

       *       *       *       *       *

MEMPHIS AND ITS COMMERCIAL IMPORTANCE.

The city of Memphis, from its high bluff on the Mississippi, overlooks the surrounding country
for a long distance. The muddy waters of the river, when at a low stage, lap the ever crumbling
banks that yearly change, yielding to new deflections of the current. For hundreds of miles
below there is a highly interesting and rarely broken series of forests, cane brakes and sand
bars, covered with masses of willows and poplars which, in the spring, when the floods come
down, are overflowed for many miles back. It was found necessary to run embankments practically
parallel with the current, in order to confine the waters of the river in its channel. Memphis
was and is the most important city of Tennessee, indeed, the most important between St. Louis
and New Orleans, particularly from the commercial point of view. Cotton was the principal product
of the territory tributary to it. The street running along the bluff was called Front Row,
and was filled with stores and business houses. This street was the principal cotton market,
and here the article which, in those days, was personified as the commercial "king," was bought
and sold, and whence it was shipped, or stored, awaiting an advancing price. The completion
of the Memphis and Charleston railroad was a great event in the history of the city. It was
termed the marriage of the Mississippi and the Atlantic, and was celebrated with a great popular
demonstration, people coming from the surrounding country for many miles. Water was brought
from the Atlantic ocean and poured into the river; and water taken from the river and poured
into the Atlantic at Charleston. It was anticipated that this railroad connection between the
two cities would make of Charleston the great shipping port, and of Memphis the principal cotton
market of the southwest. The expectation in neither of these cases has been fully realized.
Boss, in common with planters and business men throughout that whole region, was greatly excited.
I attended him and thus had the opportunity of witnessing this notable celebration.

CHAPTER III.

SLAVERY AND THE WAR OF THE REBELLION.

       *       *       *       *       *

BEGINNING OF THE WAR.

I remember well when Abraham Lincoln was elected. Boss and the madam had been reading the papers,
when he broke out with the exclamation: "The very idea of electing an old rail splitter to
the presidency of the United States! Well he'll never take his seat." When Lincoln was inaugurated,
Boss, old Master Jack and a great company of men met at our house to discuss the matter, and
they were wild with excitement. Was not this excitement an admission that their confidence
in their ability to whip the Yankees, five or six to one, was not so strong as they pretended?

The war had been talked of for some time, but at last it came. When the rebels fired upon Fort
Sumter, then great excitement arose. The next day when I drove Boss to town, he went into the
store of one Williams, a merchant, and when he came out, he stepped to the carriage, and said:
"What do you think? Old Abraham Lincoln has called for four hundred thousand men to come to
Washington immediately. Well, let them come; we will make a breakfast of them. I can whip a
half dozen Yankees with my pocket knife." This was the chief topic everywhere. Soon after this
Boss bought himself a six shooter. I had to mould the bullets for him, and every afternoon
he would go out to practice. By his direction, I fixed a large piece of white paper on the
back fence, and in the center of it put a large black dot. At this mark he would fire away,
expecting to hit it; but he did not succeed well. He would sometimes miss the fence entirely,
the ball going out into the woods beyond. Each time he would shoot I would have to run down
to the fence to see how near he came to the mark. When he came very near to it--within an inch
or so, he would say laughingly: "Ah! I would have got him that time." (Meaning a Yankee soldier.)
There was something very ludicrous in this pistol practice of a man who boasted that he could
whip half a dozen Yankees with a jackknife. Every day for a month this business, so tiresome
to me, went on. Boss was very brave until it came time for him to go to war, when his courage
oozed out, and he sent a substitute; he remaining at home as a "home guard." One day when I
came back with the papers from the city, the house was soon ringing with cries of victory.
Boss said: "Why, that was a great battle at Bull Run. If our men had only known, at first,
what they afterwords found out, they would have wiped all the Yankees out, and succeeded in
taking Washington."

       *       *       *       *       *

PETTY DISRESPECT TO THE EMBLEM OF THE UNION.

Right after the bombardment of Fort Sumter, they brought to Memphis the Union flag that floated
over the fort. There was a great jubilee in celebration of this. Portions of the flag, no larger
than a half dollar in paper money, were given out to the wealthy-people, and these evidences
of their treason were long preserved as precious treasures. Boss had one of these pieces which
he kept a long time; but, as the rebel cause waned these reminders of its beginning were less
and less seen, and if any of them are now in existence, it is not likely that their possessors
will take any pride in exposing them to view.

As the war continued we would, now and then, hear of some slave of our neighborhood running
away to the Yankees. It was common when the message of a Union victory came to see the slaves
whispering to each other: "We will be free." I tried to catch everything I could about the
war, I was so eager for the success of the Union cause. These things went on until

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BATTLE OF SHILOH, APRIL 9, 1862.

Boss came hurrying in one morning, right after breakfast, calling to me: "Lou, Lou, come; we
have a great victory! I want to go up and carry the boys something to eat. I want you and Matilda
to get something ready as quickly as you can." A barrel of flour was rolled into the kitchen,
and my wife and I "pitched in" to work. Biscuit, bread, hoe-cake, ham, tongue--all kinds of
meat and bread were rapidly cooked; and, though the task was a heavy one for my wife and me,
we worked steadily; and, about five o'clock in the afternoon the things were ready. One of
the large baskets used to hold cotton was packed full of these provisions. Our limbs ached
from the strain of the work, for we had little help. One reason for the anxiety of the Boss
for the preparation of this provision for the soldiers was that he knew so many in one of the
companies, which was known as the "Como Avengers," and he had a son, a nephew and a brother
of his wife connected with it; the latter a major on Gen. Martin's staff. On the following
morning I got up early, and hurried with my work to get through, as I had to go to the postoffice.
Madam hurried me off, as she expected a letter from her husband, who had promised to write,
at the earliest moment, of their friends and relatives. I rushed into the city, at full speed,
got some letters and a morning paper, and, returning as rapidly as possible, gave them to her.
She grasped them eagerly, and commenced reading the paper. In a short time I heard her calling
me to come to her. I went in, and she said, in great excitement: "Louis, we want to have you
drive us into town, to see the Yankee prisoners, who are coming through, at noon, from Shiloh."
I went and told Madison to hitch up, as soon as he could. In the meantime I got myself ready,
and it was not long before we were off for the city. The madam was accompanied by a friend
of hers, a Mrs. Oliver. We were at the station in plenty of time. About twelve o'clock the
train from Shiloh drew into the station; but the prisoners that were reported to be on board
were missing--it proved to be a false report. While they were looking for the prisoners, Mrs.
Oliver saw Jack, a servant of Edward McGee, brother of madam. "Oh! Look," said Mrs. Oliver,
"there is Edward's Jack. Lou, run and call him." In a minute I was off the carriage, leaving
the reins in madam's hands. Jack came up to the carriage, and the women began to question him:
"Where is your Master, Ed," asked both of them. "He is in the car, Missis--he is shot in the
ankle," said Jack. In a minute the women were crying. "I was going to get a hack," said Jack,
"to--" "No, No!" said both of them. "Go, Lou, and help Jack to bring him to our carriage. You
can drive him more steadily than the hackman." Jack and I went to the car, and helped him out,
and after some effort, got him into our carriage. Then I went and got a livery hack to take
the women and his baggage home. When we reached home, we found there old Mrs. Jack McGee, mother
of the madam, Mrs. Charles Dandridge, Mrs. Farrington, sisters of madam, and Fanny, a colored
woman, Edward's housekeeper and mistress--a wife in all but name. All of these had come to
hear the news of the great battle, for all had near relatives in it. Mrs. Jack McGee and Mrs.
Dr. Charles Dandridge had each a son in the terrible conflict.

       *       *       *       *       *

MOURNING IN MASTER'S FAMILY.

In the afternoon, when all were seated in the library reading, and I was in the dining room,
finishing up my work, I happened to look out of the window, and saw a messenger coming up the
graveled walk. I went out to meet him. "Telegram for Mrs. McGee," he said. I took it to her;
and, reading it without a word, she passed it to the next member of the family, and so it was
passed around until all had read it except Mrs. Dandridge. When it was handed to her, I saw,
at a glance, that it contained for her the most sorrowful tidings. As she read she became livid,
and when she had finished she covered her face with her handkerchief, giving a great, heavy
sob. By this time the whole family was crying and screaming: "Oh! our Mack is killed." "Mars,
Mack is killed," was echoed by the servants, in tones of heart-felt sorrow, for he was an exceptional
young man. Every one loved him--both whites and blacks. The affection of the slaves for him
bordered on reverence, and this was true not alone of his father's slaves, but of all those
who knew him. This telegram was from Boss, and announced that he would be home the next day
with the remains. Mrs. Farrington at once wrote to old Master Jack and to Dr. Dandridge, telling
them of Mack's death and to come at once. After I mailed those letters nothing unusual happened
during the afternoon, and the house was wrapped in silence and gloom. On the following morning
I went for the mail as usual, but there was nothing new. At noon, the remains of the much loved
young man arrived at our station, accompanied by Boss and Dr. Henry Dandridge, brother of the
father of the deceased, who was a surgeon in the rebel army. I went to the station with another
servant, to assist in bringing the body to the house. We carried it into the back parlor, and,
after all had been made ready, we proceeded to wash and dress it. He had lain on the battlefield
two days before he was found, and his face was black as a piece of coal; but Dr. Henry Dandridge,
with his ready tact, suggested the idea of painting it. I was there to assist in whatever way
they needed me. After the body was all dressed, and the face painted, cheeks tinted with a
rosy hue, to appear as he always did in life, the look was natural and handsome. We were all
the afternoon employed in this sad work, and it was not until late in the evening that his
father and mother came down to view the body for the first time. I remember, as they came down
the broad stairs together, the sorrow-stricken yet calm look of those two people. Mrs. Dandridge
was very calm--her grief was too great for her to scream as the others did when they went in.
She stood and looked at her Mack; then turning to Boss, she said: "Cousin Eddie, how brave
he was! He died for his country." Poor, sorrowing, misguided woman! It was not for his country
he died, but for the perpetuation of the cruel, the infamous system of human slavery. All the
servants were allowed to come in and view the body. Many sad tears were shed by them. Some
of the older slaves clasped their hands, as if in mute prayer, and exclaimed, as they passed
by the coffin: "He was a lovin boy." It seems that all his company but five or six were killed.
At an early hour next morning the funeral party started for the home in Panola, where the body
of the lamented young man, sacrificed to an unholy cause, was buried, at the close of the same day.

Edward stayed at our house some six weeks, his ankle was so slow in getting well. At the end
of that time, he could walk with the aid of crutches, and he took Fanny and went home.

       *       *       *       *       *

ALARM OF THE MEMPHIS REBELS.

Not long after this the people were very much worked up over the military situation. The Yankees
had taken Nashville, and had begun to bombard Fort Pillow. The officials of the Memphis and
Ohio railroad company became alarmed at the condition of things, fearing for the safety of
their stock. The officers, therefore, set about devising some plan by which they might get
the cars down on the Memphis and Jackson road, where they imagined their property would be
safe from the now terrible Yankees. The railroad officials at once set to work to buy the right
of way through Main street, to give them the connection with the southern road named. At first
it was refused by the city authorities, but finally the right of way was granted. When, however,
the railroad men began to lay the ties and rails, the people grew furious. Some fled at once,
for they imagined that this act of the railroad officials indicated that the Yankees must be
coming pretty near. Boss became so excited, at this time, that he almost felt like going away
too. The family grew more and more uneasy; and it was the continual talk: "We must get away
from Memphis. The companies are already moving their rolling stock, fearing the Yankees may
come at any time and destroy everything; we must get away," said Boss, speaking to the madam.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FAMILY FLEE FROM MEMPHIS.

Things continued in this way until about June, 1862. The Union troops had taken Fort Pillow.
We had heard the firing of cannon, and did not know what it meant. One morning I was in the
city after the mail, and I learned that a transient boat had just come down the river, which
had lost a part of her wheelhouse. She was fired on from Fort Pillow, sustaining this serious
damage from the shot. This increased the excitement among the people; and our folks became
alarmed right away, and commenced talking of moving and running the servants away from the
Yankees, to a place of safety. McGee was trying for some time to get some one to take the house,
that is, to live in and care for it until after the war, while the family were gone. They never
thought that slavery would be abolished, and so hoped to come back again. After some search,
they found a widow, a Mrs. Hancock. She was to have full charge of the house and continue keeping
boarders, as she had been doing in Memphis. The vaunted courage of this man seems to have early
disappeared, and his thought was chiefly devoted to getting his family and his slaves into
some obscure place, as far away as possible from the Yankees, that were to be so easily whipped.
We were about two weeks getting ready to leave, stowing away some of the things they did not
want to move. The Boss and his family, my wife and I, and all the house servants were to go
to Panola, to his father's. The family went by rail, but I had to drive through in a wagon.

       *       *       *       *       *

I AM TAKEN TO BOLIVAR FARM.

Soon after the family all reached Master Jack's, Boss took me to his own farm in Bolivar county.
This separated me for a time from my wife, for she remained with the family. I had to look
after the house, at the farm, attend the dining room, and, between meals, sew every day, making
clothes for the hands. I could run on the machine eighteen to twenty pairs of pants a day,
but two women made the button holes and did the basting for me, getting the goods all ready
for the machine.

       *       *       *       *       *

CAPTURE OF A UNION TRADING BOAT.

The Yankees had made a raid through Bolivar, before I came, and the excitement had not abated,
as they were spreading themselves all through the state. There was a Union trading boat, the
Lake City, that had been successful in exchanging her goods for cotton that came from Memphis.
She usually stopped at Helena, Fryer's Point and other small towns; but on a trip at this time
she came about fifty miles farther down the river, to Carson's Landing, right at Boss' farm.
She was loaded with all kinds of merchandise--sugar, tobacco, liquor, etc. She had a crew of
about forty men, but they were not well prepared for a vigorous defense. The rebel soldiers
stationed in the vicinity saw her as she dropped her anchor near the landing, and they determined
to make an effort for her capture. They put out pickets just above our farm, and allowed no
one to pass, or stop to communicate with the boat. Every one that sought to pass was held prisoner,
and every precaution taken to prevent those on the boat from learning of the purposes of the
rebels, knowing that the boat would land in the morning, if not informed of the danger, and
then it was anticipated that they could easily make her a prize. There was a small ferry boat
behind the steamer, and as the latter dropped down stream, and then steamed up to the landing,
the former stood off for a few moments. As the steamer touched shore, the rebels charged on
her, and captured her without a struggle. In the meantime the ferry boat, seeing what had happened,
sped away up stream, the soldiers firing at her, but doing little damage, except the breaking
of the glass in the pilot house. The rebels, seeing that the ferry boat had escaped them, turned
their attention to the unloading of the steamer. They sent out for help in this work, and the
summons was answered by the neighbors far and near. Wagons were brought, two of which were
from our farm, and loaded with goods, which were taken to Deer Creek, forty miles from Carson
Landing. What goods they found themselves unable to carry away were packed in the warehouse.
The steamer was then burned. McGee was present, and the rebel captain gave him a written statement
of the affair to the effect that the residents were not responsible for it, and that this should
be a protection for them against the Union forces. The officers and crew of the steamer to
the number of forty were made prisoners, and taken to Deer Creek, the rebel headquarters of
that region, and put in the jail there. The ferry boat that escaped went to Helena, Arkansas,
and carried the news of the affair to the Union forces there.

       *       *       *       *       *

BOSS TAKEN PRISONER.

I was told by Boss to take my stand on our veranda, and keep watch on the river, and if I saw
any boat coming down to let him know at once. I kept a close watch the next morning until about
eight o'clock, when I saw a boat, but she had almost gone past our house before I discovered
her. I ran into the house and told Boss. He ordered me to get his horse at once, which I did;
and he mounted and went down to the landing as fast as he could. Upon reaching there, he was
taken prisoner by the Union soldiers, who had just landed from the boat. All who came near
were captured. The Union soldiers went to work and transferred all the goods which the rebels
had put into the warehouse from the boat which they had captured, then setting fire to the
warehouse and the postoffice, they pushed off yelling and shouting with glee. Among those captured
by the Union soldiers were three other rich planters besides Boss, all of whom were taken to
Helena. After they had been there about a week, the planters offered to secure the release
of the Unionists captured on the boat which the rebels had burned at Carson Landing, and who
had been sent to the rebel jail at Deer Creek, if they were guaranteed their own release in
exchange. They offered to bear the expense of a messenger to the rebel officer, at Deer Creek,
with this proposition. The Union officer at Helena accepted the proposition, and the messenger
was sent off. It was arranged that he should stop over at our house, both on his way down and
back. Upon his return, he stopped over night, and the next morning proceeded on his way. When
he had gone about five miles, he saw a flat-boat at a landing, on which were people drinking
and having a merry time. He stopped, and went aboard; and, in joining the carousal, he soon
became so intoxicated that he was unable to go on with his journey. Among those present was
one Gilcrease, a cousin of the McGees, who recognized the man as the messenger in this important
business, went to him and asked him for the letters he carried. The fellow refusing to give
them up, Gilcrease took them from him, and at once sent to our overseer for a reliable man
by whom to forward them to the commandant at Helena. The overseer called me up from the cabin
to his room, and told me that I was to go to Helena to carry some important papers, and to
come to him for them in the morning, and make an early start. I left him and went back to my cabin.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY THIRD EFFORT FOR FREEDOM.

I made up my mind that this would be a good chance for me to run away. I got my clothes, and
put them in an old pair of saddle bags--two bags made of leather, connected with a strip of
leather, and used when traveling horseback for the same purpose as a satchel is used in traveling
in the cars. I took these bags, carried them about a half mile up the road, and hid them in
a fence corner, where I could get them in the morning when I had started on my trip. Fryer's
Point, the place to which I was to go, was about fifty miles from the farm. I started early
in the morning, and, after I had gone twenty-five miles, I came to the farm of William McGee,
a brother of the madam, and stopped to change horses. I found that William McGee was going,
in the morning, down to old Master Jack's; so I took one of their horses, leaving mine to use
in its place, went right to Fryer's Point, delivered the letters to a man there to carry to
Helena, and got back to William McGee's farm that night. I made up my mind to go with William
down to Panola, where madam was, to tell her about Boss being captured. The next morning, he
started, and Gibson, his overseer and myself accompanied him. He questioned me about the capture
of Boss, what the soldiers had done, etc., and I told him all I knew of the matter. "Well,
Lou," he said, "why did you not bring us some whisky?" "I did bring a little with me," I said.
He laughed, saying: "Oh, well, when we come to some clear water we will stop and have a drink."
Then I said: "Mr. Smith will look for me to-night, but he wont see me. I am going to tell the
madam that Boss is captured." "Hey, ho!" he said, "then you are running away." I replied: "Well
I know Miss Sarah don't know Boss is in prison." We traveled on, all three of us, stopping
at intervals to be refreshed. After two days, we arrived at Panola. Our journey was a tedious
one. The streams were so swollen in places that we could hardly pass. The Tallehatchie we had
to swim, and one of the men came near losing his horse and his life. The horses became tangled
in a prep vine, as we were nearing the shore at which we aimed, and, the current being very
swift, we were carried below the landing place; but, finally, we got safely ashore, McGee landing,
and we following. Reaching Panola, wet and weary, I conveyed to madam the story of her husband's
capture and imprisonment, a rumor of which had already reached her.

The next morning was Christmas, and a number of the family had come to spend it together. They
had heard that McGee was captured and in prison; but, now, as I told them every feature of
the affair in detail, they grew excited and talked wildly about it. Among those who came were
Dr. Dandridge and his wife, Blanton McGee and his wife, Tim Oliver and his wife. All these
women were daughters of old Master Jack McGee, and sisters to the madam. Mrs. Farrington and
old lady McGee were already there. These re-unions on Christmas were a long established custom
with them, but the pleasure of this one was sadly marred by the vicissitudes and calamities
of the war. A shadow hung over all the family group. They asked me many questions about Boss,
and, of course, I related all I knew.

After I had been there three days, they started me back with letters for Boss. When I left
it was near night, and I was to stop over at Master Jack's farm fifteen miles away. It was
expected that I would reach Fryer's Point on the third morning, thus allowing me three days
to go sixty miles; but I could not make much headway, as the roads were so heavy. The understanding
was that I was to deliver the letters to the same gentleman, at Fryer's, to whom I delivered
the others, for forwarding to Boss at Helena. I was then to go straight to the farm at Boliver,
and report to Smith, the overseer. But after I had got about four miles away, I concluded that
I would not go back to the farm, but try to get to the Yankees. I knew I had disobeyed Smith
by going down to the madam's to tell her about Boss, because he told me not to go when I spoke
to him about it. And now if I went back I feared he would kill me; for I knew there would be
no escape for me from being run into the bull ring, and that torture I could not think of enduring.
I, therefore, stopped, and, taking the bridle and saddle from the horse, hid them in the corner
of a fence in a cornfield. Then I went into the woods. The papers which I had were in the saddlebag
safe. The place where I stayed in the daytime was in a large shuck-pen--a pen built in the
field to feed stock from, in the winter time. This pen was on Dr. Dandridge's farm; and the
second night I worked my way up near the house. Knowing all the servants, I was watching a
chance to send word to the coachman, Alfred Dandridge, that I wanted him to tell my wife that
I was not gone. I went down to his cabin, in the quarters; and, after a short time he came.
I was badly scared, and my heart was heavy and sore; but he spoke comfortingly to me, and I
was cheered, somewhat, especially when he promised to see Matilda, and tell her of my whereabouts.
He gave me some food, and hid me away for the night in his house. I kept close all the next
day; and, at night, when all was still, Alfred and I crept out, and went to old Master Jack's.
The distance was not great, and we soon covered it. Alfred went in and told my wife that I
was outside and wanted to see her. She came out, and was so frightened and nervous that she
commenced sobbing and crying, and almost fainted when I told her, in low tones, that I was
going to try to get to Memphis, and that Alfred was helping to plan a way to this end. The
rebels occupied both roads leading to Memphis, and I was puzzled to know how to reach the city
without coming in contact with them. You see it is in the shape of a wedge. It is used to raise or
depress the muzzle of the mortar. The figure 8 represents what is called a quoin, and keeps
the bolster in its place. The figure 9 represents one of the many bolts by which the whole is
kept in place on the boat.

The boat is built like a raft, of thick timbers, laid crosswise and bolted firmly together. It
is about thirty feet long and twelve wide, and has iron plates around its sides to screen the
men from Rebel sharpshooters. The mortar is more than four feet in diameter. It is thicker
than it is long. To fire a mortar accurately requires a good knowledge of mathematics, of the relations
of curves to straight lines, for the shell is fired into the air at an angle of thirty or forty
degrees. The gunner must calculate the distance from the mortar to the enemy in a straight line,
and then elevate or lower the muzzle to drop his shell not too near, neither too far away.
He must calculate the time it will take for the shell to describe the curve through the air.
Then he must make his fuses of the right length to have the shell explode at the proper time,
either high in the air, that its fragments may rain down on the encampment of the enemy, or
close down to the ground among the men working the guns. It requires skill and a great deal of
practice to do all this.

The mortar flotilla was commanded by Captain Henry E. Maynadier, assisted by Captain E. B. Pike of
the engineers. There were four Masters of Ordnance, who commanded each four mortars. Each mortar-boat
had a crew of fifteen men; three of them were Mississippi flatboatmen, who understood all
about the river, the currents and the sand-bars.

Commodore Foote's flotilla consisted of the Benton, 16 guns, which was his flag-ship, covered
all over with iron plates, and commanded by Captain Phelps; the Mound City, 13 guns, commanded
by Captain Kelty; the Carondelet, 13 guns, Lieutenant Walke; the Cincinnati, 13 guns, Captain
Stemble; the St. Louis, 13 guns, Captain Dove; the Louisville, 13 guns, Lieutenant Paulding;
the Pittsburg, 13 guns, Lieutenant Thompson; the Conestoga, 9 guns, Lieutenant Blodgett; in
all, 103 guns and 10 mortars. The Conestoga was used to guard the ammunition-boats, and took
no part in the active operations. Commodore Foote had several small steam-tugs, which were used
as tenders, to carry orders from boat to boat.

The Southern people thought that Island No. 10 could not be taken. On the 6th of March a newspaper
at Memphis said:--

"For the enemy to get possession of Memphis and the Mississippi Valley would require an army
of greater strength than Secretary Stanton can concentrate upon the banks of the Mississippi River.
The gunboats in which they have so much confidence have proved their weakness. They cannot stand
our guns of heavy calibre. The approach of the enemy by land to New Madrid induces us to believe
that the flotilla is one grand humbug, and that it is not ready,
and does not intend to descend the river.

Foote, the commander of the Federal fleet, served his time under Commodore Hollins, and should
he attempt to descend the river, Hollins will teach him that some things can be done as well as
others."[25]

[Footnote 25: Memphis Argus.]

On Saturday, the 15th of March, the fleet approached the island. The clouds were thick and lowering.
The rain pattered on the decks of the gunboats, the fog settled upon the river. As the boats
swept round a point of land, the old river pilot, who was on the watch, who knew every crook,
turn, sand-bar, and all the objects along the bank, sung out, "Boat ahead!"

The sailors scrambled to the portholes; Captain Phelps sprang from the cabin to the deck.

There she was, a steamer, just visible through the fog a mile ahead. It was the Grampus, owned
by Captain Chester of the steamer Alps, who had two of the mortar-boats in tow. He belonged to Pittsburg,
and used to carry coal to Memphis. When the war broke out the Rebels seized his steamboats and
his coal-barges, and refused to pay him for the coal they had already purchased. The act roused
all his ire. He was a tall, athletic man, and had followed the river thirty years. Although surrounded
by enemies, he gave them plain words.

"You are a set of thieves and rascals! You are cowards, every one of you!" he shouted.

He took off his coat, rolled up his shirt-sleeves, bared his great brawny arms, dashed his hat
upon the ground.

"Now come on! I'll fight every one of you, you infernal rascals! I'll whip you all! I challenge you
to fight me!

       You call yourselves chivalrous people.

You say you believe in fair play.

If I whip, you shall give up my boats, but if I am beaten, you are welcome to them."

They laughed in his face, and said: "Blow away, old fellow. We have got your boats. Help yourself
if you can."

A hot-headed secessionist cried out, "Hang the Yankee!"

The crowd hustled him about, but he had a few old friends, who took his part, and he succeeded
in making his escape.

Captain Phelps looked a moment at the Grampus. He saw her wheels move. She was starting off.

"Out with the starboard gun! Give her a shot!"

Lieutenant Bishop runs his eye along the sights of the great eleven-inch gun, which has been loaded
and run out of the porthole in a twinkling.

There is a flash. A great cloud puffs out into the fog, and the shot screams through the air and
is lost to sight. We cannot see where it fell. Another--another. Boom!--boom!--boom!--from the
Cincinnati and Carondelet. But the Grampus is light-heeled. The distance widens. You can hardly
see her, and at last she vanishes like a ghost from sight.

We were not more than four or five miles from the head of the island. One by one the boats rounded
to along the Kentucky shore. The sailors sprang upon the land, carrying out the strong warps,
and fastening us to the trunks of the buttonwood-trees.

There was a clearing and a miserable log-hut near by. The family had fled, frightened by the
cannonade. We found them cowering in the woods,--a man, his wife and daughter. The land all around
them was exceedingly rich, but they were very poor. All they had to eat was hog and hominy.
They had been told that the Union troops would rob them of all they
had, which was not likely, because they had nothing worth stealing!

       They were trembling with fear, but when they found the soldiers and
sailors well-behaved and peaceable, they forgot their terror.

The fog lifts at last, and we can see the white tents of the Rebels on the Tennessee shore. There
are the batteries, with the cannon grim and black pointing up stream. Round the point of land
is the island. A half-dozen steamboats lie in the stream below it. At times they steam up to
the bend and then go back again,--wandering back and forth like rats in a cage. They cannot get
past General Pope's guns at New Madrid. On the north side of the island is a great floating-battery
of eight guns, which has been towed up from New Orleans. General Mackall has sunk a steamboat in
a narrow part of the channel on the north side of the island, so that if Commodore Foote attempts
to run the blockade he will be compelled to pass along the south channel, exposed to the fire
of all the guns in the four batteries upon the Tennessee shore, as well as those upon the island.

Two
of the mortar-boats were brought into position two miles from the Rebel batteries. We waited
in a fever of expectation while Captain Maynadier was making ready, for thirteen-inch mortars
had never been used in war. The largest used by the French and English in the bombardment of
Sebastopol were much smaller.

There came a roar like thunder. It was not a sharp, piercing report, but a deep, heavy boom, which
rolled along the mighty river, echoing and re-echoing from shore to shore,--a prolonged reverberation,
heard fifty miles away. A keg of powder was burned in the single explosion. The shell rose in
a beautiful curve, exploded five hundred feet high, and fell in fragments around the distant
encampment.

There was a flash beneath the dark forest-trees near the encampment, a puff of white smoke, an answering
roar, and a shot fell into the water a half-mile down stream from the mortars. The Rebels had
accepted the challenge.

Sunday came. The boats having the mortars in tow dropped them along the Missouri shore. The gunboats
swung into the stream. The Benton fired her rifled guns over the point of land at the Rebel
steamboats below the island. There was a sudden commotion. They quickly disappeared down the
river towards New Madrid, out of range. During the morning there was a deep booming from the
direction of Point Pleasant. The Rebel gunboats were trying to drive Colonel Plummer from his
position.

Ten o'clock came, the hour for divine service. The church flag was flung out on the flagstaff
of the Benton, and all the commanders called their crews together for worship. I was on board
the Pittsburg with Captain Thompson. The crew assembled on the upper deck. There were men
from Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island, from the Eastern as well as the Western
States. Some of them were scholars and teachers in Sabbath-schools at home. They were dressed
in dark-blue, and each sailor appeared in his Sunday suit. A small table was brought up from
the cabin, and the flag of our country spread upon it. A Bible was brought. We stood around
the captain with uncovered heads, while he read the twenty-seventh Psalm.

After the Psalm, the prayer, "Our Father which art in heaven."

How impressive! The uncovered group standing around the open Bible, and the low voices of a
hundred men in prayer. On our right hand, looking down the mighty river, were the mortars, in
play, jarring the earth with their heavy thunders. The shells were sweeping in graceful curves
through the air. Upon our left hand, the Benton and Carondelet were covering themselves with
white clouds, which slowly floated away over the woodlands, fragrant with the early buds and
blossoms of spring. The Rebel batteries below us were flaming and smoking. Solid shot screamed
past us, shells exploded above us. Away beyond the island, beyond the dark-green of the forest,
rose the cloud of another bombardment, where Commodore Hollins was vainly endeavoring to drive
Colonel Plummer from his position. So the prayer was mingled with the deep, wild thunders of
the cannonade.

A light fog, like a thin veil, lay along the river. After service, we saw that strange and peculiar
optical illusion called mirage, so often seen in deserts, where the thirsty traveller beholds lakes,
and shady places, cities, towns, and ships. I was looking up stream, and saw, sweeping round
the wooded point of land, something afloat. A boat or floating battery it seemed to be. There
were chimneys, a flagstaff, a porthole. It was seemingly two hundred feet long, coming broadside
towards us.

"Captain Thompson, see there!"

He looked at it, and jumped upon the pilot-house, scanned it over and over. The other officers
raised their glasses.

"It looks like a floating battery!" said one.

"There is a porthole, certainly!" said another.

It came nearer. Its proportions increased.

"Pilot, put on steam! Head her up stream!" said Captain Thompson.

"Lieutenant, beat to quarters! Light up the magazine! We will see what she is made of."

There was activity on deck. The guns were run out, shot and shell were brought up. The boat moved up
stream. Broadside upon us came the unknown craft.

Suddenly the illusion vanished. The monster three hundred feet long, changed to an old coal-barge. The
chimneys became two timbers, the flagstaff a small stick of firewood.

The fog, the currents of air, had produced the transformation. We had a hearty laugh over our
preparations for an encounter with the enemy in our rear. It was an enemy more quickly disposed
of than the one in front.

The Rebels in the upper battery waved a white flag. The firing ceased. Commodore Foote sent Lieutenant
Bishop down with a tug and a white flag flying, to see what it meant. He approached the battery.

"Are
we to understand that you wish to communicate with us?" he asked.

"No, sir," said an officer wearing a gold-laced coat.

       "Then why do you display a white flag?"

"It is a mistake, sir. It is a signal-flag. I regret that it has deceived you."

"Good morning, sir."

"Good morning, sir."

     The tug steams back to the Benton, the white flag
     is taken down, and the uproar begins again.

Lieutenant Bishop made good use of his eyes. There were seven thirty-two-pounders and one heavy
rifled gun in the upper battery.

Commodore Foote was not ready to begin the bombardment in earnest till Monday noon, March 17th.

The
Benton, Cincinnati, and St. Louis dropped down stream, side by side, and came into position
about a mile from the upper batteries. Anchors were dropped from the stern of each gunboat,
that they might fight head on, using their heavy rifled guns.

Their position was on the east side of the river. The Mound City and Carondelet took position
near the west bank, just below the mortars. The boats were thus placed to bring a cross fire
upon the upper Rebel battery.

"Pay no attention to the island, but direct your fire into the upper battery!" is the order.

A
signal is raised upon the flag-ship. We do not understand the signification of the flag, but
while we look at it the ten mortars open fire, one after another, in rapid succession. The
gunboats follow.

       There are ten shells, thirteen inches in diameter, rising high in
air.

There are handfuls of smoke flecking the sky, and a prolonged, indescribable
crashing, rolling, and rumbling.

You have seen battle-pieces by the great painters; but the highest artistic skill cannot portray
the scene. It is a vernal day, as beautiful as ever dawned. The gunboats are enveloped in
flame and smoke. The unfolding clouds are slowly wafted away by the gentle breeze. Huge columns
rise majestically from the mortars. A line of white--a thread-like tissue--spans the sky. It
is the momentary and vanishing mark of the shell in the invisible air. There are little splashes
in the stream, where the fragments of iron fall. There are pillars of water tossed upward
in front of the earthwork, which break into spray, painted with rainbow hues by the bright
sunshine. A round shot skips along the surface and pierces the embankment. Another just clears
the parapet, and cuts down a tree beyond. The air is filled with sticks, timbers, branches
of trees, and earth, as if a dozen thunderbolts had fallen upon the spot from a cloudless sky.
There are explosions deep under ground, where the great shells have buried themselves in their
downward flight. There are volumes of smoke which rise like the mists of a summer morning.

There
are some brave fellows behind that breastwork. Amid this storm they come out from their shelter
and load a gun. There it comes! A flash, a cloud, a hissing, a crash! The shot strikes the
upper deck of the Benton, tears up the iron plates, breaks the thick timbers into kindlings,
falls upon the lower deck, bounds up again to the beams above, and drops into Commodore Foote's writing-desk!

All
around, from the gunboats, the mortars, from all the batteries, are flashes, clouds of smoke,
and thunderings, which bring to mind the gorgeous imagery of the Book of Revelation in the New
Testament, descriptive of the scenes of the Last Judgment.

The firing ceased at sunset. The Benton was struck four times, and
the Cincinnati once. No one was injured by these shots, but one of
the guns of the St. Louis burst, killing two men instantly, and wounding
thirteen.

When the bombardment was at its height, Commodore Foote
received a letter from Cairo, containing the sad information that
a beloved son had died suddenly. It was a sore bereavement, but it
was no time for him to give way to grief, no time to think of his
great affliction.

After the firing had ceased, I sat with him in
the cabin of the Benton. There were tears upon his cheeks. He was
thinking of his loss.

Were he living now, I should have no right
to give the conversation I had with him, but he has gone to his reward,
leaving us his bright example. These were his words, as I remember:--

"It
is a terrible blow, but the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away;
blessed be His name. It is hard for me to bear, but no harder than
it will be for the fathers of the noble men who were killed on the
St. Louis. Poor fellows! I feel bad for the wounded."

He called the
orderly who stood outside the cabin.

"Orderly, tell the surgeon that
I want to see him."

The surgeon came in.

"Surgeon, I wish you to
do everything you can for those poor fellows on the St. Louis. Don't
omit anything that will contribute to their comfort."

"It shall be
done, sir," said the surgeon, as he left the cabin.

"Poor fellows!
I must see them myself. It is a great deal worse to have a gun explode
than to have the men wounded by the enemy's shot, for they lose confidence.
I have protested again and again to the Department against using these
old thirty-two-pounders, which have been weakened by being rifled;
but I had to take them or none. I had to pick them up wherever I could
find them. I have tried my best to get the fleet in good trim, and
it is too bad to have the men slaughtered in this way. I shall try
to do my duty. The country needs the services of every man. We shall
have a long war. I would like to rest, and have a little breathing
spell, but I shall not ask for it. I shall try to do my duty to my
country and to God. He is leading this nation in a way we know not
of. My faith is unshaken in Him. He will bring us out of all trouble
at last."

Thus, in the hour of battle, while attending to his duties,
while bearing up under the intelligence that a beloved son had died,
he talked calmly, cheerfully, and hopefully of the future, and manifested
the care and tenderness of a father for the wounded.

Although the
gunboats ceased firing at sunset, the mortars were in play all night.
It was beautiful to see the great flash, illuminating all the landscape,
the white cloud rolling upward and outward, unfolding, expanding,
spreading over the wide river, and the bright spark rising high in
the air, turning with the revolving shell, reaching its altitude and
sailing straight along the arch of the parabola, then descending with
increasing rapidity, ending in a bright flash, and an explosion which
echoes and re-echoes far away. The next day I went with Captain Maynadier
across the point to reconnoitre the batteries on the island and watch
the explosions of the shells. We passed a deserted farm-house, and
saw a squad of Colonel Buford's soldiers running down pigs and chickens.
Crossing a creek upon a corduroy bridge, we came to a second squad.
One was playing a violin, and several were dancing; they were as happy
as larks. We stood upon the bank of the river opposite the island.
Before us was the floating battery, which was formerly the New Orleans
dry-dock. It mounted eight guns. There were four batteries on the
Tennessee shore and several on the island. We could see the artillerists
at their guns. They saw us, and sent a shell whizzing over our heads,
which struck in a cornfield, and ploughed a deep furrow for the farmer
owning it. We went where they could not see us, and mounted a fence
to watch the effect of the mortar-firing. It was interesting to sit
there and hear the great shells sail through the air five hundred
feet above us. It was like the sound of far-off, invisible machinery,
turning with a constant motion, not the sharp, shrill whistle of a
rifled-bolt, but a whirr and roll, like that which you may sometimes
hear above the clouds in a thunder-storm. One shell fell like a millstone
into the river. The water did not extinguish the fuse, and a great
column was thrown up fifty feet high. Another buried itself deep in
the ground before it burst, and excavated a great hole. I learned,
after the place surrendered, that one fell through a tent where several
officers were sitting, playing cards, and that the next moment the
tent, furniture, officers, and fifty cartloads of earth were sailing
through the air! None of them were wounded, but they were bruised,
wrenched, and their nice clothes covered with dirt.

At night there
was a storm, with vivid lightning and heavy thunder. The mortars kept
up their fire. It was a sublime spectacle,--earth against heaven,
but the artillery of the skies was the best.

You would have given
a great deal, I dare say, to have seen all this; but there is another
side to the story. Can you eat dirt? Can you eat grease in all its
forms,--baked, boiled, fried, simmered? Can you bear variegated butter,
variable in taste and smell? Can you get along with ham, hash, and
beans for breakfast, beans, hash, and ham for dinner, and hash, ham,
and beans for supper, week after week, with fat in all its forms,
with cakes solid enough for grape-shot to fire at the Rebels, with
blackest coffee and the nearest available cow fifty miles off?--with
sour molasses, greasy griddle-cakes, with Mississippi water thick
with the filth of the great valley of the West, with slime from the
Cincinnati slaughter-houses, sweepings from the streets, slops from
the steamboats, with all the miasma and mould of the forests? The
fairest countenance soon changes to a milk and molasses color, and
energy lags, and strength becomes weakness under such living. But for his wanton shooting of the Union officer, he would probably not have met
his death as he did.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNION SOLDIERS PASS THE PANOLA HOME.

One winter night, while I was at old Master Jack's, I was awakened by a rumbling noise like
that of heavy wagons, which continued steadily and so long a time that I finally concluded
it must be an army passing, and such I found to be the case, upon getting up and venturing
out, the rumbling which had awakened me being caused by the passing artillery. I was afraid
to go out straight to the soldiers, but would take a few steps at a time, then stop and listen
behind a tree or the shrubbery. All seemed quiet--there was no talking. I had listened about
twenty minutes when there seemed to be a halt at the creek, some distance from the house. Soon
afterwords I heard the command given: "Forward!" I at once made up my mind that they were Yankee
soldiers. I got on my knees and crawled to the fence, not daring to go openly, fearing that
they might hear or see me and shoot, supposing me to be a spy. I went back into the house and
told my wife that they were Yankees who had just passed. "Uncle George," said I, "this would
be a good time for us to go." "Oh, no," said he, "we are not quite ready." Uncle George's cabin
was where my wife and I stayed while at old Master Jack's. In the morning I was to carry a
parcel to Como, a place not far from home, to Mr. James McGee, who was in the rebel army. It
was not quite daylight when I made ready to go on my trip, for I was anxious to find out more
about the soldiers. Going to the stable and saddling my horse, I mounted and rode out to the
big gate leading to the main road, just as day was dawning. As I dismounted to open the gate,
some soldiers were passing and an officer sung out to me, "Hello! which way are you going."
I said "to Como, to carry this parcel of clothing to my young master in the war." "You have
a fine horse," said the officer, "I guess I will exchange horses with you." He took my package
of clothing and some letters which I had to mail and my horse, leaving me his, which was a
very poor animal. I was badly scared at this performance, fearing that I would be severely
whipped for the loss of the horse and package. Yet how could I help it? We knew nothing but
to serve a white man, no matter what he asked or commanded. As a matter of course, I did not
go to Como, as I had nothing to take--the officer had everything, but went back to the cabin.
I supposed that the soldiers had all passed; but in about half an hour Aunt Kitty, on looking
out of her cabin window, exclaimed: "My God! just look at the soldiers!" The yard was covered
with the blue coats. Another venerable slave said: "My Lord! de year of jubilee am come." During
the excitement I ran to the big house, and told the madam that the Yankees were there, and
had taken my horse and every thing I had. Old Master Jack had heard the news, but was not able
to come out. He had arisen, but, when he knew of the presence of the Yankees, he went back
to bed, calling for Kitty to get him a mush poultice. "Tell Kitty-ity-ity to get me a mush
poultice-oltice." It was customary, after the beginning of the war, for him to take sick, and
call for a poultice to be put upon his stomach whenever he heard of the Yankees being near.
He and many like him were especially valorous only when the blue coats were far away. The soldiers
went into the dairy and drank all the milk, helped themselves to butter, cheese, meat, bread
and everything in sight which they wanted. Nothing was said to them by the white folks, but
the slaves were glad, and whispered to each other: "Ah! we's goin' to be free." Old Master
Jack, lying on his couch would ask every little while: "Where are they? Are they gone?" After
they had all left the premises, he said; "My God! I can't stand it. Them devils-evils are just
goin' through the country destroyin' everything." I was sent down to get Uncle Peter for old
master, and when Peter came up the old man asked: "Well, did any of the servants go away? And,
sir, them devils took Louis' horse and the clothes he had for his young master."

       *       *       *       *       *

HIDING VALUABLES FROM THE YANKEES.

Right after this the McGees commenced planning to put away their valuables, to keep them from
the Union soldiers. All the servants had to fill up their bed-ticks with fine gin cotton--the
lint part--for safe keeping. Great boxes and barrels were packed full of their best things,
and put into the cellar, under the house. It was not exactly a cellar, but a large shallow
excavation, which held a great deal. We put all the solid silver ware, such as cake baskets,
trays, spoons, forks, dishes, etc., in boxes, and buried them under the hen house. Great packages
of the finest clothing I had to make up, and these were given in charge of certain servants
whose duty it was to run into the big house and get them, whenever they heard that the Yankees
were coming, and take them to their cabins. This was a shrewd arrangement, for the soldiers
never went into the cabins to get anything. When the soldiers had passed, these packages were
taken back to the house. It speaks well for the honesty and faithfulness of the slaves that
such trusts could be devolved upon them, notwithstanding all the cruelties inflicted upon them
by their masters.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEATH TO RUNAWAY SLAVES.

It was about this time, that the law or regulation of the rebel government was promulgated,
authorizing or directing the shooting or hanging of any slave caught trying to get away to
the Union army. This barbarous law was carried out in many cases, for every little while we
would hear of some slave who was caught running away, and hung or shot. A slave belonging to
Boss, ran away, and got safely within the Union lines; but he returned to get his sister. They
both got away from the house, but had gone only a few miles, when William McGee overtook them,
and shot the man dead. William boasted of this, but told Uncle Peter, the foreman, that he
never wanted it mentioned.

       *       *       *       *       *

SLAVES HUNG AND LEFT TO ROT AS A WARNING.

Two slaves belonging to one Wallace, one of our nearest neighbors, had tried to escape to the
Union soldiers, but were caught, brought back and hung. All of our servants were called up,
told every detail of the runaway and capture of the poor creatures and their shocking murder,
and then compelled to go and see them where they hung. I never shall forget the horror of the
scene--it was sickening. The bodies hung at the roadside, where the execution took place, until
the blue flies literally swarmed around them, and the stench was fearful. This barbarous spectacle
was for the purpose of showing the passing slaves what would be the fate of those caught in
the attempt to escape, and to secure the circulation of the details of the awful affair among
them, throughout all the neighborhood. It is difficult at this day for those not familiar with
the atrocities of the institution of slavery to believe that such scenes could ever have been
witnessed in this or any other civilized land, as a result simply of a human being's effort
to reach a portion of the country, where the freedom of which it was said to be the home, could
be enjoyed without molestation. Yet such was the horrible truth in not one case alone, but
in many, as I know only too well.

       *       *       *       *       *

RUNAWAY SLAVE CAUGHT AND WHIPPED.

One day while I was waiting at dinner, some of the children from the slave quarters came running
into the house, and said to old Master Jack: "Uncle John is going away--he is down to the creek."
He had been put in the carpenter shop, fastened in the stocks, but by some means he had gotten
the stocks off his feet, and got loose. All in the house immediately got up and ran out. Old
master told me to run and catch the runaway. I did not like to do it, but had to obey. Old
master and I ran in pursuit, and soon overtook him. He could not run, as the stocks were still
on his arms and neck. We brought him back, and he was "staked out"--that is, four stakes were
driven into the ground, the arms tied to two and the legs to the other two. He was then paddled
with the whipping paddle upon the bottom of his feet, by old Master Jack, until blood blisters
arose, when he took his knife and opened them. I was then sent for salt and water, and the
bruises of the suffering chattel were washed as usual in the stinging brine.

       *       *       *       *       *

A HOME GUARD ACCIDENTALLY SHOOTS HIMSELF.

After the capture of Memphis by the Union forces, the soldiers were in the habit of making
raids into the surrounding country. These were a source of alarm and anxiety among the people,
and they were constantly on the watch to defend their property and themselves, as best they
could. One day Dr. Charles Dandridge went over to one of our neighbors, Mr. Bobor's, to practice
shooting, and to see if he had heard anything new about the war. It was the custom of the home-guards
to meet weekly, and practice with their fire-arms, in order to be the better prepared, as they
pretended, for any sudden incursion of the now dreaded Yankee. Mr. Bobor had gotten a Yankee
pistol from some friend, who was in the army, and Dr. Charles wanted to see and try it. It
was shown him, and its workings explained. He took it and began shooting, and in showing the
other men how quickly he could shoot a Yankee, and mount his horse, he accidentally shot himself
under the short rib near his heart, and fell to the ground. All the men came running to him,
picked him up and carried him into the house, immediately sending word to Mrs. Dandridge and
Master Jack McGee, his father-in-law. The boys came hurrying in, and told us what had happened.
I hitched up and drove Boss over to Mr. Bobor's. We found the wounded man rapidly sinking;
and when, a little later, his wife came, he could not speak--only clasped her hand. He died
that night, and we carried his body to the home, which so short a time before, he had left
in health and high spirits. No casket was to be had--everything of that kind had been consumed
or shut out by the war. Accordingly two slaves were ordered to make a coffin, which they did,
using plain boards. It was then covered with black alpaca from a dress of the madam, and lined
with the cloth from Mrs. Dandridge's opera cloak. The regular material used for these purposes
was not to be had. By the time the coffin was ready, the body was so bloated, that it could
not be got into it. Resort was then had to a plain box, and in this the body of another of
the stricken family group was laid away. At the suggestion of old Master Jack, the coffin,
was put up in the carriage house, for safe keeping, he saying it would do for him to be buried
in. Sorrow had come to this family with such crushing force, that their former pride and boastful
spirit had given place to utter dejection.

       *       *       *       *       *

SUBSTITUTES FOR COFFEE.

During the war everything was scarce and dear, and substitutes were devised for many of those
things which had formerly been regarded as the necessaries of life. Sweet potatoes were peeled,
then cut in small pieces and put out in the sun to dry. They were then used as a substitute
for coffee, when that article became so scarce, toward the close of the war. Great quantities
of this preparation were used. Okra was another substitute for coffee. It was dried in the
pod, then the seeds shelled out, and these were dried again and prepared something as the coffee
is. This made a delicious drink when served with cream, being very rich and pleasant to the
taste. Quinine was a medicine that had been of almost universal use in the south; yet it became
so scarce that it was sold at seven dollars a bottle, and could not often be had at that price.
Lemon leaves were used as a substitute in cases of chills and fever. The leaves were made into
a tea, and given to the patient hot, to produce perspiration. During an attack of chills, I
was treated in this manner to some advantage. At any rate I got well, which can not always
be said of all methods of treatment.

CHAPTER IV.

REBELLION WEAKENING--SLAVES' HOPES STRENGTHENING.

       *       *       *       *       *

M'GEES SLAVES TAKEN TO ALABAMA.

While I was absent on my last runaway trip, the Yankees had made a raid through Panola; and
our people had become greatly frightened. As soon as they had got back with me and my fellow
runaways, they assembled a gang of slaves for the purpose of taking them to Atlanta, Ga., to
get them out of the reach of the Union soldiers. Among the slaves selected for the transfer
were myself, my wife Matilda, and the seamstress. The others all belonged to Dr. Dandridge
and Blanton McGee. Both the Drs. Dandridge went with us to Atlanta. We traveled across the
country until we came to Demopolis, Alabama, where we found Boss camped on the bank of the
Tombigbee river with all the farm slaves from Bolivar county. This was the first time I had
seen Boss since he was captured and taken to Helena. As my wife and I were the only ones in
the gang who belonged to Boss, we left those with whom we had come and joined his gang. We
all then went aboard a boat and were taken to the salt works, situated on the Tombigbee, ninety
miles from Mobile. These salt works belonged to the rebel government. The first president of
the works was Mr. Woolsey, of Salem, Alabama. During Mr. Woolsey's term, the first part of
1864, when we had been there some time, he wrote to Boss asking if he would sell myself and
wife, and offering $3,000 for both of us. Boss was indignant at this and curtly refused. My
wife acted as cook at the salt works, in the headquarters for the president, managers and clerks.
Mr. Woolsey was delighted with her cooking; her bread and rolls, he said, could not be surpassed.

       *       *       *       *       *

M'GEE'S GREAT SCHEME.

When the election of officers of the works came off in the fall, Mr. Gallatin McGee was chosen
president. Boss then hired us all, about 100 in number, to labor in these works, but he, of
course, received all the revenue. The work assigned me was that of butler at headquarters,
and my wife was cook. Both women and children, as well as men, were employed in these works.
After some months labor here, soon after Gallatin McGee became president, Matilda and I were
removed to the Montgomery headquarters, where we remained until nearly Christmas. A few days
before that time, Boss came to Montgomery and arranged for us to meet him in Mobile. We started
at the appointed time, reached the city in the morning, and I went directly to the hotel where
he told me he would be. I found him at once, and he informed me all about his plans for the
future, and what he expected to accomplish. He had purchased an island in the bay, a little
way from Mobile, where he had decided to establish salt works of his own. All the brick and
lumber for the buildings had been carried there, and work upon them was to be commenced immediately
after Christmas. He intended to make a home for the family on the island; and, as soon as he
could complete the works, to remove all his hands from the government works to his own. He
was very enthusiastic over this scheme, claiming that he would make far more money by it than
he was then receiving from hiring out his slaves. He told me that he would remain in Mobile
two or three days and would go to Panola to spend the holidays, after which he intended to
bring all the family to Mobile, and remain there until the island was in readiness to be occupied.
There was to be a general break up of the old home, and the beginning of a new manner of life.
I stayed in his room at the hotel all the forenoon, listening to his plans; then I went back
where my wife was stopping. As I left his room, he said: "Lou," as he always called me, "I
will see you and Matilda at the boat this evening." We went to the boat at the appointed time
and saw the Boss, but he did not come near us. As the boat was about to put off, I looked and
saw him walking up and down the levee, apparently much excited, running his hands nervously
through his hair--a habit common to him when he was worried. He seemed greatly distressed.
The military situation troubled him, for the Union army had conquered nearly everything; and
the fact now stared him in the face that he would soon lose his slaves. He never dreamed in
the beginning of the war that the Unionists would conquer, and that the slaves would be freed;
but now he saw that not only all his wealth in the bodies and souls of men was slipping away
from him, but that much, if not all of the gain which these chattels had brought him was likely
to "take wings and fly away."

       *       *       *       *       *

M'GEE'S DEATH.

We returned to the salt works the morning after leaving Mobile. Boss remained two days in Mobile,
and then started for Panola, the home of his father-in-law; but, on his way, he was taken sick,
having contracted a heavy cold which ran into pneumonia, and he lasted only a short time, dying
on New Year's day. He had taken cold in bringing the slaves from Bolivar over the river on
barges. The river was overflowed about fifty miles out, and the only way he could get the slaves
across was by using large barges made of logs. They were several days floating down in this
way, before he could get out to the railroad at Jackson, Miss., where he transferred them to
the cars. This was too much of an exposure and it killed him.

After Boss died all the plans were changed. Col. Hunting, son-in-law of old Master Jack, came
down to the salt works and hired us all out there for another year. This was the beginning
of the year 1865. Of master's plans concerning the island and his proposed salt works the family
knew little, for they questioned me close as to what he told me of the matter. What he spent
on the island in lumber, brick, etc., was lost, as they knew nothing of the particulars of
the expenditure. The madam remained at her fathers, and the slaves at the works.

       *       *       *       *       *

I MAKE SOME MONEY.

As I was here for another year, acting as butler, I thought I would try and see if I could
not make some money for myself. I asked Mr. Brooks, the manager of the works, if he could get
me some tobacco by sending to Mobile for it. He said he could; and on the fourth day thereafter,
in the evening, it came. I was anxious to get it the same evening, but Mr. Brooks said: "Oh!
I guess you had better wait until morning, then when you finish your work come down to the
office and get it--you will then have more time to see the boys in the works." In the morning
I was up early, and after doing my morning work I was off to Brooks' office. When I went in
he said: "There it is under the table." The package was so small I felt disappointed--a hundred
dollars worth ought to be more, said I to myself; but I took it, and went out among the men.
I thought I would try to sell it at five dollars a plug, and if I could not sell it at that
I would take four dollars. I must make something, for I had borrowed the money to buy it with;
and I saw that to clear anything on it, I must at least get four dollars a plug. The money
which I had borrowed was from three fellow servants, who had been fortunate in earning some
little time and had saved their money. The first man I met in the works bought two plugs, at
five dollars each; and after I had been there about an hour all was sold. So I went back with
a light heart. Mr. Brooks said to me at dinner: "Well, how did you get along with your tobacco?"
"I did very well," I said, "the only trouble was I did not have enough. I sold it for $180."
"Well," said he, "if you did, you made more clear money than the works here. How much a plug
did you sell it for?" at the same time drawing out his pencil and commencing to figure it up.
"I had thirty-six plugs," said I, "and I sold them for five dollars a plug." Nothing more was
said just then, but after dinner Brooks and two of the clerks went out on the veranda to smoke.
When they were in a good way smoking, Brooks slipped into the dining room, and said: "Well,
that was fine; you got five dollars a plug for the tobacco?" "Oh, yes!" I said, "tobacco is
scarce, and they were hungry for it; it went like hot cakes--the price was not questioned,
I sold at once." "What is the prospect for selling more?" he asked. "Will you sell it for half
the profit if I furnish the tobacco?" I said "yes." So he sent the same day for a box of tobacco--about
five hundred plugs. When the tobacco came the box was sawed in two and one-half sent up to
my room. I put some fellows out as agents to sell for me--Uncle Hudson, who took care of the
horses and mules at the works; John at the hospital; William, head chopper, among the 100 men
in the woods. Each brought in from $40.00 to $50.00 every two or three days, and took another
supply. Sometimes, when I had finished my work in the afternoon, I would get an old pony and
go around through the neighborhood and sell four or five plugs. It was a mystery to the servants
how I got the tobacco; but I did not let on that Brooks was backing me. In two weeks we had
taken in $1,600.00, and I was happy as I could be. Brooks was a fine fellow--a northerner by
birth, and did just what he said he would. I received one-half of the money. Of course this
was all rebel money, but I was sharp, and bought up all the silver I could find. Just as we
got on the other half of the box, Brooks received word that the Yankees were coming, and to
send all the hands to their masters. I was glad that I had made some money, knowing that I
would need it if I gained my freedom, which I now knew was quite probable, as the Union forces
were gaining ground everywhere. But the message ended my money-making, and I prepared to go
home to Panola.

       *       *       *       *       *

GOING BACK TO PANOLA.

Mr. Brooks fixed the return papers so that my wife and I could leave the party of slaves at
Demopolis, and go on thence to Panola by rail, to convey the news to madam that all hands were
coming home; that the Yankees were expected to capture the salt works within a short time.
At Jackson, some seven miles from the salt works, we were delayed over night by reason of lack
of facilities for crossing the Tombigbee river. The report that the Yankees were coming through
had created a panic among the white people; and hundreds, fleeing from their homes, had gathered
at the river, waiting and clamoring for an opportunity to cross. Though slaves were property,
and valuable on that account, the whites seemed to think that their own lives were in danger,
and to be protected first. They therefore took precedence of us. In the morning about seven
o'clock a steamer was seen coming at a distance; but it could not be discovered at once just
what the character of it was. The whites became alarmed. Some said: "The Yankees are coming."
Other said: "It is a gun boat--they will surely fire on us." But as the boat drew near the
people saw that there was nothing to fear--it was only the regular passenger boat. Besides
the hundreds of people, there were scores of wagons, filled with household goods to go over,
and the passage was slow and tedious. We finally got across and traveled as far as Demopolis,
where Matilda and I left the other slaves, and took a train and went on to Panola. I delivered
the papers to the madam from Brooks, which told her all the particulars concerning the break
up at the salt works. She sent wagons right away after the other slaves who were coming back
on foot. They were not brought back to Panola; but were hired out to different farmers along
the road home--some in Jackson, some in Granda and others in Panola town. These were all small
towns in Mississippi. My wife and I went to work at old Master Jack's, I on the farm and my
wife at her old duties in the house. We longed for freedom, but were content for the time with
hoping and praying for the coming of the day when it should be realized. It was sad to see
the changes that had come to the white folks. Sorrow had left its impress upon all and we felt
it, notwithstanding all that we had suffered at their hands. Boss had willed the homestead
in Memphis to Mrs. Farrington, and she was getting ready to take possession. He had borrowed
a great amount of money from her when he bought the island at Mobile; and the rapid coming
on of the end of the rebellion destroyed all prospect of the success of his salt works scheme,
even before his death, and really rendered him bankrupt. Hence the transfer of the Memphis
property to her was the only way he could make good what he owed her. The madam now had no
home, but was compelled to stay with her father, old Master Jack. She was sadly changed--did
not appear like the same person. Her troubles and sorrows had crushed her former cruel and
haughty spirit. Her mother had died a few months before, and then her husband had followed,
dying suddenly and away from home. Then much of her property had been lost, and social pleasures
and distinction were gone forever. Who shall say that the wrongs done her poor, helpless slaves
were not avenged in this life? The last I knew of her she was still at her father's.

       *       *       *       *       *

INCIDENTS.

A servant who belonged to Dr. Dandridge ran away and got to Memphis just after it was captured
by the Union soldiers. He was put into the army and was stationed at one of the entrances to
the city. He was to halt all persons passing to or from the city, no difference who they were,
and learn their names and their business. Young William McGee and his sister, Miss Cherry,
one day went up to Memphis and, to their surprise, were halted by this former servant of their
uncle. When they came home they were speaking of it to their father, and old Master Jack said:
"And you halted, did you?" "Why, yes," replied William, "we had to do it." "Well," said the
old man, "I would have died-died before I would have done it. To think that a servant should
have halted you, and one who has belonged to the family like Anderson!" This old man, notwithstanding
all his boasting in the absence of immediate danger, was the veriest coward when danger was
present; and if he had been in the place of young William, he would have halted with the greatest
alacrity.

While at the salt works I had a little experience at nursing. A fellow slave was taken ill,
and I was called on to care for him at night. I always liked this work; it was a pleasure to
me to be in the sick room. Typhoid fever was a new case to me, but I remembered what instructions
Boss had given me about it. I "pitched in" to do what I could; but the fever was so great he
lasted only a few days.

       *       *       *       *       *

MY FIFTH STRIKE FOR FREEDOM IS A SUCCESS.

We had remained at old Jack's until June, 1865, and had tried to be content. The Union soldiers
were still raiding all through that section. Every day some town would be taken, and the slaves
would secretly rejoice. After we came back from Alabama we were held with a tighter rein than
ever. We were not allowed to go outside of the premises. George Washington, a fellow servant,
and Kitty, his wife, and I had talked considerably about the Yankees, and how we might get
away. We knew it was our right to be free, for the proclamation had long been issued--yet they
still held us. I did not talk much to my wife about going away, as she was always so afraid
I would be killed, and did not want me to try any more to escape. But George, his wife and
I continued to discuss the matter, whenever we had a chance. We knew that Memphis was headquarters
for the Union troops, but how to reach it was the great question.

It was Sunday, and I had driven one portion of the family to church, and George the other.
The family was now very large, as the madam and her family were there, in addition to Old Master
Jack's, and all could not go in one carriage. On the way back, young William McGee came up
through the farm, on horseback, a nearer way home from church, and encountered several servants
belonging to some of the neighbors. He asked them what they were doing there, and if they had
passes. To this last question all answered no. "Well," said he, "never come here again without
having passes, all of you." At this they all quickly disappeared. When Old Jack came home,
Will told him what had passed; and he immediately called for George and Uncle Peter, the foreman,
and told them that no one not belonging there was to come into the quarters without a pass;
and any servant with a pass should be brought to the house, that the pass might be inspected.
They thought, or feared, that if the servants were permitted to come together freely they might
plan ways of escape, and communicate to each other what they knew about the war and the Yankees.
George came out, and finding me, told me what they had said. "No slave from outside is to be
allowed on the place," said he. I replied: "If we listen to them we shall be here until Christmas
comes again." "What do you mean?" asked George. "I mean that now, today, is the time to make
a start." So, late in the afternoon, during the servants' prayer meeting, of which I have heretofore
spoken, we thought would be a good time to get away, as no one would be likely to see us. We
talked with John Smith, another servant, and told him all about our plan, asking him not to
say a word about our being gone until he was through feeding the stock. This would give us
another hour to advance on our journey, as the feeding usually took about that time--from six
o'clock until seven. Our fear was that we might be overtaken by the bloodhounds; and, therefore,
we wished to get as far away as possible before the white people knew we were gone. It was
Sunday afternoon, June 26th, 1865, when George and I, having made ready for the start for the
Union lines, went to bid our wives good-bye. I told my wife to cheer up, as I was coming again
to get her. I said to Kitty, George's wife: "We are going, but look for us again. It will not
be with us as with so many others, who have gone away, leaving their families and never returning
for them. We will be here again." She looked up at me, smiling, and with a look of resolution,
said: "I'll be ready." She was of a firm, daring nature--I did not fear to tell her all my
plans. As my wife was so timid, I said as little as possible to her. George and I hurriedly
said our farewells to our wives. The parting was heartrending, for we knew the dangers were
great, and the chances were almost even that we should not meet again. I could hardly leave
my wife, her agitation and grief were so great. But we were off in a few moments. We crept
through the orchard, passing through farm after farm until we struck the railroad, about seven
miles from home. We followed this road until we reached Senatobia, about half past seven in
the evening. We felt good, and, stopping all night, we started the next morning for Hernando,
Miss., another small town, and reached there at two o'clock in the afternoon. The most of the
bridges had been burned, by the troops, and there were no regular railroad trains. Fortunately,
however, flat cars, drawn by horses were run over the road; and on a train of this kind we
took passage. On several occasions, the passengers had to get out, and push the car over a
bridge, as it was not made so horses could cross on it, the horses meantime being driven or
led through the stream, and then hitched to the car again. After we had gone through this process
repeatedly, we at last reached Memphis, arriving about seven o'clock Monday evening. The city
was filled with slaves, from all over the south, who cheered and gave us a welcome. I could
scarcely recognize Memphis, things were so changed. We met numbers of our fellow servants who
had run away before us, when the war began. Tuesday and Wednesday we spent in making inquiries;
and I visited our old home at McGee's station. But how different it was from what it had been
when the McGees were there. All was changed. Thursday we went to see Col. Walker, a Union officer,
who looked after the colored folks, and saw that they had their rights. When we reached his
office we found it so filled with people, waiting to see him, that we were delayed about two
hours, before we had an opportunity of speaking with him. When our turn came, we went in, and
told him that we were citizens of Memphis until the fall of Fort Pillow and Donelson, when
our master had run us off, with a hundred other slaves, into Mississippi, and thence to the
salt works in Alabama. He questioned us as to where we lived in Memphis. I answered: "What
is now headquarters of the Union forces was the home of master, Mr. Edmund McGee, who is now
dead." After a few minutes, I said: "Colonel, we want protection to go back to Mississippi
after our wives, who are still held as slaves." He replied: "You are both free men to go and
come as you please." "Why," said I, "Colonel, if we go back to Mississippi they will shoot
the gizzards out of us." "Well," said he, "I can not grant your request. I would be overrun
with similar applications; but I will tell you what you can do. We must clear our minds altogether
of these fictions; they are not even ancient: they came into existence
at a time when the early history of Rome was viewed in the deceptive
light of her later achievements; when, under the influence of altered
circumstances, Roman sentiment had probably undergone a considerable
change; and when, consequently, the national imagination no longer
pointed true to anything primaeval.

       

Race, when tribal peculiarities are once formed, is a most important feature in history; those who
deny this and who seek to resolve everything, even in advanced humanity, into the influence of external
circumstances or of some particular external circumstance, such as food, are not less one-sided
or less wide of the truth than those who employ race as the universal solution. Who can doubt
that between the English and the French, between the Scotch and the Irish, there are differences
of character which have profoundly affected and still affect the course of history? The case
is still stronger if we take races more remote from each other, such as the English and the
Hindoo. But the further we inquire, the more reason there appears to be for believing that peculiarities
of race are themselves originally formed by the influence of external circumstances on the
primitive tribe; that, however marked and ingrained they may be, they are not congenital and perhaps
not indelible. Englishmen and Frenchmen are closely assimilated by education; and the weaknesses
of character supposed to be inherent in the Irish gradually disappear under the more benign
influences of the New World. Thus, by ascribing the achievements of the Romans to the special
qualities of their race, we should not be solving the problem, but only stating it again in
other terms.

But besides this, the wolf theory halts in a still more evident manner. The foster-children of
the she-wolf, let them have never so much of their foster-mother's milk in them, do not do what
the Romans did, and they do precisely what the Romans did not. They kill, ravage, plunder-- perhaps
they conquer and even for a time retain their conquests--but they do not found highly organized
empires, they do not civilize, much less do they give birth to law. The brutal and desolating
domination of the Turk, which after being long artificially upheld by diplomacy, is at last falling
into final ruin, is the type of an empire founded by the foster-children of the she-wolf. Plunder,
in the animal lust of which alone it originated, remains its law, and its only notion of imperial
administration is a coarse division, imposed by the extent of its territory, into satrapies,
which, as the central dynasty, enervated by sensuality, loses its force, revolt, and break
up the empire. Even the Macedonian, pupil of Aristotle though he
was, did not create an empire at all comparable to that created by
the Romans.

       He overran an immense extent of territory, and scattered over a portion
of it the seed of an inferior species of Hellenic civilization, but
he did not organize it politically, much less did he give it, and
through it the world, a code of law.

It at once fell apart into a number of separate kingdoms, the despotic
rulers of which were Sultans with a tinge of Hellenism, and which
went for nothing in the political development of mankind.

What if the very opposite theory to that of the she-wolf and her foster- children should be true?
What if the Romans should have owed their peculiar and unparalleled success to their having been
at first not more warlike, but less warlike than their neighbours? It may seem a paradox,
but we suspect in their imperial ascendency is seen one of the earliest and not least important
steps in that gradual triumph of intellect over force, even in war, which has been an essential
part of the progress of civilization. The happy day may come when Science in the form of a benign
old gentleman with a bald head and spectacles on nose, holding some beneficent compound in his
hand, will confront a standing army and the standing army will cease to exist.
 We
gave them each ten dollars; and promised, if they brought us out safely, to give each ten dollars
more. It was now about half-past eleven o'clock. They had to go to camp, and slip their horses
out cautiously, so as not to be seen by the captain. In half an hour we were on our way; and,
after we had ridden some two miles, we were overtaken by the two soldiers. It was Sunday afternoon;
and our having a wagon attracted much attention from the farmers as we passed along. They looked
at us so sharply that George and I felt decidedly uneasy; yet we kept up courage and pressed
steadily on. After a long and weary ride we reached old Master Jack's a little after sundown.
The soldiers rode into the yard ahead of us, and the first person they met was a servant (Frank)
at the woodpile. They said to him: "Go in and tell your master, Mr. McGee, to come out, we
want to see him," at the same time asking for Louis' and George's wives. Young William McGee
came out and the soldiers said to him: "We want feed for seventy-five head of horses." McGee
said: "We have not got it." Just then George and I were coming up. We drove in at the gate,
through the grove, and passed the woodpile where McGee and the soldiers were talking. McGee
had just replied: "We have not got that much feed to spare--we are almost out." "Well," said
the soldiers, "we must have it," and they followed on right after the wagons. As we drove past
them, young McGee went running into the house, saying to his mother: "It is Louis and George,
and I'll kill one of them to-night." This raised quite an alarm, and the members of the family
told him not to do that, as it would ruin them. As soon as George and I drove up to the first
cabin, which was my wife's and Kitty's, we ran in. Kitty met us at the door and said: "I am
all ready." She was looking for us. We commenced loading our wagon with our few things. Meanwhile
the soldiers had ridden around a few rods and came upon old Master Jack and the minister of
the parish, who were watching as guards to keep the slaves from running away to the Yankees.
Just think of the outrage upon those poor creatures in forcibly retaining them in slavery long
after the proclamation making them free had gone into effect beyond all question! As the soldiers
rode up to the two men they said: "Hello! what are you doing here? Why have you not told these
two men, Louis and George, that they are free men--that they can go and come as they like?"
By this time all the family were aroused, and great excitement prevailed. The soldier's presence
drew all the servants near. George and I hurried to fill up our wagon, telling our wives to
get in, as there was no time to lose--we must go at once. In twenty minutes we were all loaded.
My wife, Aunt Kitty and nine other servants followed the wagon. I waited for a few moments
for Mary Ellen, sister of my wife; and as she came running out of the white folks' house, she
said to her mistress, Mrs. Farrington: "Good-bye; I wish you good luck." "I wish you all the
bad luck," said she in a rage. But Mary did not stop to notice her mistress further; and joining
me, we were soon on the road following the wagon.

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO BRAVE MEN.

Those soldiers were brave indeed. Think of the courage and daring involved in this scheme--only
two soldiers going into a country of which they knew nothing except that every white man living
in it was their enemy. The demand which they made for food for seventy-five horses was a clever
ruse, invented by them to alarm the McGees, and make them think that there was a troop of horses
near by, and that it would not be safe for them to offer any resistance to our going away with
our wives. Had they thought that there were but two soldiers, it is certain that they would
have endeavored to prevent us getting away again, and one or more of us would undoubtedly have
been killed.

As already stated, nine other slaves followed our wagon, as it moved off. They had no hats
on; some were bare-footed,--they had not stopped to get anything; but, as soon as they saw
a chance to get away, they went just as they were at the moment. Aunt Kitty was brave and forethoughtful,
for during the week we were gone she had baked and cooked a large amount of substantial food
that would keep us from starving while on our journey.

At the first road crossing, the two soldiers thought they saw a large troop of soldiers in
the distance, and they galloped ahead of us at full speed; but, on arriving at the spot, they
found that what they had thought soldiers were only a herd of cattle. They rode on to the next
crossing, we following as we conveniently could. Each poor slave was busy with his thoughts
and his prayers. Now and then one would hear a moan or a word from some of the party. All were
scared, even though the soldiers were with us. We came to the next cross road, and passed that
safely. Our fear was that the McGees might get the neighborhood to join them and pursue us,
or send the home guards after us; but Providence was seemingly smiling upon us at last, for
no one followed or molested us. We moved on all night, until we came to a creek, at four o'clock
in the morning of Monday. The banks of the creek were very steep, and as the horses and wagon
went down into the stream, the mattress on top of the wagon, upon which my wife and her sister's
children were sitting, was thrown off into the water. Immediately the horses stopped, and became
balky. It was such a warm night that they did not want to move on out of the water, and would
not start, either, until they got ready. As soon as the soldiers saw the mattress slide off
with my wife and the children, one of them plunged into the water with his horse, and, in a
minute, brought them all out. All had a good ducking--indeed it seemed like a baptism by immersion.
The drenched ones were wrapped in old blankets; and, after an hour's delay, we were again on
our way. The soldiers said: "Now we must leave you; the time is coming when we must be in camp
for roll call. If you are not at our camp when roll call is over, we will come back and see
about you." We gave them each the second ten dollars, as agreed upon, and just as they rode
to the top of the hill they left us. We had a clear sweep from this point, and we came into
Senatobia about nine o'clock in the forenoon. Our two soldier friends, who had brought us out
so safely, came out of camp to see us. They cheered us, and seemed glad that they had rendered
us service. We stopped at the camp until we had dried our clothes and had some breakfast; and,
then, we made our way to Memphis.

       *       *       *       *       *

OUT OF BONDAGE AT LAST.

My wife and her sister were shoeless, and the latter had no hat on--she had hurried out of
the house in such excitement that she thought of nothing but getting away. Having to walk some
of the way, as all could not ride in the wagon at the same time, we were all tired, dirty and
rest-broken, and, on the whole, a pitiful crowd to look at, as we came into the city. One venerable
old man, bent with age, whose ebony face shone with delight, came running out into the road
as we appeared, exclaiming: "Oh! here dey come, God bless 'em! Poor chil'en! they come fannin."
We used large palm leaves to fan ourselves with, as we were so warm. The battle surges around
the house of Mrs. Henry. She is lying there amidst its thunders. Rebel sharpshooters take
possession of it, and pick off Rickett's gunners. He turns his guns upon the house. Crash! crash!
crash! It is riddled with grape and canister.

It was appropriately the 4th of July when we arrived; and, aside from the citizens of Memphis,
hundreds of colored refugees thronged the streets. Everywhere you looked you could see soldiers.
Such a day I don't believe Memphis will ever see again--when so large and so motley a crowd
will come together. Our two soldier rescuers looked us up after we were in Memphis, and seemed
truly glad that we had attained our freedom, and that they had been instrumental in it. Only
one thing we regret, and that is that we did not learn their names; but we were in so much
trouble, and so absorbed in the business which we had in hand--so excited by the perils of
our undertaking, that we never thought to ask them their names, or to what regiment they belonged.
Then, after we got to Memphis, though we were most grateful for the service which they had
rendered us, we were still so excited by our new condition and surroundings that we thought
of little else, and forgot that we had no means of establishing, at a later time, the identity
of those to whom we owed so much. Freedom, that we had so long looked for, had come at last;
and we gave praise to God, blessing the day when we met those two heroes. It is true that we
should have been free, sooner or later; still, but for their assistance, my wife and I might
never have met again. If I could not have gone back, which I could never have done alone, until
long after, such changes might have occurred as would have separated us for years, if not forever.
Thousands were separated in this manner--men escaping to the Union lines, hoping to make a
way to return for their families; but, failing in this, and not daring to return alone, never
saw their wives or children more. Thanks to God, we were guided to these brave soldiers, and
so escaped from so cruel a fate.

       *       *       *       *       *

A WORD FOR MY OLD MASTER.

In closing this account of my years of bondage, it is, perhaps, but justice to say of my old
master that he was in some respects kinder and more humane than many other slaveholders. He
fed well, and all had enough to wear, such as it was. It is true that the material was coarse,
but it was suited to the season, and, therefore, comfortable, which could not truthfully be
said of the clothing of the slaves of other planters. Not a few of these did not have sufficient
clothes to keep them warm in winter; nor did they have sufficient nourishing and wholesome
food. But while my master showed these virtues, similar to those which a provident farmer would
show in the care of his dumb brutes, he lacked in that humane feeling which should have kept
him from buying and selling human beings and parting kindred--which should have made it impossible
for him to have permitted the lashing, beating and lacerating of his slaves, much more the
hiring of an irresponsible brute, by the year, to perform this barbarous service for him. The
McGees were charitable--as they interpreted the word--were always ready to contribute to educational
and missionary funds, while denying, under the severest penalties, all education to those most
needing it, and all true missionary effort--the spiritual enlightenment for which they were
famishing. Then our masters lacked that fervent charity, the love of Christ in the heart, which
if they had possessed they could not have treated us as they did. They would have remembered
the golden rule: "Do unto others as ye would that men should do to you." Possessing absolute
power over the bodies and souls of their slaves, and grown rich from their unrequited toil,
they became possessed by the demon of avarice and pride, and lost sight of the most vital of
the Christly qualities.

CHAPTER V.

FREEDOM AFTER SLAVERY.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMING NORTH.

As before stated, we arrived in Memphis on the Fourth of July, 1865. My first effort as a freeman
was to get something to do to sustain myself and wife and a babe of a few months, that was
born at the salt works. I succeeded in getting a room for us, and went to work the second day
driving a public carriage. I made enough to keep us and pay our room rent. By our economy we
managed to get on very well. I worked on, hoping to go further north, feeling somehow that
it would be better for us there; when, one day I ran across a man who knew my wife's mother.
He said to me: "Why, your wife's mother went back up the river to Cincinnati. I knew her well
and the people to whom she belonged." This information made us eager to take steps to find
her. My wife was naturally anxious to follow the clue thus obtained, in hopes of finding her
mother, whom she had not seen since the separation at Memphis years before. We, therefore,
concluded to go as far as Cincinnati, at any rate, and endeavor to get some further information
of mother. My wife seemed to gather new strength in learning this news of her mother, meager
though it was. After a stay in Memphis of six weeks we went on to Cincinnati, hopeful of meeting
some, at least, of the family that, though free, in defiance of justice, had been consigned
to cruel and hopeless bondage--bondage in violation of civil as well as moral law. We felt
it was almost impossible that we should see any one that we ever knew; but the man had spoken
so earnestly and positively regarding my mother-in-law that we were not without hope. On arriving
at Cincinnati, our first inquiry was about her, my wife giving her name and description; and,
fortunately, we came upon a colored man who said he knew of a woman answering to the name and
description which my wife gave of her mother, and he directed us to the house where she was
stopping. When we reached the place to which we had been directed, my wife not only found her
mother but one of her sisters. The meeting was a joyful one to us all. No mortal who has not
experienced it can imagine the feeling of those who meet again after long years of enforced
separation and hardship and utter ignorance of one another's condition and place of habitation.
I questioned them as to when and where they had met, and how it happened that they were now
together. My mother-in-law then began the following narrative:

"When I was sold from the Memphis trader's yard I was bought by a man who lived not far from
Memphis. I never heard of any of the children, and knew nothing as to what had become of them.
After the capture of Memphis by the Union army, the people to whom I belonged fled from their
home, leaving their slaves; and the other slaveholders of the neighborhood did the same. The
slaves, left to themselves, at once departed for Memphis, and I among the number. When I had
been there but a short time a call was made for nurses to go into the hospital; and, after
thinking of it for a few minutes, I concluded to answer the call, and was speedily installed
in the work. When I had been there a short time I found, to my great surprise and delight,
my eldest daughter was also employed there. She had come to Memphis as I had, because her master's
family had fled; and, hearing the call for nurses, had entered the service at once. I can not
tell my pleasure in meeting one of my children, for I had never expected to see any of them
again. We continued our work in the hospital until Generals Sheridan and Grant said the city
was getting too crowded with colored people--there was not room for them; some must be removed.
So, large numbers of them were sent to Cincinnati, and my daughter and I were among them. This
is why you see us here together."

When she had finished telling this story my wife and I were shedding tears of joy. My sister-in-law,
Mary Ellen, whom Boss bought at the same time that he bought my wife, was with us; thus the
mother and three daughters had met again most unexpectedly, and in a way almost miraculous.
This meeting again of mother and daughters, after years of separation and many vicissitudes,
was an occasion of the profoundest joy, although all were almost wholly destitute of the necessaries
of life. This first evening we spent together can never be forgotten. I can see the old woman
now, with bowed form and gray locks, as she gave thanks in joyful tones yet reverent manner,
for such a wonderful blessing.

       *       *       *       *       *

IN CANADA.

We did not remain long in Cincinnati, as houses were so scarce we could not get a place to
stop in. My wife's mother had but one room, and we could not stay there. We went on to Hamilton,
but stayed there only two months. I worked at whatever I could get to do--whitewashing and
odd jobs of any kind. The women managed to get washing to do, so that we got on very well.
Our aim was when we left Memphis to get to Canada, as we regarded that as the safest place
for refugees from slavery. We did not know what might come again for our injury. So, now, as
we had found some of my wife's people, we were more eager to go; and, as I could not get any
steady work in Hamilton, we made ready to move on. We went straight to Detroit, and crossed
over the river to Windsor, Canada, arriving there on Christmas 1865. I succeeded in getting
work as a porter at the Iron House, a hotel situated near the landing. Here my wife also was
employed, and here we remained until spring; when, as the wages were so small in Windsor, I
went over to Detroit to seek for more profitable employment. After some effort, I succeeded
in securing a situation, as waiter, in the Biddle House, and remained there two years, when
the manager died, and it changed hands; and, much as I disliked to make a change in my work,
I found it necessary. An opportunity soon offered of a position as sailor on the steamer Saginaw,
which ran from Green Bay to Escanaba, in connection with the railroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

A CLEW TO MY BROTHER WILLIAM.

While I was on this boat, one of the men who worked with me said to me, one day: "Have you
a brother, Hughes?" I said, "Yes, but I don't know anything about him. We were sold from each
other when boys." "Well," said he, "I used to sail with a man whose name was Billy Hughes,
and he looked just like you." I told him there were three boys of us; that we were sold to
different parties, and that I had never seen either of my brothers since. One brother was named
William, but went by the nickname of Billy. "Has this man had his forefinger cut off," asked
I. "Oh!" replied he, "I don't know, Hughes, about that." "Well," said I, "this is all I remember
about Billy. I accidentally chopped off his forefinger one day, when we were small boys in
Virginia. This is the only thing by which I could identify my brother William." Nothing more
was said upon the matter, and it dropped out of my mind. I did not realize how important were
the words of this man. It never occurred to me that he held the clew that might bring us together
again.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORK IN CHICAGO.

When the sailing season had ended, the steamer tied up at Chicago for the winter. Upon going
ashore, I at once tried to get something else to do, for I could not afford to be idle a day.
One of the first men I met in Chicago was my old friend and fellow-servant Thomas Bland. He
was glad to see me, and told me all about his escape to Canada, and how he had met Will McGee,
at Niagara Falls. He was working at the Sherman House, having charge of the coat room. I told
him that I had been sailing during the summer, but that the boat was now laid up, and that
I was anxious for another job. He said he would try and see what he could do for me. He went
to the proprietor of the hotel, Mr. Rice; and, to my surprise and delight, he was so fortunate
as to secure me a position as porter and general utility man. Pyrrhus at first beat her, but there
was no nation behind him, Hannibal beat her, but his nation did not support him; she beat the
army of Alexander, but the army of Alexander when it encountered her, like that of Frederic
at Jena, was an old machine, and it was commanded by a man who was more like Tippoo Sahib than
the conqueror of Darius.

But how came military discipline to be so specially cultivated by
the Romans?

       We can see how it came to be specially cultivated by the Greeks:
it was the necessity of civic armies, fighting perhaps against warlike
aristocracies; it was the necessity of Greeks in general fighting
against the invading hordes of the Persian.

We can see how it came to be cultivated among the mercenaries and
professional soldiers of Pyrrhus and Hannibal.

But what was the motive power in the case of Rome? Dismissing the notion of occult qualities
of race, we look for a rational explanation in the circumstances of the plain which was the
cradle of the Roman Empire.

It is evident that in the period designated as that of the kings, when Rome commenced her career
of conquest, she was, for that time and country, a great and wealthy city. This is proved by
the works of the kings, the Capitoline Temple, the excavation for the Circus Maximus, the Servian
Wall, and above all the Cloaca Maxima.

       Historians have indeed undertaken to give us a very disparaging picture
of the ancient Rome, which they confidently describe as nothing more
than a great village of shingle-roofed cottages thinly scattered over
a large area.

We ask in vain what are the materials for this description.

It is most probable that the private buildings of Rome under the kings were roofed with nothing
better than shingle, and it is very likely that they were mean and dirty, as the private buildings
of Athens appear to have been, and as those of most of the great cities of the Middle Ages unquestionably
were. But the Cloaca Maxima is in itself conclusive evidence of a large population, of wealth,
and of a not inconsiderable degree of civilization. Taking our stand upon this monument, and
clearing our vision entirely of Romulus and his asylum, we seem dimly to perceive the existence
of a deep prehistoric background, richer than is commonly supposed in the germs of civilization,--a
remark which may in all likelihood be extended to the background of history in general. Nothing
surely can be more grotesque than the idea of a set of wolves, like the Norse pirates before their
conversion to Christianity, constructing in their den the Cloaca Maxima.

That Rome was comparatively great and wealthy is certain.

       We can hardly doubt that she was a seat of industry and commerce,
and that the theory which represents her industry and commerce as
having been developed subsequently to her conquests is the reverse
of the fact.

Whence, but from industry and commerce, could the population and
the wealth have come?

Peasant farmers do not live in cities, and plunderers do not accumulate. Rome had around her what
was then a rich and peopled plain; she stood at a meeting-place of nationalities; she was on
a navigable river, yet out of the reach of pirates; the sea near her was full of commerce, Etruscan,
Greek, and Carthaginian. Her first colony was Ostia, evidently commercial and connected with
salt-works, which may well have supplied the staple of her trade. Her patricians were financiers
and money-lenders. We are aware that a different turn has been given to this part of the story,
and that the indebtedness has been represented as incurred not by
loans of money, but by advances of farm stock.

       This, however, completely contradicts the whole tenor of the narrative,
and especially what is said about the measures for relieving the debtor
by reducing the rate of interest and by deducting from the principal
debt the interest already paid.

The narrative as it stands, moreover, is supported by analogy.

It has a parallel in the economical history of ancient Athens, and in the "scaling of debts," to
use the American equivalent for Seisachtheia, by the legislation of Solon. What prevents our
supposing that usury, when it first made its appearance on the scene, before people had learned
to draw the distinction between crimes and defaults, presented itself in a very coarse and cruel
form?


While I was at the Plankinton House many of the traveling men seemingly liked to talk with
me when they came to the coat room to check their things. I remember one day when conversing
with one of these gentlemen, he asked, all of a sudden: "Say, Hughes, have you a brother?"
I answered: "Yes, I had two, but I think they are dead. I was sold from them when a mere lad."
"Well," said he, "if you have a brother he is in Cleveland. There is a fellow there who is
chief cook at the Forest City Hotel who looks just like you." I grew eager at these words,
and put the same question to him that I did to the man on the steamer when I was sailing: "Has
he one fore-finger cut off?" He laughed and answered: "Well, I don't know, Hughes, about that;
but I do know this: His name is Billy and he resembles you very much. I'll tell you what I'll
do, when I go back to Cleveland on my next trip I'll look and see if that fore-finger is off."
Now that the second person had called my attention to the fact that there was a man in Cleveland
who looked very much like me, I became deeply interested--in fact, I was so excited I could
hardly do my work. I awaited the agents return with what of patience I could command; and,
at last, one day, when I was least expecting him, I was greeted with these words: "Hello, Hughes!
I have good news for you." I grew so excited I could hardly stand still. "Well," he said, "you
told me that you had a brother whose name was William, but called Billy for short?" "Yes,"
I said. "Did your brother Billy have his fore-finger chopped off by his brother Louis, when,
as boys, they were one day playing together?" "Yes," I replied. "Then I have found your brother,"
he said. "I have seen the man in Cleveland, and he corroborates your story in every particular.
He says that he was born in Virginia, near Charlottesville, and was owned by one John Martin."
I knew now, beyond question, that this was my brother William. Words failed me to express my
feelings at this news. The prospect of seeing my brother, lost so many years before, made me
almost wild with joy. I thanked the agent for the interest he had taken in me, and for the
invaluable and comprehensive information he had brought. He could hardly have done me a greater
favor, or bound me to him by a more lasting obligation.

My first step was to arrange for a leave of absence from my work, which I found no difficulty
in accomplishing, and by night I was aboard the express going to Cleveland. My excitement did
not diminish as I sped on my journey, and the speed of the express was too slow for my eager
anticipations. Upon reaching Cleveland I went directly to the hotel where I was told my brother
was employed, and inquired at the office for Billy Hughes. A bell boy was summoned to take
me around to the department where he was. When we met neither of us spoke for some moments--speech
is not for such occasions, but silence rather, and the rush of thoughts. TORONTO, Feb. 16, 1881

CONTENTS.

THE
GREATNESS OF THE ROMANS (Contemporary Review)

THE GREATNESS OF ENGLAND (Contemporary Review.)

THE GREAT DUEL OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY (Canadian Monthly)

THE LAMPS OF FICTION (A Speech on the Centenary of the Birth of Sir Walter Scott)

AN ADDRESS TO THE OXFORD SCHOOL OF SCIENCE AND ART

THE ASCENT OF MAN (Macmillan's Magazine.)

THE PROPOSED SUBSTITUTES FOR RELIGION (Macmillan's Magazine.)

THE LABOUR MOVEMENT (Canadian Monthly.)

WHAT IS CULPABLE LUXURY? (Canadian Monthly.)

A TRUE CAPTAIN OF INDUSTRY (Canadian Monthly.)

A WIREPULLER OF KINGS (Canadian Monthly.)

THE EARLY YEARS OF THE
CONQUEROR OF QUEBEC (Toronto Nation.)

FALKLAND AND THE PURITANS (Contemporary
Review.)

THE EARLY YEARS OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN (Toronto Mail)

ALFREDUS
REX FUNDATOR (Canadian Monthly)

THE LAST REPUBLICANS OF ROME (MacMillan's
Magazine)

AUSTEN LEIGH'S MEMOIR OF JANE AUSTEN (New York Nation)

PATTISON'S
MILTON (New York Nation)

CLERIDGE'S LIFE OF KEBLE (New York Nation)

THE
GREATNESS OF THE ROMANS

Rome was great in arms, in government, in
law.

       This combination was the talisman of her august fortunes.

But the three things, though blended in her, are distinct from each
other, and the political analyst is called upon to give a separate
account of each.

By what agency was this State, out of all the States of Italy, out
of all the States of the world, elected to a triple pre-eminence,
and to the imperial supremacy of which, it was the foundation? By
what agency was Rome chosen as the foundress of an empire which we
regard almost as a necessary step in human development, and which
formed the material, and to no small extent the political matrix of
modern Europe, though the spiritual life of our civilization is derived
from another source? We are not aware that this question has ever
been distinctly answered, or even distinctly propounded. I had been
in the Plankinton House then six years and a half. The laundry business had increased to such
an extent that my wife could not manage it all alone. I, therefore, gave up my position at
the hotel, and went into the laundry work on a somewhat larger scale than that upon which we
had been conducting it. We were still doing business at 216 Grand avenue, and there we remained
until 1876; when we removed to more commodious quarters at 713 on the avenue. But we remained
there only a few mouths, when we removed to 134 Fourth street in the rear. The establishment
here was fitted up with all modern appliances; but I was not so successful as I anticipated.
My losses were heavy; and though the facilities for doing the work were much better than those
which we had before possessed, the location was not so accessible or inviting. We, therefore,
went back to our former location at 713 on the avenue.

       *       *       *       *       *

EMPLOYED AS A NURSE.

Not long after this, Dr. Douglas, a prominent physician of the city at that time, was in failing
health, and, wishing a nurse, I was recommended to him for this service by a friend. I served
the doctor in this capacity every night for three months. I then went with him to McComb, a
village in southern Mississippi, which had been, in the days of slavery, a somewhat famous
resort, but which had lost its prestige, and entered upon a general decline; the hotel and
all its surroundings presenting the appearance of general dilapidation. I remained here with
the doctor for two weeks--until they succeeded in getting another person to care for him. I
then took a run down to New Orleans.

       *       *       *       *       *

A TRIP SOUTH.

On this southern trip I had the opportunity of observing the condition of the country through
which we passed. Many of the farms seemed neglected, the houses dilapidated, or abandoned,
the fields either uncultivated and overgrown with bushes, or the crops struggling with grass
and weeds for the mastery, and presenting but little promise of a paying harvest. In some places
the bushes and other undergrowth were fifteen feet high, and the landscape was peculiar and
by no means inviting. I could remember the appearance of the cotton farms in slavery days;
but how changed were things I now saw! They did not look at all like those which I had been
accustomed to see. Everything was dismal and uninviting. The entire country passed through
in Mississippi looked like a wilderness. This deterioration was the natural result of the devastating
war which had swept the country, and to the industrial revolution which followed and to which
affairs had not been adjusted.

When I arrived at New Orleans I found the levee filled with fruit. Oranges and bananas were
piled in masses like coal, and the scenes in this portion of the city were very different from
anything one sees in the north. Among the many places of interest in the city were the cemeteries.
Owing to the low level of the ground and its saturation with water, burials are seldom made
in graves, but instead in tombs built of brick or marble or other stone, in which are constructed
cells running back from the front and of a size and shape sufficient to admit a coffin. Then,
as soon as filled, they are sealed up. These tombs contain from two to six or eight, or even
more of these cells, and their general appearance from the front is not unlike that of a section
of mail boxes in a postoffice. Other places of interest were the old French market, the public
squares and gardens, the old Catholic churches, and some of the relics of slavery days in the
shape of pens where slaves were exposed for sale. One of these was in the basement of the Hotel
Royal, which would contain several hundred at once, and from which hundreds went to a bondage
bitterer than death, and from which death was the only relief.

       *       *       *       *       *

I MAKE NURSING MY REGULAR BUSINESS.

I came back to Milwaukee with a new idea. I liked nursing--it was my choice from childhood.
Even though I had been deprived of a course of training, I felt that I was not too old to try,
at least, to learn the art, or to add to what I already knew. Dr. Douglas gave me a splendid
recommendation, and had some cards printed, bearing my name and address. These I distributed,
and thus began the business which I have followed steadily since that time. Dr. Marks very
kindly recommended me to well known men needing the service of a nurse, and to his professional
associates; and through this means, and through his continued kindness and interest, I have
been almost constantly engaged in this work. I am also indebted to Drs. Fox and Spearman and
other prominent physicians for recommendations which have resulted in securing me employment
which has proved remunerative to me, and which seemed to give entire satisfaction to the sick
and their friends. This is no small part of the compensation in the difficult, often wearing,
and always delicate duties of the nurse in the sick room. To every true man or woman it is
one of the greatest satisfactions to have the consciousness of having been useful to his fellow
beings. My duties as nurse have taken me to different parts of the state, to Chicago, to California
and to Florida; and I have thus gained no little experience, not only in my business, but in
many other directions.

I have endeavored, in the foregoing sketch, to give a clear and correct idea of the institution
of human slavery, as I witnessed and experienced it--its brutality, its degrading influence
upon both master and slave, and its utter incompatibility with industrial improvement and general
educational progress. Nothing has been exaggerated or set down in malice, although in the scars
which I still bear upon my person, and in the wounds of spirit which will never wholly heal,
there might be found a seeming excuse for such a course. About the only answer that we get to
these questions is race. The Romans, we are told, were by nature a peculiarly warlike race. "They
were the wolves of Italy," says Mr. Merivale, who may be taken to represent fairly the state
of opinion on this subject.

