From such vague laments I turned to the contemplation of the minutiae of my situation. So far,
I had not succeeded in the sole object of my desires, the finding a companion for my desolation.
Yet I did not despair. It is true that my inscriptions were set up for the most part, in insignificant
towns and villages; yet, even without these memorials, it was possible that the person, who
like me should find himself alone in a depopulate land, should, like me, come to Rome. The
more slender my expectation was, the more I chose to build on it, and to accommodate my actions
to this vague possibility.

It became necessary therefore, that for a time I should domesticate myself at Rome. It became
necessary, that I should look my disaster in the face-- not playing the school-boy's part of
obedience without submission; enduring life, and yet rebelling against the laws by which I lived.

Yet how could I resign myself? Without love, without sympathy, without communion with any,
how could I meet the morning sun, and with it trace its oft repeated journey to the evening
shades? Why did I continue to live-- why not throw off the weary weight of time, and with my
own hand, let out the fluttering prisoner from my agonized breast?--It was not cowardice that
withheld me; for the true fortitude was to endure; and death had a soothing sound accompanying
it, that would easily entice me to enter its demesne. But this I would not do. I had, from
the moment I had reasoned on the subject, instituted myself the subject to fate, and the servant
of necessity, the visible laws of the invisible God--I believed that my obedience was the result
of sound reasoning, pure feeling, and an exalted sense of the true excellence and nobility
of my nature. Could I have seen in this empty earth, in the seasons and their change, the hand
of a blind power only, most willingly would I have placed my head on the sod, and closed my
eyes on its loveliness for ever. But fate had administered life to me, when the plague had
already seized on its prey--she had dragged me by the hair from out the strangling waves--By
such miracles she had bought me for her own; I admitted her authority, and bowed to her decrees.
If, after mature consideration, such was my resolve, it was doubly necessary that I should
not lose the end of life, the improvement of my faculties, and poison its flow by repinings
without end. Yet how cease to repine, since there was no hand near to extract the barbed spear
that had entered my heart of hearts? I stretched out my hand, and it touched none whose sensations
were responsive to mine. I was girded, walled in, vaulted over, by seven-fold barriers of loneliness.
Occupation alone, if I could deliver myself up to it, would be capable of affording an opiate
to my sleepless sense of woe. Having determined to make Rome my abode, at least for some months,
I made arrangements for my accommodation--I selected my home. The Colonna Palace was well adapted
for my purpose. Its grandeur-- its treasure of paintings, its magnificent halls were objects
soothing and even exhilarating.

I found the granaries of Rome well stored with grain, and particularly with Indian corn; this
product requiring less art in its preparation for food, I selected as my principal support.
I now found the hardships and lawlessness of my youth turn to account. A man cannot throw off
the habits of sixteen years. The Worship of Venus might be more appropriately named Games of the
Loves in Honour of Venus. The subject is taken from the Imagines[36] of Philostratus, a renowned
Greek sophist, who, belonging to a late period of the Roman Empire, yet preserved intact the
self-conscious grace and charm of the Hellenistic mode of conception. The theme is supplied by a series
of paintings, supposed to have been seen by him in a villa near Naples, but by one important
group of modern scholars held to be creations of the author's fertile brain. Before a statue
of Venus more or less of the Praxitelean type--a more earthly sister of those which have been named
the "Townley Venus" and the "Vénus d'Arles"--myriads of Loves sport, kissing, fondling, leaping,
flying, playing rhythmic games, some of them shooting arrows at the opposing faction, to which
challenge merry answer is made with the flinging of apples. Incomparable is the vigour, the
life, the joyousness of the whole, and incomparable must have been the splendour of the colour
before the outrages of time (and the cleaner) dimmed it. These delicious pagan amorini are
the successors of the angelic putti of an earlier time, whom the
Tuscan sculptors of the Quattrocento had already converted into more
joyous and more earthly beings than their predecessors had imagined.

Such painters of the North, in touch with the South, as Albrecht Dürer, Mabuse, and Jacob
Cornelissen van Oostsanen, delighted in scattering through their sacred works these lusty,
thick-limbed little urchins, and made them merrier and more mischievous still, with their quaint
Northern physiognomy. To say nothing on this occasion of Albani, Poussin, and the Flemish sculptors
of the seventeenth century, with Du Quesnoy and Van Opstal at their head, Rubens and Van Dyck
derived their chief inspiration in similar subjects from these Loves of Titian.[37]

The sumptuous Bacchanal, for which, we are told, Alfonso gave the commission and supplied the subject
in 1518, is a performance of a less delicate charm but a more realistic vigour than its companion.
From certain points of analogy with an Ariadne described by Philostratus, it has been very
generally assumed that we have here a representation of the daughter of Minos consoled already for the
departure of Theseus, whose sail gleams white on the blue sea in
the distance. May I record my many ravings--the wild
curses I hurled at torturing nature--and how I have passed days shut out from light and food--from
all except the burning hell alive in my own bosom?

I was presented, meantime, with one other occupation, the one best fitted to discipline my
melancholy thoughts, which strayed backwards, over many a ruin, and through many a flowery
glade, even to the mountain recess, from which in early youth I had first emerged.

During one of my rambles through the habitations of Rome, I found writing materials on a table
in an author's study. Parts of a manuscript lay scattered about. It contained a learned disquisition
on the Italian language; one page an unfinished dedication to posterity, for whose profit the
writer had sifted and selected the niceties of this harmonious language --to whose everlasting
benefit he bequeathed his labours.

I also will write a book, I cried--for whom to read?--to whom dedicated? And then with silly
flourish (what so capricious and childish as despair?) I wrote, DEDICATION TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS
DEAD. SHADOWS, ARISE, AND READ YOUR FALL! BEHOLD THE HISTORY OF THE LAST MAN.

Yet, will not this world be re-peopled, and the children of a saved pair of lovers, in some
to me unknown and unattainable seclusion, wandering to these prodigious relics of the ante-pestilential
race, seek to learn how beings so wondrous in their achievements, with imaginations infinite,
and powers godlike, had departed from their home to an unknown country?

I will write and leave in this most ancient city, this "world's sole monument," a record of
these things. I will leave a monument of the existence of Verney, the Last Man. At first I
thought only to speak of plague, of death, and last, of desertion; but I lingered fondly on
my early years, and recorded with sacred zeal the virtues of my companions. They have been
with me during the fulfilment of my task. I have brought it to an end--I lift my eyes from
my paper--again they are lost to me. Again I feel that I am alone.

A year has passed since I have been thus occupied. The seasons have made their wonted round,
and decked this eternal city in a changeful robe of surpassing beauty. A year has passed; and
I no longer guess at my state or my prospects--loneliness is my familiar, sorrow my inseparable
companion. I have endeavoured to brave the storm--I have endeavoured to school myself to fortitude--I
have sought to imbue myself with the lessons of wisdom. It will not do. My hair has become
nearly grey--my voice, unused now to utter sound, comes strangely on my ears. My person, with
its human powers and features, seem to me a monstrous excrescence of nature. How express in
human language a woe human being until this hour never knew! How give intelligible expression
to a pang none but I could ever understand!-- No one has entered Rome. None will ever come.
I smile bitterly at the delusion I have so long nourished, and still more, when I reflect that
I have exchanged it for another as delusive, as false, but to which I now cling with the same
fond trust.

Winter has come again; and the gardens of Rome have lost their leaves-- the sharp air comes
over the Campagna, and has driven its brute inhabitants to take up their abode in the many
dwellings of the deserted city--frost has suspended the gushing fountains--and Trevi has stilled
her eternal music. I had made a rough calculation, aided by the stars, by which I endeavoured
to ascertain the first day of the new year. In the old out-worn age, the Sovereign Pontiff
was used to go in solemn pomp, and mark the renewal of the year by driving a nail in the gate
of the temple of Janus. On that day I ascended St. Peter's, and carved on its topmost stone
the aera 2100, last year of the world!

My only companion was a dog, a shaggy fellow, half water and half shepherd's dog, whom I found
tending sheep in the Campagna. His master was dead, but nevertheless he continued fulfilling
his duties in expectation of his return. If a sheep strayed from the rest, he forced it to
return to the flock, and sedulously kept off every intruder. Riding in the Campagna I had come
upon his sheep-walk, and for some time observed his repetition of lessons learned from man,
now useless, though unforgotten. His delight was excessive when he saw me. He sprung up to
my knees; he capered round and round, wagging his tail, with the short, quick bark of pleasure:
he left his fold to follow me, and from that day has never neglected to watch by and attend
on me, shewing boisterous gratitude whenever I caressed or talked to him. His pattering steps
and mine alone were heard, when we entered the magnificent extent of nave and aisle of St.
Peter's. We ascended the myriad steps together, when on the summit I achieved my design, and
in rough figures noted the date of the last year. I then turned to gaze on the country, and
to take leave of Rome. I had long determined to quit it, and I now formed the plan I would
adopt for my future career, after I had left this magnificent abode.

A solitary being is by instinct a wanderer, and that I would become. A hope of amelioration
always attends on change of place, which would even lighten the burthen of my life. I had been
a fool to remain in Rome all this time: Rome noted for Malaria, the famous caterer for death.
But it was still possible, that, could I visit the whole extent of earth, I should find in
some part of the wide extent a survivor. Methought the sea-side was the most probable retreat
to be chosen by such a one. If left alone in an inland district, still they could not continue
in the spot where their last hopes had been extinguished; they would journey on, like me, in
search of a partner for their solitude, till the watery barrier stopped their further progress.

