CHAPTER VII

THE STRANGE, DARK SECRET

Julien had once entertained the hope that Claudet's marriage with Reine would act as a kind
of heroic remedy for the cure of his unfortunate passion, he very soon perceived that he had
been wofully mistaken.  As soon as he had informed the grand chasserot of the success of his
undertaking, he became aware that his own burden was considerably heavier.  Certainly it had
been easier for him to bear uncertainty than the boisterous rapture evinced by his fortunate
rival.  His jealousy rose against it, and that was all.  Now that he had torn from Reine the
avowal of her love for Claudet, he was more than ever oppressed by his hopeless passion, and
plunged into a condition of complete moral and physical disintegration.  It mingled with his
blood, his nerves, his thoughts, and possessed him altogether, dwelling within him like an
adored and tyrannical mistress.  Reine appeared constantly before him as he had contemplated
her on the outside steps of the farmhouse, in her never-to- be-forgotten negligee of the short
skirt and the half-open bodice.  He again beheld the silken treasure of her tresses, gliding
playfully around her shoulders, the clear, honest look of her limpid eyes, the expressive smile
of her enchanting lips, and with a sudden revulsion of feeling he reflected that perhaps before
a month was over, all these charms would belong to Claudct.  Then, almost at the same moment,
like a swallow, which, with one rapid turn of its wing, changes its course, his thoughts went
in the opposite direction, and he began to imagine what would have happened if, instead of
replying in the affirmative, Reine had objected to marrying Claudet.  He could picture himself
kneeling before her as before the Madonna, and in a low voice confessing his love.  He would
have taken her hands so respectfully, and pleaded so eloquently, that she would have allowed
herself to be convinced.  The little, hands would have remained prisoners in his own; he would
have lifted her tenderly, devotedly, in his arms, and under the influence of this feverish
dream, he fancied he could feel the beating heart of the young girl against his own bosom.
Suddenly he would wake up out of his illusions, and bite his lips with rage on finding himself
in the dull reality of his own dwelling.

One day he heard footsteps on the gravel; a sonorous and jovial voice met his ear.  It was
Claudet, starting for La Thuiliere.  Julien bent forward to see him, and ground his teeth as
he watched his joyous departure.  The sharp sting of jealousy entered his soul, and he rebelled
against the evident injustice of Fate.  How had he deserved that life should present so dismal
and forbidding an aspect to him?  He had had none of the joys of infancy; his youth had been
spent wearily under the peevish discipline of a cloister; he had entered on his young manhood
with all the awkwardness and timidity of a night-bird that is made to fly in the day. Up to
the age of twenty-seven years, he had known neither love nor friendship; his time had been
given entirely to earning his daily bread, and to the cultivation of religious exercises, which
consoled him in some measure for his apparently useless way of living.  Latterly, it is true,
Fortune had seemed to smile upon him, by giving him a little more money and liberty, but this
smile was a mere mockery, and a snare more hurtful than the pettinesses and privations of his
past life.  The fickle goddess, continuing her part of mystifier, had opened to his enraptured
sight a magic window through which she had shown him a charming vision of possible happiness;
but while he was still gazing, she had closed it abruptly in his face, laughing scornfully
at his discomfiture.  What sense was there in this perversion of justice, this perpetual mockery
of Fate?  At times the influence of his early education would resume its sway, and he would
ask himself whether all this apparent contradiction were not a secret admonition from on high,
warning him that he had not been created to enjoy the fleeting pleasures of this world, and
ought, therefore, to turn his attention toward things eternal, and renounce the perishable
delights of the flesh?

"If so," thought he, irreverently, "the warning comes rather late, and it would have answered
the purpose better had I been allowed to continue in the narrow way of obscure poverty!"  Now
that the enervating influence of a more prosperous atmosphere had weakened his courage, and
cooled the ardor of his piety, his faith began to totter like an old wall.  His religious beliefs
seemed to have been wrecked by the same storm which had destroyed his passionate hopes of love,
and left him stranded and forlorn without either haven or pilot, blown hither and thither solely
by the violence of his passion.

By degrees he took an aversion to his home, and would spend entire days in the woods.  Their
secluded haunts, already colored by the breath of autumn, became more attractive to him as
other refuge failed him.  They were his consolation; his doubts, weakness, and amorous regrets,
found sympathy and indulgence under their silent shelter.  He felt less lonely, less humiliated,
less prosaic among these great forest depths, these lofty ash-trees, raising their verdant
branches to heaven.  He found he could more easily evoke the seductive image of Reine Vincart
in these calm solitudes, where the recollections of the previous springtime mingled with the
phantoms of his heated imagination and clothed themselves with almost living forms.  He seemed
to see the young girl rising from the mists of the distant valleys.  The least fluttering of
the leaves heralded her fancied approach.  At times the hallucination was so complete that
he could see, in the interlacing of the branches, the undulations of her supple form, and the
graceful outlines of her profile. Then he would be seized by an insane desire to reach the
fugitive and speak to her once more, and would go tearing along the brushwood for that purpose.
Now and then, in the half light formed by the hanging boughs, he would see rays of golden light,
coming straight down to the ground, and resting there lightly like diaphanous apparitions.
Sometimes the rustling of birds taking flight, would sound in his ears like the timid frou-frou
of a skirt, and Julien, fascinated by the mysterious charm of these indefinite objects, and
following the impulse of their mystical suggestions, would fling himself impetuously into the
jungle, repeating to him self the words of the "Canticle of Canticles": "I hear the voice of
my beloved; behold! she cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills."  He would
continue to press forward in pursuit of the intangible apparition, until he sank with exhaustion
near some stream or fountain.  Under the influence of the fever, which was consuming his brain,
he would imagine the trickling water to be the song of a feminine voice.  He would wind his
arms around the young saplings, he would tear the berries from the bushes, pressing them against
his thirsty lips, and imagining their odoriferous sweetness to be a fond caress from the loved one.

He would return from these expeditions exhausted but not appeased. Sometimes he would come
across Claudet, also returning home from paying his court to Reine Vincart; and the unhappy
Julien would scrutinize his rival's countenance, seeking eagerly for some trace of the impressions
he had received during the loving interview.  His curiosity was nearly always baffled; for
Claudet seemed to have left all his gayety and conversational powers at La Thuiliere.  During
their tete-a-tete meals, he hardly spoke at all, maintaining a reserved attitude and a taciturn
countenance.  Julien, provoked at this unexpected sobriety, privately accused his cousin of
dissimulation, and of trying to conceal his happiness.  His jealousy so blinded him that he
considered the silence of Claudet as pure hypocrisy not recognizing that it was assumed for
the purpose of concealing some unpleasantness rather than satisfaction.

The fact was that Claudet, although rejoicing at the turn matters had taken, was verifying
the poet's saying: "Never is perfect happiness our lot."  When Julien brought him the good
news, and he had flown so joyfully to La Thuiliere, he had certainly been cordially received
by Reine, but, nevertheless, he had noticed with surprise an absent and dreamy look in her
eyes, which did not agree with his idea of a first interview of lovers.  When he wished to
express his affection in the vivacious and significant manner ordinarily employed among the
peasantry, that is to say, by vigorous embracing and resounding kisses, he met with unexpected
resistance.

"Keep quiet!"  was the order, "and let us talk rationally!"

He obeyed, although not agreeing in her view of the reserve to be maintained between lovers;
but, he made up his mind to return to the charge and triumph over her bashful scruples.  In
fact, he began again the very next day, and his impetuous ardor encountered the same refusal
in the same firm, though affectionate manner.  He ventured to complain, telling Reine that
she did not love him as she ought.

"If I did not feel friendly toward you," replied the young girl, laconically, "should I have
allowed you to talk to me of marriage?"

Then, seeing that he looked vexed and worried, and realizing that she was perhaps treating
him too roughly, she continued, more gently:

"Remember, Claudet, that I am living all alone at the farm.  That obliges me to have more reserve
than a girl whose mother is with her.  So you must not be offended if I do not behave exactly
as others might, and rest assured that it will not prevent me from being a good wife to you,
when we are married."

"Well, now," thought Claudet, as he was returning despondently to Vivey: "I can't help thinking
that a little caress now and then wouldn't hurt any one!"

Under these conditions it is not to be supposed he was in a mood to relate any of the details
of such meagre lovemaking.  His self-love was wounded by Reine's coldness.  Having always been
"cock-of-the-walk," he could not understand why he had such poor success with the only one
about whom he was in earnest.  He kept quiet, therefore, hiding his anxiety under the mask
of careless indifference.  Moreover, a certain primitive instinct of prudence made him circumspect.
In his innermost soul, he still entertained doubts of Julien's sincerity.  Sometimes he doubted
whether his cousin's conduct had not been dictated by the bitterness of rejected love, rather
than a generous impulse of affection, and he did not care to reveal Reine's repulse to one
whom he vaguely suspected of being a former lover.  His simple, ardent nature could not put
up with opposition, and he thought only of hastening the day when Reine would belong to him
altogether.  But, when he broached this subject, he had the mortification to find that she
was less impatient than himself.

"There is no hurry," she replied, "our affairs are not in order, our harvests are not housed,
and it would be better to wait till the dull season."

In his first moments of joy and effervescence, Claudet had evinced the desire to announce immediately
the betrothal throughout the village. This Reine had opposed; she thought they should avoid
awakening public curiosity so long beforehand, and she extracted from Claudet a promise to
say nothing until the date of the marriage should be settled.  He had unwillingly consented,
and thus, during the last month, the matter had been dragging on indefinitely:

With Julien de Buxieres, this interminable delay, these incessant comings and goings from the
chateau to the farm, as well as the mysterious conduct of the bridegroom-elect, became a subject
of serious irritation, amounting almost to obsession.  He would have wished the affair hurried
up, and the sacrifice consummated without hindrance.  He believed that when once the newly-married
pair had taken up their quarters at La Thuiliere, the very certainty that Reine belonged in
future to another would suffice to effect a radical cure in him, and chase away the deceptive
phantoms by which he was pursued.

One evening, as Claudet was returning home, more out of humor and silent than usual, Julien
asked him, abruptly:

"Well! how are you getting along?  When is the wedding?"

"Nothing is decided yet," replied Claudet, "we have time enough!"

"You think so?" exclaimed de Buxieres, sarcastically; "you have considerable patience for a lover!"

The remark and the tone provoked Claudet.

"The delay is not of my making," returned he.

"Ah!"  replied the other, quickly, "then it comes from Mademoiselle Vincart?"  And a sudden
gleam came into his eyes, as if Claudet's assertion had kindled a spark of hope in his breast.
The latter noticed the momentary brightness in his cousin's usually stormy countenance, and
hastened to reply:

"Nay, nay; we both think it better to postpone the wedding until the harvest is in."

"You are wrong.  A wedding should not be postponed.  Besides, this prolonged love-making, these
daily visits to the farm--all that is not very proper.  It is compromising for Mademoiselle
Vincart!"

Julien shot out these remarks with a degree of fierceness and violence that astonished Claudet.

"You think, then," said he, "that we ought to rush matters, and have the wedding before winter?"

"Undoubtedly!"

The next day, at La Thuiliere, the grand chasserot, as he stood in the orchard, watching Reine
spread linen on the grass, entered bravely on the subject.

"Reine," said he, coaxingly, "I think we shall have to decide upon a day for our wedding."

She set down the watering-pot with which she was wetting the linen, and looked anxiously at
her betrothed.

"I thought we had agreed to wait until the later season.  Why do you wish to change that arrangement?"

"That is true; I promised not to hurry you, Reine, but it is beyond me to wait--you must not
be vexed with me if I find the time long.  Besides, they know nothing, around the village,
of our intentions, and my coming here every day might cause gossip and make it unpleasant for
you.  At any rate, that is the opinion of Monsieur de Buxieres, with whom I was conferring
only yesterday evening."

At the name of Julien, Reine frowned and bit her lip.

"Aha!"  said she, "it is he who has been advising you?"

"Yes; he says the sooner we are married, the better it will be."

"Why does he interfere in what does not concern him?"  said she, angrily, turning her head
away.  She stood a moment in thought, absently pushing forward the roll of linen with her foot.
Then, shrugging her shoulders and raising her head, she said slowly, while still avoiding Claudet's
eyes:

"Perhaps you are right--both of you.  Well, let it be so!  I authorize you to go to Monsieur
le Cure and arrange the day with him."

"Oh, thanks, Reine!"  exclaimed Claudet, rapturously; "you make me very happy!"

He pressed her hands in his, but though absorbed in his own joyful feelings, he could not help
remarking that the young girl was trembling in his grasp.  He even fancied that there was a
suspicious, tearful glitter in her brilliant eyes.

He left her, however, and repaired at once to the cure's house, which stood near the chateau,
a little behind the church.

