"Hilland!" shouted Graham, in a voice that drowned the colonel's words, and echoed far and wide.

There was no answer, and the fugitives were nearly all in.

Graham galloped out beyond the last lagging trooper, and with a cry that smote the hearts of
those that heard it he shouted, "Hilland!" and strained his eyes in every direction. There
was no response--no form in view that resembled his friend.

At wild speed he returned and rode among Hilland's command. His manner was so desperate that
he drew all eyes upon him, and none seemed able or willing to answer. At last a man said, "I
heard his voice just as we were breaking from that cursed grove, and I've seen or heard nothing
of him since. I supposed he was on ahead with the colonel;" and that was all the information
that could be obtained.

The men looked very downcast, for Hilland was almost idolized by them. Graham saw that there
was an eager quest of information among themselves, and he waited with feverish impatience
for further light; but nothing could be elicited from officers or privates beyond the fact
that Hilland had been bravely doing his duty up to the moment when, as one of the captains
said, "It was a scramble, 'each man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost.'"

As long as there had been a gleam of hope that Hilland had escaped with the rest, Graham had
been almost beside himself in his feverish impatience.

He now rode to where the two colonels were standing, and the senior began rapidly, "Major Graham,
we sympathize with you deeply. We all, and indeed the army, have sustained a severe loss in
even the temporary absence of Lieutenant-Colonel Hilland; for I will not believe that worse
has happened than a wound and brief captivity. The enemy has acted peculiarly. I have fears
that they may be flanking us and trying to intercept us on some parallel road. Therefore I
shall order that we return to camp in the quickest possible time. Good God, Graham! don't take
it so to heart. You've no proof that Hilland is dead. You look desperate, man. Come, remember
that you are a soldier and that Hilland was one too. We've had to discount such experiences
from the start."

"Gentlemen," said Graham, in a low, concentrated voice, and touching his hat to the two colonels,
"I am under the command of you both--one as my superior officer, the other as leader of the
expedition. I ask permission to return in search of my friend."

"I forbid it," they both cried simultaneously, while the senior officer continued, "Graham,
you are beside yourself. It would be almost suicide to go back. It would certainly result in
your capture, while there is not one chance in a thousand that you could do Hilland any good."

Graham made no immediate reply, but was studying the ill-omened grove with his glass. After
a moment he said, "I do not think there will be any further pursuit. The enemy are retiring
from the grove. My explanation of their conduct is this: There is some large decisive movement
in progress, and we were merely brushed out of the way that we might learn nothing of it. My
advice is that we retain this commanding position, throw out scouts on every side, and I doubt
whether we find anything beyond a small rearguard in ten miles of us within a few hours."

"Your anxiety for your friend warps your judgment, and it is contrary to my instructions, which
were simply to learn if there was any considerable force of the enemy in this region. Your
explanation of the enemy's conduct is plausible, and has already occurred to me as a possibility.
If it be the true explanation, all the more reason that we should return promptly and report
what we know and what we surmise. I shall therefore order 'Retreat' to be sounded at once."

"And I, Major Graham," said his own colonel, "must add, that while you have my sympathy, I
nevertheless order you to your place in the march. Rather than permit you to carry out your
mad project, I would place you under arrest."

"Gentlemen, I cannot complain of your course, or criticise your military action. You are in
a better condition of mind to judge what is wise than I; and under ordinary circumstances I
would submit without a word. But the circumstances are extraordinary. Hilland has been my friend
since boyhood. I will not remain in suspense as to his fate; much less will I leave his wife
and friends in suspense. I know that disobedience of orders in the face of the enemy is one
of the gravest offences, but I must disobey them, be the consequences what they may."

As he wheeled his horse, his colonel cried, "Stop him. He's under arrest!" But Mayburn, feeling
the touch of the spur, sprang into his fleet gallop, and they might as well have pursued a bird.

They saw this at once, and the colonel in command only growled, "--- this reconnoissance. Here
we've lost two of the finest officers in the brigade, as well as some of our best men. Sound
'Retreat.'"

There was a hesitancy, and a wild impulse among Hilland's men to follow Graham to the rescue,
but it was sternly repressed by their officers, and the whole command was within a few moments
on a sharp trot toward camp.

CHAPTER XXVIII

ITS FULFILMENT

Graham soon slackened his pace when he found that he was not pursued, and as his friends disappeared
he returned warily to the brow of the eminence and watched their rapid march away from the
ill-fated locality. He rode over the brow of the hill as if he was following, for he had little
doubt that the movements of the Union force were watched. Having tied his horse where he could
not be seen from the grove, he crept back behind a sheltering bush, and with his glass scanned
the scene of conflict. In the road leading through the grove there were ambulances removing
the wounded. At last these disappeared, and there was not a living object in sight. He watched
a little longer, and buzzards began to wheel over and settle upon the battleground--sure evidence
that for the time it was deserted.

He hesitated no longer. Mounting his horse he continued down the hill so as to be screened
from any possible observers, then struck off to his left to a belt of woods that extended well
up to the vicinity of the grove. Making his way through this bit of forest, he soon came to
an old wood-road partially grown up with bushes, and pushed his way rapidly back toward the
point he wished to attain. Having approached the limits of the belt of woods, he tied his horse
in a thicket, listened, then stole to the edge nearest the grove. It appeared deserted. Crouching
along a rail fence with revolver in hand, he at last reached its fatal shade, and pushing through
its fringe of lower growth, peered cautiously around. Here and there he saw a lifeless body
or a struggling, wounded horse, over which the buzzards hovered, or on which they had already
settled. Disgusting as was their presence, they reassured him, and he boldly and yet with an
awful dread at heart began his search, scanning with rapid eye each prostrate form along the
entire back edge of the grove through which the Union forces had burst in their swift retreat.

He soon passed beyond all traces of conflict, and then retraced his steps, uttering half-unconsciously
and in a tone of anguish his friend's name. As he approached what had been the extreme right
of the Union line in their retreat, and their left in the advance, he beheld a dead horse that
looked familiar. He sprang forward and saw that it was Hilland's.

"Hilland! Warren!" he shouted, wild with awful foreboding.

From a dense thicket near he heard a feeble groan. Rushing into it, he stumbled against the
immense mossy trunk of a prostrate, decaying tree. Concealed beyond it lay his friend, apparently
dying.

"Oh, Warren!" he cried, "my friend, my brother, don't you know me? Oh, live, live! I can rescue
you."

There was no response from the slowly gasping man.

Graham snatched a flask from his pocket and wet the pallid lips with brandy, and then caused
Hilland to swallow a little. The stimulant kindled for a few moments the flame of life, and
the dying man slowly became conscious.

"Graham," he murmured feebly--"Graham, is that you?"

"Yes, yes, and I'll save you yet. Oh, in the name of Grace, I adjure you to live."

"Alas for Grace! My dream--will come true."

"Oh, Hilland, no, no! Oh, that I could die in your place! What is my life to yours! Rally,
Warren, rally. My fleet horse is tied near, or if you are too badly wounded I will stay and
nurse you. I'll fire a pistol shot through my arm, and then we can be sent to the hospital
together. Here, take more brandy. That's right. With your physique you should not think of
death. Let me lift you up and stanch your wound."

"Don't move me, Graham, or I'll bleed to death instantly, and--and--I want to look in your
face--once more, and send my--true love to Grace. More brandy, please. It's getting light again.
Before it was dark--oh, so dark! How is it you are here?"

"I came back for you. Could I ride away and you not with me? Oh, Warren! I must save your life.
I must, I must!"

"Leave me, Graham; leave me at once. You will be captured, if not killed," and Hilland spoke
with energy.

"I will never leave you. There, your voice proves that your strength is coming back. Warren,
Warren, can't you live for Grace's sake?"

"Graham," said Hilland, solemnly, "even my moments are numbered. One more gush of blood from
my side and I'm gone. Oh, shall I become nothing? Shall I be no more than the decaying tree
behind which I crawled when struck down? Shall I never see my peerless bride again? She would
always have been a bride to me. I can't believe it. There must be amends somewhere for the
agony of mind, not body, that I've endured as I lay here, and for the anguish that Grace will
suffer. Oh, Graham, my philosophy fails me in this strait, my whole nature revolts at it. Mere
corruption, chemical change, ought not to be the end of a man."

"Do not waste your strength in words. Live, and in a few short weeks Grace may be your nurse.
Take more brandy, and then I'll go for assistance."

"No, Graham, no. Don't leave me. Life is ebbing again. Ah, ah! farewell--true friend. Un--bounded
love--Grace. Commit--her--your care!"

There was a convulsive shudder and the noble form was still.

Graham knelt over him for a few moments in silent horror. Then he tore open Hilland's vest
and placed his hand over his heart. It was motionless. His hand, as he withdrew it, was bathed
in blood. He poured brandy into the open lips, but the powerful stimulant was without effect.
The awful truth overwhelmed him.

Hilland was dead.

He sat down, lifted his friend up against his breast, and hung over him with short, dry sobs--with
a grief far beyond tears, careless, reckless of his own safety.

The bushes near him were parted, and a sweet girlish face, full of fear, wonder, and pity,
looked upon him. The interpretation of the scene was but too evident, and tears gushed from
the young girl's eyes.

"Oh, sir," she began in a low, faltering voice.

The mourner paid no heed.

"Please, sir," she cried, "do not grieve so. I never saw a man grieve like that. Oh, papa,
papa, come, come here."

The quick pride of manhood was touched, and Graham laid his friend reverently down, and stood
erect, quiet, but with heaving breast. Hasty steps approached, and a gray-haired man stood
beside the young girl.

"I am your prisoner, sir," said Graham, "but in the name of humanity I ask you to let me bury
my dead."

"My dear young sir, in the name of humanity and a more sacred Name, I will do all for you in
my power. I am a clergyman, and am here with a party from a neighboring village, charged with
the office of burying the dead with appropriate rites. I have no desire to take you prisoner,
but will be glad to entertain you as my guest if the authorities will permit. Will you not
give me some brief explanation of this scene while they are gathering up the dead?"

Graham did so in a few sad words. The daughter sat crying on the mossy log meanwhile, and the
old man wiped his eyes again and again.

"Was there ever a nobler-looking man?" sobbed the girl; "and to think of his poor wife! Papa,
he must not be buried here. He must be taken to our little cemetery by the church, and I will
often put flowers on his grave."

"If you will carry out this plan, sweet child" said Graham, "one broken-hearted woman will
bless you while she lives."

"Think, papa," resumed the girl--"think if it was our Henry what we would wish."

"I'm glad you feel as you do, my child. It proves that this horrible war is not hardening your
heart or making you less gentle or compassionate. I will carry out your wishes and yours, sir,
and will use my whole influence to prevent your noble fidelity to your friend from becoming
the cause of your captivity. I will now summon assistance to carry your friend to the road,
where a wagon can take him to the village."

In a few moments two negro slaves, part of the force sent to bury the dead, with their tattered
hats doffed out of respect, slowly bore the body of Hilland to the roadside. Graham, with his
bare head bowed under a weight of grief that seemed wellnigh crushing, followed closely, and
then the old clergyman and his daughter. They laid the princely form down on the grass beside
a dark-haired young Confederate officer, who was also to be taken to the cemetery.

The sad rites of burial which the good old man now performed over both friend and foe of subordinate
rank need not be dwelt upon. While they were taking place Graham stood beside his friend as
motionless as if he had become a statue, heedless of the crowd of villagers and country people
that had gathered to the scene.

At last a sweet voice said: "Please, sir, it's time to go. You ride with papa. I am young and
strong and can walk."

His only response was to take her hand and kiss it fervently. Then he turned to her father
and told him of his horse that was hidden in the nearest edge of the belt of woods, and asked
that it might be sent for by some one who was trustworthy.

"Here is Sampson, one of my own people; I'd trust him with all I have;" and one of the negroes
who had borne the body of Hilland hastened away as directed, and soon returned with the beautiful
horse that awakened the admiration of all and the cupidity of a few of the nondescript characters
that had been drawn to the place.

A rude wagon was drawn to the roadside, its rough boards covered with leafy boughs, and the
Union and the Confederate officer were placed in it side by side. Then the minister climbed
into his old-fashioned gig, his daughter sprang lightly in by his side, took the reins and
slowly led the way, followed by the extemporized hearse, while Graham on his horse rode at
the feet of his friend, chief mourner in bitter truth. The negroes who had buried the dead
walked on either side of the wagon bareheaded and oblivious of the summer sun, and the country
people and villagers streamed along the road after the simple procession.

The bodies were first taken to the parsonage, and the stains of battle removed by an old colored
aunty, a slave of the clergyman. Graham gave into the care of the clergyman's daughter Hilland's
sword and some other articles that he did not wish to carry on his return to the Union lines.
Among these was an exquisite likeness of Grace smiling in her happy loveliness.

Tears again rushed into the young girl's eyes as she asked in accents of deepest commiseration:
"And will you have to break the news to her?"

"No," said Graham hoarsely; "I could not do that. I'd rather face a thousand guns than that
poor wife."

"Why do you not keep the likeness?"

"I could not look upon it and think of the change which this fatal day will bring to those
features. I shall leave it with you until she comes for his sword and to visit his grave. No
one has a better right to it than you, and in this lovely face you see the promise of your
own womanhood reflected. You have not told me your name. I wish to know it, for I shall love
and cherish it as one of my most sacred memories."

"Margarita Anderson," was the blushing reply. "Papa and my friends call me Rita."

"Let me call you what your name signifies, and what you have proved yourself to be--Pearl.
Who is Henry?"

"My only brother. He is a captain in our army."

"You are a true Southern girl?"

"Yes, in body and soul I'm a Southern girl;" and her dark eyes flashed through her tears.

"So was the original of this likeness. She is kin to you in blood and feeling as well as in
her noble qualities; but she loved her Northern husband more than the whole world, and all
in it was nothing compared with him. She will come and see you some day, and words will fail
her in thanks."

"And will you come with her?"

"I don't know. I may be dead long before that time."

The young girl turned away, and for some reason her tears flowed faster than ever before.

"Pearl, my tender-hearted child, don't grieve over what would be so small a grief to me. This
evil day has clouded your young life with the sadness of others. But at your age it will soon
pass;" and he returned to his friend and took from him the little mementoes that he knew would
be so dear to Grace.

Soon after, the two bodies were borne to the quaint old church and placed before the altar.
Both were dressed in their full uniforms, and there was a noble calmness on the face of each
as they slumbered side by side in the place sacred to the God of peace, and at peace with each
other for evermore.

For an hour the bell tolled slowly, and the people passed in at one door, looked upon the manly
forms, and with awed faces crept out at the other.

It was indeed a memorable day for the villagers. They had been awakened in the dawn by sounds
of distant conflict. They had exulted over a brilliant victory as the Confederate forces came
marching rapidly through their streets.

They had been put on the qui vive to know what the rapid movement of their troops meant. Some
of the most severely wounded had been left in their care. The battlefield with its horrors
had been visited, and there was to be a funeral service over two actors in the bloody drama,
whose untimely fate excited not only sympathy, but the deep interest and curiosity which ever
attend upon those around whom rumor has woven a romantic history. The story of Graham's return
in search of his friend, of the circumstances of their discovery by Rita, of the likeness of
the lovely wife who would soon be heart-broken from the knowledge of what was known to them,
had got abroad among the people, and their warm Southern hearts were more touched by the fate
of their Northern foe than by that of the officer wearing the livery of their own service,
but of whom little was known.

Graham's profound grief also impressed them deeply; and the presence of a Union officer, sitting
among them, forgetful of his danger, of all except that his friend was dead, formed a theme
which would be dwelt upon for months to come.

Near the close of the day, after some appropriate words in the church, the venerable clergyman,
with his white locks uncovered, led the way through the cemetery to its further side, where,
under the shade of an immense juniper-tree, were two open graves. As before, Graham followed
his friend, and after him came Rita with a number of her young companions, dressed in white
and carrying baskets of flowers. After an impressive burial service had been read, the young
girls passed to and fro between the graves, throwing flowers in each and singing as they went
a hymn breathing the certainty of the immortality that had been the object of poor Hilland's
longing aspiration. Graham's heart thrilled as he heard the words, for they seemed the answer
to his friend's questions. But, though his feelings might be touched deeply, he was the last
man to be moved by sentiment or emotion from a position to which his inexorable reason had
conducted him.

The sun threw its level rays over a scene that he never forgot--the white-haired clergyman
standing between the open graves; the young maidens, led by the dark-eyed Rita, weaving in
and out, their white hands and arms glowing like ivory as they strewed the flowers, meanwhile
singing with an unconscious grace and pathos that touched the rudest hearts; the concourse
of people, chiefly women, old men, and children, for the young and strong were either mouldering
on battlefields or marching to others; the awed sable faces of the negroes in the further background;
the exquisite evening sky; the songs of unheeding birds, so near to man in their choice of
habitation, so remote from his sorrows and anxieties--all combined to form a picture and a
memory which would be vivid and real to his latest day.

The graves were at last filled and piled up with flowers. Then Graham, standing uncovered before
them all, spoke slowly and earnestly:

"People of the South, you see before you a Northern man, an officer in the Union army; but
as I live I cherish no thought of enmity toward one of you. On the contrary, my heart is overwhelmed
with gratitude. You have placed here side by side two brave men. You have rendered to their
dust equal reverence and honor. I am in accord with you. I believe that the patriotism of one
was as sincere as that of the other, the courage of one as high as that of the other, that
the impulses which led them to offer up their lives were equally noble. In your generous sympathy
for a fallen foe you have proved yourselves Americans in the best sense of the word. May the
day come when that name shall suffice for us all. Believe me, I would defend your homes and
my own with equal zeal;" and with a bow of profound respect he turned to the grave of his friend.

With a delicate appreciation of his wish, the people, casting backward lingering, sympathetic
glances, ebbed away and he was soon left alone.

CHAPTER XXIX

A SOUTHERN GIRL

When Graham was left alone he knelt and bowed his head in the flowers that Rita had placed
on Hilland's grave, and the whole horrible truth seemed to grow, to broaden and deepen, like
a gulf that had opened at his feet. Hilland, who had become a part of his own life and seemed
inseparable from all its interests, had disappeared forever. But yesterday he was the centre
of vast interests and boundless love; now he had ceased to be. The love would remain, but oh,
the torture of a boundless love when its object has passed beyond its reach!

The thought of Grace brought to the mourner an indescribable anguish. Once his profound love
for her had asserted itself in a way that had stung him to madness, and the evil thought had
never returned. Now she seemed to belong to the dead husband even more than when he was living.
The thought that tortured him most was that Grace would not long survive Hilland. The union
between the two had been so close and vital that the separation might mean death. The possibility
overwhelmed him, and he grew faint and sick. Indeed it would seem that he partially lost consciousness,
for at last he became aware that some one was standing near and pleading with him. Then he
saw it was Rita.

"Oh, sir," she entreated, "do not grieve so. It breaks my heart to see a man so overcome. It
seems terrible. It makes me feel that there are depths of sorrow that frighten me. Oh, come
with me--do, please. I fear you've eaten nothing to-day, and we have supper all ready for you."

Graham tottered to his feet and passed his hand across his brow, as if to brush away an evil dream.

"Indeed, sir, you look sick and faint. Take my arm and lean on me. I assure you I am very strong."

"Yes, Pearl, you are strong. Many live to old age and never become as true a woman as you are
to-day. This awful event has wellnigh crushed me, and, now I think of it, I have scarcely tasted
food since last evening. Thank you, my child, I will take your arm. In an hour or two I shall
gain self-control."

"My heart aches for you, sir," she said, as they passed slowly through the twilight.

"May it be long before it aches from any sorrow of your own, Pearl."

The parsonage adjoined the church. The old clergyman abounded in almost paternal kindness,
and pressed upon Graham a glass of home-made wine. After he had taken this and eaten a little,
his strength and poise returned, and he gave his entertainers a fuller account of Hilland and
his relations, and in that Southern home there was as genuine sympathy for the inmates of the
Northern home as if they all had been devoted to the same cause.

"There are many subjects on which we differ," said his host. "You perceive that I have slaves,
but they are so attached to me that I do not think they would leave me if I offered them their
freedom. I have been brought up to think slavery right. My father and grandfather before me
held slaves and always treated them well. I truly think they did better by them than the bondmen
could have done for themselves. To give them liberty and send them adrift would be almost like
throwing little children out into the world. I know that there are evils and abuses connected
with our system, but I feel sure that liberty given to a people unfitted for it would be followed
by far greater evils."

"It's a subject to which I have given very little attention," Graham replied. "I have spent
much of my life abroad, and certainly your servants are better off than the peasantry and very
poor in many lands that I have visited."

With a kind of wonder, he thought of the truth that Hilland, who so hated slavery, had been
lifted from the battlefield by slaves, and that his remains had been treated with reverent
honor by a slave- holder.

The old clergyman's words also proved that, while he deprecated the war unspeakably, his whole
sympathy was with the South. His only son, of whom neither he nor Rita could speak without
looks of pride and affection kindling in their faces, was in the Confederate service, and the
old man prayed as fervently for success to the cause to which he had devoted the treasure of
his life as any Northern father could petition the God of nations for his boy and the restoration
of the Union. At the same time his nature was too large, too highly ennobled by Christianity,
for a narrow vindictive bitterness. He could love the enemy that he was willing his son should
oppose in deadly battle.

"We hope to secure our independence," he added, "and to work out our national development according
to the genius of our own people. I pray and hope for the time when the North and South may
exist side by side as two friendly nations. Your noble words this afternoon found their echo
in my heart. Even though my son should be slain by a Northern hand, as your friend has been
by a Southern, I wish to cherish no vindictive bitterness and enmity. The question must now
be settled by the stern arbitrament of battle; but when the war is over let it not be followed
by an era of hate."

He then told Graham how he had lost his beloved wife years before, and how lonely and desolate
he had been until Rita had learned to care for him and provide for his comfort with almost
hourly vigilance.

"Yes," said Graham, "I have seen it; she is to you what my friend's wife is to her invalid
father, the immeasurable blessing of his life. How it will be now I hardly know, for I fear
that her grief will destroy her, and the old major, her father, could not long survive."

A note was now handed to the old gentleman, who, having read it, appeared greatly distressed.
After a moment's hesitancy he gave it to Graham, who read as follows:

"I heard the North'ner speak this arternoon, an' I can't be one to take and rob him of his
horse and send him to prison. But it'll be done to-night if you can't manage his escape. Every
rode is watched, an' your house will be searched to-night. ONE OF THE BAND.

"You'll burn this an' keep mum or my neck will be stretched."

"Who brought the note?" Mr. Anderson asked, going to the door and questioning a colored woman.

"Dunno, mas'r. De do' open a little, and de ting flew in on de flo'."

"Well," said Graham, "I must mount and go at once;" and he was about to resume his arms.

"Wait, wait; I must think!" cried his host. "For you to go alone would be to rush into the
very evils we are warned against. I am pained and humiliated beyond measure by this communication.
Mr. Graham, do not judge us harshly. There is, I suppose, a vile sediment in every community,
and there is here a class that won't enlist in open, honorable warfare, but prowl around, chiefly
at night, intent on deeds like this."

"Papa," said Rita, who had read the warning, "I know what to do;" and her brave spirit flashed
in her eyes.

"You, my child?"

"Yes. I'll prove to Mr. Graham what a Southern girl will do for a guest--for one who has trusted
her. The deep, deep disgrace of his capture and robbery shall not come on our heads. I will
guide him at once through the woods to old Uncle Jehu's cabin. No one will think of looking
for him there; for there is little more than a bridle-path leading to it; but I know the way,
every inch of it."

"But, Rita, I could send one of the servants with Mr. Graham."

"No, papa; he would be missed and afterward questioned, and some awful revenge taken on him.
You must say that I have retired when the villains come. You must keep all our servants in.
Mr. Graham and I will slip out. He can saddle his horse, and I, you know well, can saddle mine.
Now we must apparently go to our rooms and within half an hour slip out unperceived and start.
No one will ever dare touch me, even if it is found out."

"Pearl, priceless Pearl, I'll fight my way through all the guerillas in the land, rather than
subject you to peril."

"You could not fight your way through them, the cowardly skulkers. What chance would you have
in darkness? My plan brings me no peril, for if they met us they would not dare to touch me.
But if it costs me my life I will go," she concluded passionately. "This disgrace must not
fall on our people."

"Rita is right," said the old clergyman, solemnly. "I could scarcely survive the disgrace of
having a guest taken from my home, and they would have to walk over my prostrate form before
it could be done; and to send you out alone would be even more shameful. The plan does not
involve much peril to Rita. Although, in a sense, you are my enemy, I will trust this pearl
beyond price to your protection, and old Jehu will return with her until within a short distance
of the house. As she says, I think no one in this region would harm her. I will co- operate
with you, Rita, and entreat the Heavenly Father until I clasp you in my arms again. Act, act
at once."

Graham was about to protest again, but she silenced him by a gesture that was almost imperious.
"Don't you see that for papa's sake, for my own, as well as yours, I must go? Now let us say
good-night as if we were parting unsuspicious of trouble. When I tap at your door, Mr. Graham,
you will follow me; and you, papa, try to keep our people in ignorance."

Graham wrung the clergyman's hand in parting, and said, "You will always be to me a type of
the noblest development of humanity."

"God bless you, sir," was the reply, "and sustain you through the dangers and trying scenes
before you. I am but a simple old man, trying to do right with God's help. And, believe me,
sir, the South is full of men as sincere as I am."

Within half an hour Graham followed his fair guide down a back stairway and out into the darkness.
Rita's pony was at pasture in a field adjoining the stable, but he came instantly at her soft call.

"I shall not put on my saddle," she whispered. "If I leave it hanging in the stable it will
be good evidence that I am in my room. There will be no need of our riding fast, and, indeed,
I have often ridden without a saddle for fun. I will guide you to your horse and saddle in
the dark stable, for we must take him out of a back door, so that there will be no sound of
his feet on the boards."

Within a few moments they were passing like shadows down a shaded lane that led from the house
to the forest, and then entered what was a mere bridle-path, the starlight barely enabling
the keen-eyed Rita to make it out at times. The thick woods on either side prevented all danger
of flank attacks. After riding some little time they stopped and listened. The absolute silence,
broken only by the cries of the wild creatures of the night, convinced them that they were
not followed. Then Rita said, "Old Jehu has a bright boy of sixteen or thereabout, and he'll
guide you north through the woods as far as he can, and then God will protect and guide you
until you are safe. I know He will help you to escape, that you may say words of comfort to
the poor, broken-hearted wife."

"Yes, Pearl, I think I shall escape. I take your guidance as a good omen. If I could only be
sure that no harm came to you and your noble father!"

"The worst of harm would have come to us had we permitted the evil that was threatened."

"You seem very young, Pearl, and yet you are in many ways very mature and womanly."

"I am young--only sixteen-but mamma's death and the responsibility it brought me made my childhood
brief. Then Henry is five years older than I, and I always played with him, and, of course,
you know I tried to reach up to those things that he thought about and did. I've never been
to school. Papa is educating me, and oh, he knows so much, and he makes knowledge so interesting,
that I can't help learning a little. And then Henry's going into the war, and all that is happening,
makes me feel so very, very old and sad at times;" and so she continued in low tones to tell
about herself and Henry and her father, of their hopes of final victory, and all that made
up her life. This she did with a guileless frankness, and yet with a refined reserve that was
indescribable in its simple pathos and beauty. In spite of himself Graham was charmed and soothed,
while he wondered at the exquisite blending of girlhood and womanhood in his guide. She also
questioned him about the North and the lands he had visited, about his aunt and Grace and her
father; and Graham's tremulous tones as he spoke of Grace led her to say sorrowfully, "Ah,
she is very, very dear to you also."

"Yes," he said, imitating her frankness, "she is dearer to me than my life. I would gladly
have died in Hilland's place to have saved her this sorrow. Were it not for the hope of serving
her in some way, death would have few terrors to me. There, my child, I have spoken to you
as I have to only one other, my dear old aunty, who is like a mother. Your noble trust begets
trust."

Then he became aware that she was crying bitterly.

"Pearl, Pearl," he said, "don't cry. I have become accustomed to a sad heart, and it's an old,
old story."

"Oh, Mr. Graham, I remember hearing mamma say once that women learn more through their hearts
than their heads. I have often thought of her words, and I think they must be true. Almost
from the first my heart told me that there was something about you which made you different
from other people. Why is the world so full of trouble of every kind? Ah, well, papa has taught
me that heaven will make amends for everything."

They had now reached a little clearing, and Rita said that they were near Jehu's cabin, and
that their final words had better be said before awakening the old man. "I must bathe my face,
too," she added, "for he would not understand my tears," and went to a clear little spring
but a few paces away.

Graham also dismounted. When she returned he took her hand and raised it reverently to his
lips as he said, "Pearl, this is not a case for ordinary thanks. I no doubt owe my life, certainly
my liberty, to you. On that I will not dwell. I owe to you and your father far more, and so
does poor Grace Hilland. You insured a burial for my friend that will bring a world of comfort
to those who loved him. The thought of your going to his grave and placing upon it fresh flowers
from time to time will contain more balm than a thousand words of well-meant condolence. Pearl,
my sweet, pure, noble child, is there nothing I can do for you?"

"Yes," she faltered; "it may be that you can return all that we have done a hundred-fold. It
may be that you will meet Henry in battle. In the memory of his little sister you will spare
him, will you not? If he should be captured I will tell him to write to you, and I feel sure
that you will remember our lonely ride and the gray old father who is praying for you now,
and will not leave him to suffer."

Graham drew a seal ring from his finger and said: "Dear Pearl, take this as a pledge that I
will serve him in any way in my power and at any cost to myself. I hope the day will come when
he will honor me with his friendship, and I would as soon strike the friend I have lost as
your brother."

 "Now I am content," she said. "I believe every word you say."

"And Grace Hilland will come some day and claim you as a sister dearly beloved. And I, sweet
Pearl, will honor your memory in my heart of hearts. The man who wins you as his bride may
well be prouder than an emperor."

"Oh, no, Mr. Graham, I'm just a simple Southern girl."

"There are few like you, I fear, South or North. You are a girl to kindle every manly instinct
and power, and I shall be better for having known you. The hope of serving you and yours in
some way and at some time will give a new zest and value to my life."

"Do not speak so kindly or I shall cry again. I've been afraid you would think me silly, I
cry so easily. I do not think we Southern girls are like those at the North. They are colder,
I imagine, or at least more able to control their feelings. Papa says I am a child of the South.
I can't decide just how much or how little I ought to feel on all occasions, and ever since
I saw you mourning over your friend with just such passionate grief as I should feel, my whole
heart has ached for you. You will come and see us again if you have a chance?"

"I will make chances, Pearl, even though they involve no little risk."

"No, no; don't do that. You ought to care too much for us to do that. Nothing would give me
pleasure that brought danger to you. If I could only know that you reached your friends in safety!"

"I'll find a way of letting you know if I can."

"Well, then, good-by. It's strange, but you seem like an old, old friend. Oh, I know Henry
will like you, and that you will like him. Next to mamma's, your ring shall be my dearest treasure.
I shall look at it every night and think I have added one more chance of Henry's safety. Oh,
I could worship the man who saved his life."

"And any man might worship you. Good-by, Pearl;" and he kissed her hand again and again, then
lifted her on her pony with a tenderness that was almost an embrace, and she rode slowly to
the door of a little log cabin, while Graham remained concealed in the shadow of the woods
until it was made certain that no one was in the vicinity except Jehu and his family.

The old man was soon aroused, and his ejaculations and exclamations were innumerable.

"No, missy, dars no un been roun' heah for right smart days. It's all safe, an' Jehu an' his
ole ooman knows how ter keep mum when Mas'r Anderson says mum; an' so does my peart boy Huey"--who,
named for his father, was thus distinguished from him. "An' de hossifer is a Linkum man? Sho,
sho! who'd a tink it, and his own son a 'Federate! Well, well, Mas'r Anderson isn't low-down
white trash. If he thought a ting was right I reckon de hull worl' couldn't make him cut up
any white- trash didoes."

When Rita explained further the old negro replied with alacrity: "Ob cose Jehu will took you
home safe, an' proud he'll be ter go wid you, honey. You'se a mighty peart little gal, an'
does youse blood an' broughten up jestice. Mighty few would dar' ride five mile troo de lonesome
woods wid a strange hossifer, if he be a Linkum man. He mus' be sumpen like Linkum hisself.
Yes, if you bain't afeared ter show him de way, Huey needn't be;" and the boy, who was now
wide awake, said he'd "like notten better dan showin' a Linkum man troo de woods."

Graham was summoned, and in a few moments all was arranged.

He then drew the old man aside and said, "You good, faithful old soul, take care of that girl
as the apple of your eye, for she has only one equal in the world. Here is one hundred dollars.
That will pay for a good many chickens and vegetables, won't it?"

"Lor' bless you, mas'r, dey ain't chickens nuff in Ole Virginny to brought hundred dollars."

"Well, I'll tell you what I'm afraid of. This region may be wasted by war, like so many others.
You may not be troubled in this out-of-the- way place. If Mr. Anderson's family is ever in
need, you are now paid to supply them with all that you can furnish"

"'Deed I is, mas'r, double paid."

"Be faithful to them and you shall have more 'Linkum money,' as you call it. Keep it, for your
money down here won't be worth much soon."

"Dat's shoah. De cullud people bain't all prayin' for Linkum for notten."

"Good-by. Do as I say and you shall be taken care of some day. Say nothing about this."

"Mum's de word all roun' ter-night, mas'r."

"Huey, are you ready?"

"I is, mas'r."

"Lead the way, then;" and again approaching Rita, Graham took off his hat and bowed low as
he said, "Give my grateful greeting to your honored father, and may every hope of his heart
be fulfilled in return for his good deeds today. As for you, Miss Anderson, no words can express
my profound respect and unbounded gratitude. We shall meet again in happier times;" and backing
his horse, while he still remained uncovered, he soon turned and followed Huey.

"Well, now," ejaculated Jehu. "'Clar ter you ef dat ar Linkum hossifer bain't nigh onter bein'
as fine a gemman as Mas'r Henry hisself. Won't you take some 'freshment, missy? No? Den I'se
go right 'long wid you."

Rita enjoined silence, ostensibly for the reason that it was prudent, but chiefly that she
might have a respite from the old man's garrulousness. Her thoughts were very busy. The first
romance of her young life had come, and she still felt on her hands the kisses that had been
so warm and sincere, although she knew they were given by one who cherished a hopeless love.
After all, it was but her vivid Southern imagination that had been kindled by the swift, strange
events of the past twenty-four hours. With the fine sense of the best type of dawning womanhood,
she had been deeply moved by Graham's strong nature. She had seen in him a love for another
man that was as tender and passionate as that of a woman, and yet it was bestowed upon the
husband of the woman whom he had loved for years. That he had not hesitated to risk captivity
and death in returning for his friend proved his bravery to be unlimited, and a Southern girl
adores courage. For a time Graham would be the ideal of her girlish heart. His words of admiration
and respect were dwelt upon, and her cheeks flushed up seen in the deep shadow of the forest.
Again her tears would fall fast as she thought of his peril and of all the sad scenes of the
day and the sadder ones still to come. Grace Hilland, a Southern girl like herself, became
a glorified image to her fancy, and it would now be her chief ambition to be like her. She
would keep her lovely portrait on her bureau beside her Bible, and it should be almost equally
sacred.

In the edge of the forest she parted from Jehu with many and warm thanks, for she thought it
wise that there should not be the slightest chance of his being seen. She also handed him a
Confederate bill out of her slender allowance, patted him on the shoulder as she would some
faithful animal, and rode away. He crept along after her till he saw her let down some bars
and turn her pony into the fields. He then crept on till he saw her enter a door, and then
stole back to the forest and shambled homeward as dusky as the shadows in which he walked,
chuckling, "Missy Rita, sweet honey, guv me one of dern 'Federate rags. Oh, golly! I'se got
more money--live Linkum money--dan Mas'r Anderson hisself, and I'se got notten ter do but raise
chickens an' garden sass all my born days. Missy Rita's red cheeks never grow pale long as
Jehu or Huey can tote chickens and sass."

 CHAPTER XXX

GUERILLAS

Graham, beyond a few low, encouraging words, held his peace and also enjoined silence on his
youthful guide. His plan was to make a wide circuit around the battlefield of the previous
day, and then strike the trail of the Union forces, which he believed he could follow at night.
Huey thought that this could be done and that they could keep in the shelter of the woods most
of the distance, and this they accomplished, reconnoitring the roads most carefully before
crossing them. Huey was an inveterate trapper; and as his pursuit was quite as profitable as
raising "sass," old Jehu gave the boy his own way. Therefore he knew every path through the
woods for miles around.

The dawn was in the east before Graham reached the Union trail, and be decided to spend the
day in a dense piece of woods not very far distant. Huey soon settled the question of Mayburn's
provender by purloining a few sheaves of late oats from a field that they passed; but when
they reached their hiding-place Graham was conscious that he was in need of food himself, and
he also remembered that a boy is always ravenous.

"Well, Huey," he said, "in providing for the horse you have attended to the main business,
but what are we going to do?"

"We'se gwine ter do better'n de hoss. If mas'r'll 'zamine his saddle- bags, reckon he'll fine
dat Missy Rita hain't de leddy to sen' us off on a hunt widout a bite of suthin' good. She
sez, sez she to me, in kind o' whisper like, 'Mas'r Graham'll fine suthin' you'll like, Huey;'"
and the boy eyed the saddle-bags like a young wolf.

"Was there ever such a blessed girl!" cried Graham, as he pulled out a flask of wine, a fowl
cut into nice portions, bread, butter, and relishes--indeed, the best that her simple housekeeping
afforded in the emergency. In the other bag there was also a piece of cake of such portentous
size that Huey clasped his hands and rolled up his eyes as he had seen his parents do when
the glories of heaven were expatiated upon in the negro prayer-meetings.

"That's all for you, Huey, and here's some bread and cold ham to go with it. When could she
have provided these things so thoughtfully? It must have been before she called me last night.
Now, Huey, if you ever catch anything extra nice in the woods you take it to Miss Rita. There
is ten dollars to pay you; and when the Lincoln men get possession here I'll look after you
and give you a fine chance, if you have been faithful. You must not tell Miss Rita what I say,
but seem to do all of your own accord. I wish I had more money with me, but you will see me
again, and I will make it all right with you."

"It's all right now, mas'r. What wouldn't I do for Missy Rita? When my ole mammy was sick she
bro't med'cin, and a right smart lot ob tings, and brung her troo de weariness. Golly! Wonder
Missy Rita don't go straight up ter heben like dem rackets dey shoots when de 'Federates say
dey hab a vict'ry;" and then the boy's mouth became so full that he was speechless for a long time.

The sense of danger, and the necessity for the utmost vigilance, had diverted Graham's thoughts
during his long night ride; and with a soldier's habit he had concentrated his faculties on
the immediate problem of finding the trail, verifying Huey's local knowledge by observation
of the stars. Now, in the cool summer morning, with Rita's delicious repast before him, life
did not seem so desperate a thing as on the day before. Although exceedingly wearied, the strength
of mind which would enable him to face his sad tasks was returning. He thought little about
the consequences of his disobedience to orders, and cared less. If he lost his rank he would
enlist as a private soldier after he had done all in his power for Grace, who had been committed
to his care by Hilland's last words. He felt that she had the most sacred claims upon him,
and yet he queried, "What can I do for her beyond communicating every detail of her husband's
last hours and his burial? What remedy is there for a sorrow like hers?"

At the same time he felt that a lifelong and devoted friendship might bring solace and help
at times, and this hope gave a new value to his life. He also thought it very possible that
the strange vicissitudes of war might put it in his power to serve the Andersons, in whom he
felt a grateful interest that only such scenes as had just occurred could have awakened. It
would ever be to him a source of unalloyed joy to add anything to Rita Anderson's happiness.

His kind old aunt, too, had her full share of his thoughts as he reclined on the dun-colored
leaves of the previous year and reviewed the past and planned for the future. He recalled her
words, "that good would come of it," when he had promised to "live and do his best." Although
in his own life he had missed happiness, there was still a prospect of his adding much to the
well-being of others.

But how could he meet Grace again? He trembled at the very thought. Her grief would unman him.
It was agony even to imagine it; and she might, in her ignorance of an officer's duties in
battle, think that if he had kept near Hilland the awful event might have been averted.

After all, he could reach but one conclusion--to keep his old promise "to do his best," as
circumstances indicated.

Asking Huey, who had the trained ear of a hunter, to watch and listen, he took some sleep in
preparation for the coming night, and then gave the boy a chance to rest.

The day passed quietly, and in the evening he dismissed Huey, with assurances to Rita and her
father that a night's ride would bring him within the Union lines, and that he now knew the
way well. The boy departed in high spirits, feeling that he would like "showin' Linkum men
troo de woods" even better than trapping.

Then looking well to his arms, and seeing that they were ready for instant use, Graham started
on his perilous ride, walking his horse and stopping to listen from time to time. Once in the
earlier part of the night he heard the sound of horses' feet, and drawing back into the deep
shadow of the woods he saw three or four men gallop by. They were undoubtedly guerillas looking
for him, or on some prowl with other objects in view. At last he knew he must be near his friends,
and he determined to push on, even though the dawn was growing bright; but he had hardly reached
this conclusion when but a short distance in advance a dozen horsemen dashed out of a grove
and started toward him.

They were part of "The Band," who, with the instincts of their class, conjectured too truly
that, since he had eluded them thus far, their best chance to intercept him would be at his
natural approach to the Union lines; and now, with the kind of joy peculiar to themselves,
they felt that their prey was in their power, beyond all hope of escape, for Graham was in
plain sight upon a road inclosed on either side by a high rail fence. There were so many guerillas
that there was not a ghost of a chance in fighting or riding through them, and for a moment
his position seemed desperate.

"It's Mayburn to the rescue now," he muttered, and he turned and sped away, and every leap
of his noble horse increased the distance between him and his pursuers. His confidence soon
returned, for he felt that unless something unforeseen occurred he could ride all around them.
His pursuers fired two shots, which were harmless enough, but to his dismay Graham soon learned
that they were signals, for from a farmhouse near other horsemen entered the road, and he was
between two parties.

There was not a moment to lose. Glancing ahead, he saw a place where the fence had lost a rail
or two. He spurred toward it, and the gallant horse flew over like a bird into a wide field
fringed on the further side by a thick growth of timber. Bullets from the intercepting party
whizzed around him; but he sped on unharmed, while his pursuers only stopped long enough to
throw off a few rails, and then both of the guerilla squads rode straight for the woods, with
the plan of keeping the fugitive between them, knowing that in its tangle he must be caught.

Graham resolved to risk another volley in order to ride around the pursuers nearest the Union
lines, thus throwing them in the rear, with no better chance than a stern chase would give
them. In order to accomplish this, however, he had to circle very near the woods, and in doing
so saw a promising wood-road leading into them. The yelling guerillas were so close as to make
his first plan of escape extremely hazardous; therefore, following some happy instinct he plunged
into the shade of the forest. The road proved narrow, but it was open and unimpeded by overhanging
boughs. Indeed, the trees were the straight, slender pines in which the region abounded, and
he gained on all of his pursuers except two, who, like himself, were superbly mounted. The
thud of their horses' hoofs kept near, and he feared that he might soon come to some obstruction
which would bring them to close quarters. Mayburn was giving signs of weariness, for his mettle
had been sorely tried of late, and Graham resolved to ambush his pursuers if possible. An opportunity
occurred speedily, for the road made a sharp turn, and there was a small clearing where the
timber had been cut. The dawn had as yet created but a twilight in the woods, and the obscurity
aided his purpose. He drew up by the roadside at the beginning of the clearing, and in a position
where he could not readily be seen until the guerillas were nearly abreast, and waited, with
his heavy revolver in hand and his drawn sword lying across the pommel of his saddle.

On they came at a headlong pace, and passed into the clearing but a few feet away. There were
two sharp reports, with the slightest possible interval. The first man dropped instantly; the
other rode wildly for a few moments and then fell headlong, while the riderless horses galloped
on for a time.

Graham, however, soon overtook them, and with far more compunction than he had felt in shooting
their riders, he struck them such a blow with his sword on their necks, a little back of their
ears, that they reeled and fell by the roadside. He feared those horses more than all "The
Band"; for if mounted again they might tire Mayburn out in a prolonged chase.

To his great joy the wood lane soon emerged into another large open field, and he now felt
comparatively safe.

The guerillas, on hearing the shots, spurred on exultantly, feeling sure of their prey, but
only to stumble over their fallen comrades. One was still able to explain the mode of their
discomfiture; and the dusky road beyond at once acquired wholesome terrors for the survivors,
who rode on more slowly and warily, hoping now for little more than the recapture of the horses,
which were the envy of all their lawless hearts. Your genuine guerilla will always incur a
heavy risk for a fine horse. They soon discovered the poor brutes, and saw at a glance that
they would be of no more service in irregular prowlings. Infuriated more at the loss of the
beasts than at that of the men, they again rushed forward only to see Graham galloping easily
away in the distance.

Even in their fury they recognized that further pursuit was useless, and with bitter curses
on their luck, they took the saddles from the fallen horses, and carried their associates,
one dead and the other dying, to the farmhouse in which dwelt a sympathizer, who had given
them refreshment during the night.

A few hours later--for he travelled the rest of the way very warily-- Graham reported to his
colonel, and found the brigade under orders to move on the following morning, provided with
ten days' rations.

The officer was both delighted and perplexed. "It's a hard case," he said. "You acted from
the noblest impulses; but it was flat disobedience to orders."

"I know it. I shall probably be dismissed from the service. If so, colonel, I will enlist as
a private in your regiment. Then you can shoot me if I disobey again."

"Well, you are the coolest fellow that ever wore the blue. Come with me to headquarters."

The fact of his arrival, and an imperfect story of what had occurred, soon got abroad among
the men; and they were wild in their approval, cheering him with the utmost enthusiasm as he
passed to the brigadier's tent. The general was a genuine cavalryman; and was too wise in his
day and generation to alienate his whole brigade by any martinetism. He knew Graham's reputation
well, and he was about starting on a dangerous service. The cheers of the men crowding to his
tent spoke volumes. Hilland's regiment seemed half beside themselves when they learned that
Graham had found their lieutenant-colonel dying on the field, and that he had been given an
honorable burial. The general, therefore, gave Graham a most cordial welcome; and said that
the question was not within his jurisdiction, and that he would forward full particulars at
once through the proper channels to the Secretary of War, adding, "We'll be on the march before
orders can reach you. Meanwhile take your old command."

Then the story had to be repeated in detail to the chief officers of the brigade. Graham told
it in as few words as possible, and they all saw that his grief was so profound that the question
of his future position in the army was scarcely thought of. "I am not a sentimental recruit,"
he said in conclusion. "I know the nature of my offence, and will make no plea beyond that
I believed that all danger to our command had passed, and that it would ride quietly into camp,
as it did. I also thought that my superiors in giving the order were more concerned for my
safety than, for anything else. What the consequences are to myself personally, I don't care
a straw. There are some misfortunes which dwarf all others." The conference broke up with the
most hearty expressions of sympathy, and the regret for Hilland's death was both deep and genuine.

"I have a favor to ask my colonel, with your approval, General," said Graham. "I would like
to take a small detachment and capture the owner of the farmhouse at which was harbored part
of the guerilla band from which I escaped. I would like to make him confess the names of his
associates, and send word to them that if harm comes to any who showed kindness or respect
to officers of our brigade, severe punishment will be meted out on every one whenever the region
is occupied by Union forces."

"I order the thing to be done at once," cried the general. With these monsters had his infernal
adversary to succeed in the future. They were his last reserves, troops of despair. Too bad
there can not crush it, before they reached grow! ...

- Come on, Lord - he said gently pushing his sovereign -. Do not give anything to this rabble. It's
better than all perish.

And Eva rudely repulsed, telling him not to insist on their demand presumptuous.

- I can not do anything, poor woman - the Lord said apologetically -.

I have nothing left to give.

Her four brothers have taken everything .... Do not cry, do not like women's tears; I will reflect
and perhaps find something for them .... We will see later.

But the mother was not convinced by these promises vague:

- Lord, give them anything, but right now! No matter the donation.
Who knows when HM here again ...?

I am happy with a small gift for each; a job occupation.

What will be, if not of these poor things? ...

The archangel was going to order an escort squadron departed to heaven
by force to this tenacious woman, when the Almighty found a solution
thanks to its infinite wisdom.

He too wanted to lose sight of the farm as soon as possible and nasty
urchins.

The Lord is stroked his silver beard and said to Eve:

- Do not cry,
woman, and I have found an occupation, and not lightly.

All these work to keep his four brothers, serving forever.

There was a long pause, and Uncle Correa ended as follows:

- You
and I and all who spend our lives hunched over the land to support
our miserable existence, are the descendants of those unfortunate
that our first mother locked in the barn.

The reapers were in a long, thoughtful silence. But suddenly, a voice came the penumbra:

- What Women Want ... What do you do for women?

Correa's uncle, surprised and puzzled, casting a glance by the circle of listeners, asking:

-
What women are these?

What women have to do with this story?

The reaper half hidden in the darkness, he added:

- Eva, surely, would ever daughters, because otherwise there would be no women currently and
are everywhere ... perhaps too-isn't this guy Correa?

... What I wonder is what was the fate of the daughters of Eve. "Our first mother brought some to
the Lord to also make a gift to them, or shut up all in the stable company our poor grandparents?

A
murmur of curiosity was raised in the circle, similar to that which arises from an election meeting
when the candidate's speech is cut off by an objection unexpectedly.

All eyes turned to the old man, scratching his head, looking down with an expression of concern
and doubt.
Suddenly she smiled triumphantly.

- Good looks - he said with a
saccharine voice - that has made that question is young and inexperienced.
Eva was a woman and knew too well the needs of women to waste time
on petitions useless. God, being God and have all that exists, can
not give anything to the women after they are born.

Was a long pause
to enjoy the silence with which the curiosity and interest in hosting
their words.

- Before they are born - continued - God can give beauty
and grace to hand over fist, and sometimes even gives them the discretion
and talent. But after being in the world their only hope is the man.
All you are and what they owe the man. For them is the working poor,
the power of the rulers, the exploits of the soldiers, money millionaires.
They are more easily twisting the hardness of justice .... No, women
have nothing to ask of God, for everything they receive from men ....
Y men, while working for the glory, ambition or love of money, they
do at the bottom rather than work for them and for them.
To his surprise there was a faint light in the library; and Hilland's ill- omened dream flashed
across his mind. With a prophetic dread at heart, he stepped lightly up the piazza to a window.
As he turned the blinds he witnessed a scene that so smote his heart that he had to lean against
the house for support. Before him was the reality of poor Hilland's vision.

On the rug before the flickering fire the stricken wife crouched, wringing her hands, which
looked ghostly in their whiteness. A candle burning dimly on a table increased the light of
the fire; and by their united rays he saw, with a thrill of horror, that her loosened hair,
which covered her bowed face and shoulders, was, in truth, silver white; and its contrast with
her black wrapper made the whole scene, linked as it was with a dead man's dream, so ghostly
that he shuddered, and was inclined to believe it to be the creation of his overwrought senses.
In self-distrust he looked around. Other objects were clear in the faint moonlight. He was
perfectly conscious of the dull ache of his wound. Had the phantom crouched before the fire
vanished? No; but now the silver hair was thrown back, and Grace Hilland's white, agonized
face was lifted heavenward. Oh, how white it was!

She slowly took a dark-colored vial from her bosom.

Thrilled with unspeakable horror, "Grace!" he shouted, and by a desperate effort threw the
blind upward and off from its hinges, and it fell with a crash on the veranda. Springing into
the apartment, he had not reached her side before the door opened, and his aunt's frightened
face appeared.

"Great God! what does this mean, Alford?"

"What does it mean, indeed!" he echoed in agonized tones, as he knelt beside Grace, who had
fallen on the floor utterly unconscious. "Bring the candle here," he added hoarsely.

She mechanically obeyed and seemed almost paralyzed. After a moment's search he snatched up
something and cried: "She's safe, she's safe! The cork is not removed." Then he thrust the
vial into his pocket, and lifted Grace gently on the lounge, saying meanwhile: "She has only
fainted; surely 'tis no more. Oh, as you value my life and hers, act. You should know what
to do. I will send the coachman for a physician instantly, and will come when you need me."

Rushing to the man's room, he dragged him from his bed, shook him awake, and gave him instructions
and offers of reward that stirred the fellow's blood as it had never been stirred before; and
yet when he reached the stable he found that Graham had broken the lock and had a horse saddled
and ready.

"Now ride," he was commanded, "as if the devil you believe in was after you."

Then Graham rushed back into the house, for he was almost beside himself. But when he heard
the poor old major calling piteously, and asking what was the matter, he was taught his need
of self-control. Going up to the veteran's room, he soothed him by saying that he had returned
late in the night in response to his aunt's telegram, and that he had found Grace fainting
on the floor, that Mrs. Mayburn and the servants were with her, and that a physician had been
sent for.

"Oh, Graham, Graham," moaned the old man, "I fear my peerless girl is losing her mind, she
has acted so strangely of late. It's time you came. It's time something was done, or the worst
may happen."

With an almost overwhelming sense of horror, Graham remembered how nearly the worst had happened,
but he only said: "Let us hope the worst has passed. I will bring you word from Mrs. Mayburn
from time to time."

His terrible anxiety was only partially relieved, for his aunt said that Grace's swoon was
obstinate, and would not yield to the remedies she was using. "Come in," she cried. "This is
no time for ceremony. Take brandy and chafe her wrists."

What a mortal chill her cold hands gave him! It was worse than when Hilland's hands were cold
in his.

"Oh, aunt, she will live?"

"Certainly," was the brusque reply. "A fainting turn is nothing. Come, you are cool in a battle:
be cool now. It won't do for us all to lose our wits, although Heaven knows there's cause enough."

"How white her face and neck are!"--for Mrs. Mayburn had opened her wrapper at the throat,
that she might breathe more easily--"just as Hilland saw her in his dream."

"Have done with your dreams, and omens, and all your weird nonsense. It's time for a little
more common-sense. Rub her wrists gently but strongly; and if she shows signs of consciousness,
disappear."

At last she said hastily, "Go"

Listening at the door, he heard Grace ask, a few moments later, in a faint voice, "What has
happened?'"

"You only fainted, deary."

"Why--why--I'm in the library."

"Yes, you got up in your sleep, and I followed you; and the doctor will soon be here, although
little need we have of him."

"Oh, I've had a fearful dream. I thought I saw Warren or Alford. I surely heard Alford's voice."

"Yes, dear, I've no doubt you had a bad dream; and it may be that Alford's voice caused it,
for he arrived late last night and has been talking with your father."

"That must be it," she sighed; "but my head is so confused. Oh, I am so glad he's come! When
can I see him?"

"Not till after the doctor comes and you are much stronger."

"I wish to thank him; I can't wait to thank him."

"He doesn't want thanks, deary; he wants you to get well. You owe it to him and your father
to get well--as well as your great and lifelong sorrow permits. Now, deary, take a little more
stimulant, and then don't talk. I've explained everything, and shown you your duty; and I know
that my brave Grace will do it."

"I'll try," she said, with a pathetic weariness in her voice that brought a rush of tears to
Graham's eyes.

Returning to Major St. John, he assured him that Grace had revived, and that he believed she
would be herself hereafter.

"Oh, this cursed war!" groaned the old man; "and how I have exulted in it and Warren's career!
I had a blind confidence that he would come out of it a veteran general while yet little more
than a boy. My ambition has been punished, punished; and I may lose both the children of whom
I was so proud. Oh, Graham, the whole world is turning as black as Grace's mourning robes."

"I have felt that way myself. But, Major, as soldiers we must face this thing like men. The
doctor has come; and I will bring him here before he goes, to give his report."

"Well, Graham, a father's blessing on you for going back for Warren. If Grace had been left
in suspense as to his fate she would have gone mad in very truth. God only knows how it will
be now; but she has a better chance in meeting and overcoming the sharp agony of certainty."

Under the physician's remedies Grace rallied more rapidly; and he said that if carried to her
room she would soon sleep quietly.

"I wish to see Mr. Graham first," she said, decisively.

To Mrs. Mayburn's questioning glance, he added, "Gratify her. I have quieting remedies at hand."

"He will prove more quieting than all remedies. He saved my husband's life once, and tried
to do so again; and I wish to tell him I never forget it night or day. He is brave, and strong,
and tranquil; and I feel that to take his hand will allay the fever in my brain."

"Grace, I am here," he said, pushing open the door and bending his knee at her side while taking
her hand. "Waste no strength in thanks. School your broken heart into patience; and remember
how dear, beyond all words, your life is to others. Your father's life depends on yours."

"I'll try," she again said; "I think I feel better, differently. An oppression that seemed
stifling, crushing me, is passing away. Alford, was there no chance--no chance at all of saving
him?"

"Alas! no; and yet it is all so much better than it might have been! His grave is in a quiet,
beautiful spot, which you can visit; and fresh flowers are placed upon it every day. Dear Grace,
compare your lot with that of so many others whose loved ones are left on the field."

"As he would have been were it not for you, my true, true friend," and she carried his hand
to her lips in passionate gratitude. Then tears gushed from her eyes, and she sobbed like a child.

"Thank the good God!" ejaculated Mrs. Mayburn. "These are the first tears she has shed. She
will be better now. Come, deary, you have seen Alford. He is to stop with us a long time, and
will tell you everything over and over. You must sleep now."

Graham kissed her hand and left the room, and the servants carried her to her apartment. Mrs.
Mayburn and the physician soon joined him in the library, which was haunted by a memory that
would shake his soul to his dying day.

The physician in a cheerful mood said, "I now predict a decided change for the better. It would
almost seem that she had had some shock which has broken the evil spell; and this natural flow
of tears is better than all the medicine in the world;" and then he and Mrs. Mayburn explained
how Grace's manner had been growing so strange and unnatural that they feared her mind was
giving way.

"I fear you were right," Graham replied sadly; and he told them of the scene he had witnessed,
and produced the vial of laudanum.

The physician was much shocked, but Mrs. Mayburn had already guessed the truth from her nephew's
words and manner when she first discovered him.

"Neither Grace nor her father must ever know of this," she said, with a shudder.

"Certainly not; but Dr. Markham should know. As her physician, he should know the whole truth."

"I think that phase of her trouble has passed," said the doctor, thoughtfully; "but, as you
say, I must be on my guard. Pardon me, you do not look well yourself. Indeed, you look faint;"
for Graham had sunk into a chair.

"I fear I have been losing considerable blood," said Graham, carelessly; "and now that this
strong excitement is passing, it begins to tell. I owe my leave of absence to a wound."

"A wound!" cried his aunt, coming to his side. "Why did you not speak of it?"

"Indeed, there has been enough to speak of beyond this trifle. Take a look at my shoulder,
doctor, and do what you think best."

"And here is enough to do," was his reply as soon as Graham's shoulder was bared: "an ugly
cut, and all broken loose by your exertions this evening. You must keep very quiet and have
good care, or this reopened wound will make you serious trouble."

"Well, doctor, we have so much serious trouble on hand that a little more won't matter much."

His aunt inspected the wound with grim satisfaction, and then said, sententiously: "I'm glad
you have got it, Alford, for it will keep you home and divert Grace's thoughts. In these times
a wound that leaves the heart untouched may be useful; and nothing cures a woman's trouble
better than having to take up the troubles of others. I predict a deal of healing for Grace
in your wound."

"All which goes to prove," added the busy physician, "that woman's nature is different from man's."

When he was gone, having first assured the major over and over again that all danger was past,
Graham said, "Aunt, Grace's hair is as white as yours."

"Yes; it turned white within a week after she learned the certainty of her husband's death."

"Would that I could have died in Hilland's place!"

"Yes," said the old lady, bitterly; "you were always too ready to die."

He drew her down to him as he lay on the lounge, and kissed her tenderly, as he said, "But
I have kept my promise 'to live and do my best.'"

"You have kept your promise to live after a fashion. My words have also proved true, 'Good
has come of it, and more good will come of it.'"

CHAPTER XXXII

A WOUNDED SPIRIT

Grace's chief symptom when she awoke on the following morning was an extreme lassitude. She
was almost as weak as a violent fever would have left her, but her former unnatural and fitful
manner was gone. Mrs. Mayburn told Graham that she had had long moods of deep abstraction,
during which her eyes would be fixed on vacancy, with a stare terrible to witness, and then
would follow uncontrollable paroxysms of grief.

"This morning, "said her anxious nurse, "she is more like a broken lily that has not strength
to raise its head. But the weakness will pass; she'll rally. Not many die of grief, especially
when young."

"Save her life, aunty, and I can still do a man's part in the world."

"Well, Alford, you must help me. She has been committed to your care; and it's a sacred trust"

Graham was now installed in his old quarters, and placed under Aunt Sheba's care. His energetic
aunt, however, promised to look in upon him often, and kept her word. The doctor predicted
a tedious time with his wound, and insisted on absolute quiet for a few days. He was mistaken,
however. Time would not be tedious, with frequent tidings of Grace's convalescence and her
many proofs of deep solicitude about his wound.

Grace did rally faster than had been expected. Her system had received a terrible shock, but
it had not been enfeebled by disease. With returning strength came an insatiate craving for
action--an almost desperate effort to occupy her hands and mind. Before it was prudent for
Graham to go out or exert himself--for his wound had developed some bad symptoms--she came
to see him, bringing delicacies made with her own hands.

Never had her appearance so appealed to his heart. Her face had grown thin, but its lovely
outlines remained; and her dark eyes seemed tenfold more lustrous in contrast with her white
hair. She had now a presence that the most stolid would turn and look after with a wondering
pity and admiration, while those gifted with a fine perception could scarcely see her without
tears. Graham often thought that if she could be turned into marble she would make the ideal
statue representing the women of both the contending sections whose hearts the war had broken.

As she came and went, and as he eventually spent long hours with her and her father, she became
to him a study of absorbing interest, in which his old analytical bent was not wholly wanting.
"What," he asked himself every hour in the day, "will be the effect of an experience like this
on such a woman? what the final outcome?" There was in this interest no curiosity, in the vulgar
sense of the word. It was rather the almost sleepless suspense of a man who has everything
at stake, and who, in watching the struggle of another mind to cope with misfortune, must learn
at the same time his own fate. It was far more than this--it was the vigilance of one who would
offer help at all times and at any cost, Still, so strong are natural or acquired characteristics
that he could not do this without manifesting some of the traits of the Alford Graham who years
before had studied the mirthful Grace St. John with the hope of analyzing her power and influence.
And had he been wholly indifferent to her, and as philosophical and cynical as once it was
his pride to think he was, she would still have remained an absorbing study. Her sudden and
awful bereavement had struck her strong and exceptional spiritual nature with the shattering
force of the ball that crashes through muscle, bone, and nerves. In the latter case the wound
may be mortal, or it may cause weakness and deformity. The wounded spirit must survive, although
the effects of the wound may be even more serious and far- reaching--changing, developing,
or warping character to a degree that even the most experienced cannot predict. Next to God,
time is the great healer; and human love, guided by tact, can often achieve signal success.

But for Graham there was no God; and it must be said that this was becoming true of Grace also.
As Hilland had feared, the influence of those she loved and trusted most had gradually sapped
her faith, which in her case had been more a cherished tradition, received from her mother,
than a vital experience.

Hilland's longings for a life hereafter, and his words of regret that she had lost the faith
of her girlhood, were neutralized by the bitter revolt of her spirit against her immeasurable
misfortune. Her own experience was to her a type of all the desolating evil and sorrow of the
world; and in her agony she could not turn to a God who permitted such evil and suffering.
It seemed to her that there could be no merciful, overruling Providence--that her husband's
view, when his mind was in its most vigorous and normal state, was more rational than a religion
which taught that a God who loved good left evil to make such general havoc.

"It's the same blind contention of forces in men as in nature," she said to herself; "and only
the strong or the fortunate survive."

One day she asked Graham abruptly, "Do you believe that the human spirit lives on after death?"

He was sorely troubled to know how to answer her, but after a little hesitation said, "I feel,
as your husband did, that I should be glad if you had the faith of your girlhood. I think it
would be a comfort to you."

"That's truly the continental view, that superstition is useful to women. Will you not honestly
treat me as your equal, and tell me what you, as an educated man, believe?"

"No," he replied, gravely and sadly, "I will only recall with emphasis your husband's last words."

"You are loyal to him, at least; and I respect you for it. But I know what you believe, and
what Warren believed when his faculties were normal and unbiased by the intense longing of
his heart. I am only a woman, Alford, but I must use such little reason as I have; and no being
except one created by man's ruthless imagination could permit the suffering which this war
daily entails. It's all of the earth, earthy. Alford," she added, in low, passionate utterance,
"I could believe in a devil more easily than in a God; and yet my unbelief sinks me into the
very depths of a hopeless desolation. What am I? A mere little atom among these mighty forces
and passions which rock the world with their violence. Oh, I was so happy! and now I am crushed
by some haphazard bullet shot in the darkness."

He looked at her wonderingly, and was silent.

"Alford," she continued, her eyes glowing in the excitement of her strong, passionate spirit,
"I will not succumb to all this monstrous evil. If I am but a transient emanation of the earth,
and must soon return to my kindred dust, still I can do a little to diminish the awful aggregate
of suffering. My nature, earth-born as it is, revolts at a selfish indifference to it all.
Oh, if there is a God, why does He not rend the heavens in His haste to stay the black torrents
of evil? Why does He not send the angels of whom my mother told me when a child, and bid them
stand between the armies that are desolating thousands of hearts like mine? Or if He chooses
to work by silent, gentle influences like those of spring, why does He not bring human hearts
together that are akin, and enhance the content and happiness which our brief life permits?
But no. Unhappy mistakes are made. Alas, my friend, we both know it to our sorrow! Why should
I feign ignorance of that which your unbounded and unselfish devotion has proved so often?
Why should you not know that before this deadly stroke fell my one grief was that you suffered;
and that as long as I could pray I prayed for your happiness? Now I can see only merciless
force or blind chance, that in nature smites with the tornado the lonely forest or the thriving
village, the desolate waves or some ship upon them. Men, with all their boasted reason, are
even worse. What could be more mad and useless than this war? Alford, I alone have suffered
enough to make the thing accursed; and I must suffer to the end: and I am only one of countless
women. What is there for me, what for them, but to grow lonelier and sadder every day? But
I won't submit to the evil. I won't be a mere bit of helpless drift. While I live there shall
be a little less suffering in the world. Ah, Alford! you see how far removed I am from the
sportive girl you saw on that May evening years ago. I am an old, white-haired, broken-hearted
woman; and yet," with a grand look in her eyes, she concluded, "I have spirit enough left to
take up arms against all the evil and suffering within my reach. I know how puny my efforts
will be; but I would rather try to push back an avalanche than cower before it."

Thus she revealed to him the workings of her mind; and he worshipped her anew as one of the
gentlest and most loving of women, and yet possessed of a nature so strong that under the guidance
of reason it could throw off the shackles of superstition and defy even fate. Under the spell
of her words the evil of the world did seem an avalanche, not of snow, but of black molten
lava; while she, too brave and noble to cower and cringe, stood before it, her little hand
outstretched to stay its deadly onset.

CHAPTER XXXIII

THE WHITE-HAIRED NURSE

Life at the two cottages was extremely secluded. All who felt entitled to do so made calls,
partly of condolence and partly from curiosity. The occupants of the two unpretending dwellings
had the respect of the community; but from their rather unsocial ways could not be popular.
The old major had ever detested society in one of its phases--that is, the claims of mere vicinage,
the duty to call and be called upon by people who live near, when there is scarcely a thought
or taste in common. With his Southern and army associations he had drifted to a New England
city; but he ignored the city except as it furnished friends and things that pleased him. His
attitude was not contemptuous or unneighborly, but simply indifferent.

"I don't thrust my life on any one," he once said to Mrs. Mayburn, "except you and Grace. Why
should other people thrust their lives on me?"

His limited income had required economy, and his infirmities a life free from annoyance. As
has been shown, Grace had practiced the one with heart as light as her purse; and had interposed
her own sweet self between the irritable veteran and everything that could vex him. The calling
world had had its revenge. The major was profane, they had said; Grace was proud, or led a
slavish life. The most heinous sin of all was, they were poor. There were several families,
however, whom Grace and the major had found congenial, with various shades of difference; and
the young girl had never lacked all the society she cared for. Books had been her chief pleasure;
the acquaintance of good whist-players had been cultivated; army and Southern friends had appeared
occasionally; and when Mrs. Mayburn had become a neighbor, she had been speedily adopted into
the closest intimacy. When Hilland had risen above their horizon he soon glorified the world
to Grace. To the astonishment of society, she had married a millionaire, and they had all continued
to live as quietly and unostentatiously as before. There had been another slight effort to
"know the people at the St. John cottage," but it had speedily died out. The war had brought
chiefly military associations and absence. Now again there was an influx of callers largely
from the church that Grace had once attended. Mrs. Mayburn received the majority with a grim
politeness, but discriminated very favorably in case of those who came solely from honest sympathy.
All were made to feel, however, that, like a mourning veil, sorrow should shield its victims
from uninvited observation.

Hilland's mother had long been dead, and his father died at the time when he was summoned from
his studies in Germany. While on good terms with his surviving relatives, there had been no
very close relationship or intimacy remaining. Grace had declared that she wished no other
funeral service than the one conducted by the good old Confederate pastor; and the relatives,
learning that they had no interest in the will, speedily discovered that they had no further
interest whatever. Thus the inmates of the two cottages were left to pursue their own shadowed
paths, with little interference from the outside world. The major treasured a few cordial eulogies
of Hilland cut from the journals at the time; and except in the hearts wherein he was enshrined
a living image, the brave, genial, high-souled man passed from men's thoughts and memories,
like thousands of others in that long harvest of death.

Graham's wound at last was wellnigh healed, and the time was drawing near for his return to
the army. His general had given such a very favorable account of the circumstances attending
his offence, and of his career as a soldier both before and after the affair, that the matter
was quietly ignored. Moreover, Hilland, as a soldier and by reason of the loyal use of his
wealth, stood very high in the estimation of the war authorities; and the veteran major was
not without his surviving circle of influential friends. Graham, therefore, not only retained
his rank, but was marked for promotion.

Of all this, however, he thought and cared little. If he had loved Grace before, he idolized
her now. And yet with all her deep affection for him and her absolute trust, she seemed more
remote than ever. In the new phase of her grief she was ever seeking to do little things which
she thought would please him. But this was also true of her course toward Mrs. Mayburn, especially
so toward her father, and also, to a certain extent, toward the poor and sick in the vicinity.
Her one effort seemed to be to escape from her thoughts, herself, in a ceaseless ministry to
others. And the effort sometimes degenerated into restlessness. There was such a lack of repose
in her manner that even those who loved her most were pained and troubled. There was not enough
to keep her busy all the time, and yet she was ever impelled to do something.

One day she said to Graham, "I wish I could go back with you to the war; not that I wish to
shed another drop of blood, but I would like to march, march forever."

Shrewd Mrs. Mayburn, who had been watching Grace closely for the last week or two, said quietly:
"Take her back with you, Alford. Let her become a nurse in some hospital. It will do both her
and a lot of poor fellows a world of good."

"Mrs. Mayburn, you have thought of just the thing," cried Grace. "In a hospital full of sick
and wounded men I could make my life amount to something; I should never need to be idle then."

"Yes, you would. You would be under orders like Alford, and would have to rest when off duty.
But, as you say, you could be of great service, instead of wasting your energy in coddling
two old people. You might save many a poor fellow's life."

"Oh," she exclaimed, clasping her hands, "the bare thought of saving one poor woman from such
suffering as mine is almost overwhelming. But how can I leave papa?"

"I'll take care of the major and insure his consent. If men are so possessed to make wounds,
it's time women did more to cure them. It's all settled: you are to go. I'll see the major
about it now, if he has just begun his newspaper;" and the old lady took her knitting and departed
with her wonted prompt energy.

At first Graham was almost speechless from surprise, mingled doubt and pleasure; but the more
he thought of it, the more he was convinced that the plan was an inspiration.

"Alford, you will take me?" she said, appealingly.

"Yes," he replied, smilingly, "if you will promise to obey my orders in part, as well as those
of your superiors."

"I'll promise anything if you will only take me. Am I not under your care?"

"Oh, Grace, Grace, I can do so little for you!"

"No one living can do more. In providing this chance of relieving a little pain, of preventing
a little suffering, you help me, you serve me, you comfort me, as no one else could. And, Alford,
if you are wounded, come to the hospital where I am; I will never leave you till you are well.
Take me to some exposed place in the field, where there is danger, where men are brought in
desperately wounded, where you would be apt to be."

"I don't know where I shall be, but I would covet any wound that would bring you to my side
as nurse."

She thought a few moments, and then said, resolutely: "I will keep as near to you as I can.
I ask no pay for my services. On the contrary, I will employ my useless wealth in providing
for exposed hospitals. When I attempt to take care of the sick or wounded, I will act scrupulously
under the orders of the surgeon in charge; but I do not see why, if I pay my own way, I cannot
come and go as I think I can be the most useful."

"Perhaps you could, to a certain extent, if you had a permit," said Graham, thoughtfully; "but
I think you would accomplish more by remaining in one hospital and acquiring skill by regular
work. It would be a source of indescribable anxiety to me to think of your going about alone.
If I know just where you are, I can find you and write to you."

"I will do just what you wish," she said, gently.

"I wish for only what is best for you."

"I know that. It would be strange if I did not."

Mrs. Mayburn was not long in convincing the major that her plan might be the means of incalculable
benefit to Grace as well as to others. He, as well as herself and Graham, had seen with deep
anxiety that Grace was giving way to a fever of unrest; and he acquiesced in the view that
it might better run its course in wholesome and useful activity, amid scenes of suffering that
might tend to reconcile her to her own sorrow.

Graham, however, took the precaution of calling on Dr. Markham, who, to his relief, heartily
approved of the measure. On one point Graham was firm. He would not permit her to go to a hospital
in the field, liable to vicissitudes from sudden movements of the contending armies. He found
one for her, however, in which she would have ample scope for all her efforts; and before he
left he interested those in charge so deeply in the white-haired nurse that he felt she would
always be under watchful, friendly eyes.

"Grace," he said, as he was taking leave, "I have tried to be a true friend to you."

"Oh, Alford!" she exclaimed, and she seized his hand and held it in both of hers.

His face grew stern rather than tender as he added: "You will not be a true friend to me--you
will wrong me deeply--if you are reckless of your health and strength. Remember that, like
myself, you have entered the service, and that you are pledged to do your duty, and not to
work with feverish zeal until your strength fails. You are just as much under obligation to
take essential rest as to care for the most sorely wounded in your ward. I shall take the advice
I give. Believing that I am somewhat essential to your welfare and the happiness of those whom
we have left at home, I shall incur no risks beyond those which properly fall to my lot. I
ask you to be equally conscientious and considerate of those whose lives are bound up in you."

"I'll try," she said, with that same pathetic look and utterance which had so moved him on
the fearful night of his return from the army. "But, Alford, do not speak to me so gravely,
I had almost said sternly, just as we are saying good-by."

He raised her hand to his lips, and smiled into her pleading face as he replied, "I only meant
to impress you with the truth that you have a patient who is not in your ward--one who will
often be sleeping under the open sky, I know not where. Care a little for him, as well as for
the unknown men in your charge. This you can do only by taking care of yourself. You, of all
others, should know that there are wounds besides those which will bring men to this hospital."

Tears rushed into her eyes as she faltered, "You could not have made a stronger appeal."

"You will write to me often?"

"Yes, and you cannot write too often. Oh, Alford, I cannot wish you had never seen me; but
it would have been far, far better for you if you had not."

"No, no," he said, in low, strong emphasis. "Grace Hilland, I would rather be your friend than
have the love of any woman that ever lived."

"You do yourself great wrong (pardon me for saying it, but your happiness is so dear to me),
you do yourself great wrong. A girl like Pearl Anderson could make you truly happy; and you
could make her happy."

"Sweet little Pearl will be happy some day; and I may be one of the causes, but not in the
way you suggest. It is hard to say good-by and leave you here alone, and every moment I stay
only makes it harder."

He raised her hand once more to his lips, then almost rushed away.

Days lapsed into weeks, and weeks into months. The tireless nurse alleviated suffering of every
kind; and her silvery hair was like a halo around a saintly head to many a poor fellow. She
had the deep solace of knowing that not a few wives and mothers would have mourned had it not
been for her faithfulness.

But her own wound would not heal. She sometimes felt that she was slowly bleeding to death.
The deep, dark tide of suffering, in spite of all she could do, grew deeper and darker; and
she was growing weary and discouraged.

Graham saw her at rare intervals; and although she brightened greatly at his presence, and
made heroic efforts to satisfy him that she was doing well, he grew anxious and depressed.
But there was nothing tangible, nothing definite. She was only a little paler, a little thinner;
and when he spoke of it she smilingly told him that he was growing gaunt himself with his hard
campaigning.

"But you, Grace," he complained, "are beginning to look like a wraith that may vanish some
moonlight night."

Her letters were frequent, sometimes even cheerful, but brief. He wrote at great length, filling
his pages with descriptions of nature, with scenes that were often humorous but not trivial,
with genuine life, but none of its froth. Life for both had become too deep a tragedy for any
nonsense. He passed through many dangers, but these, as far as possible, he kept in the background;
and fate, pitying his one deep wound, spared him any others.

At last there came the terrible battle of the Wilderness, and the wards were filled with desperately
wounded men. The poor nurse gathered up her failing powers for one more effort; and Confederate
and Union men looked after her wonderingly and reverently, even in their mortal weakness. To
many she seemed like a ministering spirit rather than a woman of flesh and blood; and lips
of dying men blessed her again and again. But they brought no blessing. She only shuddered
and grew more faint of heart as the scenes of agony and death increased. Each wound was a type
of Hilland's wound, and in every expiring man she saw her husband die. Her poor little hands
trembled now as she sought to stem the black, black tide that deepened and broadened and foamed
around her.

Late one night, after a new influx of the wounded, she was greatly startled while passing down
her ward by hearing a voice exclaim, "Grace--Grace Brentford!"

It was her mother's name.

The call was repeated; and she tremblingly approached a cot on which was lying a gray-haired man.

"Great God!" he exclaimed, "am I dreaming? am I delirious? How is it that I see before me the
woman I loved forty-odd years ago? You cannot be Grace Brentford, for she died long years since."

"No, but I am her daughter."

"Her daughter!" said the man, struggling to rise upon his elbow--"her daughter! She should
not look older than you."

"Alas, sir, my age is not the work of time, but of grief. I grew old in a day. But if you knew
and loved my mother, you have sacred claims upon me. I am a nurse in this ward, and will devote
myself to you."

The man sank back exhausted. "This is strange, strange indeed," be said. "It is God's own providence.
Yes, my child, I loved your mother, and I love her still. Harry St. John won her fairly; but
be could not have loved her better than I. I am now a lonely old man, dying, I believe, in
my enemy's hands, but I thank God that I've seen Grace Brentford's child, and that she can
soothe my last hours."

"Do not feel so discouraged about yourself," said Grace, her tears falling fast. "Think rather
that yon have been brought here that I might nurse you back to life. Believe me, I will do
so with tender, loving care."

"How strange it all is!" the man said again. "You have her very voice, her manner. But it was
by your eyes that I recognized you. Your eyes are young and beautiful like hers, and full of
tears, as hers were when she sent me away with an ache to my heart that has never ceased. It
will soon be cured now. Your father will remember a wild young planter down in Georgia by the
name of Phil Harkness."

"Indeed, sir, I've heard both of my parents speak of you, and it was ever with respect and esteem."

"Give my greeting to your father, and say I never bore him any ill- will. In the saddest life
there is always some compensation. I have had wealth and honors; I am a colonel in our army,
and have been able to serve the cause I loved; but, chief of all, the child of Grace Brentford
is by my side at the end. Is your name Grace also?"

"Yes. Oh, why is the world so full of hopeless trouble?"

"Not hopeless trouble, my child. I am not hopeless. For long years I have had peace, if not
happiness--a deep inward calm which the confusion and roar of the bloodiest battles could not
disturb. I can close my eyes now in my final sleep as quietly as a child. In a few hours, my
dear, I may see your mother; and I shall tell her that I left her child assuaging her own sorrow
by ministering to others."

"Oh, oh!" sobbed Grace, "pray cease, or I shall not be fit for my duties; your words pierce
my very soul. Let me nurse you back to health. Let me take you to my home until you are exchanged,
for I must return. I must, must. My strength is going fast; and you bring before me my dear
old father whom I have left too long."

"My poor child! God comfort and sustain you. Do not let me keep you longer from your duties,
and from those who need you more than I. Come and say a word to me when you can. That's all
I ask. My wound was dressed before your watch began, and I am doing as well as I could expect.
When you feel like it, you can tell me more about yourself."

Their conversation had been in a low tone as she sat beside him, the patients near either sleeping
or too preoccupied by their own sufferings to give much heed.

Weary and oppressed by bitter despondency, she went from cot to cot, attending to the wants
of those in her charge. To her the old colonel's sad history seemed a mockery of his faith,
and but another proof of a godless or God-forgotten world. She envied his belief, with its
hope and peace; but he had only increased her unbelief. But all through the long night she
watched over him, coming often to his side with delicacies and wine, and with gentle words
that were far more grateful.

Once, as she was smoothing back his gray locks from his damp forehead, he smiled, and murmured,
"God bless you, my child. This is a foretaste of heaven."

In the gray dawn she came to him and said, "My watch is over, and I must leave you for a little
while; but as soon as I have rested I will come again."

"Grace," he faltered, hesitatingly, "would you mind kissing an old, old man? I never had a
child of my own to kiss me."

She stooped down and kissed him again and again, and he felt her hot tears upon his face.

"You have a tender heart, my dear," he said, gently. "Good-by, Grace-- Grace Brentford's child.
Dear Grace, when we meet again perhaps all tears will be wiped from your eyes forever."

She stole away exhausted and almost despairing. On reaching her little room she sank on her
couch, moaning; "Oh, Warren, Warren, would that I were sleeping your dreamless sleep beside you!"

Long before it was time for her to go on duty again she returned to the ward to visit her aged
friend. His cot was empty. In reply to her eager question she was told that he had died suddenly
from internal hemorrhage soon after she had left him.

She looked dazed for a moment, as if she had received a blow, then fell fainting on the cot
from which her mother's friend had been taken. The limit of her endurance was passed.

Before the day closed, the surgeon in charge of the hospital told her gently and firmly that
she must take an indefinite leave of absence. She departed at once in the care of an attendant;
but stories of the white-haired nurse lingered so long in the ward and hospital that at last
they began to grow vague and marvellous, like the legends of a saint.

CHAPTER XXXIV

RITA'S BROTHER

All through the campaign of '64 the crimson tide of war deepened and broadened. Even Graham's
cool and veteran spirit was appalled at the awful slaughter on either side. The Army of the
Potomac--the grandest army ever organized, and always made more sublime and heroic by defeat--was
led by a man as remorseless as fate. He was fate to thousands of loyal men, whom he placed
at will as coolly as if they had been the pieces on a chessboard. He was fate to the Confederacy,
upon whose throat he placed his iron grasp, never relaxed until life was extinct. In May, 1864,
he quietly crossed the Rapidan for the death-grapple. He took the most direct route for Richmond,
ignoring all obstacles and the fate of his predecessors. To think that General Grant wished
to fight the battle of the Wilderness is pure idiocy. One would almost as soon choose the Dismal
Swamp for a battleground. It was undoubtedly his hope to pass beyond that gloomy tangle, over
which the shadow of death had brooded ever since fatal Chancellorsville. But Lee, his brilliant
and vigilant opponent, rarely lost an advantage; and Graham's experienced eye, as with the
cavalry he was in the extreme advance, clearly saw that their position would give their foes
enormous advantages. Lee's movements would be completely masked by the almost impervious growth,
He and his lieutenants could approach within striking distance, whenever they chose, without
being seen, and had little to fear from the Union artillery, which the past had given them
much cause to dread. It was a region also to disgust the very soul of a cavalryman; for the
low, scrubby growth lined the narrow roads almost as effectually as the most scientifically
prepared abatis.

Graham's surmise was correct. Lee would not wait till his antagonist had reached open and favorable
ground, but he made an attack at once, where, owing to peculiarities of position, one of his
thin regiments had often the strength of a brigade.

On the morning of the 5th of May began one of the most awful and bloody battles in the annals
of warfare. Indeed it was the beginning of one long and almost continuous struggle which ended
only at Appomattox.

With a hundred thousand more, Graham was swept into the bloody vortex, and through summer heat,
autumn rains, and winter cold, he marched and fought with little rest. He was eventually given
the colonelcy of his regiment, and at times commanded a brigade. He passed through unnumbered
dangers unscathed; and his invulnerability became a proverb among his associates. Indeed he
was a mystery to them, for his face grew sadder and sterner every day, and his reticence about
himself and all his affairs was often remarked upon. His men and officers had unbounded respect
for him, that was not wholly unmixed with fear; for while he was considerate, and asked for
no exposure to danger in which he did not share, his steady discipline was never relaxed, and
he kept himself almost wholly aloof, except as their military relations required contact. He
could not, therefore, be popular among the hard- swearing, rollicking, and convivial cavalrymen.
In a long period of inaction he might have become very unpopular, but the admirable manner
in which he led them in action, and his sagacious care of them and their horses on the march
and in camp, led them to trust him implicitly. Chief of all, he had acquired that which with
the stern veterans of that day went further than anything else--a reputation for dauntless
courage. What they objected to were his "glum looks and unsocial ways," as they termed them.

They little knew that his cold, stern face hid suffering that was growing almost desperate
in its intensity. They little knew that he was chained to his military duty as to a rock, while
a vulture of anxiety was eating out his very heart. What was a pale, thin, white- haired woman
to them? But what to him? How true it is that often the heaviest burdens of life are those
at which the world would laugh, and of which the overweighted heart cannot and will not speak!

For a long time after his plunge into the dreary depths of the Wilderness he had received no
letters. Then he had learned of Grace's return home; and at first he was glad indeed. His aunt
had written nothing more alarming than that Grace had overtaxed her strength in caring for
the throngs of wounded men sent from the Wilderness, that she needed rest and good tonic treatment.
Then came word that she was "better"; then they "hoped she was gaining"; then they were about
to go to "the seashore, and Grace had always improved in salt air." It was then intimated that
she had found "the summer heat very enervating, and now that fall winds were blowing she would
grow stronger." At last, at the beginning of winter, it was admitted that she had not improved
as they had hoped; but they thought she was holding her own very well--that the continued and
terrific character of the war oppressed her--and that every day she dreaded to hear that he
had been stricken among other thousands.

Thus, little by little, ever softened by some excuse or some hope, the bitter truth grew plain:
Grace was failing, fading, threatening to vanish. He wrote as often as he could, and sought
with all his skill to cheer, sustain, and reconcile her to life. At first she wrote to him
not infrequently, but her letters grew further and further apart, and at last she wrote, in
the early spring of '65.

"I wish I could see you, Alford; but I know it is impossible. You are strong, you are doing
much to end this awful war, and it's your duty to remain at your post. You must not sully your
perfect image in my mind, or add to my unhappiness by leaving the service now for my sake.
I have learned the one bitter lesson of the times. No matter how much personal agony, physical
or mental, is involved, the war must go on; and each one must keep his place in the ranks till
he falls or is disabled. I have fallen. I am disabled. My wound will not close, and drop by
drop life and strength are ebbing. I know I disappoint you, my true, true friend; but I cannot
help it. Do not reproach me. Do not blame me too harshly. Think me weak, as I truly am. Indeed,
when I am gone your chances will be far better. It costs me a great effort to write this. There
is a weight on my hand and brain as well as on my heart. Hereafter I will send my messages
through dear, kind Mrs. Mayburn, who has been a mother to me in all my sorrow. Do not fear:
I will wait till you can come with honor; for I must see you once more."

For a long time after receiving this letter a despair fell on Graham. He was so mechanical
in the performance of his duties that his associates wondered at him, and he grew more gaunt
and haggard than ever. Then in sharp reaction came a feverish eagerness to see the war ended.

Indeed all saw that the end was near, and none, probably, more clearly than the gallant and
indomitable Lee himself. At last the Confederate army was outflanked, the lines around Petersburg
were broken through, and the final pursuit began. It was noted that Graham fought and charged
with an almost tiger-like fierceness; and for once his men said with reason that he had no
mercy on them. He was almost counting the hours until the time when he could sheathe his sword
and say with honor, "I resign."

One morning they struck a large force of the enemy, and he led a headlong charge. For a time
the fortunes of the battle wavered, for the Confederates fought with the courage of desperation.
Graham on his powerful horse soon became a conspicuous object, and all gave way before him
as if he were a messenger of death, at the same time wondering at his invulnerability.

The battle surged on and forward until the enemy were driven into a thick piece of woods. Graham
on the right of his line directed his bugler to give the order to dismount, and a moment later
his line of battle plunged into the forest. In the desperate melee that followed in the underbrush,
he was lost to sight except to a few of his men. It was here that he found himself confronted
by a Confederate officer, from whose eyes flashed the determination either to slay or to be
slain. Graham had crossed swords with him but a moment when he recognized that he had no ordinary
antagonist; and with his instinct of fight aroused to its highest pitch he gave himself up
wholly to a personal and mortal combat, shouting meantime to those near, "Leave this man to me."

Looking his opponent steadily in the eye, like a true swordsman, he remained first on the defensive;
and such was his skill that his long, straight blade was a shield as well as a weapon. Suddenly
the dark eyes and features of his opponent raised before him the image of Rita Anderson; and
he was so overcome for a second that the Confederate touched his breast with his sabre and
drew blood. That sharp prick and the thought that Rita's brother might be before him aroused
every faculty and power of his mind and body. His sword was a shield again, and he shouted,
"Is not your name Henry Anderson?"

"My name is our cause," was the defiant answer; "with it I will live or die."

Then came upon Graham one of those rare moments in his life when no mortal man could stand
before him. Ceasing his wary, rapid fence, his sword played like lightning; and in less than
a moment the Confederate's sabre flew from his hand, and he stood helpless.

"Strike," he said, sullenly; "I won't surrender."

"I'd sooner cut off my right hand," replied Graham, smiling upon him, "than strike the brother
of Rita Anderson."

"Is your name Graham?" asked his opponent, his aspect changing instantly.

"Yes; and you are Henry. I saw your sister's eyes in yours. Take up your sword, and go quietly
to the rear as my friend, not prisoner. I adjure you, by the name of your old and honored father
and your noble- hearted sister, to let me keep my promise to them to save your life, were it
ever in my power."

"I yield," said the young man, in deep despondency. "Our cause is lost, and you are the only
man in the North to whom I should be willing to surrender. Colonel, I will obey your orders."

Summoning his orderly and another soldier, he said to them, "Escort this gentleman to the rear.
Let him keep his arms. I have too much confidence in you, Colonel Anderson, even to ask that
you promise not to escape. Treat him with respect. He will share my quarters to- night." And
then he turned and rushed onward to overtake the extreme advance of his line, wondering at
the strange scene which had passed with almost the rapidity of thought.

That night by Graham's camp-fire began a friendship between himself and Henry Anderson which
would be lifelong. The latter asked, "Have you heard from my father and sister since you parted
with them?"

"No. My duties have carried me far away from that region. But it is a source of unspeakable
gratification that we have met, and that you can tell me of their welfare."

"It does seem as if destiny, or, as father would say, Providence, had linked my fortunes and
those of my family with you. He and Rita would actually have suffered with hunger but for you.
Since you were there the region has been tramped and fought over by the forces of both sides,
and swept bare. My father mentioned your name and that of Colonel Hilland; and a guard was
placed over his house, and he and Rita were saved from any personal annoyance. But all of his
slaves, except the old woman you remember, were either run off or enticed away, and his means
of livelihood practically destroyed. Old Uncle Jehu and his son Huey have almost supported
them. They, simple souls, could not keep your secret, though they tried to after their clumsy
fashion. My pay, you know, was almost worthless; and indeed there was little left for them
to buy. Colonel Graham, I am indebted to you for far more than life, which has become wellnigh
a burden to me."

"Life has brought far heavier burdens to others than to you, Colonel Anderson. Those you love
are living; and to provide for and protect such a father and sister as you possess might well
give zest to any life. Your cause is lost; and the time may come sooner than you expect when
you will be right glad of it. I know you cannot think so now, and we will not dwell on this
topic. I can testify from four years' experience that no cause was ever defended with higher
courage or more heroic self-sacrifice. But your South is not lost; and it will be the fault
of its own people if it does not work out a grander destiny within the Union than it could
ever achieve alone. But don't let us discuss politics. You have the same right to your views
that I have to mine. I will tell you how much I owe to your father and sister, and then you
will see that the burden of obligation rests upon me;" and he gave his own version of that
memorable day whose consequences threatened to culminate in Grace Hilland's death.

Under the dominion of this thought he could not hide the anguish of his mind; and Rita had
hinted enough in her letters to enable Anderson to comprehend his new-found friend. He took
Graham's hand, and as he wrung it he said, "Yes, life has brought to others heavier burdens
than to me."

"You may have thought," resumed Graham, "that I fought savagely to- day; but I felt that it
is best for all to end this useless, bloody struggle as soon as possible. As for myself, I'm
just crazed with anxiety to get away and return home. Of course we cannot be together after
tonight, for with the dawn I must be in the saddle. Tonight you shall share my blankets. You
must let me treat you as your father and Rita treated me. I will divide my money with you:
don't grieve me by objecting. Call it a loan if you will. Your currency is now worthless. You
must go with the other prisoners; but I can soon obtain your release on parole, and then, in
the name of all that is sacred, return home to those who idolize you. Do this, Colonel Anderson,
and you will lift a heavy burden from one already overweighted"'

"As you put the case I cannot do otherwise," was the sad reply. "Indeed I have no heart for
any more useless fighting. My duty now is clearly to my father and sister."

That night the two men slumbered side by side, and in the dawn parted more like brothers than
like foes.

As Graham had predicted, but a brief time elapsed before Lee surrendered, and Colonel Anderson's
liberty on parole was soon secured. They parted with the assurance that they would meet again
as soon as circumstances would permit.

At the earliest hour in which he could depart with honor, Graham's urgent entreaty secured
him a leave of absence; and he lost not a moment in his return, sending to his aunt in advance
a telegram to announce his coming.

CHAPTER XXXV

HIS SOMBRE RIVALS

Never had his noble horse Mayburn seemed to fail him until the hour that severed the military
chain which had so long bound him to inexorable duty, and yet the faithful beast was carrying
him like the wind. Iss, his servant, soon fell so far behind that Graham paused and told him
to come on more leisurely, that Mayburn would be at the terminus of the military railroad.
And there Iss found him, with drooping head and white with foam. The steam-engine was driven
to City Point with the reckless speed characteristic of military railroads; but to Graham the
train seemed to crawl. He caught a steamer bound for Washington, and paced the deck, while
in the moonlight the dark shores of the James looked stationary. From Washington the lightning
express was in his view more dilatory than the most lumbering stage of the old regime.

When at last he reached the gate to his aunt's cottage and walked swiftly up the path, the
hour and the scene were almost the same as when he had first come, an indifferent stranger,
long years before. The fruit-trees were as snowy white with blossoms, the air as fragrant,
the birds singing as jubilantly, as when he had stood at the window and gazed with critical
admiration on a sportive girl, a child- woman, playing with her little Spitz dog. As he passed
the spot where she had stood, beneath his ambush behind the curtains, his excited mind brought
back her image with lifelike realism--the breeze in her light hair, her dark eyes brimming
with mirth, her bosom panting from her swift advance, and the color of the red rose in her cheeks.

He groaned as he thought of her now.

His aunt saw him from the window, and a moment later was sobbing on his breast.

"Aunt," he gasped, "I'm not too late?"

"Oh, no," she said, wearily; "Grace is alive; but one can scarcely say much more. Alford, you
must be prepared for a sad change."

He placed her in her chair, and stood before her with heaving breast. "Now tell me all," he
said, hoarsely.

"Oh, Alford, you frighten me. You must be more composed. You cannot see Grace, looking and
feeling as you do. She is weakness itself;" and she told him how the idol of his heart was
slowly, gradually, but inevitably sinking into the grave.

"Alford, Alford," she cried, entreatingly, "why do you look so stern? You could not look more
terrible in the most desperate battle."

In low, deep utterance, he said, "This is my most desperate battle; and in it are the issues
of life and death."

"You terrify me, and can you think that a weak, dying woman can look upon you as you now appear?"

"She shall not die," he continued, in the same low, stern utterance, "and she must look upon
me, and listen, too. Aunt, you have been faithful to me all these years. You have been my mother.
I must entreat one more service. You must second me, sustain me, co-work with me. You must
ally all your experienced womanhood with my manhood, and with my will, which may be broken,
but which shall not yield to my cruel fate."

"What do you propose to do?"

"That will soon be manifest. Go and prepare Grace for my visit. I wish to see her alone. You
will please be near, however;" and he abruptly turned and went to his room to remove his military
suit and the dust of travel.

He had given his directions as if in the field, and she wonderingly and tremblingly obeyed,
feeling that some crisis was near.

Grace was greatly agitated when she heard of Graham's arrival; and two or three hours elapsed
before she was able to be carried down and placed on the sofa in the library. He, out in the
darkness on the piazza, watched with eyes that glowed like coals--watched as he had done in
the most desperate emergency of all the bloody years of battle. He saw her again, and in her
wasted, helpless form, her hollow cheeks, her bloodless face, with its weary, hopeless look,
her mortal weakness, he clearly recognized his sombre rivals, Grief and Death; and with a look
of indomitable resolution he raised his hand and vowed that he would enter the lists against
them. If it were within the scope of human will he would drive them from their prey.

His aunt met him in the hall and whispered, "Be gentle."

"Remain here," was his low reply. "I have also sent for Dr. Markham;" and he entered.

Grace reached out to him both her hands as she said, "Oh, Alford, you are barely in time. It
is a comfort beyond all words to see you before--before--" She could not finish the sinister
sentence.

He gravely and silently took her hands, and sat down beside her.

"I know I disappoint you," she continued. "I've been your evil genius, I've saddened your whole
life; and you have been so true and faithful! Promise me, Alford, that after I'm gone you will
not let my blighted life cast its shadow over your future years. How strangely stern you look!"

"So you intend to die, Grace?" were his first, low words.

"Intend to die?"

"Yes. Do you think you are doing right by your father in dying?"

"Dear, dear papa! I have long ceased to be a comfort to him. He, too, will be better when I
am gone. I am now a hopeless grief to him. Alford, dear Alford, do not look at me in that way."

"How else can I look? Do you not comprehend what your death means to me, if not to others?"

"Alford, can I help it?"

"Certainly you can. It will be sheer, downright selfishness for you to die. It will be your
one unworthy act. You have no disease: you have only to comply with the conditions of life
in order to live."

"You are mistaken," she said, the faintest possible color coming into her face. "The bullet
that caused Warren's death has been equally fatal to me. Have I not tried to live?"

"I do not ask you to try to live, but to live. Nay, more, I demand it; and I have the right.
I ask for nothing more. Although I have loved you, idolized you, all these years, I ask only
that you comply with the conditions of life and live." The color deepened perceptibly under
his emphatic words, and she said, "Can a woman live whose heart, and hope, and soul, if she
has one, are dead and buried?"

"Yes, as surely as a man whose heart and hope were buried long years before. There was a time
when I weakly purposed to throw off the burden of life; but I promised to live and do my best,
and I am here to-day. You must make me the same promise. In the name of all the past, I demand
it. Do you imagine that I am going to sit down tamely and shed a few helpless tears if you
do me this immeasurable wrong?"

"Oh, Alford!" she gasped, "what do you mean?"

"I am not here, Grace, to make threats," he said gravely; "but I fear you have made a merely
superficial estimate of my nature. Hilland is not. You know that I would have died a hundred
times in his place. He committed you to my care with his last breath, and that trust gave value
to my life. What right have you to die and bring to me the blackness of despair? I am willing
to bear my burden patiently to the end. You should be willing to bear yours."

"I admit your claim," she cried, wringing her hands. "You have made death, that I welcome,
a terror. How can I live? What is there left of me but a shadow? What am I but a mere semblance
of a woman? The snow is not whiter than my hair, or colder than my heart. Oh, Alford, you have
grown morbid in all these years. You cannot know what is best. Your true chance is to let me
go. I am virtually dead now, and when my flickering breath ceases, the change will be slight
indeed."

"It will be a fatal change for me," he replied, with such calm emphasis that she shuddered.
"You ask how you can live. Again I repeat, by complying with the conditions of life. You have
been complying with the conditions of death; and I will not yield you to him. Grief has been
a far closer and more cherished friend than I; and you have permitted it, like a shadow, to
stand between us. The time has now come when you must choose between this fatal shadow, this
useless, selfish grief, and a loyal friend, who only asks that he may see you at times, that
he may know where to find the one life that is essential to his life. Can you not understand
from your own experience that a word from you is sweeter to me than all the music of the world?--that
smiles from you will give me courage to fight the battle of life to the last? Had Hilland come
back wounded, would you have listened if he had reasoned, 'I am weak and maimed--not like my
old self: you will be better off without me'?"

"Say no more," she faltered. "If a shadow can live, I will. If a poor, heartless, hopeless
creature can continue to breathe, I will. If I die, as I believe I must, I will die doing just
what you ask. If it is possible for me to live, I shall disappoint you more bitterly than ever.
Alford, believe me, the woman is dead within me. If I live I shall become I know not what--a
sort of unnatural creature, having little more than physical life."

"Grace, our mutual belief forbids such a thought. If a plant is deeply shadowed, and moisture
is withdrawn, it begins to die. Bring to it again light and moisture, the conditions of its
life, and it gradually revives and resumes its normal state. This principle applies equally
to you in your higher order of existence. Will you promise me that, at the utmost exertion
of your will and intelligence, you will try to live?"

"Yes, Alford; but again I warn you. You will be disappointed."

He kissed both her hands with a manner that evinced profound gratitude and respect, but nothing
more; and then summoned his aunt and Dr. Markham.

Grace lay back on the sofa, white and faint, with closed eyes.

"Oh, Alford, what have you done?" exclaimed Mrs. Mayburn.

"What is right and rational. Dr. Markham, Mrs. Hilland has promised to use the utmost exertion
of her will and intelligence to live. I ask that you and my aunt employ your utmost skill and
intelligence in co- operation with her effort. We here--all four of us--enter upon a battle;
and, like all battles, it should be fought with skill and indomitable courage, not sentimental
impulse. I know that Mrs. Hilland will honestly make the effort, for she is one to keep her
word. Am I not right, Grace?"

"Yes," was the faint reply.

"Why, now I can go to work with hope," said the physician briskly, as he gave his patient a
little stimulant.

"And I also," cried the old lady, tears streaming down her face. "Oh, darling Grace, you will
live and keep all our hearts from breaking."

"I'll try," she said, in almost mortal weariness.

When she had been revived somewhat by his restoratives, Dr. Markham said, "I now advise that
she be carried back to her room, and I promise to be unwearied in my care."

"No," said Graham to his aunt. "Do not call the servants; I shall carry her to her room myself;"
and he lifted her as gently as he would take up a child, and bore her strongly and easily to
her room.

"Poor, poor Alford!" she whispered--"wasting your rich, full heart on a shadow."

CHAPTER XXXVI

ALL MATERIALISTS

When Graham returned to the library he found that the major had tottered in, and was awaiting
him with a look of intense anxiety.

"Graham, Graham!" he cried, "do you. think there is any hope?"

"I do, sir. I think there is almost a certainty that your daughter will live."

"Now God be praised! although I have little right to say it, for I've put His name to a bad
use all my life."

"I don't think any harm has been done," said Graham, smiling.

"Oh, I know, I know how wise you German students are. You can't find God with a microscope
or a telescope, and therefore there is none. But I'm the last man to criticise. Grace has been
my divinity since her mother died; and if you can give a reasonable hope that she'll live to
close my eyes, I'll thank the God that my wife worshipped, in spite of all your new-fangled
philosophies."

"And I hope I shall never be so wanting in courtesy, to say the least, as to show anything
but respect for your convictions. You shall know the whole truth about Grace; and I shall look
to you also for aid in a combined effort to rally and strengthen her forces of life. You know,
Major, that I have seen some service."

"Yes, yes; boy that you are, you are a hundred-fold more of a veteran than I am. At the beginning
of the war I felt very superior and experienced. But the war that I saw was mere child's-play."

"Well, sir, the war that I've been through was child's play to me compared with the battle
begun to-night. I never feared death, except as it might bring trouble to others, and for long
years I coveted it; but I fear the death of Grace Hilland beyond anything in this world or
any other. As her father, you now shall learn the whole truth;" and he told his story from
the evening of their first game of whist together.

"Strange, strange!" muttered the old man. "It's the story of Philip Harkness over again. But,
by the God who made me, she shall reward you if she lives."

"No, Major St. John, no. She shall devote herself to you, and live the life that her own feelings
dictate. She understands this, and I will it. I assure you that whatever else I lack it's not
a will."

"You've proved that, Graham, if ever a man did. Well, well, well, your coming has brought a
strange and most welcome state of affairs. Somehow you've given me a new lease of life and
courage. Of late we've all felt like hauling down the flag, and letting grim death do his worst.
I couldn't have survived Grace, and didn't want to. Only plucky Mrs. Mayburn held on to your
coming as a forlorn hope. You now make me feel like nailing the flag to the staff, and opening
again with every gun. Grace is like her mother, if I do say it. Grace Brentford never lacked
for suitors, and she had the faculty of waking up men. Forgive an old man's vanity. Phil Harkness
was a little wild as a young fellow, but he had grand mettle in him. He made more of a figure
in the world than I--was sent to Congress, owned a big plantation, and all that--but sweet
Grace Brentford always looked at me reproachfully when I rallied her on the mistake she had
made, and was contentment itself in my rough soldier's quarters," and the old man took off
his spectacles to wipe his tear-dimmed eyes. "Grace is just like her. She, too, has waked up
men. Hilland was a grand fellow; and, Graham, you are a soldier every inch of you, and that's
the highest praise I can bestow. You are in command in this battle, and God be with you. Your
unbelief doesn't affect Him any more than a mole's."

Graham laughed--he could laugh in his present hopefulness--as he replied, "I agree with you
fully. If there is a personal Creator of the universe, I certainly am a small object in it."
"That's not what I've been taught to believe either; nor is it according to my reason. An infinite
God could give as much attention to you as to the solar system."

"From the present aspect of the world, a great deal would appear neglected," Graham replied,
with a shrug.

"Come, Colonel Graham," said the major, a little sharply, "you and I have both heard the rank
and file grumble over the tactics of their general. It often turned out that the general knew
more than the men. But it's nice business for me to be talking religion to you or any one else;"
and the idea struck him as so comical that he laughed outright.

Mrs. Mayburn, who entered at that moment, said: "That's a welcome sound. I can't remember,
Major, when I've heard you laugh. Alford, you are a magician. Grace is sleeping quietly."

"Little wonder! What have I had to laugh about?" said the major. "But melancholy itself would
laugh at my joke to-night. Would you believe it, I've been talking religion to the colonel,--if
I haven't!"

"I think it's time religion was talked to all of us."

"Oh, now, Mrs. Mayburn, don't you begin. You haven't any God any more than Graham has. You
have a jumble of old-fashioned theological attributes, that are of no more practical use to
you than the doctrines of Aristotle. Please ring for Jinny, and tell her to bring us a bottle
of wine and some cake. I want to drink to Grace's health. If I could see her smile again I'd
fire a feu de joie if I could find any ordnance larger than a popgun. Don't laugh at me, friends,"
he added, wiping the tears from his dim old eyes; "but the bare thought that Grace will live
to bless my last few days almost turns my head. Where is Dr. Markham?"

"He had other patients to see, and said he would return by and by," Mrs. Mayburn replied.

"It's time we had a little relief," she continued, "whatever the future may be. The slow, steady
pressure of anxiety and fear was becoming unendurable. I could scarcely have suffered more
if Grace had been my own child; and I feared for you, Alford, quite as much."

"And with good reason," he said, quietly.

She gave him a keen look, and then did as the major had requested.

"Come, friends," cried he, "let us give up this evening to hope and cheer. Let what will come
on the morrow, we'll have at least one more gleam of wintry sunshine to-day."

Filling the glasses of all with his trembling hand, he added, when they were alone: "Here's
to my darling's health. May the good God spare her, and spare us all, to see brighter days.
Because I'm not good, is no reason why He isn't."

"Amen!" cried the old lady, with Methodistic fervor.

"What are you saying amen to?--that I'm not good?"

"Oh, I imagine we all average about alike," was her grim reply--"the more shame to us all!"

"Dear, conscience-stricken old aunty!" said Graham, smiling at her. "Will nothing ever lay
your theological ghosts?"

"No, Alford," she said, gravely. "Let us change the subject."

"I've told Major St. John everything from the day I first came here," Graham explained; "and
now before we separate let it be understood that he joins us as a powerful ally. His influence
over Grace, after all, is more potent than that of all the rest of us united. My words to-night
have acted more like a shock than anything else. I have placed before her clearly and sharply
the consequences of yielding passively, and of drifting further toward darkness. We must possess
ourselves with an almost infinite patience and vigilance. She, after all, must bear the brunt
of this fight with death; but we must be ever on hand to give her support, and it must be given
also unobtrusively, with all the tact we possess. We can let her see that we are more cheerful
in our renewed hope, but we must be profoundly sympathetic and considerate."

"Well, Graham, as I said before, you are captain. I learned to obey orders long ago as well
as to give them;" and the major summoned his valet and bade them goodnight.

Graham, weary in the reaction from his intense feeling and excitement, threw himself on the
sofa, and his aunt came and sat beside him.

"Alford," she said, "what an immense change your coming has made!"

"The beginning of a change, I hope."

"It was time--it was time. A drearier household could scarcely be imagined. Oh, how dreary
life can become! Grace was dying. Every day I expected tidings of your death. It's a miracle
that you are alive after all these bloody years. All zest in living had departed from the major.
We are all materialists, after our own fashion, wholly dependent on earthly things, and earthly
things were failing us. In losing Grace, you and the major would have lost everything; so would
I in losing you. Alford, you have become a son to me. Would you break a mother's heart? Can
you not still promise to live and do your best?"

"Dear aunt, we shall all live and do our best."

"Is that the best you can say, Alford?"

"Aunty, there are limitations to the strength of every man. I have reached the boundary of
mine. From the time I began the struggle in the Vermont woods, and all through my exile, I
fought this passion. I hesitated at no danger, and the wilder and more desolate the region,
the greater were its attractions to me. I sought to occupy my mind with all that was new and
strange; but such was my nature that this love became an inseparable part of my being. I might
just as well have said I would forget my sad childhood, the studies that have interested me,
your kindness. I might as well have decreed that I should not look the same and be the same--that
all my habits of thought and traits of character should not be my own. Imagine that a tree
in your garden had will and intelligence. Could it ignore the law of its being, all the long
years which had made it what it is, and decide to be some other kind of tree, totally different?
A man who from childhood has had many interests, many affections, loses, no doubt, a sort of
concentration when the one supreme love of his life takes possession of him. If Grace lives,
and I can see that she has at last tranquilly and patiently accepted her lot, you will find
that I can be tranquil and patient. If she dies, I feel that I shall break utterly. I can't
look into the abyss that her grave would open. Do not think that I would consciously and deliberately
become a vulgar suicide--I hope I long since passed that point, and love and respect for you
forbid the thought--but the long strain that I have been under, and the dominating influence
of my life, would culminate. I should give way like a man before a cold, deadly avalanche.
I have been frank with you, for in my profound gratitude for your love and kindness I would
not have you misunderstand me, or think for a moment that I proposed deliberately to forget
you in my own trouble. The truth is just this, aunt: I have not strength enough to endure Grace
Hilland's death. It would be such a lame, dreary, impotent conclusion that I should sink under
it, as truly as a man who found himself in the sea weighted by a ton of lead. But don't let
us dwell on this thought. I truly believe that Grace will live, if we give her all the aid
she requires. If she honestly makes the effort to live--as she will, I feel sure--she can scarcely
help living when the conditions of life are supplied."

"I think I understand you, Alford," said the old lady, musingly; "and yet your attitude seems
a strange one."

"It's not an unnatural one. I am what I have been growing to be all these years. I can trace
the sequence of cause and effect until this moment."

"Well, then," said the old lady, grimly, "Grace must live, if it be in the power of human will
and effort to save her. Would that I had the faith in God that I ought to have! But He is afar
off, and He acts in accordance with an infinite wisdom that I can't understand. The happiness
of His creatures seems a very secondary affair."

"Now, aunty, we are on ground where we differ theoretically, to say the least; but I accord
to you full right to think what you please, because I know you will employ all the natural
and rational expedients of a skilful nurse."

"Yes, Alford; you and Grace only make me unhappy when you talk in that way. I know you are
wrong, just as certainly as the people who believed the sun moved round the earth. The trouble
is that I know it only with the same cold mental conviction, and therefore can be of no help
to either of you. Pardon me for my bluntness: do you expect to marry Grace, should she become
strong and well?"

"No, I can scarcely say I have any such hope. It is a thought I do not even entertain at present,
nor does she. I am content to be her friend through life, and am convinced that she could not
think of marriage again for years, if ever. That is a matter of secondary importance. All that
I ask is that she shall live."

"Well, compared with most men, a very little contents you," said his aunt dryly. "We shall
see, we shall see. But you have given me such an incentive that, were it possible, I'd open
my withered veins and give her half of my poor blood."

"Dear aunty, how true and stanch your love is! I cannot believe it will be disappointed."

"I must go back to my post now, nor shall I leave it very often."

"Here is Dr. Markham. He will see that you have it often enough to maintain your own health,
and I will too. I've been a soldier too long to permit my chief of staff to be disabled. Pardon
me, doctor, but it seems to me that this is more of a case for nursing and nourishment than
for drugs."

"You are right, and yet a drug can also become a useful ally. In my opinion, it is more a case
for change than anything else. When Mrs. Hilland is strong enough, you must take her from this
atmosphere and these associations. In a certain sense she must begin life over again, and take
root elsewhere."

"There may be truth in what you say;" and Graham was merged in deep thought when he was left
alone. The doctor, in passing out a few moments later, assured him that all promised well.

CHAPTER XXXVII

THE EFFORT TO LIVE

As Graham had said, it did seem that infinite patience and courage would be required to defeat
the dark adversaries now threatening the life upon which he felt that his own depended. He
had full assurance that Grace made her promised effort, but it was little more than an effort
of will, dictated by a sense of duty. She had lost her hold on life, which to her enfeebled
mind and body promised little beyond renewed weariness and disappointment. How she could live
again in any proper sense of the word was beyond her comprehension; and what was bare existence?
It would be burdensome to herself and become wearisome to others. The mind acts through its
own natural medium, and all the light that came to her was colored by almost despairing memories.

Too little allowance is often made for those in her condition. The strong man smiles half contemptuously
at the efforts of one who is feeble to lift a trifling weight. Still, he is charitable. He
knows that if the man has not the muscle, all is explained. So material are the conceptions
of many that they have no patience with those who have been enfeebled in mind, will, and courage.
Such persons would say, "Of course Mrs. Hilland cannot attend to her household as before; but
she ought to have faith, resignation; she ought to make up her mind cheerfully to submit, and
she would soon be well. Great heavens! haven't other women lost their husbands? Yes, indeed,
and they worried along quite comfortably."

Graham took no such superficial view. "Other women" were not Grace. He was philosophical, and
tried to estimate the effect of her own peculiar experience on her own nature, and was not
guilty of the absurdity of generalizing. It was his problem to save Grace as she was, and not
as some good people said she ought to be. Still, his firm belief remained, that she could live
if she would comply with what he believed to be the conditions of life; indeed, that she could
scarcely help living. If the time could come when her brain would be nourished by an abundance
of healthful blood, he might hope for almost anything. She would then be able to view the past
dispassionately, to recognize that what was past was gone forever, and to see the folly of
a grief which wasted the present and the future. If she never became strong enough for that--and
the prospect was only a faint, half- acknowledged hope--then he would reverently worship a
patient, gentle, white-haired woman, who should choose her own secluded path, he being content
to make it as smooth and thornless as possible.

Beyond a brief absence at the time his regiment was mustered out of the service, he was always
at home, and the allies against death--with their several hopes, wishes, and interests--worked
faithfully. At last there was a more decided response in the patient. Her sleep became prolonged,
as if she were making amends for the weariness of years. Skilful tonic treatment told on the
wasted form. New blood was made, and that, in Graham's creed, was new life.

His materialistic theory, however, was far removed from any gross conception of the problem.
He did not propose to feed a woman into a new and healthful existence, except as he fed what
he deemed to be her whole nature. In his idea, flowers, beauty in as many forms as he could
command and she enjoy at the time, were essential. He ransacked nature in his walks for things
to interest her. He brought her out into the sunshine, and taught her to distinguish the different
birds by their notes. He had Mrs. Mayburn talk to her and consult with her over the homely
and wholesome details of housekeeping. Much of the news of the day was brought to her attention
as that which should naturally interest her, especially the reconstruction of the South, as
represented and made definite by the experience of Henry Anderson and his sister. He told her
that he had bought at a nominal sum a large plantation in the vicinity of the parsonage, and
that Colonel Anderson should be his agent, with the privilege of buying at no more of an advance
than would satisfy the proud young Southerner's self respect.

Thus from every side he sought to bring natural and healthful influences to bear upon her mind,
to interest her in life at every point where it touched her, and to reconnect the broken threads
which had bound her to the world.

He was aided earnestly and skilfully on all sides. Their success, however, was discouragingly
slow. In her weakness Grace made pathetic attempts to respond, but not from much genuine interest.
As she grew stronger her manner toward her father was more like that of her former self than
was the rest of her conduct. Almost as if from the force of habit, she resumed her thoughtful
care for his comfort; but beyond that there seemed to be an apathy, an indifference, a dreary
preoccupation hard to combat.

In Graham's presence she would make visible effort to do all he wished, but it was painfully
visible, and sometimes she would recognize his unobtrusive attentions with a smile that was
sadder than any words could be. One day she seemed almost wholly free from the deep apathy
that was becoming characteristic, and she said to him, "Alas, my friend! as I said to you at
first, the woman is dead within me. My body grows stronger, as the result of the skill and
help you all are bringing to bear on my sad problem, but my heart is dead, and my hope takes
no hold on life. I cannot overcome the feeling that I am a mere shadow, and have no right to
be here among the living. You are so brave, patient, and faithful that I am ever conscious
of a sort of dull remorse; but there is a weight on my brain and a despairing numbness at my
heart, making everything seem vain and unreal. Please do not blame me. Asking me to feel is
like requiring sight of the blind. I've lost the faculty. I have suffered so much that I have
become numb, if not dead. The shadows of the past mingle with the shadows of to-day. Only you
seem real in your strong, vain effort, and as far as I can suffer any more it pains me to see
you thus waste yourself on a hopeless shadow of a woman. I told you I should disappoint you."

"I am not wasting myself, Grace. Remain a shadow till you can be more. I will bear my part
of the burden, if you will be patient with yours. Won't you believe that I am infinitely happier
in caring for you as you are than I should be if I could not thus take your hand and express
to you my thought, my sympathy? Dear Grace, the causes which led to your depression were strong
and terrible. Should we expect them to be counteracted in a few short weeks?"

"Alas, Alford! is there any adequate remedy? Forgive me for saying this to you, and yet you,
of all people, can understand me best. You cling to me who should be nothing to a man of your
power and force. You say you cannot go on in life without me, even as a weak, dependent friend--that
you would lose all zest, incentive, and interest; for I cannot think you mean more. If you
feel in this way toward me, who in the eyes of other men would be a dismal burden, think how
Warren dwells in my memory, what he was to me, how his strong sunny nature was the sun of my
life. Do you not see you are asking of me what you say you could not do yourself, although
you would, after your own brave, manly fashion? But your own belief should teach you the nature
of my task when you ask me to go on and take up life again, from which I was torn more completely
than the vine which falls with the tree to which it clung."

"Dear Grace, do not think for a moment that I am not always gratefully conscious of the immense
self-sacrifice you are making for me and others. You long for rest and forgetfulness, and yet
you know well that your absence would leave an abyss of despair. You now add so much to the
comfort of your father! Mrs. Mayburn clings to you with all the love of a mother. And I, Grace--what
else can i do? Even your frail, sad presence is more to me than the sun in the sky. Is it pure
selfishness on my part to wish to keep you? Time, the healer, will gradually bring to you rest
from pain, and serenity to us all. When you are stronger I will take you to Hilland's grave--"

"No, no, no!" she cried, almost passionately. "Why should I go there? Oh, this is the awful
part of it! What I so loved has become nothing, worse than nothing--that from which I shrink
as something horrible. Oh, Alford! why are we endowed with such natures if corruption is to
be the end? It is this thought that paralyzes me. It seems as if pure, unselfish love is singled
out for the most diabolical punishment. To think that a form which has become sacred to you
may be put away at any moment as a horrible and unsightly thing! and that such should be the
end of the noblest devotion of which man is capable! My whole being revolts at it; and yet
how can I escape from its truth? I am beset by despairing thoughts on every side when able
to think at all, and my best remedy seems a sort of dreary apathy, in which I do little more
than breathe. I have read that there comes a time when the tortured cease to feel much pain.
There was a time, especially at the hospital, when I suffered constantly--when almost everything
but you suggested torturing thoughts. I suffered with you and for you, but there was always
something sustaining in your presence. There is still. I should not live a month in your absence,
but it seems as if it were your strong will that holds me, not my own. You have given me the
power, the incentive, to make such poor effort as I am putting forth. Moreover, in intent,
you gave your life for Warren again and again, and as long as I have any volition left I will
try and do all you wish, since you so wish it. But my hope is dead. I do not see how any more
good can come to me or through me."

"You are still willing, however, to permit me to think for you, to guide you? You will still
use your utmost effort to live?"

"Yes. I can refuse to the man who went back to my dying husband nothing within my power to
grant. It is indeed little. Besides, I am in your care, but I fear I shall prove a sad, if
not a fatal legacy."

"Of that, dear Grace, you must permit me to be the judge. All that you have said only adds
strength to my purpose. Does not the thought that you are doing so very much for me and for
all who love you bring some solace?"

"It should. But what have I brought you but pain and deep anxiety? Oh, Alford, Alford! you
will waken some bitter day to the truth that you love but the wraith of the girl who unconsciously
won your heart. You have idealized her, and the being you now love does not exist. How can
I let you go on thus wronging yourself?"

"Grace," replied he, gravely and almost sternly, "I learned in the northern woods, among the
fiords of Norway, under the shadow of the Himalayas, and in my long, lonely hours in the war,
whom I loved, and why I loved her. I made every effort at forgetfulness that I, at least, was
capable of exerting, and never forgot for an hour. Am I a sentimental boy, that you should
talk to me in this way? Let us leave that question as settled for all time. Moreover, never
entertain the thought that I am planning and hoping for the future. I see in your affection
for me only a pale reflection of your love for Hilland."

"No, Alford, I love you for your own sake. How tenderly you have ever spoken of little Rita
Anderson, and yet--"

"And yet, as I have told you more than once, the thought of loving her never entered my mind.
I could plan for her happiness as I would for a sister, had I one."

"Therefore you can interpret me."

"Therefore I have interpreted you, and, from the first, have asked for nothing more than that
you still make one of our little circle, each member of which would be sadly missed, you most
of all."

"I ought to be able to do so little as that for you. Indeed, I am trying."

"I know you are, and, as you succeed, you will see that I am content. Do not feel that when
I am present you must struggle and make unwonted effort. The tide is setting toward life; float
gently on with it. Do not try to force nature. Let time and rest daily bring their imperceptible
healing. The war is over. I now have but one object in life, and if you improve I shall come
and go and do some man's work in the world. My plantation in Virginia will soon give me plenty
of wholesome out-of-door thoughts."

She gave him one of her sad smiles as she replied wearily, "You set me a good example."

This frank interchange of thought appeared at first to have a good effect on Grace, and brought
something of the rest which comes from submission to the inevitable. She found that Graham's
purpose was as immovable as the hills, and at the same time was more absolutely convinced that
he was not looking forward to what seemed an impossible future. Nor did he ask that her effort
should be one of feeble struggles to manifest an interest before him which she did not feel.
She yielded to her listlessness and apathy to a degree that alarmed her father and Mrs. Mayburn,
but Graham said: "It's the course of nature. I finally beat me to blows with those who pushed me toward the door. They
called the same agent who is now here. They say he insulted, that bit in one hand. I do not know
how I do it. Maybe I was crazy at that moment. It is true that this man I led to pushing, not
wanting to hear me, that would not let me keep seeing my Alberto ....

Was a long pause. His eyes began to moisten.

- And so - ended the old - as I returned to find my grandson .... I apologize to Mr. Commissioner
.... I apologize to Mr. Agent.

He lowered his head, clasped his hands and looked down, voluntarily taking refuge in silence, trusting
to luck, not insist more on defense, as his tears began to running down her cheeks.

The commissioner said nothing.

The agent looked at his hand, a veteran of the Croix de Guerre on the chest of the uniform and
several gallons in a sleeve indicators of their campaigns. He also looked at his superior. Until
then had remained impassive, but bit her several times the mighty
mustache.

The two men seemed to understand with his eyes. The sheriff returned the agent part edited by
him half an hour earlier in the waiting room of the police station
giving an account of scandal occurred in the cinema.

The veteran, without saying a word, he tore the paper into tiny pieces.

- Good woman, you can leave.

Voice of the sheriff pulled the old woman of his abstraction. Was
it true that left to go?

... What gentlemen so good!

- How can I return to cinema? - Added with anxiety -. "I will see every night to my little boy?

The
two men laughed at his simplicity, answering with a nod.

Slowly left the police station. Not desirable that they saw flee as having consciousness dirty.

But
on reaching the street, convinced that no one was watching, and snatched her skirts, began to
run with a youthful lightness.

His wrinkled face was delayed, panting with fatigue, their white
hair escaped in disorder crocheted scarf that sheltered his head.

When he got to the cinema, leaving him the last group of viewers.
Employees lights out and removed the posters. The old saw then how
to close the doors.

He remained motionless, with one elbow on the
wall and the forehead in one hand. Cried with child distress.

- Wait
until tomorrow! - Murmured -. Not seeing my small in so many hours!
...

II

The next night the old woman appeared in the cinema with
an air of humility. Hunched to pass unnoticed. He approached the ticket
office, turning his face to avoid the employee recognized her.

But
the man charged with guarding the door, ran to her:

- Ah, no! Do
you come to move scandal again? ... For you there is no input.

-
Let me go, good sir. Grace would quietly do anything he asked, but she grew more
forgetful and inattentive, coming out of her deep abstraction--if such it could be termed--with
increasing effort. With Graham she seemed more content than with any one else. With him she
took lengthening walks on the beach. He sat quietly beside her while she watched the billows
chasing one another to the shore. Their swift onset, their defeat, over which they appeared
to foam in wrath, their backward and disheartened retreat, ever seemed to tell her in some
dim way a story of which she never wearied. Often she would turn and look at him with a vague
trouble in her face, as if faintly remembering something that was a sorrow to them both; but
his reassuring smile quieted her, and she would take his hand as a little child might have
done, and sit for an hour without removing her eyes from the waves. He waited patiently day
after day, week after week, reiterating to himself, "She will waken, she will remember all,
and then will have strength and calmness to meet it. This is nature's long repose."

It was growing strangely long and deep.

Meanwhile Grace, in her outward appearance, was undergoing a subtle change. Graham was the
first to observe it, and at last it was apparent to all. As her mind became inert, sleeping
on a downy couch of forgetfulness, closely curtained, the silent forces of physical life, in
her deep tranquillity, were doing an artist's work. The hollow cheeks were gradually rounded
and given the faintest possible bloom. Her form was gaining a contour that might satisfy a
sculptor's dream.

The major had met old friends, and it was whispered about who they were--the widow of a millionaire;
Colonel Graham, one of the most dashing cavalry officers in the war which was still in all
minds; Major St. John, a veteran soldier of the regular service, who had been wounded in the
Mexican War and who was well and honorably known to the chief dignitaries of the former generation.
Knowing all this, the quidnuncs complacently felt at first that they knew all. The next thing
was to know the people. This proved to be difficult indeed. The major soon found a few veteran
cronies at whist, but to others was more unapproachable than a major-general of the old school.
Graham was far worse, and belles tossed their heads at the idea that he had ever been a "dashing
cavalry officer" or dashing anything else. Before the summer was over the men began to discover
that Mrs. Hilland was the most beautiful woman in the house--strangely, marvellously, supernaturally
beautiful.

An artist, who had found opportunity to watch the poor unconscious woman furtively--not so
furtively either but that any belle in the hostelry would know all about it in half a minute--raved
about the combination of charms he had discovered.

"Just imagine," he said, "what a picture she made as she sat alone on the beach! She was so
remarkable in her appearance that one might think she had arisen from the sea, and was not
a creature of the earth. Her black, close-fitting dress suggested the form of Aphrodite as
she rose from the waves. Her profile was almost faultless in its exquisite lines. Her complexion,
with just a slight warm tinge imparted by the breeze, had not the cold, dead white of snow,
but the clear transparency which good aristocratic blood imparts. But her eyes and hair were
her crowning features. How shall I describe the deep, dreamy languor of her large, dark eyes,
made a hundred-fold more effective by the silvery whiteness of her hair, which had partly escaped
from her comb, and fell upon her neck! And then her sublime, tranquil indifference! That I
was near, spellbound with admiration, did not interest her so much as a sail, no larger than
a gull's wing, far out at sea."

"Strange, strange!" said one of his friends, laughing; "her unconsciousness of your presence
was the strangest part of it all. Why did you not make a sketch?"

"I did, but that infernal Colonel Graham, who is said to be her shadow--after her million,
you know--suddenly appeared and asked sternly: 'Have you the lady's permission for this sketch?'
I stammered about being 'so impressed, that in the interests of art,' etc. He then snatched
my sketch and threw it into the waves. Of course I was angry, and I suppose my words and manner
became threatening. He took a step toward me, looking as I never saw a man look. 'Hush,' he
said, in a low voice. 'Say or do a thing to annoy that lady, and I'll wring your neck and toss
you after your sketch. Do you think I've been through a hundred battles to fear your insignificance?'
By Jove! he looked as if he could do it as easily as say it. Of course I was not going to brawl
before a lady."

"No; it wouldn't have been prudent--I mean gentlemanly," remarked his bantering friend.

"Well, laugh at me," replied the young fellow, who was as honest as light-hearted and vain.
'I'd risk the chance of having my neck wrung for another glimpse at such marvellous beauty.
Would you believe it? the superb creature never so much as once turned to glance at us. She
left me to her attendant as completely as if he were removing an annoying insect. Heavens!
but it was the perfection of high breeding. But I shall have my revenge: "I'll paint her yet."

"Right, my friend, right you are; and your revenge will be terrible. Her supernatural and high-bred
nonchalance will be lost forever should she see her portrait;" and with mutual chaffing, spiced
with good- natured satire, as good-naturedly received, the little party in a smoking-room separated.

But furtive eyes soon relieved the artist from the charge of exaggeration. Thus far Grace's
manner had been ascribed to high-bred reserve and the natural desire for seclusion in her widowhood.
Now, however, that attention was concentrated upon her, Graham feared that more than her beauty
would be discovered.

He himself also longed inexpressibly to hide his new phase of trouble from the chattering throng
of people who were curious to know about them. To know? As if they could know! They might better
sit down to gossip over the secrets of the differential and the integral calculus.

But he saw increasing evidences that they were becoming objects of "interest," and the beautiful
millionaire widow "very interesting," as it was phrased; and he knew that there is no curiosity
so penetrating as that of the fashionable world when once it is aroused, and the game deemed
worthy of pursuit.

People appeared from Washington who had known Lieutenant-Colonel Hilland and heard something
of Graham, and the past was being ferreted out. "Her hair had turned white from grief in a
night," it was confidently affirmed.

Poor Jones shrugged his shoulders as he thought: "I shall never be the cause of my wife's hair
turning white, unless I may, in the future, prevent her from dyeing it."

After all, sympathy was not very deep. It was generally concluded that Colonel Graham would
console her, and one lady of elegant leisure, proud of her superior research, declared that
she had seen the colonel "holding Mrs. Hilland's hand," as they sat in a secluded angle of
the rocks.

Up to a certain time it was comparatively easy to shield Grace; but now, except as she would
turn her large, dreamy eyes and unresponsive lips upon those who sought her acquaintance, she
was as helpless as a child. The major and Mrs. Mayburn at once acquiesced in Graham's wish
to depart. Within a day or two the gossips found that their prey had escaped, and Grace was
once more in her cottage home.

At first she recognized familiar surroundings with a sigh of content. Then a deeply troubled
look flitted across her face and she looked at Graham inquiringly.

"What is it, Grace?" he asked, gently.

She pressed her hand to her brow, glanced around once more, shook her head sadly, and went
to her room to throw off her wraps.

They all looked at one another with consternation. Hitherto they had tried to be dumb and blind,
each hiding the growing and awful conviction that Grace was drifting away from them almost
as surely as if she had died.

"Something must be done at once," said practical Mrs. Mayburn.

"I have telegraphed for Dr. Markham," replied Graham, gloomily." Nothing can be done till he
returns. He is away on a distant trip."

"Oh!" groaned the old major, "there will be an end of me before there is to all this trouble."

CHAPTER XXXVIII

GRAHAM'S LAST SACRIFICE

A terrible foreboding oppressed Graham. Would Grace fulfil her prediction and disappoint him,
after all? Would she elude him, escape, die, and yet remain at his side, beautiful as a dream?
Oh, the agony of possessing this perfect casket, remembering the jewel that had vanished! He
had vowed to defeat his gloomy rivals, Grief and Death, and they were mocking him, giving the
semblance of what he craved beyond even imagined perfection, but carrying away into their own
inscrutable darkness the woman herself.

What was Grace?--what becoming? As he looked he thought of her as a sculptor's ideal embodied,
a dream of beauty only, not a woman--as the legend of Eve, who might, before becoming a living
soul, have harmonized with the loveliness of her garden without seeing or feeling it.

He could not think of her mind as blotted out or perverted; he could not conceive of it otherwise
than as corresponding with her outward symmetry. To his thought it slumbered, as her form might
repose upon her couch, in a death-like trance. She went and came among them like a somnambulist,
guided by unconscious instincts, memories, and habits.

She knew their voices, did, within limitations, as they requested; but when she waited on her
father there was a sad, mechanical repetition of what she had done since childhood. Mrs. Mayburn
found her docile and easily controlled, and the heart-stricken old lady was vigilance itself.

Toward Graham, however, her manner had a marked characteristic. He was her master, and she
a dumb, lovely, unreasoning creature, that looked into his eyes for guidance, and gathered
more from his tones than from his words. Some faint consciousness of the past had grown into
an instinct that to him she must look for care and direction; and she never thought of resisting
his will. If he read to her, she turned to him her lovely face, across which not a gleam of
interest or intelligence would pass. If he brought her flowers, she would hold them until they
were taken from her. She would pace the garden walks by his side, with her hand upon his arm,
by the hour if he wished it, sometimes smiling faintly at his gentle tones, but giving no proof
that she understood the import of his words. At Hilland's name only she would start and tremble
as if some deep chord were struck, which could merely vibrate until its sounds were faint and
meaningless.

It was deeply touching also to observe in her sad eclipse how her ingrained refinement asserted
itself. In all her half-conscious action there was never a coarse look or word. She was a rose
without its perfume. She was a woman without a woman's mind and heart. These had been subtracted,
with all the differences they made; otherwise she was Grace Hilland.

Graham was profoundly perplexed and distressed. The problem had become too deep for him. The
brain, nourished by good blood, had not brought life. All his skill and that of those allied
with him had failed. The materialist had matter in the perfection of breathing outline, but
where was the woman he loved? How could he reach her, how make himself understood by her, except
as some timid, docile creature responds to a caress or a tone? His very power over her was
terrifying. It was built upon the instinct, the allegiance that cannot reason but is unquestioning.
Nothing could so have daunted his hope, courage, and will as the exquisite being Grace had
become, as she looked up to him with her large, mild, trusting eyes, from which thought, intelligence,
and volition had departed.

At last Dr. Markham came, and for several days watched his patient closely, she giving little
heed to his presence. They all hung on his perturbed looks with a painful anxiety. For a time
he was very reticent, but one day he followed Graham to his quarters in Mrs. Mayburn's cottage,
where he was now much alone. Grace seemed to miss him but slightly, although she always gave
some sign of welcome on his return. The mocking semblance of all that he could desire often
so tantalized him that her presence became unendurable. The doctor found him pacing his room
in a manner betokening his half-despairing perplexity.

"Colonel Graham," he said, "shall I surprise you when I say physicians are very fallible? I
know that it is not the habit of the profession to admit this, but I have not come here to
talk nonsense to you. You have trusted me in this matter, and admitted me largely into your
confidence, and I shall speak to you in honest, plain English. Mrs. Hilland's symptoms are
very serious. What I feared has taken place. From her acute and prolonged mental distress and
depression, of which she would have died had you not come, she reacted first into mental lethargy,
and now into almost complete mental inactivity. I cannot discover that any disturbed physical
functions have been an element in her mental aberration, for more perfect physical life and
loveliness I have never seen. Her white hair, which might have made her look old, is a foil
to a beauty which seems to defy age.

"Pardon me for saying it, but I fear our treatment has been superficial. We men of the world
may believe what we please, but to many natures, especially to an organization like Mrs. Hilland's,
hope and faith are essential. She has practically been without these from the first, and, as
you know, she was sinking under the struggle maintained by her own brave, womanly spirit. She
was contending with more than actual bereavement. It was the hopelessness of the struggle that
crushed her, for she is not one of that large class of women who can find consolation in crape
and becoming mourning.

"In response to your appeal, she did make the effort you required, but it was the effort of
a mind still without hope or faith--one that saw no remedy for the evils that had already overwhelmed
her--and I must bear witness that her efforts were as sincere as they were pathetic. We all
watched to give every assistance in our power. I've lain awake nights, Colonel Graham, to think
of remedies that would meet her needs; and good Mrs. Mayburn and your old black cook, Aunt
Sheba, prepared food fit for the gods. You were more untiring and effective than any of us,
and the major's very infirmities were among her strongest allies. Well, we have the result--a
woman who might be a model for a goddess, even to her tranquil face, in which there is no trace
of varying human feeling. Explanation of the evil that crushed her, hope, and faith were not
given--who can give them?--but they were essential to her from the first. Unbelief, which is
a refuge to some, was an abyss to her. In it she struggled and groped until her mind, appalled
and discouraged and overwhelmed, refused to act at all. In one sense it is a merciful oblivion,
in another a fatal one, from which she must be aroused if possible. But it's a hard, hard case."

"You make it hard indeed," said Graham, desperately. "What faith can I instil except the one
I have? I can't lie, even for Grace Hilland. She knew well once that I could easily die for her."

"Well, then," said the physician, "permit a plain, direct question. Will you marry her?"

"Marry her--as she now is?" cried Graham, in unfeigned astonishment.

"You said you could die for her. This may be going much further. Indeed I should call it the
triumph of human affection, for in honesty I must tell you that she may never be better, she
may become worse. But I regard it as her only chance. At any rate, she needs a vigilant caretaker.
Old Mrs. Mayburn will not be equal to the task much longer, and her place will have to be filled
by hired service. I know it is like suggesting an almost impossible sacrifice to broach even
the thought, remembering her condition, but--"

"Dr. Markham," said Graham, pacing the floor in great agitation, "you wholly misunderstand
me. I was thinking of her, not of myself. What right have I to marry Grace Hilland without
her consent? She could give no intelligent assent at present."

"The right of your love; the right her husband gave when he committed her to your care; the
right of your desire to prevent her from drifting into hopeless, lifelong imbecility, wherein
she would be almost at the mercy of hired attendants, helpless to shield herself from any and
every wrong; the right of a man to sacrifice himself absolutely for another if he chooses."

"But she might waken from this mental trance and feel that I had taken a most dishonorable
advantage of her helplessness."

"Yes, you run that risk; but here is one man who will assure her to the contrary, and you would
be sustained by the consciousness of the purest motives. It is that she may waken that I suggest
the step; mark, I do not advise it. As I said at first, I am simply treating you with absolute
confidence and sincerity. If matters go on as they are, I have little or no hope. Mrs. Mayburn
is giving way under the strain, and symptoms of her old disorder are returning. She cannot
watch Mrs. Hilland much longer as she has been doing. Whom will you put in her place? Will
you send Mrs. Hilland to an asylum, with its rules and systems and its unknown attendants?
Moreover, her present tranquil condition may not last. She may become as violent as she now
is gentle. She may gradually regain her intelligence, or it may be restored to her by some
sudden shock. If the mysteries of the physical nature so baffle us, who can predict the future
of a disordered intellect? I have presented the darkest side of the picture; I still think
it has its bright side. She has no hereditary mental weakness to contend with. As it developed
somewhat gradually, it may pass in the same manner. If you should marry her and take her at
once to Europe, change of scene, of life, with your vigilant presence ever near, might become
important factors in the problem. The memory that she was committed to your care has degenerated
into a controlling instinct; but that is far better than nothing. The only real question in
my mind is, Are you willing to make the sacrifice and take the risks? You know the world will
say you married her for her money, and that will be hard on a man like you."

Graham made a gesture of contempt: "That for the world," he said. "Have you broached this subject
to her father and my aunt?"

"Certainly not before speaking to you."

"You then give me your assurance, as a man, that you believe this right, and that it is Grace
Hilland's best chance--indeed, almost her only chance--for recovery?"

"I do most unhesitatingly, and I shall do more. I shall bring from New York an eminent physician
who has made mental disease a study all his life, and he shall either confirm my opinion or
advise you better."

"Do so, Dr. Markham," said Graham, very gravely. "I have incurred risks before in my life,
but none like this. If from any cause Mrs. Hilland should recover memory and full intelligence,
and reproach me for having taken advantage of a condition which, even among savage tribes,
renders the afflicted one sacred, all the fiendish tortures of the Inquisition would be nothing
to what I should suffer. Still, prove to me, prove to her father, that it is her best chance,
and for Grace Hilland I will take even this risk. Please remember there must be no professional
generalities. I must have your solemn written statement that it is for Mrs. Hilland's sake
I adopt the measure."

"So be it," was the reply. "I shall telegraph to Dr. Armand immediately to expect me, and shall
say that I wish him to be prepared to come at once."

"Do so, and consider no question of expense. I am no longer poor, and if I were, I would mortgage
my blood at this juncture."

On the following evening Dr. Armand was almost startled by the vision on the veranda of the
St. John cottage. A silvery-haired woman sat looking placidly at the glowing sunset, with its
light and its rose- hues reflected in her face.

"If ever there was a picture of a glorified saint, there is one," he muttered, as he advanced
and bowed.

She gave him no attention, but with dark eyes, made brilliant by the level rays, she gazed
steadily on the closing day. The physician stole a step or two nearer, and looked as steadily
at her, while his experienced eye detected in all her illuminated beauty the absence of the
higher, more subtle light of reason. Dr. Markham had told him next to nothing about the case,
and had asked him to go and see for himself, impressing him only with the fact that it was
a question of vital importance that he was to aid in deciding; that he must give it his whole
professional skill, and all the necessary time, regardless of expense. The moment he saw Grace,
however, the business aspect of the affair passed from his mind. His ruling passion was aroused,
and he was more than physician--a student--as the great in any calling ever are.

Graham came to the door and recognized instinctively the intent, eagle-eyed man, who merely
nodded and motioned him to approach his patient. Graham did so, and Grace turned her eyes to
him with a timid, questioning glance. He offered her his arm; she rose instantly and took it,
and began walking with him.

"Were you looking at the sunset, Grace?"

She turned upon him the same inquiring eyes, but did not answer.

"Do you not think it very beautiful? Does it not remind you of the sunset you saw on the evening
when I returned from my first battle?"

She shook her head, and only looked perplexed,

"Why, Grace," he continued, as if provoked, "you must remember. I was carried, you know, and
you and Mrs. Mayburn acted as if my scratches were mortal wounds."

She looked frightened at his angry tones, clasped her hands, and with tears in her eyes looked
pleadingly up to him.

"Dear Grace, don't be worried." He now spoke in the gentlest tones, and lifted her hand to
his lips. A quick, evanescent smile illumined her face. She fawned against his shoulder a moment,
placed his hand against her cheek, and then leaned upon his arm as they resumed their walk,
Dr. Armand keeping near them without in the least attracting her attention.

"Grace," resumed Graham, "you must remember. Hilland, Warren, you know."

She dropped his arm, looked wildly around, covered her face with her hands, and shuddered convulsively.

After a moment he said, kindly but firmly, "Grace, dear Grace."

She sprang to him, seized his hand, and casting a look of suspicion at Dr. Armand, drew him away.

A few moments later she was again looking tranquilly at the west, but the light had departed
from the sky and from her face. It had the look of one who saw not, thought and felt not. It
was breathing, living death.

Graham looked at her mournfully for a few moments, and then, with a gesture that was almost
despairing, turned to the physician, who had not lost a single expression.

"Thank you," was that gentleman's first laconic remark; and he dropped into a chair, still
with his eyes on the motionless figure of Grace.

At last he asked, "How long would she maintain that position?"

"I scarcely know," was the sad response; "many hours certainly."

"Please let her retain it till I request you to interfere. The moon is rising almost full,
the evening is warm, and she can take no harm."

The major tottered out on his crutches, and was given his chair, the physician meanwhile being
introduced. Brief and courteous was Dr. Armand's acknowledgment, but he never took his eyes
from his patient. The same was true of his greeting to Mrs. Mayburn; but that good lady's hospitable
instincts soon asserted themselves, and she announced that dinner was ready.

"Take Mrs. Hilland to dinner," said the physician to Graham; "but first introduce me."

The young man approached and said, "Grace." She rose instantly and took his arm. "This is Dr.
Armand, Grace. He has called to see you." She made him a courteous inclination, and then turned
to Graham to see what next was expected of her, but he only led her to the dining-room.

"Gracie, darling, bring me my cushion," said her father, speaking as he had been used to do
when she was a little girl.

She brought it mechanically and arranged it, then stood in expectancy. "That will do, dear;"
and she returned to her seat in silence. Throughout the meal she maintained this silence, although
Dr. Armand broached many topics, avoiding only the name of her husband. Her manner was that
of a little, quiet, well-bred child, who did not understand what was said, and had no interest
in it. The physician's scrutiny did not embarrass her; she had never remembered, much less
forgotten him.

When the meal was over they all returned to the piazza. At the physician's request she was
placed in her old seat, and they all sat down to watch. The moon rose higher and higher, made
her hair more silvery, touched her still face with a strange, ethereal beauty, and threw the
swaying shadow of a spray of woodbine across her motionless figure--so motionless that she
seemed a sculptured rather than a breathing woman.

After a while the old major rose and groaned as he tottered away. Mrs. Mayburn, in uncontrollable
nervous restlessness, soon followed, that she might find relief in household cares. The two
men watched on till hours had passed, and still the lovely image had not stirred. At last Dr.
Armand approached her and said, "Mrs. Hilland."

She rose, and stood coldly aloof. The name, with her prefix, did not trouble her. She had long
been accustomed to that "Hilland," as Graham uttered the word, alone affected her, touching
some last deep chord of memory.

"Mrs. Hilland," the doctor continued, "it is getting late. Do you not think you had better retire?"

She looked at him blankly, and glanced around as if in search of some one.

"I am here, Grace," said Graham, emerging from the doorway.

She came to him at once, and he led her to Mrs. Mayburn, kissing her hand, and receiving, in
return, her strange, brief, fawning caress.

"I would like to know the history of Mrs. Hilland's malady from the beginning," said Dr. Armand,
when Graham returned.

"I cannot go over it again," replied Graham, hoarsely. "Dr. Markham can tell you about all,
and I will answer any questions. Your room is ready for you here, where Dr. Markham will join
you presently. I must bid you good-night;" and he strode away.

But as he passed under the apple-tree and recalled all that had occurred there, he was so overcome
that once more he leaned against it for support.

CHAPTEE XXXIX

MARRIED UNCONSCIOUSLY

There was no sleep for Graham that night, for he knew that two skilful men were consulting
on a question beyond any that had agitated his heart before. As he paced the little parlor
with restless steps, Aunt Sheba's ample form filled the doorway, and in her hands was a tray
bearing such coffee as only she knew how to brew.

"Thanks, Aunt Sheba," he said, motioning to a table, without pausing in his distracted walk.

She put down the tray, retreated hesitatingly, and then began: "Dear Mas'r Graham, my ole heart
jes aches for yer. But don't yer be so cast down, mas'r; de good Lord knows it all, and I'se
a-prayin' for yer and de lubly Miss Grace night and day."

He was so utterly miserable that he was grateful for even this homely sympathy, and he took
the old woman's hand in his as he said kindly, "Pray on, then, good old aunty, if it's any
comfort to you. It certainly can do no harm."

"Oh, Mas'r Graham, you dunno, you dunno. Wid all yer wise knowin' yer dunno. You'se all--good
Mis' Mayburn, de ole major, an' all--are in de dark land ob unbelievin', like poor Missy Grace.
She doesn't know how you'se all tink about her an' lub her; needer does you know how de good
Lord tinks about you and lubs you. You guv me my liberty; you guv what I tinks a sight more
on; you'se been kind to de poor old slave dat los' all her chillen in de weary days dat's gone.
I'se a 'memberin' yer all de time. You hab no faith, Mas'r Graham, and poor ole Aunt Sheba
mus' hab faith for yer. An' so I will. I'se a wrastlin' wid de Lord for yer all de time, an'
I'se a-gwine to wrastle on till I sees yer an' Missy Grace an' all comin' inter de light;"
and she threw her apron over her head, and went sobbing away.

He paused for a moment when she left him, touched deeply by the strong, homely, human sympathy
and gratitude of the kind old soul who fed him--as he never forgot--when he was a fugitive
in a hostile land. That she had manifested her feeling after what he deemed her own ignorant,
superstitious fashion was nothing. It was the genuine manifestation of the best human traits
that touched him--pure gems illumining a nature otherwise so clouded and crude.

Late at night footsteps approached, and the two physicians entered. "I first permitted Dr.
Armand to form his own impressions, and since have told him everything," said Dr. Markham,
"and he strongly inclines to my view. Realizing the gravity of the case, however, he has consented
to remain a day or two longer. We will give you no hasty opinion, and you shall have time on
your part to exercise the most deliberate judgment."

Dr. Armand confirmed his associate's words, and added, "We will leave you now to the rest you
must need sorely. Let me assure you, however, that I do not by any means consider Mrs. Hilland's
case hopeless, and that I am strongly impressed with the belief that her recovery must come
through you. A long train of circumstances has given you almost unbounded influence over her,
as you enabled me to see this evening. It would be sad to place such a glorious creature in
the care of strangers, for it might involve serious risk should she regain her memory and intelligence
with no strong, sympathetic friend, acquainted with her past, near her. I am inclined to think
that what is now little more than an instinct will again develop into a memory, and that the
fact that she was committed to your care will fully reconcile her to the marriage--indeed,
render her most grateful for it, if capable of understanding the reasons which led to it. If
further observation confirms my present impressions, I and Dr. Markham will plainly state our
opinions to her father and Mrs. Mayburn. As my colleague has said, you must comprehend the
step in all its bearings. It is one that I would not ask any man to take. I now think that
the probabilities are that it would restore Mrs. Hilland to health eventually. A year of foreign
travel might bring about a gradual and happy change."

"Take time to satisfy yourselves, gentlemen, and give me your decision as requested. Then you
have my permission to give your opinions to Major St. John."

Within a week this was done, and the poor old man bowed his head on Graham's shoulder and wept
aloud in his gratitude. Mrs. Mayburn also, wiping away her tears, faltered, "You know, Alford,
how I schemed for this marriage years ago; you remember my poor blind strategy on that June
day, do you not? How little I thought it would take place under circumstances like these! And
yet, I've thought of it of late often, very often. I could not go on much longer, for I am
old and feeble, and it just broke my heart to think of Grace, our Grace, passing into the hands
of some hired and indifferent stranger or strangers. I believe she will recover and reward
your sacrifice."

"It is no sacrifice on my part, aunt, except she wakens only to reproach me."

"Well, devotion, then; and little sense she'd ever have," concluded the old lady, after her
own brusque fashion, "if she does not fall on her knees and bless you. You could now take better
care of her than I, for she trusts and obeys you implicitly. She is docile and gentle with
me, but often strangely inattentive. She would be still more so with a stranger; and the idea
of some strong, unfeeling hands forcing her into the routine of her life!" Thus almost completely
was removed from his mind the unspeakable dread lest he was taking an unfair advantage of helplessness.
He fully recognized also that the ordeal for himself would be a terrible one--that it would
be the fable of Tantalus repeated for weeks, months, perhaps for years, or for life. The unfulfilled
promise of happiness would ever be before him. His dark- visaged rivals, Grief and Death, would
jeer and mock at him from a face of perfect beauty. In a blind, vindictive way he felt that
his experience was the very irony of fate. He could clasp the perfect material form of a woman
to his heart, and at the same time his heart be breaking for what could not be seen or touched.

The question, however, was decided irrevocably. He knew that he could not leave helpless Grace
Hilland to the care of strangers, and that there was no place for him in the world but at her
side; and yet it was with something of the timidity and hesitation of a lover that he asked
her, as they paced a shady garden-walk, "Grace, dear Grace, will you marry me?"

His voice was very low and gentle, and yet she turned upon him a startled, inquiring look. But
will not accept a penny for serving a comrade, a friend with a crush the glass. And he's drunk
with the great lady, have tasted the wine together sadness and consolation have touched their
cups full of pain. Guess her confused feelings with delicacy high lady, and did not insist, resave the
ticket. He speaks English, and his companion, with visible annoyance, making the truck a large cardboard
box, crown admired and gives it to the old.

- For your child to the tomb of the hero.

And majestic away in spite of his old age, walking down the platform like a gallery of the court.

The
employee is at the bottom of the car, his arms held by the box, suffering
shame unable to hide his tears, which slide up the hard mustache.

-
Madame la Duchesse!

... Ah, madame!

THE FOUR SONS OF EVA

I

I was going to finish the harvest in the
great room Argentina called "The National."

The men from of all parties to reap the harvest fleeing the crowding in the homes of the laborers
and on premises where the machines were kept till with bales of alfalfa dry. Preferred to sleep
outdoors, taking a pillow sack containing all worldly goods and had accompanied them in their incessant
pilgrimages.

There were men from almost every country in Europe. Some eternal wanderers had been launched
to spread the whole earth to quench their thirst for adventure, and were temporarily in the pampas of
Argentina, just a few months, before transferring his restless existence to the Australia or
the Cape of Good Hope. Other, simple peasants, Spanish or Italian had crossed the Atlantic, attracted
by the great novelty of winning six pesos daily for the same work that his country was paid
a few pennies. That Graham
was with her and smiled reassuringly seemed sufficient, while the presence of her old colored
nurse, who in some dim way was connected with her past, gave also an additional sense of security.

As time elapsed and they began their wanderings abroad, it seemed to Graham that his wife was
beginning life over again, as a very little quiet child would observe the strange and unaccountable
phenomena about it. Instead of her fixed vacancy of gaze, her eyes began to turn from object
to object with a dawning yet uncomprehending interest. He in simplest words sought to explain
and she to listen, though it was evident that their impression was slight indeed. Still there
was perceptible progress, and when in his tireless experimenting he began to bring before her
those things which would naturally interest a child, he was encouraged to note that they won
a larger and more pleased attention. A garden full of flowers, a farmyard with its sleek, quiet
cattle, a band of music, a broad, funny pantomime, were far more to her than Westminster Abbey
or St. Paul's. Later, the variety, color, and movement of a Paris boulevard quite absorbed
her attention, and she followed one object after another with much the same expression that
might be seen on the face of a little girl scarcely three years old. This infantile expression,
in contrast with her silver hair and upon her mature and perfect features, was pathetic to
the last degree, and yet Graham rejoiced with exceeding joy. With every conscious glance and
inquiring look the dawn of hope brightened. He was no longer left alone in the awful solitude
of living death. The beautiful form was no longer like a deserted home. It now had a tenant,
even though it seemed but the mind of a little child. The rays of intelligence sent out were
feeble indeed, but how much better than the blank darkness that had preceded! Something like
happiness began to soften and brighten the husband's face as he took his child-wife here and
there. He made the long galleries of the Louvre and of Italy her picture-books, and while recognizing
that she was pleased with little more than color, form, and action--that the sublime, equally
with the vicious and superstitious meanings of the great masters, were hidden--he was nevertheless
cheered and made more hopeful by the fact that she was pleased and observant--that she began
to single out favorites; and before these he would let her stand as long as she chose, and
return to them when so inclined.

She had lost the power of reading a line. She did not know even her letters; and these he began
to teach her with unflagging zeal and patience. How the mysterious problem would end he could
not tell. It might be that by kindling a little light the whole past would become illumined;
it might be that he would have to educate her over again; but be the future what it would,
the steadfast principle of devotion to her became more fixed, and to care for her the supreme
law of his being.

From the time of his first message to them he had rarely lost an opportunity to send a letter
to the anxious ones at home, and their replies abounded in solicitous, grateful words. Dr.
Markham often called, and rubbed his hands with increasing self-gratulation over the success
of his bold measure, especially as encomiums on his sagacity had been passed by the great Dr.
Armand.

Nearly a year had passed, and Graham and his wife, after their saunterings over the Continent,
were spending the summer in the Scottish Highlands. They sailed on the lochs, fished from their
banks, and climbed the mountain passes on little shaggy ponies that were Scotch in their stubbornness
and unflinching endurance. Grace had become even companionable in her growing intelligence,
and in the place of her silent, inquiring glances there were sometimes eager, childlike questionings.

Of late, however, Graham noted the beginnings of another change. With growing frequency she
passed her hand over her brow, that was contracted in perplexity. Sometimes she would look
at him curiously, at Jinny, and at the unfamiliar scenes of her environment, then shake her
head as if she could not comprehend it all. Speedily, however, she would return with the zest
of a quiet little girl to the pleasures and tasks that he unweariedly provided. But Graham
grew haggard and sleepless in his vigilance, for he believed that the time of her awakening
was near.

One day, while sailing on a loch, they were overtaken by a heavy storm and compelled to run
before it, and thus to land at no little distance from their inn. Grace showed much alarm at
the dashing waves and howling tempest. Nor was her fright at the storm wholly that of an unreasoning
child. Its fury seemed to arouse and shock her, and while she clung to Graham's hand, she persisted
in sitting upright and looking about, as if trying to comprehend it all. After landing they
had a long, fatiguing ride in the darkness, and she was unusually silent. On reaching her room
she glanced around as if all was unfamiliar and incomprehensible. Graham had a presentiment
that the hour was near, and he left her wholly to the care of her old colored nurse, but almost
immediately, from excessive weariness, she sank into a deep slumber.

Her lethargy lasted so late in the following day that he was alarmed, fearing lest her old
symptoms were returning. With anxious, hollow eyes, he watched and waited, and at last she
awoke and looked at him with an expression that he had longed for through many weary months,
and yet now it terrified him.

"Alford--Mr. Graham," she began, in deep surprise.

"Hush, dear Grace. You have been very ill."

"Yes, but where am I? What has happened?"

"Very much; but you are better now. Here is Jinny, your old nurse, who took care of you as
a child."

The old colored woman came in, and, as instructed, said: "Yes, honey, I'se tooken care ob you
since you was a baby, and I'se nebber lef' you."

"Everything looks very strange. Why, Alford, I had a long, sad talk with you but a short time
since in the library, and you were so kind and unselfish!"

"Yes, Grace; we spoke frankly to each other, but you have been very ill since then, worse than
ever before. At your father's request and Dr. Markham's urgent counsel, I brought you to Europe.
It was said to be your only chance."

"But where is Mrs. Mayburn?"

"She is at home taking care of your father. Her old sickness threatened to return. She could
take care of you no longer, and you needed constant care."

A slow, deep flush overspread her face and even her neck as she faltered: "And--and--has no
one else been with me but Jinny?"

"No one else except myself. Grace, dear Grace, I am your husband. I was married to you in the
presence of your father, Mrs. Mayburn, and your family physician."

"Now long since?" she asked, in a constrained voice.

"About a year ago."

"Have we been abroad ever since?"

"Yes, and you have been steadily improving. You were intrusted to my care, and there came a
time when I must either be faithful to that trust, or place you in the hands of strangers.
You were helpless, dear Grace."

"Evidently," in the same low, constrained tone. "Could--could you not have fulfilled your trust
in some other way?"

"Your father, your second mother, and your physician thought not."

"Still--" she began, hesitated, and again came that deep, deep flush.

"For your sake, Grace, I incurred the risk of this awful moment."

She turned, and saw an expression which brought tears to her eyes. "I cannot misjudge you,"
she said slowly; "the past forbids that. But I cannot understand it, I cannot understand it
at all."

"Perhaps you never will, dear Grace; I took that risk also to save your life and mind."

"My mind?"

"Yes, your mind. If, in recalling the past, the memory of which has returned, you can preserve
sufficient confidence in me to wait till all is clear and explained, I shall be profoundly
grateful. I foresaw the possibility of this hour; I foresaw it as the chief danger and trial
of my life; and I took the risk of its consequences for your sake because assured by the highest
authority that it was your one chance for escape, not from death, but from a fate worse than
death, which also would have removed you from my care--indeed the care of all who loved you.
I have prepared myself for this emergency as well as I could. Here are letters from your father,
Mrs. Mayburn, Dr. Markham, and Dr. Armand, one of the most eminent authorities in the world
on brain diseases. But after all I must be judged by your woman's heart, and so stand or fall.
I now have but one request, or entreaty rather, to make--that you do not let all the efforts
we have made in your behalf be in vain. Can you not calmly and gradually receive the whole
truth? There must be no more relapses, or they will end in black ruin to us all. Now that you
can think for yourself, your slightest wish shall be my law. Jinny, remain with your mistress."

He lifted her passive hand to his lips, passed into their little parlor, and closed the door.
Grace turned to her nurse, and in low, almost passionate utterance, said: "Now tell me all."

"Lor' bress you, Missy Grace, it 'ud take a right smart time to tell yer all. When de big doctors
an' all de folks say you'se got to hab strangers take care ob you or go ter a'sylum, and arter
all you'd git wuss, Mas'r Graham he guv in, and said he'd take care ob you, and dey all bress
'im and tank 'im, and couldn't say 'nuff. Den he took you 'cross de big ocean--golly I how
big it be--jes' as de doctor said; an' nebber hab I seed sich lub, sich 'votion in a moder
as Mas'r Graham hab had fer you. He had to take care ob you like a little chile, an' he was
teachin' you how to read like a little chile when, all on a suddint, you wakes up an' knows
ebryting you'se forgotten. But de part you doesn't know is de part mos' wuth knowin'. No woman
eber had sich a husban' as Mas'r Graham, an' no chile sich a moder. 'Clar' ter grashus ef I
b'lieve he's ebber slep' a wink wid his watchin' an' a-tinkin' what he could do fer you."

"But, Jinny, I'm not ill; I never felt stronger in my life."

"Laws, Missy Grace, dar's been a mirackle. You'se strong 'nuff 'cept your mine's been off wisitin'
somewhar. Golly! you jes' git up an' let me dress you, an' I'll show yer de han'somest woman
in de worl'. All yer's got ter do now is jes' be sensible like, an' yer won't have yer match."

Grace cast an apprehensive look toward the door of the parlor in which was her husband, and
then said hurriedly: "Yes, dress me quick. Oh, heavens! how much I have to think about, to
realize!"

"Now, honey dear, you jes' keep cool. Don't go an' fly right off de handle agin, or Mas'r Graham'll
blow his brains out. Good Lor', how dat man do look sometimes! An' yet often, when he was pintin'
out yer letters ter yer, or showin' yer pearty tings, like as you was a chile, he look so happy
and gentle like, dat I say he jes' like a moder."

Grace was touched, and yet deep, deep in her soul she felt that a wrong had been done her,
no matter what had been the motives. Jinny had no such fine perceptions, but with a feminine
tact which runs down through the lowliest natures, she chose one of Grace's quietest, yet most
becoming costumes, and would not let her go to the glass till arrayed to the dusky woman's
intense satisfaction. Then she led her mistress to the mirror and said: "Look dar, honey! All
de picters you'se eber seen can't beat dat!" and Grace gazed long and fixedly at the lovely
creature that gazed back with troubled and bewildered eyes.

"Was--was I like that when--when he married me?"

"Yes, an' no, honey. You only look like a picter of a woman den--a berry pearty picter, but
nothin' but a picter arter all. Mas'r Graham hab brought yer ter life."

With another lingering, wondering glance at herself, she turned away and said: "Leave me, now,
Jinny; I wish to be alone."

The woman hesitated, and was about to speak, but Grace waved her away imperiously, and sat
down to the letters Graham had given her. She read and re-read them. They confirmed his words.
She was a wife: her husband awaited her but a few feet away--her husband, and she had never
dreamed of marrying again. The past now stood out luminous to her, and Warren Hilland was its
centre. But another husband awaited her--one whom she had never consciously promised "to love,
honor, and obey." As a friend she could worship him, obey him, die for him; but as her husband--how
could she sustain that mysterious bond which merges one life in another? She was drawn toward
him by every impulse of gratitude. She saw that, whether misled or not, he had been governed
by the best of motives--nay, more, by the spirit of self- sacrifice in its extreme manifestation--that
he had been made to believe that it was her only chance for health and life. Still, in her
deepest consciousness he was but Alford Graham, the friend most loved and trusted, whom she
had known in her far distant home, yet not her husband. How could she go to him, what could
she say to him, in their new relations that seemed so unreal?

She trembled to leave him longer in the agony of suspense; but her limbs refused to support
her, and her woman's heart shrank with a strange and hitherto unknown fear.

There was a timid knock at the door.

"Come in, Alford," she said, tremblingly.

He stood before her haggard, pale, and expectant.

"Alford," she said, sadly, "why did you not let me die?"

"I could not," he replied, desperately. "As I told you, there is a limit to every man's strength.
I see it all in your face and manner-- what I feared, what I warned Dr. Markham against. Listen
to me. I shall take you home at once. You are well. You will not require my further care, and
you need never see my face again."

"And you, Alford?" she faltered.

"Do not ask about me. Beyond the hour when I place you in your father's arms I know nothing.
I have reached my limit. I have made the last sacrifice of which I am capable. If you go back
as you are now, you are saved from a fate which it seemed to me you would most shrink from
could you know it--the coarse, unfeeling touch and care of strangers who could have treated
you in your helplessness as they chose. You might have regained your reason years hence, only
to find that those who loved you were broken-hearted, lost, gone. They are now well and waiting
for you. Here are their letters, written from week to week and breathing hope and cheer. Here
is the last one from your father, written in immediate response to mine. In it he says, 'My
hand trembles, but it is more from joy than age.' You were gaining steadily, although only
as a child's intelligence develops. He writes, 'I shall have my little Grace once more, and
see her mind grow up into her beautiful form.'"

She bent her head low to hide the tears that were falling fast as she faltered: "Was it wholly
self-sacrifice when you married me?"

"Yes--in the fear of this hour, the bitterest of my life--yes. It has followed me like a spectre
through every waking and sleeping hour. Please make the wide distinction. My care for you,
the giving up of my life for you, is nothing. That I should have done in any case, as far as
I could. But with my knowledge of your nature and your past, I could not seem to take advantage
of your helplessness without an unspeakable dread. When shown by the best human skill that
I could thus save you, or at least ensure that you would ever have gentle, sympathetic care,
I resolved to risk the last extremity of evil to myself for your sake. Now you have the whole
truth."

She rose and came swiftly to him--for he had scarcely entered the room in his wish to show
her respect--and putting her arm around his neck, while she laid her head upon his breast,
said gently and firmly: "The sacrifice shall not be all on your side. I have never consciously
promised to be your wife, but now, as far as my poor broken spirit will permit, I do promise
it. But be patient with me, Alford. Do not expect what I have not the power to give. I can
only promise that all there is left of poor Grace Hilland's heart--if aught--shall be yours."

Then for the first time in his life the strong man gave way. He disengaged her so hastily as
to seem almost rough, and fell forward on the couch unconscious. The long strain of years had
culminated in the hour he so dreaded, and in the sudden revulsion caused by her words nature
gave way.

Almost frantic with terror, Grace summoned her servant, and help from the people of the inn.
Fortunately an excellent English physician was stopping at the same house, and he was speedily
at work. Graham recovered, only to pass into muttering delirium, and the burden of his one
sad refrain was: "If she should never forgive me!"

"Great heavens, madam! what has he done?" asked the matter-of-fact Englishman.

What a keen probe that question was to the wife as she sat watching through the long, weary
night! In an agony of self-reproach she recalled all that he had done for her and hers in all
the years, and now in her turn she entreated him to live; but he was as unconscious as she
had been in the blank past. No wooing, no pleading, could have been so potent as his unconscious
form, his strength broken at last in her service.

"O God!" she cried--forgetting in her anguish that she had no God-- "have I been more cruel
than all the war? Have I given him the wound that shall prove fatal--him who saved Warren's
life, my own, my reason, and everything that a woman holds dear?"

Graham's powerful and unvitiated nature soon rallied, however, and under the skilful treatment
the fever within a few days gave place to the first deep happiness he had ever known. Grace
was tender, considerate, her own former self, and with something sweeter to him than self-sacrifice
in her eyes; and he gave himself up to an unspeakable content.

It was she who wrote the home letters that week, and a wondrous tale they told to the two old
people, who subsisted on foreign news even more than on Aunt Sheba's delicate cookery.

Graham was soon out again, but he looked older and more broken than his wife, who seemingly
had passed by age into a bloom that could not fade. She decided that for his sake they would
pass the winter in Italy, and that he should show her again as a woman what he had tried to
interest her in as a child. Her happiness, although often deeply shadowed, grew in its quiet
depths. Graham had too much tact to be an ardent lover. He was rather her stanch friend, her
genial but most considerate companion. His powerful human love at last kindled a quiet flame
on the hearth of her own heart that had so long been cold, and her life was warmed and revived
by it. He also proved in picture galleries and cathedrals that he had seen much when he was
abroad beyond wild mountain regions and wilder people, and her mind, seemingly strengthened
by its long sleep, followed his vigorous criticism with daily increasing zest.

The soft, sun-lighted air of Italy appeared to have a healing balm for both, and even to poor
Grace there came a serenity which she had not known since the "cloud in the South" first cast
its shadow over her distant hearth.

To Graham at last there had come a respite from pain and fear, a deep content. His inner life
had been too impoverished, and his nature too chastened by stern and bitter experience, for
him to crave gayety and exuberant sentiment in his wife. Her quiet face, in which now was the
serenity of rest, and not the tranquillity of death in life, grew daily more lovely to him;
and he was not without his human pride as he saw the beauty-loving Italians look wonderingly
at her. She in turn was pleased to observe how he impressed cultivated people with his quiet
power, with a presence that such varied experiences had combined to create. Among fine minds,
men and women are more truly felt than seen. We meet people of the plainest appearance and
most unostentatious manner, and yet without effort they compel us to recognize their superiority,
while those who seek to impress others with their importance are known at once to be weak and
insignificant.

It was also a source of deep gratification to Grace that now, since her husband had obtained
rest of mind, he turned naturally to healthful business interests. Her own affairs, of which
he had charge in connection with Hilland's lawyer, were looked after and explained fully to
her; and his solicitude for Henry Anderson's success led to an exchange of letters with increasing
frequency. Much business relating to the Virginia plantation was transacted on the shores of
the Mediterranean.

Grace sought to quiet her compunctions at leaving her father and Mrs. Mayburn so long by frequent
letters written in her dear old style, by cases of Italian wines, delicate and rare; exquisite
fabrics of the loom, and articles of vertu; and between the letters and the gifts the old people
held high carnival after their quaint fashion all that winter.

The soft Italian days lapsed one after another, like bright smiles on the face of nature; but
at last there came one on which Grace leaned her head upon her husband's shoulder and whispered,
"Alford, take me home, please."

Had he cared for her before, when she was as helpless as a little child? Jinny, in recalling
that journey and in dilating on the wonders of her experience abroad, by which she invariably
struck awe into the souls of Aunt Sheba and Iss, would roll up her eyes, and turn outward the
palms of her hands, as she exclaimed, "Good Lor', you niggers, how I make you 'prehen' Mas'r
Graham's goin's on from de night he sez, sez he ter me, 'Pack up, Jinny; we'se a-gwine straight
home.' Iss 'clares dat Mas'r Graham's a ter'ble soger wid his long, straight sword and pistol,
an' dat he's laid out more 'Federates dan he can shake a stick at. Well, you'd nebber b'lieve
he'd a done wuss dan say, 'How d'ye' to a 'Federate ef yer'd seen how he 'volved roun' Missy
Grace. He wouldn't let de sun shine on her, nor de win' blow near her, and eberybody had ter
git right up an' git ef she eben wanted ter sneeze. On de ship he had eberybody, from de cap'n
to de cabin-boys, a waitin' on her. Dey all said we hab a mighty quiet v'yage, but Lor' bress
yer! it was all 'long ob Mas'r Graham. He wouldn't let no wabes run ter pitch his darlin' roun'.
Missy Grace, she used ter sit an' larf an' larf at 'im--bress her dear heart, how much good
it do me to hear de honey larf like her ole dear self! Her moder used ter be mighty keerful
on her, but 'twan't nothin' 'pared ter Mas'r Graham's goin's on."

Jinny had never heard of Baron Munchausen, but her accounts of foreign experiences and scenes
were much after the type of that famous raconteur; and by each repetition her stories seemed
to make a portentous growth. There was, however, a residuum of truth in all her marvels. The
event which she so vaguely foreshadowed by ever- increasing clouds of words took place. In
June, when the nests around the cottage were full of little birds, there was also, in a downy,
nest-like cradle, a miniature of sweet Grace Graham; and Jinny thenceforth was the oracle of
the kitchen.

CHAPTER XL

RITA ANDERSON

The belief of children that babies are brought from heaven seems often verified by the experiences
that follow their advent. And truly the baby at the St. John cottage was a heavenly gift, even
to the crotchety old major, whom it kept awake at night by its unseasonable complaints of the
evils which it encountered in spite of Grandma Mayburn, faithful old Aunt Sheba, who pleaded
to be its nurse, and the gentle mother, who bent over it with a tenderness new and strange
even to her heart.

She could laugh now, and laugh she would, when Graham, with a trepidation never felt in battle,
took the tiny morsel of humanity, and paraded up and down the library. Lying back on the sofa
in one of her dainty wrappers, she would cry, "Look at him, papa; look at that grim cavalryman,
and think of his leading a charge!"

"Well, Gracie, dear," the old major would reply, chuckling at his well-worn joke, "the colonel
was only a cavalryman, you know. He's not up in infantry tactics." To
remedy this lack, he wore goggles, which in Brazil and Portugal called cangalhas. Always had
pinned their ears, and when they did not need to see, is the away from the eyes and the rose
resting on the forehead, which was not pretty. So they took away Rafaela cangalhas made and that,
instead of them, spent monocle. Everything, therefore, had contributed to the look fashionable,
dapper and worthy of an old retired diplomat.

In his rare intelligence and deep affection that had inspired the aforementioned due Rafaela triumphs,
but also due to their lightness, full of sincerity and faith based on altruism. This requires explanation,
and I will give it.

Instantly she raised her eyes, brimming with tears, to his, and faltered, "Thank you, Alford";
and she clasped the child almost convulsively to her breast, proving that there was one love
which no other could obliterate.

"That's right, dear Grace. Link her name with the memory of Warren. She will thus make you
happier, and it's my wish."

The conclave ended at once. The old major took off his spectacles to wipe his eyes, and Mrs.
Mayburn stole away.

From that hour little Hilda pushed sorrow from Grace's heart with her baby hands, as nothing
had ever done before, and the memory of the lost husband ceased to be a shadow in the background.
The innocent young life was associated with his, and loved the more intensely.

Graham had spoken from the impulse of a generous nature, too large to feel the miserable jealousies
that infest some minds; but he had spoken more wisely than he knew. Thereafter there was a
tenderness in Grace's manner toward him which he had never recognized before. He tasted a happiness
of which he had never dreamed, alloyed only by the thought that his treasures were mortal and
frail. But as the little one thrived, and his wife bloomed into the most exquisite beauty seen
in this world, that of young and happy motherhood, he gave himself up to his deep content,
believing that fate at last was appeased. The major grew even hilarious, and had his morning
and evening parades, as he called them, when the baby, in its laces and soft draperies, was
brought for his inspection. Mrs. Mayburn, with all the accumulated maternal yearnings of her
heart satisfied, would preside at the ceremony. Grace, happy and proud, would nod and smile
over her shoulder at her husband, who made a poor pretence of reading his paper, while the
old veteran deliberately adjusted his spectacles and made comments that in their solemn drollery
and military jargon were irresistible to the household that could now laugh so easily. The
young life that had come had brought a new life to them all, and the dark shadows of the past
shrank further and further into the background.

But they were there--all the sad mysteries of evil that had crushed the mother's heart. Once
they seemed to rush forward and close around her. Little Hilda was ill and Grace in terror.
But Dr. Markham speedily satisfied her that it was a trivial matter, and proved it to be so
by his remedies. The impression of danger remained, however, and she clung to her little idol
more closely than ever; and this was true of all.

Time sped tranquilly on. Hilda grew in endearing ways, and began to have knowing looks and
smiles for each. Her preference for her grandfather with his great frosty eyebrows pleased
the old gentleman immensely. It was both droll and touching to observe how one often so irascible
would patiently let her take off his spectacles, toy with and often pull his gray locks, and
rumple his old-fashioned ruffles, which he persisted in wearing on state occasions. It was
also silently noted that the veteran never even verged toward profanity in the presence of
the child.

Each new token of intelligence was hailed with a delight of which natures coarse or blunted
never know. The Wise Men of old worshipped the Babe in the manger, and sadly defective or perverted
in their organizations are those who do not see something divine in a little innocent child.

Henry and Rita Anderson, at the urgent solicitation of Graham and his wife, came on in the
autumn to make a visit, and, by a very strange coincidence, Graham's favorite captain, a manly,
prosperous fellow, happened to be visiting him at the time. By a still more remarkable conjunction
of events, he at once shared in his former colonel's admiration of the dark-eyed Southern girl.
She was very shy, distant, and observant at first, for this fortuitous captain was a Northerner.
But the atmosphere of the two cottages was not in the least conducive to coolness and reserve.
The wood fires that crackled on the hearth, or something else, thawed perceptibly the spirited
girl. Moreover, there were walks, drives, horseback excursions, daily; and Iss shone forth
in a glory of which he had never dreamed as a plantation hand. There were light steps passing
to and fro, light laughter, cheery, hearty voices--in which the baby's crowing and cooing were
heard as a low, sweet chord--music and whist to the major's infinite consent. The shadows shrank
further into the background than ever before. No one thought of or heeded them now; but they
were there, cowering and waiting.

Only Aunt Sheba was ill at ease. Crooning her quaint lullabies to the baby, she would often
lift her eyes to heaven and sigh, "De good Lord hab marcy on dem! Dey's all a drinkin' at de
little shaller pools dat may dry up any minit. It's all ob de earth; it's all ob tings, nothin'
but tings which de eyes can see and de han's can touch. De good Lord lift dar eyes from de
earth widout takin' dat mos' dear!"

But no one thought of old Aunt Sheba except as a faithful creature born to serve them in her
humble way.

The Northern captain soon proved that he had not a little Southern dash and ardor, and he had
already discovered that his accidental visit to Graham was quite providential, as he had been
taught to regard events that promised favorably. He very significantly asked Colonel Anderson
to take a gallop with him one morning, but they had not galloped far before he halted and plumply
asked the brother's permission, as the present representative of her father, to pay his addresses
to Rita. Now Captain Windom had made a good impression on the colonel, which Graham, in a very
casual way, had been at pains to strengthen; and he came back radiant over one point gained.
But he was more afraid of that little Virginian girl than he had ever been of all her Southern
compatriots. He felt that he must forego his cavalry tactics and open a regular siege; but
she, with one flash of her mirthful eyes, saw through it all, laughed over it with Grace, whom
from worshipping as a saint she now loved as a sister. Amid the pauses in their mutual worship
of the baby, they talked the captain over in a way that would have made his ears tingle could
he have heard them; but Grace, underneath all her good-natured criticism, seconded her husband's
efforts with a mature woman's tact. Rita should be made happy in spite of all her little perversities
and Southern prejudices, and yet the hands that guided and helped her should not be seen.

The captain soon abandoned his siege tactics, in which he was ill at ease, and resumed his
old habit of impetuous advances in which Graham had trained him. Time was growing short. His
visit and hers would soon be over. He became so downright and desperately in earnest that the
little girl began to be frightened. It was no laughing matter now, and Grace looked grave over
the affair. Then Rita began to be very sorry for him, and at last, through Graham's unwonted
awkwardness and inattention to his guests, the captain and Rita were permitted to take a different
road from the others on an equestrian party. When they appeared the captain looked as if he
were returning from a successful charge, and Rita was as shy and blushing as one of the wild
roses of her native hills. She fled to Grace's room, as if it were the only refuge left in
the world, and her first breathless words were: "I haven't promised anything--that is, nothing
definite. I said he might come and see me in Virginia and talk to papa about it, and I'd think
it over, and--and--Well, he was so impetuous and earnest! Good heavens! I thought the Northern
people were cold, but that captain fairly took away my breath. You never heard a man talk so."

Grace had put down the baby, and now stood with her arm around her friend, smiling the sweetest
encouragement.

"I'll explain it all to you, Miss Rita," began Graham's deep voice, as he advanced from a recess.

"Oh, the powers! are you here?" and she started back and looked at him with dismay.

"Yes," said he, "and I merely wished to explain that my friend Windom was in the cavalry, and
from much fighting with your brave, impetuous hard-riders we gradually fell into their habits."

"I half believe that you are laughing at me--that you are in league with him, and have been
all along."

"Yes, Rita, noble little woman, truest friend at the time of my bitter need, I am in league
with any man worthy of you--that is, as far as a man can be who seeks to make you happy;" and
he took her hand and held it warmly.

"Here come my silly tears again," and she dashed them to right and left. Then, looking up at
him shyly, she faltered, "I must admit that I'm a little bit happy."

"I vowed you should be, all through that dark ride on which you led me away from cruel enemies;
and every flower you have placed on the grave of that noble man that Grace and I both loved
has added strength to my vow."

"Oh, Rita, Rita, darling!" cried Grace, clasping her in close embrace; "do you think we ever
forget it?"

"Can you think, Rita, that in memory of that never-to-be-forgotten day I would give Captain
Windom the opportunities he has enjoyed if I did not think he would make you happy? One cannot
live and fight side by side with a man for years and not know his mettle. He was lion-like
in battle, but he will ever be gentleness itself toward you. Best of all, he will appreciate
you, and I should feel like choking any fellow who didn't."

"But indeed, indeed, I haven't promised anything; I only said--"

"No matter what you said, my dear, so long as the captain knows. We are well assured that your
every word and thought and act were true and maidenly. Let Windom visit you and become acquainted
with your father. The more you all see of him the more you will respect him."

"You are wonderfully reassuring," said the young girl, "and I learned to trust you long ago.
Indeed, after your course toward Henry, I believe I'd marry any one you told me to. But to
tell the truth, I have felt, for the last few hours, as if caught up by a whirlwind and landed
I don't know where. No one ever need talk to me any more about cold-blooded Northerners. Well,
I must land at the dinner-table before long, and so must go and dress. It's proper to eat under
the circumstances, isn't it?"

"I expect to," said Graham, laughing, "and I'm more in love than you are."

"Little wonder!" with a glance of ardent admiration toward Grace, and she whisked out. In a
moment she returned and said, "Now, Colonel, I must be honest, especially as I think of your
vow in the dark woods. I am very, very happy;" and then in a meteoric brilliancy of smiles,
tears, and excitement, she vanished.

On the day following Captain Windom marched triumphantly away, and his absence proved to Rita
that the question was settled, no matter what she had said when having little breath left to
say anything.

She and her brother followed speedily, and Graham accompanied them, to superintend in person
the setting up of a beautiful marble column which he and Grace had designed for Hilland's grave.

It was a time of sad, yet chastened, memories to both. In their consciousness Hilland had ceased
to exist. He was but a memory, cherished indeed with an indescribable honor and love--still
only a memory. There was an immense difference, however, in the thoughts of each as they reverted
to his distant grave. Graham felt that he had there closed a chapter of his life--a chapter
that he would ever recall with the deep melancholy that often broods in the hearts of the happiest
of men whose natures are large enough to be truly impressed by life's vicissitudes. Grace knew
that her girlhood, her former self, was buried in that grave, and with her early lover had
vanished forever. Graham had, in a sense, raised her from the dead. His boundless love and
self-sacrifice, his indomitable will, had created for her new life, different from the old,
yet full of tranquil joys, new hopes and interests. He had not rent the new from the old, but
had bridged with generous acts the existing chasm. He was doing all within his power, not jealously
to withdraw her thoughts from that terrible past, but to veil its more cruel and repulsive
features with flowers, laurel wreaths, and sculptured marble; and in her heart, which had been
dead, but into which his love had breathed a new life, she daily blessed him with a deeper
affection.

He soon returned to her from Virginia, and by his vivid descriptions made real to her the scenes
he had visited. He told her how Rita and her brother had changed the plot in which slept the
National and the Confederate officer into a little garden of blossoming greenery; how he had
arranged with Colonel Anderson to place a fitting monument over the young Confederate officer,
whose friends had been impoverished by the war; and he kissed away the tears, no longer bitter
and despairing, evoked by the memories his words recalled. Then, in lighter vein, he described
the sudden advent of the impetuous captain; the consternation of the little housekeeper, who
was not expecting him so soon; her efforts to improvise a feast for the man who would blissfully
swallow half-baked "pones" if served by her; her shy presentation of her lover to the venerable
clergyman, which he and Henry had witnessed on the veranda through the half-closed blinds,
and the fond old man's immense surprise that his little Rita should have a lover at all.

"My dear sir," he said, "this is all very premature. You must wait for the child to grow up
before imbuing her mind with thoughts beyond her years."

"'My dear Dr. Anderson,' had pleaded the adroit Windom, 'I will wait indefinitely, and submit
to any conditions that you and Miss Rita impose. If already she has impressed me so deeply,
time can only increase my respect, admiration, and affection, if that were possible. Before
making a single effort to win your daughter's regard, I asked permission of her brother, since
you were so far away. I have not sought to bind her, but have only revealed the deep feeling
which she has inspired, and I now come to ask your sanction also to my addresses.'

"'Your conduct,' replied the old gentleman, unbending urbanely toward the young man, 'is both
honorable and considerate. 

One cold morning in March, when pedestrians were struck in the face with snow the army moved back into
the passage. Left behind at the iron door of San Sebastian Street was an old blind man named Pulido
who could resist extremes of temperature and remain strong and healthy.
 You know well how many years, months rather,
Windom will wait.

"Well, I left the little girl happier than the day was long, for I believe her eyes sparkle
all through the night under their long lashes. As for Windom, he is in the seventh heaven.
'My latest campaign in Virginia,' he whispered to me as I was about to ride away; 'good prospects
of the best capture yet won from the Confederacy.'"

And so he made the place familiar to her, with its high lights and deep shadows, and its characters
real, even down to old Jehu and his son Huey.

CHAPTEE XLI

A LITTLE CHILD SHALL LEAD THEM

Autumn merged imperceptibly into winter, and the days sped tranquilly on. With the exception
of brief absences on business, Graham was mostly at home, for there was no place like his own
hearth. His heart, so long denied happiness, was content only at the side of his wife and child.
The shadows of the past crouched further away than ever, but even their own health and prosperity,
their happiness, and the reflected happiness of others could not banish them wholly. The lights
which burned so brightly around them, like the fire on their hearth, had been kindled and were
fed by human hands only, and were ever liable to die out. The fuel that kept them burning was
the best that earth afforded, but the supply had its inherent limitations. Each new tranquil
day increased the habitual sense of security. Graham was busy with plans of a large agricultural
enterprise in Virginia. The more he saw of Henry Anderson the more he appreciated his sterling
integrity and fine business capabilities, and from being an agent he had become a partner.
Grace's writing-desk, at which Graham had cast a wistful glance the first time he had seen
it, was often covered with maps of the Virginia plantation, which he proposed to develop into
its best capabilities. Grace had a cradle by the library fire as well as in her room. Beside
this the adopted grandmother knitted placidly, and the major rustled his paper softly lest
he should waken the little sleeper. Grace, who persisted in making all of her little one's
dainty plumage herself, would lift her eyes from time to time, full of genuine interest in
his projects and in his plans for a dwelling on the plantation, which should be built according
to her taste and constructed for her convenience.

The shadows had never been further away. Even old Aunt Sheba was lulled into security. Into
her bereaved heart, as into the hearts of all the others, the baby crept; and she grew so bewitching
with her winsome ways, so absorbing in her many little wants and her need of watching, as with
the dawning spirit of curiosity she sought to explore for herself what was beyond the cradle
and the door, that Aunt Sheba, with the doting mother, thought of Hilda during all waking hours
and dreamed of her in sleep.

At last the inconstant New England spring passed away, and June came with its ever-new heritage
of beauty. The baby's birthday was to be the grand fete of the year, and the little creature
seemed to enter into the spirit of the occasion. She could now call her parents and grandparents
by name, and talk to them in her pretty though senseless jargon, which was to them more precious
than the wisdom of Solomon.

It was a day of roses and rose-colors. Roses banked the mantelpieces, wreathed the cradle,
crowned the table at which Hilda sat in state in her high chair, a fairy form in gossamer laces,
with dark eyes-- Grace's eyes--that danced with the unrestrained delight of a child.

"She looks just like my little Grace of long, long years ago," said the major, with wistful
eyes; "and yet, Colonel, it seems but yesterday that your wife was the image of that laughing
little witch yonder."

"Well, I can believe," admitted Grandma Mayburn, "that Grace was as pretty--a tremendous compliment
to you, Grace--but there never was and never will be another baby as pretty and cunning as
our Hilda."

The good old lady never spoke of the child as Grace's baby. It was always "ours." In Graham,
Grace, and especially Hilda, she had her children about her, and the mother-need in her heart
was satisfied.

"Yes, Hilda darling," said the colonel, with fond eyes, "you have begun well. You could not
please me more than by looking like your mother; the next thing is to grow like her."

"Poor blind papa, with the perpetual glamour on his eyes! He will never see his old white-haired
wife as she is."

He looked at her almost perfect features with the bloom of health upon them, into her dark
eyes with their depths of motherly pride and joy, at her snowy neck and ivory arms bare to
the summer heat, and longest at the wavy silver of her hair, that crowned her beauty with an
almost supernatural charm.

"Don't I see you as you are, Grace?" he said. "Well, I am often spellbound by what I do see.
If Hilda becomes like you, excepting your sorrows, my dearest wish in her behalf will be fulfilled."

Old Aunt Sheba, standing behind the baby's chair, felt a chill at heart as she thought: "Dey'se
all a-worshippin' de chile and each oder. I sees it so plain dat I'se all ob a-tremble."

Surely the dark shadows of the past have no place near that birthday feast, but they are coming
nearer, closing in, remorseless, relentless as ever, and among them are the gloomy rivals against
whom Graham struggled so long. He thought he had vanquished them, but they are stealing upon
him again like vindictive, unforgiving savages.

There was a jar of thunder upon the still air, but it was not heeded. The room began to darken,
but they thought only of a shower that would banish the sultriness of the day. Darker shadows
than those of thunder-clouds were falling upon them, had they known it.

The wine was brought, and the health of the baby drank. Then Graham, ordering all glasses to
be filled, said reverently: "To the memory of Warren Hilland! May the child who is named for
him ever remind us of his noble life and heroic death."

They drank in silence, then put down the glasses and sat for moments with bowed heads, Grace's
tears falling softly. Without, nature seemed equally hushed. Not a breath stirred the sultry
air, until at last a heavier and nearer jar of thunder vibrated in the distance.

The unseen shadows are closing around the little Hilda, whose eyelids are heavy with satiety.
Aunt Sheba is about to take her from her chair, when a swift gust, cold and spray-laden, rushes
through the house, crushing to the doors and whirling all light articles into a carnival of
disorder.

The little gossamer-clad girl shivered, and, while others hastily closed windows, Grace ran
for a shawl in which to wrap her darling. End the madness! His little woman and nothing
more the serious studies. As before, she continued flirting, but by habit, without giving the
pretext of bold advances, wanting to make the husband happy with a spur
of danger.

Suddenly, in her sleep, the child gave an ominous barking cough.

"Oh, de good Lor'!" cried Aunt Sheba, springing to her feet. Then with a swiftness in which
there was no sign of age, she went to the landing and called, "Mas'r Graham."

Grace was in the room before him. "What is it?" she asked breathlessly.

"Well, Missy Grace, don't be 'larmed, but I tinks Mas'r Graham 'ud better sen' for de doctor,
jes' for caution like."

Again came that peculiar cough, terror-inspiring to all mothers.

"Alford, Alford, lose not a moment!" she cried. "It's the croup."

The soldier acted as if his camp were attacked at midnight. There were swift feet, the trampling
of a horse; and soon the skill of science, the experience of age, and motherly tenderness confronted
the black shadows, but they remained immovable.

The child gasped and struggled for life. Grace, half frantic, followed the doctor's directions
with trembling hands, seeking to do everything for her idol herself as far as possible. Mrs.
Mayburn, gray, grim, with face of ashen hue, hovered near and assisted. Aunt Sheba, praying
often audibly, proved by her deft hands that the experience of her long-past motherhood was
of service now. The servants gathered at the door, eager and impatient to do something for
"de bressed chile." The poor old major thumped restlessly back and forth on his crutches in
the hall below, half swearing, half praying. Dr. Markham, pale with anxiety, but cool and collected
as a veteran general in battle, put forth his whole skill to baffle the destroyer. Graham,
standing in the background with clenched hands, more excited, more desperate than he had ever
been when sitting on his horse waiting for the bugle to sound the charge, watched his wife
and child with eyes that burned in the intensity of his feeling.

Time, of which no notice was taken, passed, although moments seemed like hours. The child still
struggled and gasped, but more and more feebly. At last, in the dawn, the little Hilda lay
still, looked up and smiled. Was it at her mother's face, or something beyond?

"She is better," cried Grace, turning her imploring eyes to the physician, who held the little
hand.

Alas! it was growing cold in his. He turned quickly to Graham and whispered: "Support your
wife. The end is near."

He came mechanically and put his arm around her.

"Grace, dear Grace," he faltered, hoarsely, "can you not bear this sorrow also for my sake?"

"Alford!" she panted with horror in her tones--"Alford! why, why, her hand is growing cold!"

There was a long low sigh from the little one, and then she was still.

"Take your wife away," said Dr. Markham, in a low, authoritative tone.

Graham sought to obey in the same mechanical manner. She sprang from him and stood aloof. There
was a terrible light in her eyes, before which he quailed.

"Take me away!" she cried, in a voice that was hoarse, strained, and unnatural. "Never! Tell
me the belief of your heart. Have I lost my child forever? Is that sweet image of my Hilda
nothing but clay? Is there nothing further for this idol of my heart but horrible corruption?
If this is true, no more learned jargon to me about law and force! If this is true, I am the
creation of a fiend who, with all the cruel ingenuity of a fiend, has so made me that he can
inflict the utmost degree of torture. If this is true, my motherhood is a lie, and good is
punished, not evil. If this is true, there is neither God nor law, but only a devil. But let
me have the truth: have I lost that child forever?"

He was dumb, and an awful silence fell upon the chamber of death.

