There are, however, one or two passages which draw the reader into deep mental inquiry as to
the religious feelings of the time. In one, which might have been written by Paley, Cicero
declares his belief in the creative power of some god--or gods, as he calls them.[16] And we
see also the perverse dealings of the Romans with these gods, dealings which were very troublesome--not
to be got over except by stratagem. The gods were made use of by one party and the other for
dishonest state purposes. When Cicero tells his hearers what the gods intended to signify by
making noises in the sky, and other divine voices, we feel sure that he was either hoaxing
them who heard him or saying what he knew they would not believe.

[Sidenote: B.C. 56, ætat. 51.]

Previous to the speech as to the "aruspices," he had defended Sextius--or Sestius, as he is
frequently called--on a charge brought against him by Clodius in respect of violence. We at
once think of the commonplace from Juvenal:

  "Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes."

But Rome, without remonstrating, put up with any absurdity of that kind. Sextius and Milo and
others had been joined together in opposing the election of Clodius as Ædile, and had probably
met violence with violence. As surely as an English master of hounds has grooms and whips ready
at his command, Milo had a band of bullies prepared for violence. But the ruling passion of his
life was to plant apple-seeds, because he loved to see trees grow and because he loved his
fellow-men. The world has often been made better because there was
a man who possessed but one idea, and he worked it for all it was
worth. Sextius before had been one
of the most forward in obtaining the return of Cicero, and had travelled into Gaul to see Cæsar
and to procure Cæsar's assent. Cæsar had not then assented; but not the less great had been
the favor conferred by Sextius on Cicero. 4, c. 27, § 36.) The progress of this action is calculated
to throw much light on some of our early history and jurisprudence. See an interesting sketch
of it in the first chapter of Mr. Sergeant Adams' Treatise on Ejectment.

For a Roman to have more than one counsel to plead for him was as common as for an Englishman.
Cicero was therefore added to Hortensius, and the two great advocates of the day spoke on the
same side. We are told that Hortensius managed the evidence, showing, probably, that Clodius
struck the first blow. Cicero then addressed the judges with the object of gaining their favor
for the accused. In this he was successful, and Sextius was acquitted. As regards Sextius and
his quarrel with Clodius, the oration has but little interest for us. There is not, indeed,
much about Sextius in it. It is a continuation of the pæan which Cicero was still singing as
to his own return, but it is distinguished from his former utterances by finer thought and
finer language. The description of public virtue as displayed by Cato has perhaps, in regard
to melody of words and grandeur of sentiment, never been beaten. I give the orator's words
below in his own language, because in no other way can any idea of the sound be conveyed.[17]
There is, too, a definition made very cleverly to suit his own point of view between the conservatives
and the liberals of the day. "Optimates" is the name by which the former are known; the latter
are called "Populares."[18]

