On entering the lodge the chief pointed to mats or cushions which had been placed around for
the strangers, and on which they seated themselves, while he placed himself on a kind of stool.
An old man then came forward with the pipe of peace or good-fellowship, lighted and handed
it to the chief, and then falling back, squatted himself near the door. The pipe was passed
from mouth to mouth, each one taking a whiff, which is equivalent to the inviolable pledge
of faith, of taking salt together among the ancient Britons. The chief then made a sign to
the old pipe-bearer, who seemed to fill, likewise, the station of herald, seneschal, and public
crier, for he ascended to the top of the lodge to make proclamation. Here he took his post
beside the aperture for the emission of smoke and the admission of light; the chief dictated
from within what he was to proclaim, and he bawled it forth with a force of lungs that resounded
over all the village. In this way he summoned the warriors and great men to council; every
now and then reporting progress to his chief through the hole in the roof.

In a little while the braves and sages began to enter one by one as their names were called
or announced, emerging from under the buffalo robe suspended over the entrance instead of a
door, stalking across the lodge to the skins placed on the floor, and crouching down on them
in silence. In this way twenty entered and took their seats, forming an assemblage worthy of
the pencil; for the Arickaras are a noble race of men, large and well formed, and maintain
a savage grandeur and gravity of demeanor in their solemn ceremonials.

All being seated, the old seneschal prepared the pipe of ceremony or council, and having lit
it, handed it to the chief. He inhaled the sacred smoke, gave a puff upward to the heaven,
then downward to the earth, then toward the east; after this it was as usual passed from mouth
to mouth, each holding it respectfully until his neighbor had taken several whiffs; and now
the grand council was considered as opened in due form.

The chief made an harangue welcoming the white men to his village, and expressing his happiness
in taking them by the hand as friends; but at the same time complaining of the poverty of himself
and his people; the usual prelude among Indians to begging or hard bargaining.

Mr. Hunt then spoke, declaring the object of his journey to the great Salt Lake beyond the
mountains, and that he should want horses for the purpose, for which he was ready to trade,
having brought with him plenty of goods. He concluded his speech by making presents of tobacco.

The left-handed chieftain in reply promised his friendship and aid to the new-comers, and welcomed
them to his village. He added that they had not the number of horses to spare that Mr. Hunt
required, and expressed a doubt whether they should be able to part with any. Upon this, another
chieftain, called Gray Eyes, made a speech, and declared that they could readily supply Mr.
Hunt with all the horses he might want, since, if they had not enough in the village, they
could easily steal more. This honest expedient immediately removed the main difficulty; but
the chief deferred all trading for a day or two, until he should have time to consult with
his subordinate chiefs, as to market rates; for the principal chief of a village, in conjunction
with his council, usually fixes the prices at which articles shall be bought and sold, and
to them the village must conform.

The council now broke up. Mr. Hunt transferred his camp across the river at a little distance
below the village, and the left-handed chief placed some of his warriors as a guard to prevent
the intrusion of any of his people. The camp was pitched on the river bank just above the boats.
The tents, and the men wrapped in their blankets and bivouacking on skins in the open air,
surrounded the baggage at night. Four sentinels also kept watch within sight of each other
outside of the camp until midnight, when they were relieved by four others who mounted guard
until daylight.

A trade now commenced with the Arickaras under the regulation and supervision of their two
chieftains. Mr. Hunt established his mart in the lodge of the Big Man. The village soon presented
the appearance of a busy fair; and as horses were in demand, the purlieus and the adjacent
plain were like the vicinity of a Tartar encampment; horses were put through all paces, and
horsemen were careering about with that dexterity and grace for which the Arickaras are noted.
As soon as a horse was purchased, his tail was cropped, a sure mode of distinguishing him from
the horses of the tribe; for the Indians disdain to practice this absurd, barbarous, and indecent
mutilation, invented by some mean and vulgar mind, insensible to the merit and perfections
of the animal. On the contrary, the Indian horses are suffered to remain in every respect the
superb and beautiful animals which nature formed them.

The wealth of an Indian of the far west consists principally in his horses, of which each chief
and warrior possesses a great number, so that the plains about an Indian village or encampment
are covered with them. These form objects of traffic or objects of depredation, and in this
way pass from tribe to tribe over great tracts of country. The horses owned by the Arickaras
are, for the most part, of the wild stock of the prairies; some, however, had been obtained
from the Poncas, Pawnees, and other tribes to the southwest, who had stolen them from the Spaniards
in the course of horse-stealing expeditions into the Mexican territories. That I did not drop
it into a cageful of terrier-pups was wholly due to the native vigour
with which Striatus hung on.

"The price of that is forty-five guineas," continued the Pontifical
Person smoothly, as he restored it to its cage. I shivered.
The price of a horse, as regulated by the chiefs, was commonly ten
dollars' worth of goods at first cost. To supply the demand thus
suddenly created, parties of young men and braves had sallied
 forth on expeditions to steal horses; a species of service among the
Indians which takes precedence of hunting, and is considered a
department of honorable warfare.

While the leaders of the expedition were actively engaged in preparing for the approaching
journey, those who had accompanied it for curiosity or amusement, found ample matter for observation
in the village and its inhabitants. Wherever they went they were kindly entertained. If they
entered a lodge, the buffalo robe was spread before the fire for them to sit down; the pipe
was brought, and while the master of the lodge conversed with his guests, the squaw put the
earthen vessel over the fire, well filled with dried buffalo meat and pounded corn; for the
Indian in his native state, before he has mingled much with white men, and acquired their sordid
habits, has the hospitality of the Arab; never does a stranger enter his door without having
food placed before him; and never is the food thus furnished made a matter of traffic.

The life of an Indian when at home in his village is a life of indolence and amusement. To
the woman is consigned the labors of the household and the field; she arranges the lodge; brings
wood for the fire; cooks; jerks venison and buffalo meat; dresses the skins of the animals
killed in the chase; cultivates the little patch of maize, pumpkins, and pulse, which furnishes
a great part of their provisions. Their time for repose and recreation is at sunset, when,
the labors of the day being ended, they gather together to amuse themselves with petty games,
or hold gossiping convocations on the tops of their lodges.

