In one of the little towns in the north of Holland, the authorities requested the Emperor's
permission to present to him an old man aged one hundred and one years, and he ordered him
brought before him.  This more than centenarian was still vigorous, and had served formerly
in the guards of the Stadtholder; he presented a petition entreating the Emperor to exempt
from conscription one of his grandsons, the support of his old age.  His Majesty assured him,
through an interpreter, that he would not deprive him of his grandson, and Marshal Duroc was
ordered to leave with the old man a testimonial of Imperial liberality.  In another little
town in Friesland, the authorities made the Emperor this singular address: "Sire, we were afraid
you would come with the whole court; you are almost alone, and thereby we see you the better,
and the more at our ease."  The Emperor applauded this loyal compliment, and honored the orator
by most touching thanks.  After this long journey, passed in fetes, reviews, and displays of
all kinds, where the Emperor, under the guise of being entertained, had made profound observations
on the moral, commercial, and military situation of Holland, observations which bore fruit
after his return to Paris, and even while in the country, in wise and useful decrees, their
Majesties left Holland, passing through Haarlem, The Hague, and Rotterdam, where they were
welcomed, as they had been in the whole of Holland, by fetes.  They crossed the Rhine, visited
Cologne and Aix-la-Chapelle, and arrived at Saint-Cloud early in November, 1811.

CHAPTER II.

Marie Louis was a very handsome woman.  She had a majestic figure and noble bearing, fresh
complexion, blond hair, and blue eyes full of expression; her hands and feet were the admiration
of the court. Her figure was, perhaps, a trifle too stout; but she lost some of this superfluous
flesh during her stay in France, though thereby she gained as much in grace and beauty.  Such
was her appearance.  In her intercourse with those immediately around her she was affable and
cordial; and the enjoyment she felt in the freedom of these conversations was depicted on her
countenance, which grew animated, and took on an infinite grace. But when she was obliged to
appear in public she became extremely timid; formal society served of itself to isolate her;
and as persons who are not naturally haughty always appear so with a poor grace, Marie Louise,
being always much embarrassed on reception days, was often the subject of unjust criticism;
for, as I have said, her coldness in reality arose from an excessive timidity.

Immediately after her arrival in France, Marie Louise suffered from this embarrassment to a
very great degree, which can be easily understood in a young princess who found herself so
suddenly transported into an entirely new society, to whose habits and tastes she felt obliged
to conform, and in which, although her high position must naturally attract the world to her,
the circumstances of this position rendered it necessary that she should take the initiative
in any advances made, a fact which explains the awkwardness of her early relations with the
ladies of her court. After intimacies had been formed, and the young Empress had chosen her
friends with all the abandon of her young heart, then haughtiness and constraint vanished,
or reappeared only on occasions of ceremony. Marie Louise was of a calm, thoughtful character;
it took little to arouse her sensitive spirit; and yet, although easily moved, she was by no
means demonstrative.  The Empress had received a very careful education, her mind was cultivated
and her tastes very simple, and she possessed every accomplishment.

She detested the insipid hours passed in idleness, and liked occupation because it suited her
tastes, and also because in a proper employment of her time she found the only means of driving
away ennui.  I think she was, in fact, a most congenial wife for the Emperor.  She was too
much interested in the concerns of her own private life to ever mingle in political intrigues,
and, although she was both Empress and Queen, very often was in entire ignorance of public
affairs, except what knowledge she obtained from the journals.  The Emperor at the end of days
filled with agitation could find a little relaxation only in a quiet domestic hearth, which
restored to him the happiness of family life; and, consequently, an intriguing woman or a talkative
politician would have annoyed him exceedingly.

Nevertheless, the Emperor sometimes complained of the want of affability the Empress showed
to the ladies of her court, and said that this excessive reserve was injurious to him in a
country where the opposite extreme is most common.

This was because he was recalling the past somewhat, and thinking of the Empress Josephine,
whose constant gayety was the chief charm of the court.  He was necessarily struck by the contrast;
but was there not some injustice at the foundation of this?  The Empress Marie Louise was the
daughter of an Emperor, and had seen and known only courtiers, and, having no acquaintance
with any other class, knew nothing of any world outside the walls of the palace of Vienna.
She arrived one fine day at the Tuileries, in the midst of a people whom she had never seen
except as soldiers; and on this account the constraint of her manner towards the persons composing
the brilliant society of Paris seems to me to a certain point excusable.  It seems to me, besides,
that the Empress was expected to show a frankness and simplicity which were entirely misplaced;
and, by being cautioned over and over again to be natural, she was prevented from the observance
of that formality also suitable on the part of the great, who should be approached only when
they themselves give the signal.  The Empress Josephine loved the people because she had been
one of them; and in mounting a throne her expansive nature had everything to gain, for she
found it was only extending her friendship among a larger circle.  Inspired by her own kind
heart, the Empress Marie Louise sought to make those around her happy; and her benevolent deeds
were long the subject of conversation, and, above all, the delicate manner in which they were
performed.  Each month she took from the sum allotted for her toilet ten thousand francs for
the poor, which was not the limit of her charities; for she always welcomed with the greatest
interest those who came to tell her of distresses to be alleviated.  From the eagerness with
which she listened to those soliciting aid, it would seem that she had been recalled suddenly
to a duty; and yet it was simply an evidence that the chords of her sensitive heart had been
touched.  I do not know if any one ever received from her a refusal of a demand of this sort.
The Emperor was deeply touched each time that he was informed of a benevolent act of the Empress. "No--I
saw no joining."

"Why, you stupid fellow, didn't you see that the first part was from a novel of the present day,
and the other from a story of the rebellion--who the deuce do you think talks of thees and thous
except the Quaker?"

"I didn't notice it, I confess."

"Glad to hear
it; nobody else will; and in the next chapter, which is the seventeenth
of the second volume of this romance, you will see how closely the
story fits. Recollect to change the names as I have marked them in
pencil, and go on.]

CHAPTER II. Every day in the Emperor's absence, the Empress ascended
to the apartment of Madame de Montebello, her lady of honor, followed by her service, composed
of the chevalier of honor, and some of the ladies of the palace; and on her return to her apartments,
a light breakfast was served, consisting of pastry and fruits.  After her lessons in drawing,
painting, and music, she commenced her grand toilet.  Between six and seven o'clock she dined
with the Emperor, or in his absence with Madame de Montebello, the dinner comprising only one
course.  The evening was spent in receptions, or at concerts, plays, etc.; and the Empress
retired at eleven o'clock.  One of her women always slept in the room in front of her bedroom,
and it was through this the Emperor was obliged to pass when he spent the night in his wife's room.

This customary routine of the Empress was changed, however, when the Emperor was at the chateau;
but when alone she was punctual in all her employments, and did exactly the same things at
the same hours.  Her personal domestics seemed much attached to her; for though cool and distant
in her manner, they always found her good and just.

In the Emperor's absence the portrait of the Duchess of Montebello ornamented the Empress's
room with those of the entire Imperial family of Austria; but when the Emperor returned, the
portrait of the duchess was removed; and during the war between Napoleon and the Emperors of
Austria and Russia, the portrait of Francis II.  was removed from his daughter's room, by order
of his Majesty, and was, I think, consigned to some secret spot.

The King of Rome was a very fine child; and though he resembled the Emperor less than the son
of Hortense had done, his features were an agreeable union of those of his father and mother.
I never knew him except in his infancy, and what was most remarkable in him at that age was
the great kindness and affection he showed to those around him.  He was much devoted to a young
and pretty person named Fanny Soufflot, daughter of the first lady of the bedchamber, who was
his constant companion; and, as he liked to see her always well dressed, he begged of Marie
Louise, or his governess, Madame the Countess of Montesquiou, any finery that struck his fancy,
which he wished to give to his young friend.  He made her promise to follow him to the war
when he was grown, and said many charming things which showed his affectionate disposition.

There was chosen as companion for the little king (as he styled himself) a young child named
Albert Froment, I think, the son of one of the ladies of honor.  One morning as they were playing
together in the garden on which the apartments of the king opened at Saint-Cloud, Mademoiselle
Fanny was watching them without interfering with their games, Albert tried to take the king's
wheelbarrow; and, when the latter resisted, Albert struck him, whereupon the king exclaimed,
"Oh, suppose some one had seen you!  But I will not tell!" I consider this a fine evidence
of character.

One day he was at the windows of the chateau with his governess, amusing himself by looking
at the passers-by, and pointing out with his finger those who attracted his attention.  While
standing there he saw below a woman in deep mourning, holding by the hand a little boy also
dressed in mourning.  The little child carried a petition, which he waved from a distance to
the prince, and seemed to be entreating him to receive. Their black clothing made a deep impression
on the prince, and he asked why the poor child was dressed all in black. "Doubtless because
his papa is dead," replied the governess, whereupon the child expressed an earnest desire to
speak to the little petitioner.  Madame de Montesquiou, who especially desired to cultivate
in her young pupil this disposition to mercy, gave orders that the mother and child should
be brought up. Barnley Wold was a wild, uncultivated district, interspersed at irregular intervals
with the remains of an ancient forest, and famous, at the period of our narrative, as the resort
of many lawless and dangerous characters.
And next day when he went as usual to pay his respects to his father, and handed him all the
petitions presented to him the evening before, one alone was kept apart; it was that of his
little protege.  "Papa," said he, "here is a petition from a little boy whose father was killed
on your account; give him a pension."  Napoleon was deeply moved, and embraced his son, and
orders for the pension were given that day.  This conduct in so young a child gives undeniable
evidence of an excellent heart.

His early training was excellent; as Madame de Montesquiou had an unbounded influence over
him, owing to the manner at once gentle and grave in which she corrected his faults.  The child
was generally docile, but, nevertheless, sometimes had violent fits of anger, which his governess
had adopted an excellent means of correcting, which was to remain perfectly unmoved until he
himself controlled his fury.  When the child returned to himself, a few severe and pertinent
remarks transformed him into a little Cato for the remainder of the day.  One day as he was
rolling on the floor refusing to listen to the remonstrances of his governess, she closed tie
windows and shutters; and the child, astonished by this performance, forgot what had enraged
him, and asked her why she did this.  "I did it because I was afraid you would be heard; do
you suppose the French people would want you as their prince, if they knew that you gave way
to such fits of anger?"--"Do you think they heard me?" he inquired; "I would be very sorry
if they had.  Pardon, Mamma Quiou [this was his name for her], I will not do it again."

The Emperor was passionately devoted to his son; took him in his arms every time he saw him,
and jumped him up and down most merrily, and was delighted with the joy he manifested.  He
teased him by carrying him in front of the glass and making grimaces, at which the child laughed
till he cried.  While at breakfast he took him on his knee, dipped his finger in the sauce
and made him suck it, and smeared his face with it; and when the governess scolded, the Emperor
laughed still more heartily, and the child, who enjoyed the sport, begged his father to repeat
it.  This was an opportune moment for the arrival of petitions at the chateau; for they were
always well received at such times, thanks to the all-powerful credit of the little mediator.

The Emperor in his tender moods was sometimes even more childish than his son.  The young prince
was only four months old when his father put his three-cornered hat on the pretty infant.

The child usually cried a good deal, and at these times the Emperor embraced him with an ardor
and delight which none but a tender father could feel, saying to him,

"What, Sire, you crying!  A king weeping; fie, then, how ugly that is!" He was just a year
old when I saw the Emperor, on the lawn in front of the chateau, place his sword-belt over
the shoulders of the king, and his hat on his head, and holding out his arms to the child,
who tottered to him, his little feet now and then entangled in his father's sword; and it was
beautiful to see the eagerness with which the Emperor extended his arms to keep him from falling.

One day in his cabinet the Emperor was lying on the floor, the king riding horseback on his
knee, mounting by jumps up to his father's face, and kissing him.  On another occasion the
child entered the council chamber after the meeting had ended, and ran into his father's arms
without paying attention to any one else, upon which the Emperor said to him, "Sire, you have
not saluted these gentlemen."  The child turned, bowed most gracefully, and his father then
took him in his arms. Sometimes when going to visit the Emperor, he ran so fast that he left
Madame de Montesquiou far behind, and said to the usher, "Open the door for me, I want to see
papa."  The usher replied, "Sire, I cannot do it." --"But I am the little king."--"No, Sire,
I cannot open it."  At this moment his governess appeared; and strong in her protection he
proudly repeated, "Open the door, the king desires it."

Madame de Montesquiou had added to the prayers which the child repeated morning and evening,
these words: "My God, inspire papa to make peace for the happiness of France."  One evening
the Emperor was present when his son was retiring, and he made the same prayer, whereupon the
Emperor embraced him in silence, smiling most kindly on Madame de Montesquiou.

The Emperor was accustomed to say to the King of Rome when he was frightened at any noise or
at his grimaces, "Come, come! a king should have no fear."

I recall another anecdote concerning the young son of the Emperor, which was related to me
by his Majesty himself one evening when I was undressing him as usual, and at which the Emperor
laughed most heartily. "You would not believe," said he, "the singular reward my son desired
of his governess for being good.  Would she not allow him to go and wade in the mud?"  This
was, true, and proves, it seems to me, that the greatness which surrounds the cradle of princes
cannot eradicate from their minds the singular caprices of childhood.

CHAPTER III.

All the world is familiar with the name of the Abbe Geoffroy of satirical memory, who drove
the most popular actors and authors of the time to desperation.  This pitiless Aristarchus
must have been most ardently enamored of this disagreeable profession; for he sometimes endangered
thereby, not his life, which many persons would have desired earnestly perhaps, but at any
rate his health and his repose.  It is well, doubtless, to attack those who can reply with
the pen, as then the consequences of the encounter do not reach beyond the ridicule which is
often the portion of both adversaries.  But Abbe Geoffroy fulfilled only one of the two conditions
by virtue of which one can criticise,--he had much bitterness in his pen, but he was not a
man of the sword; and every one knows that there are persons whom it is necessary to attack
with both these weapons.

An actor whom Geoffroy had not exactly flattered in his criticisms decided to avenge himself
in a piquant style, and one at which he could laugh long and loud.  One evening, foreseeing
what would appear in the journal of the next day, he could think of nothing better than to
carry off Geoffroy as he was returning from the theater, and conduct him with bandaged eyes
to a house where a schoolboy's punishment would be inflicted on this man who considered himself
a master in the art of writing.

This plan was carried out.  Just as the abbe regained his lodging, rubbing his hands perhaps
as he thought of some fine point for tomorrow's paper, three or four vigorous fellows seized
him, and conveyed him without a word to the place of punishment; and some time later that evening,
the abbe, well flogged, opened his eyes in the middle of the street, to find himself alone
far from his dwelling. And Lawleigh pressed onward. His horse, which for several miles had shown
symptoms of fatigue now yielded to the difficulties it could no longer encounter; and after a
few heavy struggles, fell forward, and did not attempt to rise. Thirteen hours had elapsed from the
time the chase on that day commenced, and unless for a short minute, he had seen nothing of
the fugitive. Yet he had dashed onward, feeling occasionally his
holsters, and satisfied that his pistols were in serviceable condition.
  It was
said in Paris that this predilection of a great man for a caustic critic came from the fact
that these contributions to the Journal of the Empire, which attracted much attention at this
period, were a useful diversion to the minds of the capital.  I know nothing positively in
regard to this; but when I reflect on the character of the Emperor, who wished no one to occupy
themselves with his political affairs, these opinions seem to me not devoid of foundation.

Doctor Corvisart was not a courtier, and came rarely to the Emperor, except on his regular
visit each Wednesday and Saturday.  He was very candid with the Emperor, insisted positively
that his directions should be obeyed to the letter, and made full use of the right accorded
to physicians to scold their negligent patient.  The Emperor was especially fond of him, and
always detained him, seeming to find much pleasure in his conversation.

After the journey to Holland in 1811, M. Corvisart came to see the Emperor one Saturday, and
found him in good health.  He left him after the toilet, and immediately went to enjoy the
pleasures of the chase, of which he was exceedingly fond.  He was in the habit of not announcing
where he was going, solely in order that he might not be interrupted for some slight cause,
as had happened to him sometimes, for the doctor was most obliging and considerate.  That day
after his breakfast, which, according to custom, he had devoured rapidly, the Emperor was taken
suddenly with a violent colic, and was quite ill.  He asked for M. Corvisart, and a courier
was dispatched for him, who, not finding him in Paris, hastened to his country house; but the
doctor was at the chase, no one knew where, so the courier was obliged to return without him.
The Emperor was deeply vexed, and as he continued to suffer extremely, at last went to bed,
and Marie Louise came and spent a few moments with him; at last M. Yvan was summoned, and administered
remedies which soon relieved the Emperor.

M. Corvisart, somewhat anxious perhaps, came on Monday instead of Wednesday; and when he entered
Napoleon's room, the latter, who was in his dressing-gown, ran to him, and taking him by both
ears, said, "Well, Monsieur, it seems that if I were seriously ill, I should have to dispense
with your services."  M. Corvisart excused himself, asked the Emperor how he had been affected,
what remedies he had used, and promised always to leave word where he could be found, in order
that he might be summoned immediately on his Majesty's orders, and the Emperor was soon appeased.
This event was really of advantage to the doctor; for he thus abandoned a bad habit, at which
it is probable his patients rejoiced.

M. Corvisart had a very great influence with the Emperor, so much so that many persons who
knew him gave him the soubriquet of doctor of petitions; and it was very rarely he failed to
obtain a favorable answer to his requests.  Nevertheless, I often heard him speak warmly in
favor of M. de Bourrienne, in order to impress upon the Emperor's mind that he was much attached
to his Majesty; but the latter always replied, "No, Bourrienne is too much of an Englishman;
and besides, he is doing very well; I have located him at Hamburg.  He loves money, and he
can make it there."

It was during the year 1811 that Cardinal Fesch came most frequently to the Emperor's apartments,
and their discussions seemed to me very animated.  The cardinal maintained his opinions most
vehemently, speaking in a very loud tone and with great volubility.  These conversations did
not last more than five moments before they became very bitter, and I heard the Emperor raise
his voice to the same pitch; then followed an exchange of harsh terms, and each time the cardinal
arrived I felt distressed for the Emperor, who was always much agitated at the close of these
interviews.  One day as the cardinal was taking leave of the Emperor, I heard the latter say
to him sharply, "Cardinal, you take advantage of your position."

A few days before our departure for Russia the Emperor had me summoned during the day, and
ordered me to bring from the treasury the box of diamonds, and place it in his room, and not
to go far away, as he had some important business for me.  About nine o'clock in the evening
I was again summoned, and found M. de Lavalette, director-general of the post, in the Emperor's
room.  His Majesty opened the box in my presence, and examined the contents, saying to me,
"Constant, carry this box yourself to the count's carriage, and remain there till he arrives."
The carriage was standing at the foot of the grand staircase in the court of the Tuileries;
and I opened it, took my seat, and waited until half-past eleven, when M. de Lavalette arrived,
having spent all this time in conversation with the Emperor.  I could not understand these
precautions in delivering the diamonds to M. de Lavalette, but they were certainly not without
a motive.

The box contained the sword, on the pommel of which was mounted the regent diamond, the handle
also set with diamonds of great value; the grand collar of the Legion of Honor; the ornaments,
hatcord, shoulder- piece, and buttons of the coronation robes, with the shoe-buckles and garters,
all of which were of immense value.

A short time before we set out for the Russian campaign, Josephine sent for me, and I went
at once to Malmaison, where this excellent woman renewed her earnest recommendations to watch
most carefully over the Emperor's health and safety; and made me promise that if any accident,
however slight, happened to him, I would write to her, as she was exceedingly anxious to know
the real truth concerning him.  She wept much; talked to me constantly about the Emperor, and
after a conversation of more than an hour, in which she gave full vent to her emotions, presented
me with her portrait painted by Saint on a gold snuff-box.  I felt much depressed by this interview;
for nothing could be more touching than to see this woman disgraced, but still loving, entreating
my care over the man who had abandoned her, and manifesting the same affectionate interest
in him which the most beloved wife would have done.

On entering Russia, a thing of which I speak here more according to the order of my reminiscences
than in the order of time, the Emperor sent out, on three different roads, details of select
police to prepare in advance lodgings, beds, supplies, etc.  These officers were Messieurs
Sarrazin, adjutant-lieutenant, Verges, Molene, and Lieutenant Pachot.  I will devote farther
on an entire chapter to our itinerary from Paris to Moscow.

A short time before the battle of La Moskwa, a man was brought to the camp dressed in the Russian
uniform, but speaking French; at least his language was a singular mixture of French and Russian.
This man had escaped secretly from the enemy's lines; and when he perceived that our soldiers
were only a short distance from him, had thrown his gun on the ground, crying in a very strong
Russian accent, "I am French," and our soldiers had at once taken him prisoner.

Never was prisoner more charmed with his change of abode.  This poor fellow, who seemed to
have been forced to take arms against his will in the service of the enemies of his country,
arrived at the French camp, called himself the happiest of men in finding again his fellow-
countrymen, and pressed the hand of all the soldiers with an ardor which delighted them.  He
was brought to the Emperor, and appeared much over- awed at finding himself in the presence
of the King of the French, as he called his Majesty.  The Emperor questioned him closely, and
in his reply he declared that the noise of the French cannon had always made his heart beat;
and that he had feared only one thing, which was that he might be killed by his compatriots.
From what he told the Emperor it appeared that he belonged to that numerous class of men who
find themselves transplanted by their family to a foreign land, without really knowing the
cause of their emigration.  His father had pursued at Moscow an unremunerative industrial profession,
and had died leaving him without resources for the future, and, in order to earn his bread,
he had become a soldier.  He said that the Russian military discipline was one of his strongest
incentives to desert, adding that he had strong arms and a brave heart, and would serve in
the French army if the general permitted. His frankness pleased the Emperor, and he endeavored
to obtain from him some positive information on the state of the public mind at Moscow; and
ascertained from his revelations, more or less intelligent, that there was much disturbance
in that ancient capital.

He said that in the street could be heard cries of, "No more of Barclay!

     [Prince Michael Barclay de Tolly, born in Livonia, 1755, of
     Scottish extraction; distinguished himself in wars against Sweden,
     Turkey, and Poland, 1788 and 1794, and against the French, 1806;
     commanded Russian army against Napoleon in 1812, until superseded,
     after battle of Smolensk, by Kutusoff, and commanded the right wing
     at Borodino; afterwards commanded at Bautzen and Leipsic; died
     1818]

Down with the traitor!  dismiss him!  Long live Kutusoff!"  The merchant class, which possessed
great influence on account of its wealth, complained of a system of temporizing which left
men in uncertainty, and compromised the honor of the Russian arms; and it was thought unpardonable
in the Emperor that he had bestowed his confidence on a foreigner when old Kutusoff, with the
blood and the heart of a Russian, was given a secondary position.  The Emperor Alexander had
paid little attention to these energetic complaints, until at last, frightened by the symptoms
of insurrection which began to be manifest in the army, he had yielded, and Kutusoff had been
named generalissimo, over which important event there had been rejoicings and illuminations
at Moscow.  A great battle with the French was talked of; enthusiasm was at its height in the
Russian army, and every soldier had fastened to his cap a green branch. The prisoner spoke
with awe of Kutusoff, and said that he was an old man, with white hair and great mustaches,
and eyes that struck him with terror; that he lacked much of dressing like the French generals;
that he wore very ordinary clothes--he who could have such fine ones; that he roared like a
lion when he was angry; that he never started on a march without saying his prayers; and that
he crossed himself frequently at different hours of the day.  "The soldiers love him because
they say he so much resembles Suwarrow.  I am afraid he will do the French much harm," said
he.  The Emperor, satisfied with this information, dismissed the prisoner, and gave orders
that he should be allowed the freedom of the camp; and afterwards he fought bravely beside
our soldiers.  The Emperor made his entrance into Gjatsk with a most singular escort.

Some Cossacks had been taken in a skirmish; and his Majesty, who was at this time very eager
for information from every quarter, desired to question these savages, and for this purpose
had two or three brought to his headquarters.  These men seemed formed to be always on horseback,
and their appearance when they alighted on the ground was most amusing. Their legs, which the
habit of pressing their horses' sides had driven far apart, resembled a pair of pincers, and
they had a general air of being out of their element.  The Emperor entered Gjatsk, escorted
by two of these barbarians on horseback, who appeared much flattered by this honor.  I remarked
that sometimes the Emperor could with difficulty repress a smile as he witnessed the awkward
appearance made by these cavaliers from the Ukraine, above all when they attempted to put on
airs. Their reports, which the interpreter of the Emperor had some difficulty in comprehending,
seemed a confirmation of all his Majesty had heard concerning Moscow.  These barbarians made
the Emperor understand by their animated gestures, convulsive movements, and warlike postures,
that there would soon be a great battle between the French and the Russians.  The Emperor had
brandy given them, which they drank like water, and presented their glasses anew with a coolness
which was very amusing.  Their horses were small, with cropped manes and long tails, such as
unfortunately can be seen without leaving Paris.

It is a matter of history that the King of Naples made a most favorable impression on these
barbarians.  When it was announced to the Emperor one day that they desired to appoint him
their hetman, the Emperor was much amused by this offer, and said jestingly that he was ready
to indorse this choice of a free people.  The King of Naples had something theatrical in his
appearance which fascinated these barbarians, for he always dressed magnificently.  When his
steed bore him in front of his column, his beautiful hair disordered by the wind, as he gave
those grand saber strokes which mowed down men like stubble, I can well comprehend the deep
impression he made on the fancy of these warlike people, among whom exterior qualities alone
can be appreciated.  It is said that the King of Naples by simply raising this powerful sword
had put to flight a horde of these barbarians.  I do not know how much truth there is in this
statement, but it is at least possible.

The Cossacks, in common with all races still in their infancy, believe in magicians.  A very
amusing anecdote was told of the great chief of the Cossacks, the celebrated Platoff.  Pursued
by the King of Naples, he was beating a retreat, when a ball reached one of the officers beside
him, on which event the hetman was so much irritated against his magician that he had him flogged
in presence of all his hordes, reproaching him most bitterly because he had not turned away
the balls by his witchcraft. This was plain evidence of the fact that he had more faith in
his art than the sorcerer himself possessed.

On the 3d of September, from his headquarters at Gjatsk, the Emperor ordered his army to prepare
for a general engagement.  There had been for some days much laxity in the police of the bivouacs,
and he now redoubled the severity of the regulations in regard to the countersigns.  Some detachments
which had been sent for provisions having too greatly prolonged their expedition, the Emperor
charged the colonels to express to them his dissatisfaction, adding that those who had not
returned by the next day could not take part in the battle.  These words needed no commentary. 

On his return from commanding the legion he was raised by Vespasian to the patrician order, and
then invested with the government of Aquitania, [32] a distinguished promotion, both in respect
to the office itself, and the hopes of the consulate to which it destined him. It is a common
supposition that military men, habituated to the unscrupulous and summary processes of camps,
where things are carried with a strong hand, are deficient in the
address and subtlety of genius requisite in civil jurisdiction.

On the eve of this great event he discussed everything in the calmest manner, speaking of this
country as he would have done of a beautiful, fertile province of France.  In hearing him one
might think that the granary of the army had here been found, that it would consequently furnish
excellent winter quarters, and the first care of the government he was about to establish at
Gjatsk would be the encouragement of agriculture.  He then pointed out to his marshals the
beautiful windings of the river which gives its name to the village, and appeared delighted
with the landscape spread before his eyes.  I have never seen the Emperor abandon himself to
such gentle emotions, nor seen such serenity manifested both in his countenance and conversation;
and at the same time I was never more deeply impressed with the greatness of his soul.

On the 5th of September the Emperor mounted the heights of Borodino, hoping to take in at a
glance the respective positions of the two armies; but the sky was overcast.  One of those
fine, cold rains soon began to fall, which so often come in the early autumn, and resemble
from a distance a tolerably thick fog.  The Emperor tried to use his glasses; but the kind
of veil which covered the whole country prevented his seeing any distance, by which he was
much vexed.  The rain, driven by the wind, fell slanting against his field-glasses, and he
had to dry them over and over again, to his very great annoyance.  The atmosphere was so cold
and damp that he ordered his cloak, and wrapped himself in it, saying that as it was impossible
to remain there, he must return to headquarters, which he did, and throwing himself on the
bed slept a short while.  On awaking he said, "Constant, I hear a noise outside; go see what
it is."  I went out, and returned to inform him that General Caulaincourt had arrived; at which
news the Emperor rose hastily, and ran to meet the general, asking him anxiously, "Do you bring
any prisoners?"  The general replied that he had not been able to take prisoners, since the
Russian soldiers preferred death to surrender.  The Emperor immediately cried, "Let all the
artillery be brought forward."  He had decided that in his preparations to make this war one
of extermination, the cannon would spare his troops the fatigue of discharging their muskets.

On the 6th, at midnight, it was announced to the Emperor that the fires of the Russians seemed
less numerous, and the flames were extinguished at several points; and some few said they had
heard the muffled sound of drums.  The army was in a state of great anxiety.  The Emperor sprang
wildly from his bed, repeatedly exclaiming, "It is impossible!"

I tried to hand him his garments, that he might clothe himself warmly, as the night was so
cold; but he was so eager to assure himself personally of the truth of these statements, that
he rushed out of the tent with only his cloak wrapped around him.  It was a fact that the fires
of the bivouac had grown paler, and the Emperor had reason for the gravest suspicions.  Where
would the war end if the Russians fell back now?  He re-entered his tent much agitated, and
retired to bed again, repeating many times, "We will know the truth to-morrow morning."

On the 7th of September, the sun rose in a cloudless sky, and the Emperor exclaimed, "It is
the sun of Austerlitz!" These words of the Emperor were reported to the army, and repeated
by them amid great enthusiasm.  The drums were beaten, and the order of the day was read as
follows:

     SOLDIERS,--Behold the battle you have so long desired!  Henceforth
     that victory depends on you which is so necessary to us, since it
     will furnish us abundant provisions, good winter quarters, and a
     prompt return to our native land.  Conduct yourselves as at
     Austerlitz, at Friedland, at Witepsk, at Smolensk, and let the most
     remote posterity refer with pride to your conduct on this day; let
     it be said of you, "He took part in the great battle under the walls
     of Moscow."

The army replied by reiterated acclamations.  The Emperor, a few hours before the battle, had
dictated this proclamation, and it was read in the morning to the soldiers.  Napoleon was then
on the heights of Borodino; and when the enthusiastic cries of the army struck his ear, he
was standing with folded arms, the sun shining full in his eyes, reflected from the French
and Russian bayonets.  He smiled, then became more serious until the affair was terminated.

