  Blest be the mason's hand who built
  This house of mine by the roadside,
  And made my window low and wide
  For me to watch my love go by.
  And if I knew when she went by,
  My window should be fairly gilt;
  And if I knew what time she went,
  My window should be flower-besprent.

Here is a conceit which reminds one of the pretty epistle of Philostratus, in which the footsteps
of the beloved are called [Greek: erêreismena philêmpta] (p. 117):--

  What time I see you passing by;
  I sit and count the steps you take:
  You take the steps; I sit and sigh:
  Step after step, my sighs awake.
  Tell me, dear love, which more abound,
  My sighs or your steps on the ground?
  Tell me, dear love, which are the most,
  Your light steps or the sighs they cost?

A girl complains that she cannot see her lover's house (p. 117):-

  I lean upon the lattice, and look forth
  To see the house where my lover dwells.
  There grows an envious tree that spoils my mirth:
  Cursed be the man who set it on these hills!
  But when those jealous boughs are all unclad,
  I then shall see the cottage of my lad:
  When once that tree is rooted from the hills,
  I'll see the house wherein my lover dwells.

In the same mood a girl who has just parted from her sweetheart is angry with the hill beyond
which he is travelling (p. 167):--

  I see and see, yet see not what I would:
  I see the leaves atremble on the tree:
  I saw my love where on the hill he stood,
  Yet see him not drop downward to the lea.
     O traitor hill, what will you do?
     I ask him, live or dead, from you.
     O traitor hill, what shall it be?
     I ask him, live or dead, from thee.

All the songs of love in absence are very quaint. Here is one which calls our nursery rhymes
to mind (p. 119):--

I would I were a bird so free, That I had wings to fly away: Unto that window I would flee,
Where stands my love and grinds all day. Grind, miller, grind; the water's deep! I cannot grind;
love makes me weep. Grind, miller, grind; the waters flow! I cannot grind; love wastes me so.

The next begins after the same fashion, but breaks into a very shower of benedictions (p. 118):--

  Would God I were a swallow free,
  That I had wings to fly away:
  Upon the miller's door I'd be,
  Where stands my love and grinds all day:
  Upon the door, upon the sill,
  Where stays my love;--God bless him still!
  God bless my love, and blessed be
  His house, and bless my house for me;
  Yea, blest be both, and ever blest
  My lover's house, and all the rest!

The girl alone at home in her garden sees a wood-dove flying by and calls to it (p. 179):--

 O dove, who fliest far to yonder hill,
  Dear dove, who in the rock hast made thy nest,
  Let me a feather from thy pinion pull,
  For I will write to him who loves me best.
  And when I've written it and made it clear,
  I'll give thee back thy feather, dove so dear:
  And when I've written it and sealed it, then
  I'll give thee back thy feather love-laden.

A swallow is asked to lend the same kind service (p. 179):--

 O swallow, swallow, flying through the air,
  Turn, turn, I prithee, from thy flight above!
  Give me one feather from thy wing so fair,
  For I will write a letter to my love.

Long before Tennyson's song in the 'Princess,' it would seem that swallows were favourite messengers
of love. In the next song which I translate, the repetition of one thought with delicate variation
is full of character (p. 178):--

  O swallow, flying over hill and plain,
  If thou shouldst find my love, oh bid him come!
  And tell him, on these mountains I remain
  Even as a lamb who cannot find her home:
  And tell him, I am left all, all alone,
  Even as a tree whose flowers are overblown:
  And tell him, I am left without a mate
  Even as a tree whose boughs are desolate:
  And tell him, I am left uncomforted
  Even as the grass upon the meadows dead.

The following is spoken by a girl who has been watching the lads of the village returning from
their autumn service in the plain, and whose damo comes the last of all (p. 240):--

  O dear my love, you come too late!
  What found you by the way to do?
  I saw your comrades pass the gate,
  But yet not you, dear heart, not you!
  If but a little more you'd stayed,
  With sighs you would have found me dead;
  If but a while you'd keep me crying,
  With sighs you would have found me dying.

The amantium irae find a place too in these rustic ditties. A girl explains to her sweetheart
(p. 240):--

  'Twas told me and vouchsafed for true,
  Your kin are wroth as wroth can be;
  For loving me they swear at you,
  They swear at you because of me;
  Your father, mother, all your folk,
  Because you love me, chafe and choke!
  Then set your kith and kin at ease;
  Set them at ease and let me die:
  Set the whole clan of them at ease;
  Set them at ease and see me die!

Another suspects that her damo has paid his suit to a rival (p. 200):--

  On Sunday morning well I knew
  Where gaily dressed you turned your feet;
  And there were many saw it too,
  And came to tell me through the street:
  And when they spoke, I smiled, ah me!
  But in my room wept privately;
  And when they spoke, I sang for pride,
  But in my room alone I sighed.

Then come reconciliations (p. 223):--

  Let us make peace, my love, my bliss!
  For cruel strife can last no more.
  If you say nay, yet I say yes:
  'Twixt me and you there is no war.
  Princes and mighty lords make peace;
  And so may lovers twain, I wis:
  Princes and soldiers sign a truce;
  And so may two sweethearts like us:
  Princes and potentates agree;
  And so may friends like you and me.

There is much character about the following, which is spoken by the damo (p. 223):--

  As yonder mountain height I trod,
  I chanced to think of your dear name;
  I knelt with clasped hands on the sod,
  And thought of my neglect with shame:
  I knelt upon the stone, and swore
  Our love should bloom as heretofore.

Sometimes the language of affection takes a more imaginative tone, as in the following (p. 232):--

  Dearest, what time you mount to heaven above,
  I'll meet you holding in my hand my heart:
  You to your breast shall clasp me full of love,
  And I will lead you to our Lord apart.

  Our Lord, when he our love so true hath known,
  Shall make of our two hearts one heart alone;
  One heart shall make of our two hearts, to rest
  In heaven amid the splendours of the blest.

This was the woman's. Here is the man's (p. 113):--

  If I were master of all loveliness,
  I'd make thee still more lovely than thou art:
  If I were master of all wealthiness,
  Much gold and silver should be thine, sweetheart:
  If I were master of the house of hell,
  I'd bar the brazen gates in thy sweet face;
  Or ruled the place where purging spirits dwell,
  I'd free thee from that punishment apace.
  Were I in paradise and thou shouldst come,
  I'd stand aside, my love, to make thee room;
  Were I in paradise, well seated there,
  I'd quit my place to give it thee, my fair!

Sometimes, but very rarely, weird images are sought to clothe passion, as in the following
(p. 136):--

  Down into hell I went and thence returned:
  Ah me! alas! the people that were there!
  I found a room where many candles burned,
  And saw within my love that languished there.
  When as she saw me, she was glad of cheer,
  And at the last she said: Sweet soul of mine;
  Dost thou recall the time long past, so dear,
  When thou didst say to me, Sweet soul of mine?
  Now kiss me on the mouth, my dearest, here;
  Kiss me that I for once may cease to pine!
  So sweet, ah me, is thy dear mouth, so dear,
  That of thy mercy prithee sweeten mine! Some
  little time after this note went to Averell, word
  was brought me that he had already carried out the programme indicated
when forwarding the report of the expected turning of his right, and
that he had actually withdrawn and gone into camp near Hawkinsburg.


  It is my lover come to bid me rise,
  If I am fain forthwith toward heaven to fare.
  But I have answered him, and said him No!
  I've given my paradise, my heaven, for you:
  Till we together go to paradise,
  I'll stay on earth and love your beauteous eyes.

But it is not with such remote and eerie thoughts that the rustic muse of Italy can deal successfully.
Far better is the following half-playful description of love-sadness (p. 71):--

  Ah me, alas! who know not how to sigh!
  Of sighs I now full well have learned the art:
  Sighing at table when to eat I try,
  Sighing within my little room apart,
  Sighing when jests and laughter round me fly,
  Sighing with her and her who know my heart:
  I sigh at first, and then I go on sighing;
  'Tis for your eyes that I am ever sighing:
  I sigh at first, and sigh the whole year through;
  And 'tis your eyes that keep me sighing so.

The next two rispetti, delicious in their naïveté, might seem to have been extracted from the
libretto of an opera, but that they lack the sympathising chorus, who should have stood at
hand, ready to chime in with 'he,' 'she,' and 'they,' to the 'I,' 'you,' and 'we' of the lovers
(p. 123):--

  Ah, when will dawn that glorious day
  When you will softly mount my stair?
  My kin shall bring you on the way;
  I shall be first to greet you there.
  Ah, when will dawn that day of bliss
  When we before the priest say Yes?

  Ah, when will dawn that blissful day
  When I shall softly mount your stair,
  Your brothers meet me on the way,
  And one by one I greet them there?
  When comes the day, my staff, my strength,
  To call your mother mine at length?
  When will the day come, love of mine,
  I shall be yours and you be mine?

Hitherto the songs have told only of happy love, or of love returned. Some of the best, however,
are unhappy. Here is one, for instance, steeped in gloom (p. 142):--

  They have this custom in fair Naples town;
  They never mourn a man when he is dead:
  The mother weeps when she has reared a son
  To be a serf and slave by love misled;
  The mother weeps when she a son hath born
  To be the serf and slave of galley scorn;
  The mother weeps when she a son gives suck
  To be the serf and slave of city luck.

The following contains a fine wild image, wrought out with strange passion in detail (p. 300):--

  I'll spread a table brave for revelry,
  And to the feast will bid sad lovers all.
  For meat I'll give them my heart's misery;
  For drink I'll give these briny tears that fall.
  Sorrows and sighs shall be the varletry,
  To serve the lovers at this festival:
  The table shall be death, black death profound;
  Weep, stones, and utter sighs, ye walls around!
  The table shall be death, yea, sacred death;
  Weep, stones, and sigh as one that sorroweth!

Nor is the next a whit less in the vein of mad Jeronimo (p. 304):--

  High up, high up, a house I'll rear,
  High up, high up, on yonder height;
  At every window set a snare,
  With treason, to betray the night;
  With treason, to betray the stars,
  Since I'm betrayed by my false feres;
  With treason, to betray the day,
  Since Love betrayed me, well away!

The vengeance of an Italian reveals itself in the energetic song which I quote next (p. 303):--

  I have a sword; 'twould cut a brazen bell,
  Tough steel 'twould cut, if there were any need:
  I've had it tempered in the streams of hell
  By masters mighty in the mystic rede:
  I've had it tempered by the light of stars;
  Then let him come whose skin is stout as Mars;
  I've had it tempered to a trenchant blade;
  Then let him come who stole from me my maid.

