Released from the thraldom of Morton, the king, with more than youthful levity, threw his supreme
power into the hands of Lennox and Arran. The religion of the first, and the infamous character
of the second favourite, excited the hatred of the commons, while their exclusive and engrossing
power awakened the jealousy of the other nobles. James, doomed to be the sport of contending
factions was seized at Stirling by the nobles, confederated in what was termed the Raid of
Ruthven. But the conspirators soon suffered their prize to escape, and were rewarded for their
enterprize by exile or death.

In 1585, an affray took place at a border meeting in which Lord Russel, the Earl of Bedford's
eldest son, chanced to be slain. Queen Elizabeth imputed the guilt of this slaughter to Thomas
Kerr of Fairnihirst, instigated by Arran. Upon the imperious demand of the English ambassador,
both were committed to prison; but the minion, Arran, was soon restored to liberty and favour;
while Fairnihirst, the dread of the English borderers and the gallant defender of Queen Mary,
died in his confinement, of a broken heart.--Spottiswoode p. 341.

The tyranny of Arran becoming daily more insupportable the exiled lords, joined by Maxwell,
Home, Bothwell, and other border chieftains, seized the town of Stirling, which was pillaged
by their disorderly followers, invested the castle, which surrendered at discretion, and drove
the favourite from the king's council[27].

[Footnote 27: The associated nobles seem to have owed their success chiefly to the border spearmen;
for, though they had a band of mercenaries, who used fire arms, yet they were such bad masters
of their craft, their captain was heard to observe, "that those, who knew his soldiers as well
as he did, would hardly chuse to march before them."--Godscroft, v. ii. p. 368.]

The king, perceiving the Earl of Bothwell among the armed barons, to whom he surrendered his
person addressed him in these prophetic words:-- "Francis, Francis, what moved thee to come
in arms against thy prince, who never wronged thee? I wish thee a more quiet spirit, else I
foresee thy destruction."--Spottiswoode, p. 343.

In fact, the extraordinary enterprizes of this nobleman disturbed the next ten years of James's
reign. Francis Stuart, son to a bastard of James V., had been invested with the titles and
estates belonging to his maternal uncle, James Hepburn, Earl of Bothwell, upon the forfeiture
of that infamous man; and consequently became lord of Liddesdale, and of the castle of Hermitage.--This
acquisition of power upon the borders, where he could easily levy followers, willing to undertake
the most desperate enterprize, joined to the man's native daring and violent spirit, rendered
Bothwell the most turbulent insurgent, that ever disturbed the tranquillity of a kingdom. During
the king's absence in Denmark, Bothwell, swayed by the superstition of his age, had tampered
with certain soothsayers and witches, by whose pretended art he hoped to atchieve the death
of his monarch. In one of the courts of inquisition, which James delighted to hold upon the
professors of the occult sciences, some of his cousin's proceedings were brought to light,
for which he was put in ward in the castle of Edinburgh. Burning with revenge, he broke from
his confinement, and lurked for some time upon the borders, where he hoped for the countenance
of his son-in-law, Buccleuch. Undeterred by the absence of that chief, who, in obedience to
the royal command, had prudently retired to France, Bothwell attempted the desperate enterprize
of seizing the person of the king, while residing in his metropolis. At the dead of night,
followed by a band of borderers, he occupied the court of the palace of Holyrood, and began
to burst open the doors of the royal apartments. The nobility, distrustful of each other, and
ignorant of the extent of the conspiracy, only endeavoured to make good the defence of their
separate lodgings; but darkness and confusion prevented the assailants from profiting by their
disunion. Melville, who was present, gives a lively picture of the scene of disorder, transiently
illuminated by the glare of passing torches; while the report of fire arms, the clatter of
armour, the din of hammers thundering on the gates, mingled wildly with the war-cry of the
borderers, who shouted incessantly, "Justice! Justice! A Bothwell! A Bothwell!" The citizens
of Edinburgh at length began to assemble for the defence of their sovereign; and Bothwell was
compelled to retreat, which he did without considerable loss.--Melville, p. 356. A similar
attempt on the person of James, while residing at Faulkland, also misgave; but the credit which
Bothwell obtained on the borders, by these bold and desperate enterprizes, was incredible "All
Tiviotdale," says Spottiswoode, "ran after him;" so that he finally obtained his object; and,
at Edinburgh, in 1593, he stood before James, an unexpected apparition, with his naked sword
in his hand. 45 min. W.; and entered George the IVth Coronation Gulf, by the Dolphin and Union
Straits (so named after the boats), which brought them within sight of Cape Barrow, and two degrees
of longitude to the eastward of the coppermine river.
 Incensed at this reverse,
Bothwell levied a body of four hundred cavalry, and attacked the king's guard in broad day,
upon the Borough Moor, near Edinburgh.--The ready succour of the citizens saved James from
falling once more into the hands of his turbulent subject[28]. On a subsequent day, Bothwell
met the laird of Cessford, riding near Edinburgh, with whom he fought a single combat, which
lasted for two hours[29]. But his credit was now fallen; he retreated to England, whence he
was driven by Elizabeth, and then wandered to Spain and Italy, where he subsisted, in indigence
and obscurity, on the bread which he earned by apostatizing to the faith of Rome. So fell this
agitator of domestic broils, whose name passed into a proverb, denoting a powerful and turbulent
demagogue[30].

[Footnote 28: Spottiswoode says, the king awaited this charge with firmness; but Birrell avers,
that he fled upon the gallop. The same author, instead of the firm deportment of James, when
seized by Bothwell, describes "the king's majestie as flying down the back stair, with his
breeches in his hand, in great fear."--Birrell, apud Dalyell, p. 30. Such is the difference
betwixt the narrative of the courtly archbishop, and that of the presbyterian burgess of Edinburgh.]

[Footnote 29: This rencounter took place at Humbie, in East Lothian. Bothwell was attended
by a servant, called Gibson, and Cessford by one of the Rutherfords, who was hurt in the cheek.
The combatant parted from pure fatigue.]

[Footnote 30: Sir Walter Raleigh, in writing of Essex, then in prison, says, "Let the queen
hold Bothwell while she hath him."--Murdin, Vol. II. p. 812. It appears, from Crichton's Memoirs,
that Bothwell's grandson, though so nearly related to the royal family, actually rode a private
in the Scottish horse guards, in the reign of Charles II.--Edinburgh, 1731, p. 43.]

