All the Protestant states were invited to accede to the treaty of Prague, and on that condition
were to benefit by the amnesty.  The princes of Wurtemberg and Baden, whose territories the
Emperor was already in possession of, and which he was not disposed to restore unconditionally;
and such vassals of Austria as had borne arms against their sovereign; and those states which,
under the direction of Oxenstiern, composed the council of the Upper German Circle, were excluded
from the treaty,--not so much with the view of continuing the war against them, as of compelling
them to purchase peace at a dearer rate.  Their territories were to be retained in pledge,
till every thing should be restored to its former footing.  Such was the treaty of Prague.
Equal justice, however, towards all, might perhaps have restored confidence between the head
of the Empire and its members-- between the Protestants and the Roman Catholics--between the
Reformed and the Lutheran party; and the Swedes, abandoned by all their allies, would in all
probability have been driven from Germany with disgrace. But this inequality strengthened,
in those who were more severely treated, the spirit of mistrust and opposition, and made it
an easier task for the Swedes to keep alive the flame of war, and to maintain a party in Germany.

The peace of Prague, as might have been expected, was received with very various feelings throughout
Germany.  The attempt to conciliate both parties, had rendered it obnoxious to both.  The Protestants
complained of the restraints imposed upon them; the Roman Catholics thought that these hated
sectaries had been favoured at the expense of the true church.  In the opinion of the latter,
the church had been deprived of its inalienable rights, by the concession to the Protestants
of forty years' undisturbed possession of the ecclesiastical benefices; while the former murmured
that the interests of the Protestant church had been betrayed, because toleration had not been
granted to their co-religionists in the Austrian dominions.  But no one was so bitterly reproached
as the Elector of Saxony, who was publicly denounced as a deserter, a traitor to religion and
the liberties of the Empire, and a confederate of the Emperor.

In the mean time, he consoled himself with the triumph of seeing most of the Protestant states
compelled by necessity to embrace this peace.  The Elector of Brandenburg, Duke William of
Weimar, the princes of Anhalt, the dukes of Mecklenburg, the dukes of Brunswick Lunenburg,
the Hanse towns, and most of the imperial cities, acceded to it.  The Landgrave William of
Hesse long wavered, or affected to do so, in order to gain time, and to regulate his measures
by the course of events.  He had conquered several fertile provinces of Westphalia, and derived
from them principally the means of continuing the war; these, by the terms of the treaty, he
was bound to restore.  Bernard, Duke of Weimar, whose states, as yet, existed only on paper,
as a belligerent power was not affected by the treaty, but as a general was so materially;
and, in either view, he must equally be disposed to reject it.  His whole riches consisted
in his bravery, his possessions in his sword.  War alone gave him greatness and importance,
and war alone could realize the projects which his ambition suggested.

But of all who declaimed against the treaty of Prague, none were so loud in their clamours
as the Swedes, and none had so much reason for their opposition.  Invited to Germany by the
Germans themselves, the champions of the Protestant Church, and the freedom of the States,
which they had defended with so much bloodshed, and with the sacred life of their king, they
now saw themselves suddenly and shamefully abandoned, disappointed in all their hopes, without
reward and without gratitude driven from the empire for which they had toiled and bled, and
exposed to the ridicule of the enemy by the very princes who owed every thing to them.  No
satisfaction, no indemnification for the expenses which they had incurred, no equivalent for
the conquests which they were to leave behind them, was provided by the treaty of Prague. 
They were to be dismissed poorer than they came, or, if they resisted, to be expelled by the
very powers who had invited them.  The Elector of Saxony at last spoke of a pecuniary indemnification,
and mentioned the small sum of two millions five hundred thousand florins; but the Swedes had
already expended considerably more, and this disgraceful equivalent in money was both contrary
to their true interests, and injurious to their pride. "The Electors of Bavaria and Saxony,"
replied Oxenstiern, "have been paid for their services, which, as vassals, they were bound
to render the Emperor, with the possession of important provinces; and shall we, who have sacrificed
our king for Germany, be dismissed with the miserable sum of 2,500,000 florins?"  The disappointment
of their expectations was the more severe, because the Swedes had calculated upon being recompensed
with the Duchy of Pomerania, the present possessor of which was old and without heirs.  But
the succession of this territory was confirmed by the treaty of Prague to the Elector of Brandenburg;
and all the neighbouring powers declared against allowing the Swedes to obtain a footing within
the empire.

Never, in the whole course of the war, had the prospects of the Swedes looked more gloomy,
than in the year 1635, immediately after the conclusion of the treaty of Prague.  Many of their
allies, particularly among the free cities, abandoned them to benefit by the peace; others
were compelled to accede to it by the victorious arms of the Emperor. Augsburg, subdued by
famine, surrendered under the severest conditions; Wurtzburg and Coburg were lost to the Austrians.
The League of Heilbronn was formally dissolved.  Nearly the whole of Upper Germany, the chief
seat of the Swedish power, was reduced under the Emperor. Saxony, on the strength of the treaty
of Prague, demanded the evacuation of Thuringia, Halberstadt, and Magdeburg.  Philipsburg,
the military depot of France, was surprised by the Austrians, with all the stores it contained;
and this severe loss checked the activity of France.  To complete the embarrassments of Sweden,
the truce with Poland was drawing to a close.  To support a war at the same time with Poland
and in Germany, was far beyond the power of Sweden; and all that remained was to choose between
them.  Pride and ambition declared in favour of continuing the German war, at whatever sacrifice
on the side of Poland. An army, however, was necessary to command the respect of Poland, and
to give weight to Sweden in any negotiations for a truce or a peace.

The mind of Oxenstiern, firm, and inexhaustible in expedients, set itself manfully to meet
these calamities, which all combined to overwhelm Sweden; and his shrewd understanding taught
him how to turn even misfortunes to his advantage.  The defection of so many German cities
of the empire deprived him, it is true, of a great part of his former allies, but at the same
time it freed him from the necessity of paying any regard to their interests.  The more the
number of his enemies increased, the more provinces and magazines were opened to his troops.
The gross ingratitude of the States, and the haughty contempt with which the Emperor behaved,
(who did not even condescend to treat directly with him about a peace,) excited in him the
courage of despair, and a noble determination to maintain the struggle to the last.  The continuance
of war, however unfortunate it might prove, could not render the situation of Sweden worse
than it now was; and if Germany was to be evacuated, it was at least better and nobler to do
so sword in hand, and to yield to force rather than to fear.

In the extremity in which the Swedes were now placed by the desertion of their allies, they
addressed themselves to France, who met them with the greatest encouragement.  The interests
of the two crowns were closely united, and France would have injured herself by allowing the
Swedish power in Germany to decline.  The helpless situation of the Swedes, was rather an additional
motive with France to cement more closely their alliance, and to take a more active part in
the German war.  Since the alliance with Sweden, at Beerwald, in 1632, France had maintained
the war against the Emperor, by the arms of Gustavus Adolphus, without any open or formal breach,
by furnishing subsidies and increasing the number of his enemies.  But alarmed at the unexpected
rapidity and success of the Swedish arms, France, in anxiety to restore the balance of power,
which was disturbed by the preponderance of the Swedes, seemed, for a time, to have lost sight
of her original designs.  She endeavoured to protect the Roman Catholic princes of the empire
against the Swedish conqueror, by the treaties of neutrality, and when this plan failed, she
even meditated herself to declare war against him.  But no sooner had the death of Gustavus
Adolphus, and the desperate situation of the Swedish affairs, dispelled this apprehension,
than she returned with fresh zeal to her first design, and readily afforded in this misfortune
the aid which in the hour of success she had refused.  Freed from the checks which the ambition
and vigilance of Gustavus Adolphus placed upon her plans of aggrandizement, France availed
herself of the favourable opportunity afforded by the defeat of Nordlingen, to obtain the entire
direction of the war, and to prescribe laws to those who sued for her powerful protection.
The moment seemed to smile upon her boldest plans, and those which had formerly seemed chimerical,
now appeared to be justified by circumstances.  She now turned her whole attention to the war
in Germany; and, as soon as she had secured her own private ends by a treaty with the Germans,
she suddenly entered the political arena as an active and a commanding power.  While the other
belligerent states had been exhausting themselves in a tedious contest, France had been reserving
her strength, and maintained the contest by money alone; but now, when the state of things
called for more active measures, she seized the sword, and astonished Europe by the boldness
and magnitude of her undertakings.  At the same moment, she fitted out two fleets, and sent
six different armies into the field, while she subsidized a foreign crown and several of the
German princes.  Animated by this powerful co-operation, the Swedes and Germans awoke from
the consternation, and hoped, sword in hand, to obtain a more honourable peace than that of
Prague.  Abandoned by their confederates, who had been reconciled to the Emperor, they formed
a still closer alliance with France, which increased her support with their growing necessities,
at the same time taking a more active, although secret share in the German war, until at last,
she threw off the mask altogether, and in her own name made an unequivocal declaration of war
against the Emperor.

To leave Sweden at full liberty to act against Austria, France commenced her operations by
liberating it from all fear of a Polish war.  By means of the Count d'Avaux, its minister,
an agreement was concluded between the two powers at Stummsdorf in Prussia, by which the truce
was prolonged for twenty-six years, though not without a great sacrifice on the part of the
Swedes, who ceded by a single stroke of the pen almost the whole of Polish Prussia, the dear-bought
conquest of Gustavus Adolphus.  The treaty of Beerwald was, with certain modifications, which
circumstances rendered necessary, renewed at different times at Compiegne, and afterwards at
Wismar and Hamburg.  France had already come to a rupture with Spain, in May, 1635, and the
vigorous attack which it made upon that power, deprived the Emperor of his most valuable auxiliaries
from the Netherlands.  By supporting the Landgrave William of Cassel, and Duke Bernard of Weimar,
the Swedes were enabled to act with more vigour upon the Elbe and the Danube, and a diversion
upon the Rhine compelled the Emperor to divide his force.

The war was now prosecuted with increasing activity.  By the treaty of Prague, the Emperor
had lessened the number of his adversaries within the Empire; though, at the same time, the
zeal and activity of his foreign enemies had been augmented by it.  In Germany, his influence
was almost unlimited, for, with the exception of a few states, he had rendered himself absolute
master of the German body and its resources, and was again enabled to act in the character
of emperor and sovereign. The first fruit of his power was the elevation of his son, Ferdinand
III., to the dignity of King of the Romans, to which he was elected by a decided majority of
votes, notwithstanding the opposition of Treves, and of the heirs of the Elector Palatine.
But, on the other hand, he had exasperated the Swedes to desperation, had armed the power of
France against him, and drawn its troops into the heart of the kingdom.  France and Sweden,
with their German allies, formed, from this moment, one firm and compactly united power; the
Emperor, with the German states which adhered to him, were equally firm and united.  The Swedes,
who no longer fought for Germany, but for their own lives, showed no more indulgence; relieved
from the necessity of consulting their German allies, or accounting to them for the plans which
they adopted, they acted with more precipitation, rapidity, and boldness.  Battles, though
less decisive, became more obstinate and bloody; greater achievements, both in bravery and
military skill, were performed; but they were but insulated efforts; and being neither dictated
by any consistent plan, nor improved by any commanding spirit, had comparatively little influence
upon the course of the war.

Saxony had bound herself, by the treaty of Prague, to expel the Swedes from Germany.  From
this moment, the banners of the Saxons and Imperialists were united:  the former confederates
were converted into implacable enemies.  The archbishopric of Magdeburg which, by the treaty,
was ceded to the prince of Saxony, was still held by the Swedes, and every attempt to acquire
it by negociation had proved ineffectual. Hostilities commenced, by the Elector of Saxony recalling
all his subjects from the army of Banner, which was encamped upon the Elbe.  The officers,
long irritated by the accumulation of their arrears, obeyed the summons, and evacuated one
quarter after another.  As the Saxons, at the same time, made a movement towards Mecklenburg,
to take Doemitz, and to drive the Swedes from Pomerania and the Baltic, Banner suddenly marched
thither, relieved Doemitz, and totally defeated the Saxon General Baudissin, with 7000 men,
of whom 1000 were slain, and about the same number taken prisoners.  Reinforced by the troops
and artillery, which had hitherto been employed in Polish Prussia, but which the treaty of
Stummsdorf rendered unnecessary, this brave and impetuous general made, the following year
(1636), a sudden inroad into the Electorate of Saxony, where he gratified his inveterate hatred
of the Saxons by the most destructive ravages.  Irritated by the memory of old grievances which,
during their common campaigns, he and the Swedes had suffered from the haughtiness of the Saxons,
and now exasperated to the utmost by the late defection of the Elector, they wreaked upon the
unfortunate inhabitants all their rancour.  Against Austria and Bavaria, the Swedish soldier
had fought from a sense, as it were, of duty; but against the Saxons, they contended with all
the energy of private animosity and personal revenge, detesting them as deserters and traitors;
for the hatred of former friends is of all the most fierce and irreconcileable. The powerful
diversion made by the Duke of Weimar, and the Landgrave of Hesse, upon the Rhine and in Westphalia,
prevented the Emperor from affording the necessary assistance to Saxony, and left the whole
Electorate exposed to the destructive ravages of Banner's army.

At length, the Elector, having formed a junction with the Imperial General Hatzfeld, advanced
against Magdeburg, which Banner in vain hastened to relieve.  The united army of the Imperialists
and the Saxons now spread itself over Brandenburg, wrested several places from the Swedes,
and almost drove them to the Baltic.  But, contrary to all expectation, Banner, who had been
given up as lost, attacked the allies, on the 24th of September, 1636, at Wittstock, where
a bloody battle took place.  The onset was terrific; and the whole force of the enemy was directed
against the right wing of the Swedes, which was led by Banner in person.  The contest was long
maintained with equal animosity and obstinacy on both sides.  There was not a squadron among
the Swedes, which did not return ten times to the charge, to be as often repulsed; when at
last, Banner was obliged to retire before the superior numbers of the enemy.  His left wing
sustained the combat until night, and the second line of the Swedes, which had not as yet been
engaged, was prepared to renew it the next morning.  But the Elector did not wait for a second
attack.  His army was exhausted by the efforts of the preceding day; and, as the drivers had
fled with the horses, his artillery was unserviceable.  He accordingly retreated in the night,
with Count Hatzfeld, and relinquished the ground to the Swedes.  About 5000 of the allies fell
upon the field, exclusive of those who were killed in the pursuit, or who fell into the hands
of the exasperated peasantry.  One hundred and fifty standards and colours, twenty-three pieces
of cannon, the whole baggage and silver plate of the Elector, were captured, and more than
2000 men taken prisoners.  This brilliant victory, achieved over an enemy far superior in numbers,
and in a very advantageous position, restored the Swedes at once to their former reputation;
their enemies were discouraged, and their friends inspired with new hopes. Banner instantly
followed up this decisive success, and hastily crossing the Elbe, drove the Imperialists before
him, through Thuringia and Hesse, into Westphalia.  He then returned, and took up his winter
quarters in Saxony.

