 'Tis very obvious and common to observe
that Persons of Seriousness and Judgment that consider what they sing, are often forced to
break off in the midst, to omit whole Lines and Verses, even where the best of our present
Translations at used; and thus the Tune, and the Sense, and their Devotion is interrupted at
once, because they dare not sing without understanding, and almost against their Consciences.
Whereas the more unthinking Multitude go on singing in chearful Ignorance wheresoever the Clerk
guides them, a-cross the River Jordan, thro' the Land of Gebal, Ammon and Amalek; He leads
'em into the strong City, he brings them into Edom; Anon they follow him thro' the Valley of
Bacha, till they come up to Jerusalem; they wait upon him into {252} the Court of Burnt-Offerings,
and bind their Sacrifice with Cords to the Horns of the Altar; they enter so far into the Temple,
till they join their Song in Consort with the high sounding Cymbals, their Thoughts are be-darkened
with the Smoke of Incense, and cover'd with Jewish Veils. Such Expressions as these are the
beauties and Perfections of a Hebrew Song, they paint every thing to the Life: Such Language
was suited by Infinite Wisdom to raise the Affections of the Saints of that Day: But I fear
they do but sink our Devotion, and hurt our Worship.

 I esteem the Book of Psalms the most valuable Part of the Old
Testament upon many Accounts: I advise the Reading and Meditation of it
more frequently than any single Book of Scripture; and what I advise I
practise. Nothing is more proper to furnish our Souls with devout
Thoughts, and lead us into a World of Spiritual Experiences: The
Expressions of it that are not Jewish or peculiar, give us constant
Assistance in Prayer and in Praise: But yet if we would prepare
David's Psalms to be sung by Christian Lips, we should, observe these
two plain Rules.

First, They ought to be translated its such a Manner as we have reason to believe David would
have compos'd 'em if he had lived in our Day: And therefore his Poems are given as a Pattern
to be imitated in our Composures, rather than as the precise and invariable Matter of our Psalmody.
'Tis one of the Excellencies of Scripture-Songs, that they {253} are exactly suited to the
very Purpose and Design for which they were written, and that both in the Matter, in the Stile,
and in all their Ornaments: This gives Life and Strength to the Expression, it presents Objects
to the Ears and to the Eyes, and touches the Heart in the most affecting Manner. David's Language
is adapted to his own Devotion, and to the Worship of the Jewish Church; he mentions the very
Places of his Journies, or Retirements, of his Sorrows, or his Successes; He names the Nations
that were Enemies of the Church, or that shall be its Friends and tho for the most part he
leaves the single Persons of his Time nameless in the Body of his Psalm, yet he describes them
there with great Particularity, and often names them in the Title. This gives us abundant Ground
to infer, that should the Sweet-Singer of Israel return from the Dead into our Age, he would
not sing the Words of his own Psalms without considerable Alteration; and were he now to transcribe
them, he would make them speak the present Circumstances of the Church, and that in the Language
of the New Testament: He would see frequent Occasion to insert the Cross of Christ in his Song,
and often interline the Confessions of his Sins with the Blood of the Lamb; often would he
describe the Glories and the Triumphs of our blessed Lord in long and flowing Verse, even as
St. Paul, when he mentions the Name and Honours of Christ can hardly part his Lips from 'em
again: {254} His Expressions would run ever bright and clear; such as here and there we find
in a single Verse of his old Composures, when he is transported beyond himself, and carried
far away from Jewish Shadows by the Spirit of Prophecy and the Gospel. We have the more abundant
Reason to believe this, if we observe, that all along the sacred History as the Revelations
of God and his Grace were made plainer, so the Songs of the Saints express'd that Grace and
those Revelations according to the Measure of their Clearness and Increase. Let us begin at
the Song of Moses, Exod. 15. and proceed to David and Solomon, to the Song of the Virgin Mary,
of Zecharias, Simeon, and the Angels, the Hosanna of the young Children, the Praises paid to
God by the Disciples in the Acts, the Doxologies of Paul, and the Songs of the Christian Church
in the Book of the Revelations: Every Beam of new Light that broke into the World gave occasion
of fresh joy to the Saints, and they were taught to sing of Salvation in all the Degrees of
its advancing Glory.

Secondly, In the Translation of Jewish Songs for Gospel-Worship, if Scripture affords us any
Example, we should be ready to follow it, and the Management thereof should be a Pattern for
us. Now tho the Disciples and primitive Christians had so many and so vast Occasions for Praise,
yet I know but two Pieces of Songs they borrow'd from the Book of Psalms. One is mention'd
in Luke 19.38.

{255} Where the Disciples assume a Part of a Verse from the 118th Psalm, but sing it with Alterations
and Additions to the Words of David.

The other is the Beginning of the second Palm, sung by Peter and John and their Company, Acts
4. 23, 24, &c. You find there an Addition of Praise in the Beginning, Lord thou art God which
hast made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all that in them is. Then there is a Narration
of what David spoke, who by the Mouth of thy servant David hast said, &c. Next follow the two
first Verses of that Psalm, but not in the very Words of the Psalmist: Afterwards an Explication
of the Heathen and the People, (viz.) the Gentiles and Israel: The Kings and the Rulers, (viz.)
Herod and Pontius Pilate, and the Holy Child Jesus, is God's anointed. Then there is an Enlargement
of the Matter of Fact by a Consideration of the Hand of God in it, and the Song concludes with
the breathing of their Desires towards God for Mercies most precisely suited to their Day and
Duty; and you find when they had sung, they went to Prayer in the Assembly, and then they preached
the Word of God by the holy Ghost, and with amazing Success. O may I live to see Psalmody perform'd
in these evangelick Beauties of Holiness! May these Ears of mine be entertain'd with such Devotion
in Publick, such Prayer, such Preaching, and such Praise! May these Eyes behold such returning
Glory in the Churches! Then my Soul shall be all Admiration, my Tongue {256} shall humbly attempt
to mingle in the Worship, and assist the Harmony and the Joy.

After we have found the true Method of translating Jewish Songs for the Use of the Christian
Church, let us enquire also how lawful and necessary 'tis to compose Spiritual Songs of a more
evangelic Frame for the Use of Divine Worship under the Gospel.

The First Argument I shall borrow from all the foregoing Discourse concerning the Translation
of the Psalms of David: For by that time they are fitted for Christian Psalmody, and have all
the Particularities of Circumstance that related to David's Person, and Times alter'd and suited
to our present Case; and the Language of Judaism is chang'd into the Stile of the Gospel; the
Form and Composure of the Psalm can hardly be called inspired or Divine: only the Materials
or the Sense contain'd therein may in a large Sense be called the Word of God, as it is borrowed
from that Word. Why then may it not be esteemed as lawful to take some Divine Sense and Materials
agreeable to the Word of God, and suited to the present Case and Experience of Christians,
and compose them into a Spiritual Song? Especially when we cannot find one ready pen'd in the
Bible, whose Subject is near a-kin to our present Condition, or whose Form is adapted to our
present Purpose.

The Second Argument shall be drawn from the several Ends and Designs of Singing, which can
never be sufficiently attain'd by {257} confining ourselves to David's Psalms, or the Words
of any Songs in Scripture. The first and chief intent of this part of Worship, is to express
unto God what Sense and Apprehensions we have of his Essential Glories; and what notice we
take of his Works of Wisdom and Power, Vengeance and Mercy; 'tis to vent the inward Devotion
of our Spirits in Words of Melody, to speak our own Experience of divine Things, especially
our religious Joy; 'twould be tiresom to recount the endless Instances out of the Book of Psalms
and other divine Songs, where this is made the chief Business of them. In the Texts of the
New Testament where Singing is requir'd, the same Designs are propos'd; when the Ephesians
are filled with the Spirit, the Enlightner and Comforter, they are charged to indulge those
Divine Sensations, and let them break out into a Spiritual Song, Eph. 5.19. When any is merry
or chearful, the Apostle James bids him express it by Singing. Giving Thanks unto God, is the
Command of St. Paul to the Saints while he injoins Psalmody on them; And speaking the Wonders
of his Power, Justice and Grace, is the Practice of the Church constantly in the Visions of
St. John. To teach and admonish one another, is mention'd by St. Paul as another Design of
Singing; the Improvement of our Meditations, and the kindling Divine Affections Within our
selves, is one of the Purposes also of religious Melody, if Eph. 5. 19. be rightly translated.
Now, {258} how is it possible all these Ends should be attain'd by a Christian, if he confines
his Meditations, his Joys, and his Praises, to the Hebrew Book of Psalms? Have we nothing more
of the Nature of God revealed to us than David had? Is not the Mystery of the ever-blessed
Trinity brought out of Darkness into open Light? Where can you find a Psalm that speaks the
Miracles of Wisdom and Power as they are discover'd in a crucify'd Christ? And how do we rob
God the Son of the Glory of his dying Love, if we speak of it only in the gloomy Language of
Smoke and Sacrifices, Bullocks and Goats, and the Fat of Lambs? Is not the Ascent of Christ
into Heaven, and his Triumph over Principalities and Powers of Darkness a nobler Entertainment
for our tuneful Meditations than the removing of the Ark up to the City of David, to the Hill
of God, which is high as the Hill of Bashan? Is not our Heart often warm'd with holy Delight
in the Contemplation of the Son of God our dear Redeemer whose Love was stronger than Death?
Are not our Souls possess'd with a Variety of Divine Affections, when we behold him who is
our chief Beloved hanging on the cursed Tree, with the Load of all our Sins upon him, and giving
up his Soul to the Sword of Divine Justice in the stead of Rebels and Enemies? And must these
Affections be confin'd only to our own Bosoms, or never break forth but in Jewish Language,
and Words which were not made to express the {259} Devotion of the Gospel? The Heaven and the
Hell that we are acquainted with by the Discovery of God our Saviour, give us amore distinct
Knowledge of the future and eternal State, than all the former Revelations of God to Men: Life
and Immortality is brought to light by the Gospel; we are taught to look far into the invisible
World, and take a Prospect of the last awful Scene of Things: We see the Graves opening, and
the Dead arising at the Voice of the Archangel, and the Sounding of the Trump of God; We behold
the judge on his Tribunal, and we hear the dreadful and the delightful Sentences of Decision
that shall pass on all the Sons and Daughters of Adam; we are assur'd, that the Saints shall
arise to meet the Lord in the Air, and so shall we be for ever with the Lord: The Apostle bids
us, Exhort or comfort one another with these Words, 1 Thess. 4. 17, 18. Or shall it be suppos'd,
that we must admonish one another of the old Jewish Affairs and Ceremonies in Verse, and make
Melody with those weak and beggarly Elements, and the Yoke of Bondage, and yet never dare to
speak of the Wonders of new Discovery except in the plain and simple Language of Prose?

{260} Perhaps 'twill be replied here, that there are some Scriptural Hymns in the Book of Revelations
that describe the Affairs of the New Testament, the Death and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, and
these are lawful to be sung in a Christian Church; I am glad that our Friends of a different
Opinion will submit to sing any thing that belongs to the Gospel; I rejoice that the Bible
hath any such Pieces of Christian Psalmody in it; lest everything that is Evangelical should
utterly be excluded from this Worship, by those who will sing nothing but what is inspired;
but how seldom are these Gospel-Songs used among our Churches? how little respect is paid to
'em in comparison of the Jewish Psalms? how little mention would ever be made of them, if it
were not to defend the Patrons of Jewish Psalmody from the gross Absurdity of an entire Return
to Judaism in this Part of Worship? But give me leave also to add, that these Christian Hymns
are but very short, and very few; nor do they contain a hundredth Part of those glorious Revelations
that are made to us by Christ Jesus and his Apostles; nor can we suppose God excludes all other
Parts of the Gospel from Verse and Singing. This is one of the Glories of Gospel-Worship, that
all must be offer'd to the Father in his Name. So very particular is our Lord Jesus in this
Command, that his last Sermon to his Disciples mentions it four times, John 14. 13, 14. & 16.
23, 24. Nov why should we make Conscience of praying in the Name of Christ always, and offer
up our Praises in his Name when we speak in Prose? And yet when we give Thanks in Verse, we
almost bind our selves to take no more notice of the Name of Christ than David or Moses did.
Why should every part of Divine Worship under the Gospel be express'd in Language suited to
that Gospel (viz.) Praying, Preaching, Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and yet when we perform
that part of Worship which brings us nearest to the heavenly State, we must run back again
to the Law to borrow Materials for this Service? And when we are employ'd in the Work of Angels,
we talk the Language of the Infant-Church, and speak in Types and Shadows? While we bind our
selves to the Words of David when he inclines his Ear to a Parable, and opens his dark saying
upon the Harp, Psal. 49. 4. we have given too great Countenance to those who still continue
the use of the Harp while they open the dark saying.

The Fourth Argument may be thus drawn up. There is almost an infinite Number of different Occasions
for Praise and Thanksgivings; as well as for Prayer, in the Life of a {262} Christian; and
there is not a Set of Psalms already prepared that can answer all the Varieties of the Providence
and the Grace of God. Now if God will be prais'd for all his Mercies, and Singing be one Method
of Praise, we have some Reason to believe that God doth not utterly confine us even to the
Forms of his own composing. This is thought a very sufficient Reason to resist the Imposition
of any Book of Prayers; and I grant that no Number of Prayers of humane Composure cam express
every new Difficulty or future Want of a Christian; scarce can we suppose a Divine Volume should
do it, except it be equal to many Folio's. However I can see no thing in the inspired Book
of Praises that should perswade me that the Spirit of God design'd it as a universal Psalm-book;
nor that he intended these to include or provide for all the Occasions of Thanksgiving that
ever Could befal Jews or Christians in a single or social Capacity. We find in the History
of Scripture, that new Favours receiv'd from God were continually the Subject of new Songs,
and the very minute Circumstances of the present Providence are describ'd in the Verse. The
Destruction of Pharoah in the Red-Sea; the Victory of Barak over Sisera; the various Deliverances,
Escapes and Successes of the Son of Jesse are described in the Songs of Moses, Deborah and
David. The Jews in a Land of Captivity sat by the Rivers of Babylon, and remembred Sion; they
could find none of the antient Songs {263} of Sion fit to express their present Sorrow and
Devotion, tho some of them are mournful enough; then was that admirable and artful Ode written,
the 137th Psalm, which even in the Judgment of the greatest humane Criticks, is not inferiour
to the finest Heathen Poems. 'Tis a more dull, and obscure, and unaffecting Method of Worship
to preach, or pray, or praise always in Generals: It doth not reach the Heart, nor touch the
Passions; God did not think any of his own inspired Hymns clear and full and special enough
to express the Praise that was his due of new Blessings of Grace and Providence; and therefore
he put a new Song into the Mouths of Mary, Zecharias and Simeon; and 'tis but according to
his own Requirement, that the British-Islands should make their present Mercies under the Gospel
the Subject of fresh Praises; Isa. 42. 9, 10. Behold the former things are come to pass, and
new things do I declare; before they spring forth I tell you of them; Sing unto the Lord a
new Song, and his Praise from the End of the Earth; Ye that go down to the Sea, and all that
is therein; the Isles and the Inhabitants thereof. As for the new Songs in the Revelations,
the occasions of some of them are very particular, and relate to the Fall of Anti-Christ; It
can never be imagin'd that there are a compleat Collection of Psalms to suit all the Cases
of a Christian Church: They are rather given to us as small Originals, by Imitation whereof
the Churches should be furnished with Matter {264} for Psalmody, by those who are capable of
composing spiritual Songs according to the various or Special Occasions of Saints or Churches.
Now, shall we suppose the Duty of Singing to be so constantly provided for when there was any
fresh Occasion under the Old Testament, and just in the very Beginning of the New, and yet
that there is no manner of Provision made ever since by ordinary or extraordinary Gifts for
the Expression of our particular joys and Thanksgivings? This would be to sink the Gospel,
which is a Dispensation of the Spirit, of Liberty, of Joy, and of Glory, beneath the Level
of Judaism, when the Saints were kept in hard Bondage, and had not half so much Occasion for
Praise.

The Fifth Argument may be borrow'd from the extraordinary Gift of the Spirit to compose or
sing spiritual Songs in the primitive Church, express'd in 1Cor. 14. 15, 26. The several Parts
of Divine Worship, Praying, Preaching and Singing, were performed by immediate Inspirations
of the holy Spirit in that Day, for there two Reasons. (1.) That there might be a Discovery
of Divine Power in them, and the Seal of a Miracle set to the several Parts of Christian Worship,
to convince the World, and to confirm the Church. (2.) Because there was not time to acquire
a Capacity of Preaching, Praying, and composing Spiritual Songs by Diligence and Study, together
with the ordinary Assistance of Grace and Blessing of {265} Providence, which would have taken
up many Years before the Gospel could have been universally preached. But even in those Times
of Inspiration, as Timothy himself was not to neglect the Gift that was in him given by Imposition
of Hands, so he was charg'd to give Attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine, to
meditate upon these things, to give himself wholly to them, that his profiting might appear
unto all, 1 Tim. 4, 14, 15. And it is granted by all, that the Ministers of the Gospel in our
Day are to acquire and improve the Gifts of Knowledge, Prayer and Preaching, by Reading, Meditation
and frequent Exercise, together with earnest Requests to God for the ordinary Assistance of
his Spirit, and, a Blessing on their Studies; Why then should it be esteem'd sinful, to acquire
a Capacity of composing a spiritual Song? Or why is it unlawful to put this Gift in Excercise,
for the Use of Singing in the Christian Church, since 'tis one of those three standing Parts
of Worship which were at first practis'd and confirm'd by Inspiration and Miracle?

Some may object here, that the words psallo and Psalmos, which the Apostle useth in this Chapter,
intend the Psalms of David, and not any new Song: But if we consult the whole Frame and Design
of that Chapter, it appears that their worship was all performed by extraordinary Gifts: Now,
'twas no very, extraordinary thing to bring forth, one of David's Psalms; nor would it have
been proper to have hindered the inspsired Worship with such an Interposition of the ordinary
Service of an antient Jewish Song; 'tis very credible therefore that the Word Psalm in this
Place signifies a new spiritual Song, and 'tis so used frequently in the Writings of the Primitive
Fathers, as appears in the Citations, pag. 274.

To close this Rank of Arguments, I might mention the Divine Delight that many pious Souls have
found in the Use of spiritual, Songs, suited to their {266} own Circumstances, and to, the
Revelations of the New Testament. If the spiritual Joy and Consolation that particular Persons
have tasted in the general Duty or Singing, be esteem'd a tolerable Argument to encourage the
Duty and confirm the Institution, I am well assured that the Argument would grow strong apace,
and seal this Ordinance beyond Contradiction, if we would but stand fast in the Liberty of
the Gospel, and not tie our Consciences up to meer Forms of the Old Testament. The Faith, the
Hope, the Love, and the heavenly Pleasure that many Christians have profess'd while they have
been singing evangelical Hymns; would probably be multiply'd and diffus'd amongst the Churches,
if they would but breath out their Devotion in the Songs of the Lamb as well as in the Song
of Moses.

Thus far have we proceeded in a way of Argument drawn from Scripture and the Reason of Things.
Many Objections have been prevented, or sufficient Hints given for the Removal of them. Those
that remain and seem to have any considerable Strength, shall be propos'd with an Attempt to
answer them; for I would not have Christians venture upon the Practice of any thing in Divine
Worship without due Knowledge and Conviction.

Object. 1. The Directions given for Psalmody in some Parts of the Old Testament, lead us to
the Use of those Songs which are inspired, Deut. 31. And in Psal. 81. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Ans. 1. I have cited these Texts at large wherein the Objection lies, that an Answer might
appear plain in the Text to every Reader. How peculiarly do these Commands refer to the Israelites?
The very Words of the Precept confine it to the Jews, to the Men that dwelt in Canaan, to the
Worship that is paid with Tymbrels and Trumpets, to the Days of the New Moon, and solemn Jewish
Festivals; and if we will insist upon there Scriptures as precise Rules of our present Duty
and Worship, the Men that use Musical Instruments in a Christian Church will take the same
Liberty of returning to Jewish ordinances, and use then same Text to defend them.

Ans. 2 But if we should grant our selves under the Gospel still obliged by these Commands,
yet they do not bind us up intirely to inspired Forms of Singing, since the same sort of Expression
is used concerning Prayer; Hos. 14. 2. Take with you Words, and say unto the Lord, take away
all Iniquity, and receive us graciously, &c. Now who is there that esteems himself confin'd
to use no other Prayer but scriptural Forms? In other Places, where these Duties are injoin'd,
we are bid to pray, or to praise, or to sing; and why should we not be as much at Liberty to
suit the Words and the Sense to our present Circumstances in Singing as well as Praying, or
in praising with Verse as well as praising in Pros?

Object. 2. The examples of Scripture direct us to inspired Matter for Singing: Deut. 31. 21.
I Chron. 16. 7. David delivered first this Song, to thank the Lord, into the Hand of Asaph
and {268} his Brethren. Now in his dying Words, the sweet Psalmist of Israel tells us, 2 Sam.
23. 1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord spake by me, and his Word was in my Tongue. And in the Days
of Hezekiah, which was some Ages after David: 2 Chron. 29. 27, 28, 29, 30.

Answ. There are nothing but Examples of Jewish, and very ceremonious Worship; Nor do they effectually
prove, that the Jews themselves were forbid upon all Occasions whatsoever to use more private
Composures in their Synagogues, tho in the Temple 'tis probable that for the most part they
sung inspired Psalms. But it must be remembred, that these Psalms are all suited to their Dispensation,
and yet without doubt they chose such out of them from time to time as best fitted their present
Case; and so will we Christians take as many of the Psalms of David and other Scripture-Songs,
as are suited to our Dispensation and our Circumstances; but there will be but very few in
Comparison of what the antient Levites might use, especially if we must sing the very words
of David and Asaph the Seer without Omission or Paraphrase.

Object. 3. We cannot pretend to make better spiritual Songs than the Spirit of God himself
has made, therefore if we should neglect these, and sing humane Composures, we should incur
the Censure of the prophet Malachy, Chap. 1. v. 13, 14. Ye brought that which was torn, and
the Lame, and the Sick, thus ye brought an Offering, saith the Lord, should I accept this of
your Hands?

Ans. 1. Can we pretend to make better Prayers {269} than the Spirit of God has made and scatter'd
up and down thro' all the Old and New Testament? Can we compose better Sermons than Moses or
Solomon? Better than our Saviour and his Apostles preach'd, and the Spirit of God hath recorded?
Why then should not we use Scripture Forms of praying and preaching, as well as of Singing?
And tho we may hope for the ordinary Assistance of the Spirit in our Prayers and Sermons, yet
how can we expect that these shall be as good as those which were compos'd by his extraordinary
Inspiration?

Ans. 2. Divine Wisdom accommodates its Inspirations, its Gifts, its Revelations, and its Writings,
to the particular Cases and Seasons in which he finds a Saint or a Church. Now tho we cannot
pretend to make a better Prayer than that of Ezra or Daniel, or our Lord, for the Day and Design
for which they were prepared; yet a Song, a Sermon, or a Prayer that expresses my Wants, my
Duties or my Mercies, tho it be compos'd by a humane Gift, is much better for me than to tie
myself to any inspired Words in any part of Worship which do not reach my Case; and consequently
can never be proper to assist the Exercise of my Graces or raise my Devotion.

Ans. 3. I believe that Phrases and Sentences used by inspired Writers are very proper to express
our Thoughts in Prayer, Preaching or Praise; and God has frequently given Witness in the Hearts
of Christians how much he approves the Language of Scripture; but 'tis always with a Proviso
that those Phrases be clear, and expressive of our present Sense, and proper to our present
Purpose: Yet we are not to dress up our Prayers, Sermons or Songs in the Language of Judaism
when we design to express the Doctrines of the Gospel: This would but darken Divine Counsel
by Words without Knowledge; it would amuse and confound the more ignorant Worshipers, 'twould
disgust the more Considerate, and give neither {270} the one nor the other Light or Comfort:
And I think it may be as proper in our Churches to read a Sermon of Moses or Isaiah instead
of preaching the Gospel, as to sing a Psalm of David whose Expressions chiefly refer to David
the Shepherd, the King, the Fugitive, the Captain, the Musician and the Jew. In short the Prayers,
Sermons and Songs in Scripture are rather Patterns by which we should frame our Worship and
adjust it to our present Case, than Forms of Worship to which we should precisely and unchangeably
confine our selves. And as Sermons which are conformable to the Holy Scripture in a large Sense
may be called the Word of God and the Word of Christ, and are usally and justly so called if
they are agreeable to the Scripture and drawn from thence; so Hymns of Humane Composure according
to the Spirit and Doctrines of the Gospel may be as well termed the Word of Christ, which is
the proper Matter for Christian Psalmody. Col. 3. 16. whereas in the strictest and most limited
Sense of the Word nothing deserves that Title but the Hebrew and Greek Originals.

Object. 4. In the New Testament there are Promises of Divine Assistance to Ministers and private
Christians in preaching the Gospel and in Prayer; But we have no Promise of the Spirit of God
to help us to compose Psalms or Hymns for our private Use or for the Use of the Churches; and
how can we practise in the Worship of God what we have no Promise of the holy Spirit to encourage
and assist us in?

Ans. 1. There are many general Promises of the Presence of Christ with his Ministers, and the
Supply of his Spirit in the Discharge of all their Duties for the Edification of the Church:
Now there are several Performances which are necessary for the Churches Edification, to which
there is no peculiar Promise made of the Assistance of the Spirit in express Words: Such are,
Translating the Bible into {271} our Mother-Tongue, Composing our Sermons or at least the Substance
and Scheme of them before preaching, Writing pious and useful Treatises upon divine Subjects,
and Diligent Reading and study of Books so written; nor is there any more express Encouragement
to expect the Presence of the Spirit in turning the Psalms of David into Rhime and Metre, than
in composing new Spiritual Songs: And yet Ministers that are fitted for such Performances may
pray and hope for Divine Assistance in them all, and trust in the general Promises for Help
in particular Services.

Ans. 2. There is no need of these Gifts of Criticism or of Poesy for all Christians nor all
Ministers, tho it seems necessary that some should be furnish'd with them. A few Persons in
an Age or a Nation may translate the Scriptures into the National Language, and may compose
a sufficient Number of Hymns to answer the chief Designs and Wants of the Church for that Day
for publick Worship. Where there happen Occasions very particular, the Ministers of the Gospel
are not or should not be so utterly destitute of common Ingenuity, as to be unable to compose
or at least to collect a few tolerable Verses proper for such a Season.

Object. 5. We find no Instances in Scripture of humane Composures sung by the People of God;
and 'tis not good to practise such pieces of Worship without a Precedent.

Ans. Whensoever there was just Occasion for an Hymn according to some new and special Providence,
we almost every where find a new Song recorded in Scripture, and we call it inspired, nor do
I know any just Reason to suspect or doubt of the Inspiration; but if there had been any one
which was not the Effect of an extraordinary Gift but only compos'd by a good Man, we should
be ready to take it for inspired because mention'd in Scripture; as we do too {272} many Expressions
of the Saints in that divine History, and make every thing that a good Man saith Heavenly and
Divine: However if there can be no Pretence made to such an Example in Scripture, yet so much
Reason, Argument and Incouragement as hath been already drawn from Scripture sufficiently justifies
this Practice, since we perform many Circumstantials of Worship under the Influence of a general
Command without express and special Examples.

Object. 6. We ought to sing nothing to God but what is given us for this very End that it may
be sung, lest we indulge Will-worship and the Inventions of Men.

Ans. 1. To convert the Verses of David into English Lines, to confine them to an exact Number
of Syllables, and to make Melody in particular Tunes, may as well be called the Inventions
of Men and Will-Worship: But these Inventions are absolutely necessary for the Performance
of Divine Commands, and for the Assistance of a whole Congregation to sing; with any tolerable
Convenience, Order or Decency, as the Reverend Mr. Boyse has well proved.

Ans. 2. Those that refuse to sing Forms of humane Composure tho the Sense be never so divine,
generally allow it lawful to take any Parts of Scripture and alter and transpose the Words
into a Form fit for Singing; But to take a mere Parable or Story out of the Bible, and put
Some Rhimes onto the End of every Line of it, without giving it a new and pathetic Turn, is
but a dull way of making spiritual Songs, and without a precedent too. David did not deal so
with Genesis and Exodus, tho he loved the Words of the Law as well as we pretend to value the
Words of the Gospels and Epistles. The most part of the New Testament as it stands in our Bible
was never given us for Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs; but for divine Instruction and Materials
for this and other Duties, that so we might borrow the Doctrines and {273} Discoveries of the
New Testament, and compose Sermons and Songs out of them: But if we take Chapters and Verses
promiscuously out of the New Testament, and make them jingle and rhime, and so sing them, we
are guilty of singing what God never commanded to be sung, as much as if we compos'd spiritual
Songs by humane Art agreeable to the Sense of Scripture and the Christian Faith.

