SECOND ARTICLE [I, Q. 49, Art. 2]

> Whether the Supreme Good, God, Is the Cause of Evil?

In a few places, where obvious errors appeared in the Benziger Brothers edition, I have corrected
them by reference to a Latin text of the Summa. These corrections are indicated by English
text in brackets. For example, in Part I, Question 45, Article 2, the first sentence in the
Benziger Brothers edition begins: "Not only is it impossible that anything should be created
by God...." By reference to the Latin, "non solum non est impossibile a Deo aliquid creari"
(emphasis added), this has been corrected to "Not only is it [not] impossible that anything
should be created by God...."

This electronic edition also differs from the Benziger Brothers edition in the following details
(as well as the obvious lack of the original page numbers and headers):

* The repetitive expression "We proceed thus to the [next] Article" does not appear directly
below the title of each article.

* Italics are represented by underscores at the beginning and end, like this. Quotations and
other "quotable" matter, however, are ordinarily set off by quotation marks with no underscores
in this edition, in accordance with common English usage, even where they were set in italics
with no quotation marks in the Benziger Brothers edition. Titles of books are set off by underscores
when they appear in the text with no parentheses, but not when the books are cited in parentheses.

* Bible chapters and verses are cited with arabic numerals separated by colons, like this:
"Dan. 7:10"--not like this: "Dan. vii. 10." Small roman numerals have been retained where they
appear in citations to books other than the Bible.

* Any matter that appeared in a footnote in the Benziger Brothers edition is presented in brackets
at the point in the text where the footnote mark appeared.

* Greek words are presented in Roman transliteration.

* Paragraphs are not indented and are separated by blank lines.

* Numbered topics, set forth at the beginning of each question and at certain other places,
are ordinarily presented on a separate line for each topic.

* Titles of questions are in all caps.

Anything else in this electronic edition that does not correspond to the content of the Benziger
Brothers edition may be regarded as a defect in this edition and attributed to me (David McClamrock).

CONTENTS

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART (QQ. 1-189)

Question

1.   Of Faith 2.   Of the Act of Faith 3.   Of the Outward Act of Faith 4.   Of the Virtue
Itself of Faith 5.   Of Those Who Have Faith 6.   Of the Cause of Faith 7.   Of the Effects
of Faith 8.   Of the Gift of Understanding 9.   Of the Gift of Knowledge 10.  Of Unbelief in
General 11.  Of Heresy 12.  Of Apostasy 13.  Of the Sin of Blasphemy, in General 14.  Of Blasphemy
Against the Holy Ghost 15.  Of the Vices Opposed to Knowledge and Understanding 16.  Of the
Precepts of Faith, Knowledge, and Understanding 17.  Of Hope, Considered in Itself 18.  Of
the Subject of Hope 19.  Of the Gift of Fear 20.  Of Despair 21.  Of Presumption 22.  Of the
Precepts Relating to Hope and Fear 23.  Of Charity, Considered in Itself 24.  Of the Subject
of Charity 25.  Of the Object of Charity 26.  Of the Order of Charity 27.  Of the Principal
Act of Charity, Which Is to Love 28.  Of Joy 29.  Of Peace 30.  Of Mercy 31.  Of Beneficence
32.  Of Almsdeeds 33.  Of Fraternal Correction 34.  Of Hatred 35.  Of Sloth 36.  Of Envy 37.
Of Discord, Which Is Contrary to Peace 38.  Of Contention 39.  Of Schism 40.  Of War 41.  Of
Strife 42.  Of Sedition 43.  Of Scandal 44.  Of the Precepts of Charity 45.  Of the Gift of
Wisdom 46.  Of Folly Which Is Opposed to Wisdom

TREATISE ON PRUDENCE AND JUSTICE

47.  Of Prudence Considered in Itself
48.  Of the Parts of Prudence
49.  Of Each Quasi-integral Part of Prudence
50.  Of the Subjective Parts of Prudence
51.  Of the Virtues Which Are Connected with Prudence
52.  Of the Gift of Counsel
53.  Of Imprudence
54.  Of Negligence
55.  Of Vices Opposed to Prudence by Way of Resemblance
56.  Of the Precepts Relating to Prudence
57.  Of Right
58.  Of Justice
59.  Of Injustice
60.  Of Judgment
61.  Of the Parts of Justice
62.  Of Restitution
63.  Of Respect of Persons
64.  Of Murder
65.  Of Injuries Committed on the Person
66.  Of Theft and Robbery
67.  Of the Injustice of a Judge, in Judging
68.  Of Matters Concerning Unjust Accusation
69.  Of Sins Committed Against Justice on the Part of the Defendant
70.  Of Injustice with Regard to the Person of the Witness
71.  Of Injustice in Judgment on the Part of Counsel
72.  Of Reviling
73.  Of Backbiting
74.  Of Tale-Bearing
75.  Of Derision
76.  Of Cursing
77.  Of Cheating, Which Is Committed in Buying and Selling
78.  Of the Sin of Usury
79.  Of the Quasi-integral Parts of Justice
80.  Of the Potential Parts of Justice
81.  Of Religion
82.  Of Devotion
83.  Of Prayer
84.  Of Adoration
85.  Of Sacrifice
86.  Of Oblations and First-fruits
87.  Of Tithes
88.  Of Vows
89.  Of Oaths
90.  Of the Taking of God's Name by Way of Adjuration
91.  Of Taking the Divine Name for the Purpose of Invoking It by
       Means of Praise
92.  Of Superstition
93.  Of Superstition Consisting in Undue Worship of the True God
94.  Of Idolatry
95.  Of Superstition in Divinations
96.  Of Superstition in Observances
97.  Of the Temptation of God
98.  Of Perjury
99.  Of Sacrilege
100. On Simony
101. Of Piety
102. Of Observance, Considered in Itself, and of Its Parts
103. Of Dulia
104. Of Obedience
105. Of Disobedience
106. Of Thankfulness or Gratitude
107. Of Ingratitude
108. Of Vengeance
109. Of Truth
110. Of the Vices Opposed to Truth, and First of Lying
111. Of Dissimulation and Hypocrisy
112. Of Boasting
113. Of Irony
114. Of the Friendliness Which Is Called Affability
115. Of Flattery
116. Of Quarreling
117. Of Liberality
118. Of the Vices Opposed to Liberality, and in the First Place,
     of Covetousness
119. Of Prodigality
120. Of "Epikeia" or Equity
121. Of Piety
122. Of the Precepts of Justice

TREATISE ON FORTITUDE AND TEMPERANCE

123. Of Fortitude 124. Of Martyrdom 125. Of Fear 126. Of Fearlessness 127. Of Daring 128. Of
the Parts of Fortitude 129. Of Magnanimity 130. Of Presumption 131. Of Ambition 132. Of Vainglory
133. Of Pusillanimity 134. Of Magnificence 135. Of Meanness 136. Of Patience 137. Of Perseverance
138. Of the Vices Opposed to Perseverance 139. Of the Gift of Fortitude 140. Of the Precepts
of Fortitude 141. Of Temperance 142. Of the Vices Opposed to Temperance 143. Of the Parts of
Temperance, in General 144. Of Shamefacedness 145. Of Honesty 146. Of Abstinence 147. Of Fasting
148. Of Gluttony 149. Of Sobriety 150. Of Drunkenness 151. Of Chastity 152. Of Virginity 153.
Of Lust 154. Of the Parts of Lust 155. Of Continence 156. Of Incontinence 157. Of Clemency
and Meekness 158. Of Anger 159. Of Cruelty 160. Of Modesty 161. Of Humility 162. Of Pride 163.
Of the First Man's Sin 164. Of the Punishments of the First Man's Sin 165. Of Our First Parents'
Temptation 166. Of Studiousness 167. Of Curiosity 168. Of Modesty as Consisting in the Outward
Movements of the Body 169. Of Modesty in the Outward Apparel 170. Of the Precepts of Temperance

TREATISE ON ACTS WHICH PERTAIN ESPECIALLY TO CERTAIN MEN

171. Of Prophecy 172. Of the Cause of Prophecy 173. Of the Manner in Which Prophetic Knowledge
Is Conveyed 174. Of the Division of Prophecy 175. Of Rapture 176. Of the Grace of Tongues 177.
Of the Gratuitous Grace Consisting in Words 178. Of the Grace of Miracles 179. Of the Division
of Life into Active and Contemplative 180. Of the Contemplative Life 181. Of the Active Life
182. Of the Active Life in Comparison with the Contemplative Life 183. Of Man's Various Duties
and States in General 184. Of the State of Perfection in General 185. Of Things Pertaining
to the Episcopal State 186. Of Those Things in Which the Religious State Properly Consists
187. Of Those Things That Are Competent to Religious 188. Of the Different Kinds of Religious
Life 189. Of the Entrance into Religious Life

SUMMA THEOLOGICA

SECOND PART OF THE SECOND PART ["II-II," "Secunda Secundae"]

TREATISE ON THE THEOLOGICAL VIRTUES (QQ. 1-46)

QUESTION 1

OF FAITH (In Ten Articles)

Having to treat now of the theological virtues, we shall begin with Faith, secondly we shall
speak of Hope, and thirdly, of Charity.

The treatise on Faith will be fourfold: (1) Of faith itself; (2) Of the corresponding gifts,
knowledge and understanding; (3) Of the opposite vices; (4) Of the precepts pertaining to this
virtue.

About faith itself we shall consider: (1) its object; (2) its act; (3) the habit of faith.

Under the first head there are ten points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the object of faith is the First Truth?

(2) Whether the object of faith is something complex or incomplex, i.e. whether it is a thing
or a proposition?

(3) Whether anything false can come under faith?

(4) Whether the object of faith can be anything seen?

(5) Whether it can be anything known?

(6) Whether the things to be believed should be divided into a certain number of articles?

(7) Whether the same articles are of faith for all times?

(8) Of the number of articles;

(9) Of the manner of embodying the articles in a symbol;

(10) Who has the right to propose a symbol of faith?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 1]

Whether the Object of Faith Is the First Truth?

Objection 1: It would seem that the object of faith is not the First Truth. For it seems that
the object of faith is that which is proposed to us to be believed. Now not only things pertaining
to the Godhead, i.e. the First Truth, are proposed to us to be believed, but also things concerning
Christ's human nature, and the sacraments of the Church, and the condition of creatures. Therefore
the object of faith is not only the First Truth.

Obj. 2: Further, faith and unbelief have the same object since they are opposed to one another.
Now unbelief can be about all things contained in Holy Writ, for whichever one of them a man
denies, he is considered an unbeliever. Therefore faith also is about all things contained
in Holy Writ. But there are many things therein, concerning man and other creatures. Therefore
the object of faith is not only the First Truth, but also created truth.

Obj. 3: Further, faith is condivided with charity, as stated above (I-II, Q. 62, A. 3). Now
by charity we love not only God, who is the sovereign Good, but also our neighbor. Therefore
the object of Faith is not only the First Truth.

On the contrary, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. vii) that "faith is about the simple and everlasting
truth." Now this is the First Truth. Therefore the object of faith is the First Truth.

I answer that, The object of every cognitive habit includes two things: first, that which is
known materially, and is the material object, so to speak, and, secondly, that whereby it is
known, which is the formal aspect of the object. Thus in the science of geometry, the conclusions
are what is known materially, while the formal aspect of the science is the mean of demonstration,
through which the conclusions are known.

Accordingly if we consider, in faith, the formal aspect of the object, it is nothing else than
the First Truth. For the faith of which we are speaking, does not assent to anything, except
because it is revealed by God. Hence the mean on which faith is based is the Divine Truth.
If, however, we consider materially the things to which faith assents, they include not only
God, but also many other things, which, nevertheless, do not come under the assent of faith,
except as bearing some relation to God, in as much as, to wit, through certain effects of the
Divine operation, man is helped on his journey towards the enjoyment of God. Consequently from
this point of view also the object of faith is, in a way, the First Truth, in as much as nothing
comes under faith except in relation to God, even as the object of the medical art is health,
for it considers nothing save in relation to health.

Reply Obj. 1: Things concerning Christ's human nature, and the sacraments of the Church, or
any creatures whatever, come under faith, in so far as by them we are directed to God, and
in as much as we assent to them on account of the Divine Truth.

The same answer applies to the Second Objection, as regards all things contained in Holy Writ.

Reply Obj. 3: Charity also loves our neighbor on account of God, so that its object, properly
speaking, is God, as we shall show further on (Q. 25, A. 1).

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 2]

Whether the Object of Faith Is Something Complex, by Way of a Proposition?

Objection 1: It would seem that the object of faith is not something complex by way of a proposition.
For the object of faith is the First Truth, as stated above (A. 1). Now the First Truth is
something simple. Therefore the object of faith is not something complex.

Obj. 2: Further, the exposition of faith is contained in the symbol. Now the symbol does not
contain propositions, but things: for it is not stated therein that God is almighty, but: "I
believe in God . . . almighty." Therefore the object of faith is not a proposition but a thing.

Obj. 3: Further, faith is succeeded by vision, according to 1 Cor. 13:12: "We see now through
a glass in a dark manner; but then face to face. Now I know in part; but then I shall know
even as I am known." But the object of the heavenly vision is something simple, for it is the
Divine Essence. Therefore the faith of the wayfarer is also.

On the contrary, Faith is a mean between science and opinion. Now the mean is in the same genus
as the extremes. Since, then, science and opinion are about propositions, it seems that faith
is likewise about propositions; so that its object is something complex.

I answer that, The thing known is in the knower according to the mode of the knower. Now the
mode proper to the human intellect is to know the truth by synthesis and analysis, as stated
in the First Part (Q. 85, A. 5). Hence things that are simple in themselves, are known by the
intellect with a certain amount of complexity, just as on the other hand, the Divine intellect
knows, without any complexity, things that are complex in themselves.

Accordingly the object of faith may be considered in two ways. First, as regards the thing
itself which is believed, and thus the object of faith is something simple, namely the thing
itself about which we have faith. Secondly, on the part of the believer, and in this respect
the object of faith is something complex by way of a proposition.

Hence in the past both opinions have been held with a certain amount of truth.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument considers the object of faith on the part of the thing believed.

Reply Obj. 2: The symbol mentions the things about which faith is, in so far as the act of
the believer is terminated in them, as is evident from the manner of speaking about them. Now
the act of the believer does not terminate in a proposition, but in a thing. For as in science
we do not form propositions, except in order to have knowledge about things through their means,
so is it in faith.

Reply Obj. 3: The object of the heavenly vision will be the First Truth seen in itself, according
to 1 John 3:2: "We know that when He shall appear, we shall be like to Him: because we shall
see Him as He is": hence that vision will not be by way of a proposition but by way of a simple
understanding. On the other hand, by faith, we do not apprehend the First Truth as it is in
itself. Hence the comparison fails.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 3]

Whether Anything False Can Come Under Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that something false can come under faith. For faith is condivided
with hope and charity. Now something false can come under hope, since many hope to have eternal
life, who will not obtain it. The same may be said of charity, for many are loved as being
good, who, nevertheless, are not good. Therefore something false can be the object of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, Abraham believed that Christ would be born, according to John 8:56: "Abraham
your father rejoiced that he might see My day: he saw it, and was glad." But after the time
of Abraham, God might not have taken flesh, for it was merely because He willed that He did,
so that what Abraham believed about Christ would have been false. Therefore the object of faith
can be something false.

Obj. 3: Further, the ancients believed in the future birth of Christ, and many continued so
to believe, until they heard the preaching of the Gospel. Now, when once Christ was born, even
before He began to preach, it was false that Christ was yet to be born. Therefore something
false can come under faith.

Obj. 4: Further, it is a matter of faith, that one should believe that the true Body of Christ
is contained in the Sacrament of the altar. But it might happen that the bread was not rightly
consecrated, and that there was not Christ's true Body there, but only bread. Therefore something
false can come under faith.

On the contrary, No virtue that perfects the intellect is related to the false, considered
as the evil of the intellect, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. vi, 2). Now faith is a virtue
that perfects the intellect, as we shall show further on (Q. 4, AA. 2, 5). Therefore nothing
false can come under it.

I answer that, Nothing comes under any power, habit or act, except by means of the formal aspect
of the object: thus color cannot be seen except by means of light, and a conclusion cannot
be known save through the mean of demonstration. Now it has been stated (A. 1) that the formal
aspect of the object of faith is the First Truth; so that nothing can come under faith, save
in so far as it stands under the First Truth, under which nothing false can stand, as neither
can non-being stand under being, nor evil under goodness. It follows therefore that nothing
false can come under faith.

Reply Obj. 1: Since the true is the good of the intellect, but not of the appetitive power,
it follows that all virtues which perfect the intellect, exclude the false altogether, because
it belongs to the nature of a virtue to bear relation to the good alone. On the other hand
those virtues which perfect the appetitive faculty, do not entirely exclude the false, for
it is possible to act in accordance with justice or temperance, while having a false opinion
about what one is doing. Therefore, as faith perfects the intellect, whereas hope and charity
perfect the appetitive part, the comparison between them fails.

Nevertheless neither can anything false come under hope, for a man hopes to obtain eternal
life, not by his own power (since this would be an act of presumption), but with the help of
grace; and if he perseveres therein he will obtain eternal life surely and infallibly.

In like manner it belongs to charity to love God, wherever He may be; so that it matters not
to charity, whether God be in the individual whom we love for God's sake.

Reply Obj. 2: That "God would not take flesh," considered in itself was possible even after
Abraham's time, but in so far as it stands in God's foreknowledge, it has a certain necessity
of infallibility, as explained in the First Part (Q. 14, AA. 13, 15): and it is thus that it
comes under faith. Hence in so far as it comes under faith, it cannot be false.

Reply Obj. 3: After Christ's birth, to believe in Him, was to believe in Christ's birth at
some time or other. The fixing of the time, wherein some were deceived was not due to their
faith, but to a human conjecture. For it is possible for a believer to have a false opinion
through a human conjecture, but it is quite impossible for a false opinion to be the outcome
of faith.

Reply Obj. 4: The faith of the believer is not directed to such and such accidents of bread,
but to the fact that the true body of Christ is under the appearances of sensible bread, when
it is rightly consecrated. Hence if it be not rightly consecrated, it does not follow that
anything false comes under faith.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 4]

Whether the Object of Faith Can Be Something Seen?

Objection 1: It would seem that the object of faith is something seen. For Our Lord said to
Thomas (John 20:29): "Because thou hast seen Me, Thomas, thou hast believed." Therefore vision
and faith regard the same object.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle, while speaking of the knowledge of faith, says (1 Cor. 13:12):
"We see now through a glass in a dark manner." Therefore what is believed is seen.

Obj. 3: Further, faith is a spiritual light. Now something is seen under every light. Therefore
faith is of things seen.

Obj. 4: Further, "Every sense is a kind of sight," as Augustine states (De Verb. Domini, Serm.
xxxiii). But faith is of things heard, according to Rom. 10:17: "Faith . . . cometh by hearing."
Therefore faith is of things seen.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 11:1) that "faith is the evidence of things that appear
not."

I answer that, Faith implies assent of the intellect to that which is believed. Now the intellect
assents to a thing in two ways. First, through being moved to assent by its very object, which
is known either by itself (as in the case of first principles, which are held by the habit
of understanding), or through something else already known (as in the case of conclusions which
are held by the habit of science). Secondly the intellect assents to something, not through
being sufficiently moved to this assent by its proper object, but through an act of choice,
whereby it turns voluntarily to one side rather than to the other: and if this be accompanied
by doubt or fear of the opposite side, there will be opinion, while, if there be certainty
and no fear of the other side, there will be faith.

Now those things are said to be seen which, of themselves, move the intellect or the senses
to knowledge of them. Wherefore it is evident that neither faith nor opinion can be of things
seen either by the senses or by the intellect.

Reply Obj. 1: Thomas "saw one thing, and believed another" [*St. Gregory: Hom. xxvi in Evang.]:
he saw the Man, and believing Him to be God, he made profession of his faith, saying: "My Lord
and my God."

Reply Obj. 2: Those things which come under faith can be considered in two ways. First, in
particular; and thus they cannot be seen and believed at the same time, as shown above. Secondly,
in general, that is, under the common aspect of credibility; and in this way they are seen
by the believer. For he would not believe unless, on the evidence of signs, or of something
similar, he saw that they ought to be believed.

Reply Obj. 3: The light of faith makes us see what we believe. For just as, by the habits of
the other virtues, man sees what is becoming to him in respect of that habit, so, by the habit
of faith, the human mind is directed to assent to such things as are becoming to a right faith,
and not to assent to others.

Reply Obj. 4: Hearing is of words signifying what is of faith, but not of the things themselves
that are believed; hence it does not follow that these things are seen.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 5]

Whether Those Things That Are of Faith Can Be an Object of Science [*Science is certain knowledge
of a demonstrated conclusion through its demonstration]?

Objection 1: It would seem that those things that are of faith can be an object of science.
For where science is lacking there is ignorance, since ignorance is the opposite of science.
Now we are not in ignorance of those things we have to believe, since ignorance of such things
savors of unbelief, according to 1 Tim. 1:13: "I did it ignorantly in unbelief." Therefore
things that are of faith can be an object of science.

Obj. 2: Further, science is acquired by reasons. Now sacred writers employ reasons to inculcate
things that are of faith. Therefore such things can be an object of science.

Obj. 3: Further, things which are demonstrated are an object of science, since a "demonstration
is a syllogism that produces science." Now certain matters of faith have been demonstrated
by the philosophers, such as the Existence and Unity of God, and so forth. Therefore things
that are of faith can be an object of science.

Obj. 4: Further, opinion is further from science than faith is, since faith is said to stand
between opinion and science. Now opinion and science can, in a way, be about the same object,
as stated in Poster. i. Therefore faith and science can be about the same object also.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xxvi in Evang.) that "when a thing is manifest, it is the
object, not of faith, but of perception." Therefore things that are of faith are not the object
of perception, whereas what is an object of science is the object of perception. Therefore
there can be no faith about things which are an object of science.

I answer that, All science is derived from self-evident and therefore "seen" principles; wherefore
all objects of science must needs be, in a fashion, seen.

Now as stated above (A. 4), it is impossible that one and the same thing should be believed
and seen by the same person. Hence it is equally impossible for one and the same thing to be
an object of science and of belief for the same person. In like manner it may happen that what
is an object of vision or scientific knowledge for one man, even in the state of a wayfarer,
is, for another man, an object of faith, because he does not know it by demonstration.

Nevertheless that which is proposed to be believed equally by all, is equally unknown by all
as an object of science: such are the things which are of faith simply. Consequently faith
and science are not about the same things.

Reply Obj. 1: Unbelievers are in ignorance of things that are of faith, for neither do they
see or know them in themselves, nor do they know them to be credible. The faithful, on the
other hand, know them, not as by demonstration, but by the light of faith which makes them
see that they ought to believe them, as stated above (A. 4, ad 2, 3).

Reply Obj. 2: The reasons employed by holy men to prove things that are of faith, are not demonstrations;
they are either persuasive arguments showing that what is proposed to our faith is not impossible,
or else they are proofs drawn from the principles of faith, i.e. from the authority of Holy
Writ, as Dionysius declares (Div. Nom. ii). Whatever is based on these principles is as well
proved in the eyes of the faithful, as a conclusion drawn from self-evident principles is in
the eyes of all. Hence again, theology is a science, as we stated at the outset of this work
(P. I, Q. 1, A. 2).

Reply Obj. 3: Things which can be proved by demonstration are reckoned among the articles of
faith, not because they are believed simply by all, but because they are a necessary presupposition
to matters of faith, so that those who do not known them by demonstration must know them first
of all by faith.

Reply Obj. 4: As the Philosopher says (Poster. i), "science and opinion about the same object
can certainly be in different men," as we have stated above about science and faith; yet it
is possible for one and the same man to have science and faith about the same thing relatively,
i.e. in relation to the object, but not in the same respect. For it is possible for the same
person, about one and the same object, to know one thing and to think another: and, in like
manner, one may know by demonstration the unity of the Godhead, and, by faith, the Trinity.
On the other hand, in one and the same man, about the same object, and in the same respect,
science is incompatible with either opinion or faith, yet for different reasons. Because science
is incompatible with opinion about the same object simply, for the reason that science demands
that its object should be deemed impossible to be otherwise, whereas it is essential to opinion,
that its object should be deemed possible to be otherwise. Yet that which is the object of
faith, on account of the certainty of faith, is also deemed impossible to be otherwise; and
the reason why science and faith cannot be about the same object and in the same respect is
because the object of science is something seen whereas the object of faith is the unseen,
as stated above.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 6]

Whether Those Things That Are of Faith Should Be Divided into Certain Articles?

Objection 1: It would seem that those things that are of faith should not be divided into certain
articles. For all things contained in Holy Writ are matters of faith. But these, by reason
of their multitude, cannot be reduced to a certain number. Therefore it seems superfluous to
distinguish certain articles of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, material differences can be multiplied indefinitely, and therefore art should
take no notice of them. Now the formal aspect of the object of faith is one and indivisible,
as stated above (A. 1), viz. the First Truth, so that matters of faith cannot be distinguished
in respect of their formal object. Therefore no notice should be taken of a material division
of matters of faith into articles.

Obj. 3: Further, it has been said by some [*Cf. William of Auxerre, Summa Aurea] that "an article
is an indivisible truth concerning God, exacting [arctans] our belief." Now belief is a voluntary
act, since, as Augustine says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.), "no man believes against his will." Therefore
it seems that matters of faith should not be divided into articles.

On the contrary, Isidore says: "An article is a glimpse of Divine truth, tending thereto."
Now we can only get a glimpse of Divine truth by way of analysis, since things which in God
are one, are manifold in our intellect. Therefore matters of faith should be divided into articles.

I answer that, the word "article" is apparently derived from the Greek; for the Greek arthron
[*Cf. William of Auxerre, Summa Aurea] which the Latin renders "articulus," signifies a fitting
together of distinct parts: wherefore the small parts of the body which fit together are called
the articulations of the limbs. Likewise, in the Greek grammar, articles are parts of speech
which are affixed to words to show their gender, number or case. Again in rhetoric, articles
are parts that fit together in a sentence, for Tully says (Rhet. iv) that an article is composed
of words each pronounced singly and separately, thus: "Your passion, your voice, your look,
have struck terror into your foes."

Hence matters of Christian faith are said to contain distinct articles, in so far as they are
divided into parts, and fit together. Now the object of faith is something unseen in connection
with God, as stated above (A. 4). Consequently any matter that, for a special reason, is unseen,
is a special article; whereas when several matters are known or not known, under the same aspect,
we are not to distinguish various articles. Thus one encounters one difficulty in seeing that
God suffered, and another in seeing that He rose again from the dead, wherefore the article
of the Resurrection is distinct from the article of the Passion. But that He suffered, died
and was buried, present the same difficulty, so that if one be accepted, it is not difficult
to accept the others; wherefore all these belong to one article.

Reply Obj. 1: Some things are proposed to our belief are in themselves of faith, while others
are of faith, not in themselves but only in relation to others: even as in sciences certain
propositions are put forward on their own account, while others are put forward in order to
manifest others. Now, since the chief object of faith consists in those things which we hope
to see, according to Heb. 11:2: "Faith is the substance of things to be hoped for," it follows
that those things are in themselves of faith, which order us directly to eternal life. Such
are the Trinity of Persons in Almighty God [*The Leonine Edition reads: The Three Persons,
the omnipotence of God, etc.], the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and the like: and these
are distinct articles of faith. On the other hand certain things in Holy Writ are proposed
to our belief, not chiefly on their own account, but for the manifestation of those mentioned
above: for instance, that Abraham had two sons, that a dead man rose again at the touch of
Eliseus' bones, and the like, which are related in Holy Writ for the purpose of manifesting
the Divine mystery or the Incarnation of Christ: and such things should not form distinct articles.

Reply Obj. 2: The formal aspect of the object of faith can be taken in two ways: first, on
the part of the thing believed, and thus there is one formal aspect of all matters of faith,
viz. the First Truth: and from this point of view there is no distinction of articles. Secondly,
the formal aspect of matters of faith, can be considered from our point of view; and thus the
formal aspect of a matter of faith is that it is something unseen; and from this point of view
there are various distinct articles of faith, as we saw above.

Reply Obj. 3: This definition of an article is taken from an etymology of the word as derived
from the Latin, rather than in accordance with its real meaning, as derived from the Greek:
hence it does not carry much weight. Yet even then it could be said that although faith is
exacted of no man by a necessity of coercion, since belief is a voluntary act, yet it is exacted
of him by a necessity of end, since "he that cometh to God must believe that He is," and "without
faith it is impossible to please God," as the Apostle declares (Heb. 11:6).

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 7]

Whether the Articles of Faith Have Increased in Course of Time?

Objection 1: It would seem that the articles of faith have not increased in course of time.
Because, as the Apostle says (Heb. 11:1), "faith is the substance of things to be hoped for."
Now the same things are to be hoped for at all times. Therefore, at all times, the same things
are to be believed.

Obj. 2: Further, development has taken place, in sciences devised by man, on account of the
lack of knowledge in those who discovered them, as the Philosopher observes (Metaph. ii). Now
the doctrine of faith was not devised by man, but was delivered to us by God, as stated in
Eph. 2:8: "It is the gift of God." Since then there can be no lack of knowledge in God, it
seems that knowledge of matters of faith was perfect from the beginning and did not increase
as time went on.

Obj. 3: Further, the operation of grace proceeds in orderly fashion no less than the operation
of nature. Now nature always makes a beginning with perfect things, as Boethius states (De
Consol. iii). Therefore it seems that the operation of grace also began with perfect things,
so that those who were the first to deliver the faith, knew it most perfectly.

Obj. 4: Further, just as the faith of Christ was delivered to us through the apostles, so too,
in the Old Testament, the knowledge of faith was delivered by the early fathers to those who
came later, according to Deut. 32:7: "Ask thy father, and he will declare to thee." Now the
apostles were most fully instructed about the mysteries, for "they received them more fully
than others, even as they received them earlier," as a gloss says on Rom. 8:23: "Ourselves
also who have the first fruits of the Spirit." Therefore it seems that knowledge of matters
of faith has not increased as time went on.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. xvi in Ezech.) that "the knowledge of the holy fathers
increased as time went on . . . and the nearer they were to Our Savior's coming, the more fully
did they receive the mysteries of salvation."

I answer that, The articles of faith stand in the same relation to the doctrine of faith, as
self-evident principles to a teaching based on natural reason. Among these principles there
is a certain order, so that some are contained implicitly in others; thus all principles are
reduced, as to their first principle, to this one: "The same thing cannot be affirmed and denied
at the same time," as the Philosopher states (Metaph. iv, text. 9). In like manner all the
articles are contained implicitly in certain primary matters of faith, such as God's existence,
and His providence over the salvation of man, according to Heb. 11: "He that cometh to God,
must believe that He is, and is a rewarder to them that seek Him." For the existence of God
includes all that we believe to exist in God eternally, and in these our happiness consists;
while belief in His providence includes all those things which God dispenses in time, for man's
salvation, and which are the way to that happiness: and in this way, again, some of those articles
which follow from these are contained in others: thus faith in the Redemption of mankind includes
belief in the Incarnation of Christ, His Passion and so forth.

Accordingly we must conclude that, as regards the substance of the articles of faith, they
have not received any increase as time went on: since whatever those who lived later have believed,
was contained, albeit implicitly, in the faith of those Fathers who preceded them. But there
was an increase in the number of articles believed explicitly, since to those who lived in
later times some were known explicitly which were not known explicitly by those who lived before
them. Hence the Lord said to Moses (Ex. 118:100): "I have had understanding above ancients":
and the Apostle says (Eph. 3:5) that the mystery of Christ, "in other generations was not known,
as it is now revealed to His holy apostles and prophets."

Reply Obj. 1: Among men the same things were always to be hoped for from Christ. But as they
did not acquire this hope save through Christ, the further they were removed from Christ in
point of time, the further they were from obtaining what they hoped for. Hence the Apostle
says (Heb. 11:13): "All these died according to faith, not having received the promises, but
beholding them afar off." Now the further off a thing is the less distinctly is it seen; wherefore
those who were nigh to Christ's advent had a more distinct knowledge of the good things to
be hoped for.

Reply Obj. 2: Progress in knowledge occurs in two ways. First, on the part of the teacher,
be he one or many, who makes progress in knowledge as time goes on: and this is the kind of
progress that takes place in sciences devised by man. Secondly, on the part of the learner;
thus the master, who has perfect knowledge of the art, does not deliver it all at once to his
disciple from the very outset, for he would not be able to take it all in, but he condescends
to the disciple's capacity and instructs him little by little. It is in this way that men made
progress in the knowledge of faith as time went on. Hence the Apostle (Gal. 3:24) compares
the state of the Old Testament to childhood.

Reply Obj. 3: Two causes are requisite before actual generation can take place, an agent, namely,
and matter. In the order of the active cause, the more perfect is naturally first; and in this
way nature makes a beginning with perfect things, since the imperfect is not brought to perfection,
except by something perfect already in existence. On the other hand, in the order of the material
cause, the imperfect comes first, and in this way nature proceeds from the imperfect to the
perfect. Now in the manifestation of faith, God is the active cause, having perfect knowledge
from all eternity; while man is likened to matter in receiving the influx of God's action.
Hence, among men, the knowledge of faith had to proceed from imperfection to perfection; and,
although some men have been after the manner of active causes, through being doctors of faith,
nevertheless the manifestation of the Spirit is given to such men for the common good, according
to 1 Cor. 12:7; so that the knowledge of faith was imparted to the Fathers who were instructors
in the faith, so far as was necessary at the time for the instruction of the people, either
openly or in figures.

Reply Obj. 4: The ultimate consummation of grace was effected by Christ, wherefore the time
of His coming is called the "time of fulness [*Vulg.: 'fulness of time']" (Gal. 4:4). Hence
those who were nearest to Christ, whether before, like John the Baptist, or after, like the
apostles, had a fuller knowledge of the mysteries of faith; for even with regard to man's state
we find that the perfection of manhood comes in youth, and that a man's state is all the more
perfect, whether before or after, the nearer it is to the time of his youth.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 8]

Whether the Articles of Faith Are Suitably Formulated?

Objection 1: It would seem that the articles of faith are unsuitably formulated. For those
things, which can be known by demonstration, do not belong to faith as to an object of belief
for all, as stated above (A. 5). Now it can be known by demonstration that there is one God;
hence the Philosopher proves this (Metaph. xii, text. 52) and many other philosophers demonstrated
the same truth. Therefore that "there is one God" should not be set down as an article of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, just as it is necessary to faith that we should believe God to be almighty,
so is it too that we should believe Him to be "all-knowing" and "provident for all," about
both of which points some have erred. Therefore, among the articles of faith, mention should
have been made of God's wisdom and providence, even as of His omnipotence.

Obj. 3: Further, to know the Father is the same things as to know the Son, according to John
14:9: "He that seeth Me, seeth the Father also." Therefore there ought to be but one article
about the Father and Son, and, for the same reason, about the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 4: Further, the Person of the Father is no less than the Person of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Now there are several articles about the Person of the Holy Ghost, and likewise
about the Person of the Son. Therefore there should be several articles about the Person of
the Father.

Obj. 5: Further, just as certain things are said by appropriation, of the Person of the Father
and of the Person of the Holy Ghost, so too is something appropriated to the Person of the
Son, in respect of His Godhead. Now, among the articles of faith, a place is given to a work
appropriated to the Father, viz. the creation, and likewise, a work appropriated to the Holy
Ghost, viz. that "He spoke by the prophets." Therefore the articles of faith should contain
some work appropriated to the Son in respect of His Godhead.

Obj. 6: Further, the sacrament of the Eucharist presents a special difficulty over and above
the other articles. Therefore it should have been mentioned in a special article: and consequently
it seems that there is not a sufficient number of articles.

On the contrary stands the authority of the Church who formulates the articles thus.

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 4, 6), to faith those things in themselves belong, the
sight of which we shall enjoy in eternal life, and by which we are brought to eternal life.
Now two things are proposed to us to be seen in eternal life: viz. the secret of the Godhead,
to see which is to possess happiness; and the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, "by Whom we
have access" to the glory of the sons of God, according to Rom. 5:2. Hence it is written (John
17:3): "This is eternal life: that they may know Thee, the . . . true God, and Jesus Christ
Whom Thou hast sent." Wherefore the first distinction in matters of faith is that some concern
the majesty of the Godhead, while others pertain to the mystery of Christ's human nature, which
is the "mystery of godliness" (1 Tim. 3:16).

Now with regard to the majesty of the Godhead, three things are proposed to our belief: first,
the unity of the Godhead, to which the first article refers; secondly, the trinity of the Persons,
to which three articles refer, corresponding to the three Persons; and thirdly, the works proper
to the Godhead, the first of which refers to the order of nature, in relation to which the
article about the creation is proposed to us; the second refers to the order of grace, in relation
to which all matters concerning the sanctification of man are included in one article; while
the third refers to the order of glory, and in relation to this another article is proposed
to us concerning the resurrection of the dead and life everlasting. Thus there are seven articles
referring to the Godhead.

In like manner, with regard to Christ's human nature, there are seven articles, the first of
which refers to Christ's incarnation or conception; the second, to His virginal birth; the
third, to His Passion, death and burial; the fourth, to His descent into hell; the fifth, to
His resurrection; the sixth, to His ascension; the seventh, to His coming for the judgment,
so that in all there are fourteen articles.

Some, however, distinguish twelve articles, six pertaining to the Godhead, and six to the humanity.
For they include in one article the three about the three Persons; because we have one knowledge
of the three Persons: while they divide the article referring to the work of glorification
into two, viz. the resurrection of the body, and the glory of the soul. Likewise they unite
the conception and nativity into one article.

Reply Obj. 1: By faith we hold many truths about God, which the philosophers were unable to
discover by natural reason, for instance His providence and omnipotence, and that He alone
is to be worshiped, all of which are contained in the one article of the unity of God.

Reply Obj. 2: The very name of the Godhead implies a kind of watching over things, as stated
in the First Part (Q. 13, A. 8). Now in beings having an intellect, power does not work save
by the will and knowledge. Hence God's omnipotence includes, in a way, universal knowledge
and providence. For He would not be able to do all He wills in things here below, unless He
knew them, and exercised His providence over them.

Reply Obj. 3: We have but one knowledge of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as to the unity
of the Essence, to which the first article refers: but, as to the distinction of the Persons,
which is by the relations of origin, knowledge of the Father does indeed, in a way, include
knowledge of the Son, for He would not be Father, had He not a Son; the bond whereof being
the Holy Ghost. From this point of view, there was a sufficient motive for those who referred
one article to the three Persons. Since, however, with regard to each Person, certain points
have to be observed, about which some happen to fall into error, looking at it in this way,
we may distinguish three articles about the three Persons. For Arius believed in the omnipotence
and eternity of the Father, but did not believe the Son to be co-equal and consubstantial with
the Father; hence the need for an article about the Person of the Son in order to settle this
point. In like manner it was necessary to appoint a third article about the Person of the Holy
Ghost, against Macedonius. In the same way Christ's conception and birth, just as the resurrection
and life everlasting, can from one point of view be united together in one article, in so far
as they are ordained to one end; while, from another point of view, they can be distinct articles,
in as much as each one separately presents a special difficulty.

Reply Obj. 4: It belongs to the Son and Holy Ghost to be sent to sanctify the creature; and
about this several things have to be believed. Hence it is that there are more articles about
the Persons of the Son and Holy Ghost than about the Person of the Father, Who is never sent,
as we stated in the First Part (Q. 43, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 5: The sanctification of a creature by grace, and its consummation by glory, is
also effected by the gift of charity, which is appropriated to the Holy Ghost, and by the gift
of wisdom, which is appropriated to the Son: so that each work belongs by appropriation, but
under different aspects, both to the Son and to the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 6: Two things may be considered in the sacrament of the Eucharist. One is the fact
that it is a sacrament, and in this respect it is like the other effects of sanctifying grace.
The other is that Christ's body is miraculously contained therein and thus it is included under
God's omnipotence, like all other miracles which are ascribed to God's almighty power.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 9]

Whether It Is Suitable for the Articles of Faith to Be Embodied in a Symbol?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is unsuitable for the articles of faith to be embodied in
a symbol. Because Holy Writ is the rule of faith, to which no addition or subtraction can lawfully
be made, since it is written (Deut. 4:2): "You shall not add to the word that I speak to you,
neither shall you take away from it." Therefore it was unlawful to make a symbol as a rule
of faith, after the Holy Writ had once been published.

Obj. 2: Further, according to the Apostle (Eph. 4:5) there is but "one faith." Now the symbol
is a profession of faith. Therefore it is not fitting that there should be more than one symbol.

Obj. 3: Further, the confession of faith, which is contained in the symbol, concerns all the
faithful. Now the faithful are not all competent to believe in God, but only those who have
living faith. Therefore it is unfitting for the symbol of faith to be expressed in the words:
"I believe in one God."

Obj. 4: Further, the descent into hell is one of the articles of faith, as stated above (A.
8). But the descent into hell is not mentioned in the symbol of the Fathers. Therefore the
latter is expressed inadequately.

Obj. 5: Further, Augustine (Tract. xxix in Joan.) expounding the passage, "You believe in God,
believe also in Me" (John 14:1) says: "We believe Peter or Paul, but we speak only of believing
'in' God." Since then the Catholic Church is merely a created being, it seems unfitting to
say: "In the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church."

Obj. 6: Further, a symbol is drawn up that it may be a rule of faith. Now a rule of faith ought
to be proposed to all, and that publicly. Therefore every symbol, besides the symbol of the
Fathers, should be sung at Mass. Therefore it seems unfitting to publish the articles of faith
in a symbol.

On the contrary, The universal Church cannot err, since she is governed by the Holy Ghost,
Who is the Spirit of truth: for such was Our Lord's promise to His disciples (John 16:13):
"When He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will teach you all truth." Now the symbol is published
by the authority of the universal Church. Therefore it contains nothing defective.

I answer that, As the Apostle says (Heb. 11:6), "he that cometh to God, must believe that He
is." Now a man cannot believe, unless the truth be proposed to him that he may believe it.
Hence the need for the truth of faith to be collected together, so that it might the more easily
be proposed to all, lest anyone might stray from the truth through ignorance of the faith.
It is from its being a collection of maxims of faith that the symbol [*The Greek symballein]
takes its name.

Reply Obj. 1: The truth of faith is contained in Holy Writ, diffusely, under various modes
of expression, and sometimes obscurely, so that, in order to gather the truth of faith from
Holy Writ, one needs long study and practice, which are unattainable by all those who require
to know the truth of faith, many of whom have no time for study, being busy with other affairs.
And so it was necessary to gather together a clear summary from the sayings of Holy Writ, to
be proposed to the belief of all. This indeed was no addition to Holy Writ, but something taken
from it.

Reply Obj. 2: The same doctrine of faith is taught in all the symbols. Nevertheless, the people
need more careful instruction about the truth of faith, when errors arise, lest the faith of
simple-minded persons be corrupted by heretics. It was this that gave rise to the necessity
of formulating several symbols, which nowise differ from one another, save that on account
of the obstinacy of heretics, one contains more explicitly what another contains implicitly.

Reply Obj. 3: The confession of faith is drawn up in a symbol in the person, as it were, of
the whole Church, which is united together by faith. Now the faith of the Church is living
faith; since such is the faith to be found in all those who are of the Church not only outwardly
but also by merit. Hence the confession of faith is expressed in a symbol, in a manner that
is in keeping with living faith, so that even if some of the faithful lack living faith, they
should endeavor to acquire it.

Reply Obj. 4: No error about the descent into hell had arisen among heretics, so that there
was no need to be more explicit on that point. For this reason it is not repeated in the symbol
of the Fathers, but is supposed as already settled in the symbol of the Apostles. For a subsequent
symbol does not cancel a preceding one; rather does it expound it, as stated above (ad 2).

Reply Obj. 5: If we say: "'In' the holy Catholic Church," this must be taken as verified in
so far as our faith is directed to the Holy Ghost, Who sanctifies the Church; so that the sense
is: "I believe in the Holy Ghost sanctifying the Church." But it is better and more in keeping
with the common use, to omit the 'in,' and say simply, "the holy Catholic Church," as Pope
Leo [*Rufinus, Comm. in Sym. Apost.] observes.

Reply Obj. 6: Since the symbol of the Fathers is an explanation of the symbol of the Apostles,
and was drawn up after the faith was already spread abroad, and when the Church was already
at peace, it is sung publicly in the Mass. On the other hand the symbol of the Apostles, which
was drawn up at the time of persecution, before the faith was made public, is said secretly
at Prime and Compline, as though it were against the darkness of past and future errors.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 1, Art. 10]

Whether It Belongs to the Sovereign Pontiff to Draw Up a Symbol of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to the Sovereign Pontiff to draw up a symbol
of faith. For a new edition of the symbol becomes necessary in order to explain the articles
of faith, as stated above (A. 9). Now, in the Old Testament, the articles of faith were more
and more explained as time went on, by reason of the truth of faith becoming clearer through
greater nearness to Christ, as stated above (A. 7). Since then this reason ceased with the
advent of the New Law, there is no need for the articles of faith to be more and more explicit.
Therefore it does not seem to belong to the authority of the Sovereign Pontiff to draw up a
new edition of the symbol.

Obj. 2: Further, no man has the power to do what is forbidden under pain of anathema by the
universal Church. Now it was forbidden under pain of anathema by the universal Church, to make
a new edition of the symbol. For it is stated in the acts of the first* council of Ephesus
(P. ii, Act. 6) that "after the symbol of the Nicene council had been read through, the holy
synod decreed that it was unlawful to utter, write or draw up any other creed, than that which
was defined by the Fathers assembled at Nicaea together with the Holy Ghost," and this under
pain of anathema. [*St. Thomas wrote 'first' (expunged by Nicolai) to distinguish it from the
other council, A.D. 451, known as the "Latrocinium" and condemned by the Pope.] The same was
repeated in the acts of the council of Chalcedon (P. ii, Act. 5). Therefore it seems that the
Sovereign Pontiff has no authority to publish a new edition of the symbol.

Obj. 3: Further, Athanasius was not the Sovereign Pontiff, but patriarch of Alexandria, and
yet he published a symbol which is sung in the Church. Therefore it does not seem to belong
to the Sovereign Pontiff any more than to other bishops, to publish a new edition of the symbol.

On the contrary, The symbol was drawn up by a general council. Now such a council cannot be
convoked otherwise than by the authority of the Sovereign Pontiff, as stated in the Decretals
[*Dist. xvii, Can. 4, 5]. Therefore it belongs to the authority of the Sovereign Pontiff to
draw up a symbol.

I answer that, As stated above (Obj. 1), a new edition of the symbol becomes necessary in order
to set aside the errors that may arise. Consequently to publish a new edition of the symbol
belongs to that authority which is empowered to decide matters of faith finally, so that they
may be held by all with unshaken faith. Now this belongs to the authority of the Sovereign
Pontiff, "to whom the more important and more difficult questions that arise in the Church
are referred," as stated in the Decretals [*Dist. xvii, Can. 5]. Hence our Lord said to Peter
whom he made Sovereign Pontiff (Luke 22:32): "I have prayed for thee," Peter, "that thy faith
fail not, and thou, being once converted, confirm thy brethren." The reason of this is that
there should be but one faith of the whole Church, according to 1 Cor. 1:10: "That you all
speak the same thing, and that there be no schisms among you": and this could not be secured
unless any question of faith that may arise be decided by him who presides over the whole Church,
so that the whole Church may hold firmly to his decision. Consequently it belongs to the sole
authority of the Sovereign Pontiff to publish a new edition of the symbol, as do all other
matters which concern the whole Church, such as to convoke a general council and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: The truth of faith is sufficiently explicit in the teaching of Christ and the
apostles. But since, according to 2 Pet. 3:16, some men are so evil-minded as to pervert the
apostolic teaching and other doctrines and Scriptures to their own destruction, it was necessary
as time went on to express the faith more explicitly against the errors which arose.

Reply Obj. 2: This prohibition and sentence of the council was intended for private individuals,
who have no business to decide matters of faith: for this decision of the general council did
not take away from a subsequent council the power of drawing up a new edition of the symbol,
containing not indeed a new faith, but the same faith with greater explicitness. For every
council has taken into account that a subsequent council would expound matters more fully than
the preceding council, if this became necessary through some heresy arising. Consequently this
belongs to the Sovereign Pontiff, by whose authority the council is convoked, and its decision
confirmed.

Reply Obj. 3: Athanasius drew up a declaration of faith, not under the form of a symbol, but
rather by way of an exposition of doctrine, as appears from his way of speaking. But since
it contained briefly the whole truth of faith, it was accepted by the authority of the Sovereign
Pontiff, so as to be considered as a rule of faith.

QUESTION 2

OF THE ACT OF FAITH (In Ten Articles)

We must now consider the act of faith, and (1) the internal act; (2) the external act.

Under the first head there are ten points of inquiry:

(1) What is "to believe," which is the internal act of faith?

(2) In how many ways is it expressed?

(3) Whether it is necessary for salvation to believe in anything above natural reason?

(4) Whether it is necessary to believe those things that are attainable by natural reason?

(5) Whether it is necessary for salvation to believe certain things explicitly?

(6) Whether all are equally bound to explicit faith?

(7) Whether explicit faith in Christ is always necessary for salvation?

(8) Whether it is necessary for salvation to believe in the Trinity explicitly?

(9) Whether the act of faith is meritorious?

(10) Whether human reason diminishes the merit of faith?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 1]

Whether to Believe Is to Think with Assent?

Objection 1: It would seem that to believe is not to think with assent. Because the Latin word
"cogitatio" [thought] implies a research, for "cogitare" [to think] seems to be equivalent
to "coagitare," i.e. "to discuss together." Now Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv) that faith
is "an assent without research." Therefore thinking has no place in the act of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, faith resides in the reason, as we shall show further on (Q. 4, A. 2). Now
to think is an act of the cogitative power, which belongs to the sensitive faculty, as stated
in the First Part (Q. 78, A. 4). Therefore thought has nothing to do with faith.

Obj. 3: Further, to believe is an act of the intellect, since its object is truth. But assent
seems to be an act not of the intellect, but of the will, even as consent is, as stated above
(I-II, Q. 15, A. 1, ad 3). Therefore to believe is not to think with assent.

On the contrary, This is how "to believe" is defined by Augustine (De Praedest. Sanct. ii).

I answer that, "To think" can be taken in three ways. First, in a general way for any kind
of actual consideration of the intellect, as Augustine observes (De Trin. xiv, 7): "By understanding
I mean now the faculty whereby we understand when thinking." Secondly, "to think" is more strictly
taken for that consideration of the intellect, which is accompanied by some kind of inquiry,
and which precedes the intellect's arrival at the stage of perfection that comes with the certitude
of sight. In this sense Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 16) that "the Son of God is not called
the Thought, but the Word of God. When our thought realizes what we know and takes form therefrom,
it becomes our word. Hence the Word of God must be understood without any thinking on the part
of God, for there is nothing there that can take form, or be unformed." In this way thought
is, properly speaking, the movement of the mind while yet deliberating, and not yet perfected
by the clear sight of truth. Since, however, such a movement of the mind may be one of deliberation
either about universal notions, which belongs to the intellectual faculty, or about particular
matters, which belongs to the sensitive part, hence it is that "to think" is taken secondly
for an act of the deliberating intellect, and thirdly for an act of the cogitative power.

Accordingly, if "to think" be understood broadly according to the first sense, then "to think
with assent," does not express completely what is meant by "to believe": since, in this way,
a man thinks with assent even when he considers what he knows by science [*Science is certain
knowledge of a demonstrated conclusion through its demonstration.], or understands. If, on
the other hand, "to think" be understood in the second way, then this expresses completely
the nature of the act of believing. For among the acts belonging to the intellect, some have
a firm assent without any such kind of thinking, as when a man considers the things that he
knows by science, or understands, for this consideration is already formed. But some acts of
the intellect have unformed thought devoid of a firm assent, whether they incline to neither
side, as in one who "doubts"; or incline to one side rather than the other, but on account
of some slight motive, as in one who "suspects"; or incline to one side yet with fear of the
other, as in one who "opines." But this act "to believe," cleaves firmly to one side, in which
respect belief has something in common with science and understanding; yet its knowledge does
not attain the perfection of clear sight, wherein it agrees with doubt, suspicion and opinion.
Hence it is proper to the believer to think with assent: so that the act of believing is distinguished
from all the other acts of the intellect, which are about the true or the false.

Reply Obj. 1: Faith has not that research of natural reason which demonstrates what is believed,
but a research into those things whereby a man is induced to believe, for instance that such
things have been uttered by God and confirmed by miracles.

Reply Obj. 2: "To think" is not taken here for the act of the cogitative power, but for an
act of the intellect, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: The intellect of the believer is determined to one object, not by the reason,
but by the will, wherefore assent is taken here for an act of the intellect as determined to
one object by the will.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 2]

Whether the Act of Faith Is Suitably Distinguished As Believing God, Believing in a God and
Believing in God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the act of faith is unsuitably distinguished as believing God,
believing in a God, and believing in God. For one habit has but one act. Now faith is one habit
since it is one virtue. Therefore it is unreasonable to say that there are three acts of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is common to all acts of faith should not be reckoned as a particular
kind of act of faith. Now "to believe God" is common to all acts of faith, since faith is founded
on the First Truth. Therefore it seems unreasonable to distinguish it from certain other acts
of faith.

Obj. 3: Further, that which can be said of unbelievers, cannot be called an act of faith. Now
unbelievers can be said to believe in a God. Therefore it should not be reckoned an act of faith.

Obj. 4: Further, movement towards the end belongs to the will, whose object is the good and
the end. Now to believe is an act, not of the will, but of the intellect. Therefore "to believe
in God," which implies movement towards an end, should not be reckoned as a species of that act.

On the contrary is the authority of Augustine who makes this distinction (De Verb. Dom., Serm.
lxi--Tract. xxix in Joan.).

I answer that, The act of any power or habit depends on the relation of that power or habit
to its object. Now the object of faith can be considered in three ways. For, since "to believe"
is an act of the intellect, in so far as the will moves it to assent, as stated above (A. 1,
ad 3), the object of faith can be considered either on the part of the intellect, or on the
part of the will that moves the intellect.

If it be considered on the part of the intellect, then two things can be observed in the object
of faith, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 1). One of these is the material object of faith, and in
this way an act of faith is "to believe in a God"; because, as stated above (ibid.) nothing
is proposed to our belief, except in as much as it is referred to God. The other is the formal
aspect of the object, for it is the medium on account of which we assent to such and such a
point of faith; and thus an act of faith is "to believe God," since, as stated above (ibid.)
the formal object of faith is the First Truth, to Which man gives his adhesion, so as to assent
for Its sake to whatever he believes.

Thirdly, if the object of faith be considered in so far as the intellect is moved by the will,
an act of faith is "to believe in God." For the First Truth is referred to the will, through
having the aspect of an end.

Reply Obj. 1: These three do not denote different acts of faith, but one and the same act having
different relations to the object of faith.

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: Unbelievers cannot be said "to believe in a God" as we understand it in relation
to the act of faith. For they do not believe that God exists under the conditions that faith
determines; hence they do not truly imply believe in a God, since, as the Philosopher observes
(Metaph. ix, text. 22) "to know simple things defectively is not to know them at all."

Reply Obj. 4: As stated above (I-II, Q. 9, A. 1) the will moves the intellect and the other
powers of the soul to the end: and in this respect an act of faith is "to believe in God."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Necessary for Salvation to Believe Anything Above the Natural Reason?

Objection 1: It would seem unnecessary for salvation to believe anything above the natural
reason. For the salvation and perfection of a thing seem to be sufficiently insured by its
natural endowments. Now matters of faith, surpass man's natural reason, since they are things
unseen as stated above (Q. 1, A. 4). Therefore to believe seems unnecessary for salvation.

Obj. 2: Further, it is dangerous for man to assent to matters, wherein he cannot judge whether
that which is proposed to him be true or false, according to Job 12:11: "Doth not the ear discern
words?" Now a man cannot form a judgment of this kind in matters of faith, since he cannot
trace them back to first principles, by which all our judgments are guided. Therefore it is
dangerous to believe in such matters. Therefore to believe is not necessary for salvation.

Obj. 3: Further, man's salvation rests on God, according to Ps. 36:39: "But the salvation of
the just is from the Lord." Now "the invisible things" of God "are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made; His eternal power also and Divinity," according to Rom. 1:20:
and those things which are clearly seen by the understanding are not an object of belief. Therefore
it is not necessary for man's salvation, that he should believe certain things.

On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:6): "Without faith it is impossible to please God."

I answer that, Wherever one nature is subordinate to another, we find that two things concur
towards the perfection of the lower nature, one of which is in respect of that nature's proper
movement, while the other is in respect of the movement of the higher nature. Thus water by
its proper movement moves towards the centre (of the earth), while according to the movement
of the moon, it moves round the centre by ebb and flow. In like manner the planets have their
proper movements from west to east, while in accordance with the movement of the first heaven,
they have a movement from east to west. Now the created rational nature alone is immediately
subordinate to God, since other creatures do not attain to the universal, but only to something
particular, while they partake of the Divine goodness either in being only, as inanimate things,
or also in living, and in knowing singulars, as plants and animals; whereas the rational nature,
in as much as it apprehends the universal notion of good and being, is immediately related
to the universal principle of being.

Consequently the perfection of the rational creature consists not only in what belongs to it
in respect of its nature, but also in that which it acquires through a supernatural participation
of Divine goodness. Hence it was said above (I-II, Q. 3, A. 8) that man's ultimate happiness
consists in a supernatural vision of God: to which vision man cannot attain unless he be taught
by God, according to John 6:45: "Every one that hath heard of the Father and hath learned cometh
to Me." Now man acquires a share of this learning, not indeed all at once, but by little and
little, according to the mode of his nature: and every one who learns thus must needs believe,
in order that he may acquire science in a perfect degree; thus also the Philosopher remarks
(De Soph. Elench. i, 2) that "it behooves a learner to believe."

Hence in order that a man arrive at the perfect vision of heavenly happiness, he must first
of all believe God, as a disciple believes the master who is teaching him.

Reply Obj. 1: Since man's nature is dependent on a higher nature, natural knowledge does not
suffice for its perfection, and some supernatural knowledge is necessary, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as man assents to first principles, by the natural light of his intellect,
so does a virtuous man, by the habit of virtue, judge aright of things concerning that virtue;
and in this way, by the light of faith which God bestows on him, a man assents to matters of
faith and not to those which are against faith. Consequently "there is no" danger or "condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus," and whom He has enlightened by faith.

Reply Obj. 3: In many respects faith perceives the invisible things of God in a higher way
than natural reason does in proceeding to God from His creatures. Hence it is written (Ecclus.
3:25): "Many things are shown to thee above the understandings of man."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Necessary to Believe Those Things Which Can Be Proved by Natural Reason?

Objection 1: It would seem unnecessary to believe those things which can be proved by natural
reason. For nothing is superfluous in God's works, much less even than in the works of nature.
Now it is superfluous to employ other means, where one already suffices. Therefore it would
be superfluous to receive by faith, things that can be known by natural reason.

Obj. 2: Further, those things must be believed, which are the object of faith. Now science
and faith are not about the same object, as stated above (Q. 1, AA. 4, 5). Since therefore
all things that can be known by natural reason are an object of science, it seems that there
is no need to believe what can be proved by natural reason.

Obj. 3: Further, all things knowable scientifically [*Science is certain knowledge of a demonstrated
conclusion through its demonstration] would seem to come under one head: so that if some of
them are proposed to man as objects of faith, in like manner the others should also be believed.
But this is not true. Therefore it is not necessary to believe those things which can be proved
by natural reason.

On the contrary, It is necessary to believe that God is one and incorporeal: which things philosophers
prove by natural reason.

I answer that, It is necessary for man to accept by faith not only things which are above reason,
but also those which can be known by reason: and this for three motives. First, in order that
man may arrive more quickly at the knowledge of Divine truth. Because the science to whose
province it belongs to prove the existence of God, is the last of all to offer itself to human
research, since it presupposes many other sciences: so that it would not by until late in life
that man would arrive at the knowledge of God. The second reason is, in order that the knowledge
of God may be more general. For many are unable to make progress in the study of science, either
through dullness of mind, or through having a number of occupations, and temporal needs, or
even through laziness in learning, all of whom would be altogether deprived of the knowledge
of God, unless Divine things were brought to their knowledge under the guise of faith. The
third reason is for the sake of certitude. For human reason is very deficient in things concerning
God. A sign of this is that philosophers in their researches, by natural investigation, into
human affairs, have fallen into many errors, and have disagreed among themselves. And consequently,
in order that men might have knowledge of God, free of doubt and uncertainty, it was necessary
for Divine matters to be delivered to them by way of faith, being told to them, as it were,
by God Himself Who cannot lie.

Reply Obj. 1: The researches of natural reason do not suffice mankind for the knowledge of
Divine matters, even of those that can be proved by reason: and so it is not superfluous if
these others be believed.

Reply Obj. 2: Science and faith cannot be in the same subject and about the same object: but
what is an object of science for one, can be an object of faith for another, as stated above
(Q. 1, A. 5).

Reply Obj. 3: Although all things that can be known by science are of one common scientific
aspect, they do not all alike lead man to beatitude: hence they are not all equally proposed
to our belief.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 5]

Whether Man Is Bound to Believe Anything Explicitly?

Objection 1: It would seem that man is not bound to believe anything explicitly. For no man
is bound to do what is not in his power. Now it is not in man's power to believe a thing explicitly,
for it is written (Rom. 10:14, 15): "How shall they believe Him, of whom they have not heard?
And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach unless they be sent?"
Therefore man is not bound to believe anything explicitly.

Obj. 2: Further, just as we are directed to God by faith, so are we by charity. Now man is
not bound to keep the precepts of charity, and it is enough if he be ready to fulfil them:
as is evidenced by the precept of Our Lord (Matt. 5:39): "If one strike thee on one [Vulg.:
'thy right'] cheek, turn to him also the other"; and by others of the same kind, according
to Augustine's exposition (De Serm. Dom. in Monte xix). Therefore neither is man bound to believe
anything explicitly, and it is enough if he be ready to believe whatever God proposes to be
believed.

Obj. 3: Further, the good of faith consists in obedience, according to Rom. 1:5: "For obedience
to the faith in all nations." Now the virtue of obedience does not require man to keep certain
fixed precepts, but it is enough that his mind be ready to obey, according to Ps. 118:60: "I
am ready and am not troubled; that I may keep Thy commandments." Therefore it seems enough
for faith, too, that man should be ready to believe whatever God may propose, without his believing
anything explicitly.

On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:6): "He that cometh to God, must believe that He is,
and is a rewarder to them that seek Him."

I answer that, The precepts of the Law, which man is bound to fulfil, concern acts of virtue
which are the means of attaining salvation. Now an act of virtue, as stated above (I-II, Q.
60, A. 5) depends on the relation of the habit to its object. Again two things may be considered
in the object of any virtue; namely, that which is the proper and direct object of that virtue,
and that which is accidental and consequent to the object properly so called. Thus it belongs
properly and directly to the object of fortitude, to face the dangers of death, and to charge
at the foe with danger to oneself, for the sake of the common good: yet that, in a just war,
a man be armed, or strike another with his sword, and so forth, is reduced to the object of
fortitude, but indirectly.

Accordingly, just as a virtuous act is required for the fulfilment of a precept, so is it necessary
that the virtuous act should terminate in its proper and direct object: but, on the other hand,
the fulfilment of the precept does not require that a virtuous act should terminate in those
things which have an accidental or secondary relation to the proper and direct object of that
virtue, except in certain places and at certain times. We must, therefore, say that the direct
object of faith is that whereby man is made one of the Blessed, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 8):
while the indirect and secondary object comprises all things delivered by God to us in Holy
Writ, for instance that Abraham had two sons, that David was the son of Jesse, and so forth.

Therefore, as regards the primary points or articles of faith, man is bound to believe them,
just as he is bound to have faith; but as to other points of faith, man is not bound to believe
them explicitly, but only implicitly, or to be ready to believe them, in so far as he is prepared
to believe whatever is contained in the Divine Scriptures. Then alone is he bound to believe
such things explicitly, when it is clear to him that they are contained in the doctrine of faith.

Reply Obj. 1: If we understand those things alone to be in a man's power, which we can do without
the help of grace, then we are bound to do many things which we cannot do without the aid of
healing grace, such as to love God and our neighbor, and likewise to believe the articles of
faith. But with the help of grace we can do this, for this help "to whomsoever it is given
from above it is mercifully given; and from whom it is withheld it is justly withheld, as a
punishment of a previous, or at least of original, sin," as Augustine states (De Corr. et Grat.
v, vi [*Cf. Ep. cxc; De Praed. Sanct. viii.]).

Reply Obj. 2: Man is bound to love definitely those lovable things which are properly and directly
the objects of charity, namely, God and our neighbor. The objection refers to those precepts
of charity which belong, as a consequence, to the objects of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: The virtue of obedience is seated, properly speaking, in the will; hence promptness
of the will subject to authority, suffices for the act of obedience, because it is the proper
and direct object of obedience. But this or that precept is accidental or consequent to that
proper and direct object.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 6]

Whether All Are Equally Bound to Have Explicit Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that all are equally bound to have explicit faith. For all are bound
to those things which are necessary for salvation, as is evidenced by the precepts of charity.
Now it is necessary for salvation that certain things should be believed explicitly. Therefore
all are equally bound to have explicit faith.

Obj. 2: Further, no one should be put to test in matters that he is not bound to believe. But
simple persons are sometimes tested in reference to the slightest articles of faith. Therefore
all are bound to believe everything explicitly.

Obj. 3: Further, if the simple are bound to have, not explicit but only implicit faith, their
faith must needs be implied in the faith of the learned. But this seems unsafe, since it is
possible for the learned to err. Therefore it seems that the simple should also have explicit
faith; so that all are, therefore, equally bound to have explicit faith.

On the contrary, It is written (Job 1:14): "The oxen were ploughing, and the asses feeding
beside them," because, as Gregory expounds this passage (Moral. ii, 17), the simple, who are
signified by the asses, ought, in matters of faith, to stay by the learned, who are denoted
by the oxen.

I answer that, The unfolding of matters of faith is the result of Divine revelation: for matters
of faith surpass natural reason. Now Divine revelation reaches those of lower degree through
those who are over them, in a certain order; to men, for instance, through the angels, and
to the lower angels through the higher, as Dionysius explains (Coel. Hier. iv, vii). In like
manner therefore the unfolding of faith must needs reach men of lower degree through those
of higher degree. Consequently, just as the higher angels, who enlighten those who are below
them, have a fuller knowledge of Divine things than the lower angels, as Dionysius states (Coel.
Hier. xii), so too, men of higher degree, whose business it is to teach others, are under obligation
to have fuller knowledge of matters of faith, and to believe them more explicitly.

Reply Obj. 1: The unfolding of the articles of faith is not equally necessary for the salvation
of all, since those of higher degree, whose duty it is to teach others, are bound to believe
explicitly more things than others are.

Reply Obj. 2: Simple persons should not be put to the test about subtle questions of faith,
unless they be suspected of having been corrupted by heretics, who are wont to corrupt the
faith of simple people in such questions. If, however, it is found that they are free from
obstinacy in their heterodox sentiments, and that it is due to their simplicity, it is no fault
of theirs.

Reply Obj. 3: The simple have no faith implied in that of the learned, except in so far as
the latter adhere to the Divine teaching. Hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 4:16): "Be ye followers
of me, as I also am of Christ."

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 7]

Whether It Is Necessary for the Salvation of All, That They Should Believe Explicitly in the
Mystery of Christ?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not necessary for the salvation of all that they should
believe explicitly in the mystery of Christ. For man is not bound to believe explicitly what
the angels are ignorant about: since the unfolding of faith is the result of Divine revelation,
which reaches man by means of the angels, as stated above (A. 6; I, Q. 111, A. 1). Now even
the angels were in ignorance of the mystery of the Incarnation: hence, according to the commentary
of Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii), it is they who ask (Ps. 23:8): "Who is this king of glory?"
and (Isa. 63:1): "Who is this that cometh from Edom?" Therefore men were not bound to believe
explicitly in the mystery of Christ's Incarnation.

Obj. 2: Further, it is evident that John the Baptist was one of the teachers, and most nigh
to Christ, Who said of him (Matt. 11:11) that "there hath not risen among them that are born
of women, a greater than" he. Now John the Baptist does not appear to have known the mystery
of Christ explicitly, since he asked Christ (Matt. 11:3): "Art Thou He that art to come, or
look we for another?" Therefore even the teachers were not bound to explicit faith in Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, many gentiles obtained salvation through the ministry of the angels, as Dionysius
states (Coel. Hier. ix). Now it would seem that the gentiles had neither explicit nor implicit
faith in Christ, since they received no revelation. Therefore it seems that it was not necessary
for the salvation of all to believe explicitly in the mystery of Christ.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Corr. et Gratia vii; Ep. cxc): "Our faith is sound if we
believe that no man, old or young is delivered from the contagion of death and the bonds of
sin, except by the one Mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5; Q. 1, A. 8), the object of faith includes, properly and
directly, that thing through which man obtains beatitude. Now the mystery of Christ's Incarnation
and Passion is the way by which men obtain beatitude; for it is written (Acts 4:12): "There
is no other name under heaven given to men, whereby we must be saved." Therefore belief of
some kind in the mystery of Christ's Incarnation was necessary at all times and for all persons,
but this belief differed according to differences of times and persons. The reason of this
is that before the state of sin, man believed, explicitly in Christ's Incarnation, in so far
as it was intended for the consummation of glory, but not as it was intended to deliver man
from sin by the Passion and Resurrection, since man had no foreknowledge of his future sin.
He does, however, seem to have had foreknowledge of the Incarnation of Christ, from the fact
that he said (Gen. 2:24): "Wherefore a man shall leave father and mother, and shall cleave
to his wife," of which the Apostle says (Eph. 5:32) that "this is a great sacrament . . . in
Christ and the Church," and it is incredible that the first man was ignorant about this sacrament.

But after sin, man believed explicitly in Christ, not only as to the Incarnation, but also
as to the Passion and Resurrection, whereby the human race is delivered from sin and death:
for they would not, else, have foreshadowed Christ's Passion by certain sacrifices both before
and after the Law, the meaning of which sacrifices was known by the learned explicitly, while
the simple folk, under the veil of those sacrifices, believed them to be ordained by God in
reference to Christ's coming, and thus their knowledge was covered with a veil, so to speak.
And, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 7), the nearer they were to Christ, the more distinct was their
knowledge of Christ's mysteries.

After grace had been revealed, both learned and simple folk are bound to explicit faith in
the mysteries of Christ, chiefly as regards those which are observed throughout the Church,
and publicly proclaimed, such as the articles which refer to the Incarnation, of which we have
spoken above (Q. 1, A. 8). As to other minute points in reference to the articles of the Incarnation,
men have been bound to believe them more or less explicitly according to each one's state and
office.

Reply Obj. 1: The mystery of the Kingdom of God was not entirely hidden from the angels, as
Augustine observes (Gen. ad lit. v, 19), yet certain aspects thereof were better known to them
when Christ revealed them to them.

Reply Obj. 2: It was not through ignorance that John the Baptist inquired of Christ's advent
in the flesh, since he had clearly professed his belief therein, saying: "I saw, and I gave
testimony, that this is the Son of God" (John 1:34). Hence he did not say: "Art Thou He that
hast come?" but "Art Thou He that art to come?" thus saying about the future, not about the
past. Likewise it is not to be believed that he was ignorant of Christ's future Passion, for
he had already said (John 1:39): "Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him who taketh away the sins
[Vulg.: 'sin'] of the world," thus foretelling His future immolation; and since other prophets
had foretold it, as may be seen especially in Isaias 53. We may therefore say with Gregory
(Hom. xxvi in Evang.) that he asked this question, being in ignorance as to whether Christ
would descend into hell in His own Person. But he did not ignore the fact that the power of
Christ's Passion would be extended to those who were detained in Limbo, according to Zech.
9:11: "Thou also, by the blood of Thy testament hast sent forth Thy prisoners out of the pit,
wherein there is no water"; nor was he bound to believe explicitly, before its fulfilment,
that Christ was to descend thither Himself.

It may also be replied that, as Ambrose observes in his commentary on Luke 7:19, he made this
inquiry, not from doubt or ignorance but from devotion: or again, with Chrysostom (Hom. xxxvi
in Matth.), that he inquired, not as though ignorant himself, but because he wished his disciples
to be satisfied on that point, through Christ: hence the latter framed His answer so as to
instruct the disciples, by pointing to the signs of His works.

Reply Obj. 3: Many of the gentiles received revelations of Christ, as is clear from their predictions.
Thus we read (Job 19:25): "I know that my Redeemer liveth." The Sibyl too foretold certain
things about Christ, as Augustine states (Contra Faust. xiii, 15). Moreover, we read in the
history of the Romans, that at the time of Constantine Augustus and his mother Irene a tomb
was discovered, wherein lay a man on whose breast was a golden plate with the inscription:
"Christ shall be born of a virgin, and in Him, I believe. O sun, during the lifetime of Irene
and Constantine, thou shalt see me again" [*Cf. Baron, Annal., A.D. 780]. If, however, some
were saved without receiving any revelation, they were not saved without faith in a Mediator,
for, though they did not believe in Him explicitly, they did, nevertheless, have implicit faith
through believing in Divine providence, since they believed that God would deliver mankind
in whatever way was pleasing to Him, and according to the revelation of the Spirit to those
who knew the truth, as stated in Job 35:11: "Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth."

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 8]

Whether It Is Necessary for Salvation to Believe Explicitly in the Trinity?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not necessary for salvation to believe explicitly in
the Trinity. For the Apostle says (Heb. 11:6): "He that cometh to God must believe that He
is, and is a rewarder to them that seek Him." Now one can believe this without believing in
the Trinity. Therefore it was not necessary to believe explicitly in the Trinity.

Obj. 2: Further our Lord said (John 17:5, 6): "Father, I have manifested Thy name to men,"
which words Augustine expounds (Tract. cvi) as follows: "Not the name by which Thou art called
God, but the name whereby Thou art called My Father," and further on he adds: "In that He made
this world, God is known to all nations; in that He is not to be worshipped together with false
gods, 'God is known in Judea'; but, in that He is the Father of this Christ, through Whom He
takes away the sin of the world, He now makes known to men this name of His, which hitherto
they knew not." Therefore before the coming of Christ it was not known that Paternity and Filiation
were in the Godhead: and so the Trinity was not believed explicitly.

Obj. 3: Further, that which we are bound to believe explicitly of God is the object of heavenly
happiness. Now the object of heavenly happiness is the sovereign good, which can be understood
to be in God, without any distinction of Persons. Therefore it was not necessary to believe
explicitly in the Trinity.

On the contrary, In the Old Testament the Trinity of Persons is expressed in many ways; thus
at the very outset of Genesis it is written in manifestation of the Trinity: "Let us make man
to Our image and likeness" (Gen. 1:26). Therefore from the very beginning it was necessary
for salvation to believe in the Trinity.

I answer that, It is impossible to believe explicitly in the mystery of Christ, without faith
in the Trinity, since the mystery of Christ includes that the Son of God took flesh; that He
renewed the world through the grace of the Holy Ghost; and again, that He was conceived by
the Holy Ghost. Wherefore just as, before Christ, the mystery of Christ was believed explicitly
by the learned, but implicitly and under a veil, so to speak, by the simple, so too was it
with the mystery of the Trinity. And consequently, when once grace had been revealed, all were
bound to explicit faith in the mystery of the Trinity: and all who are born again in Christ,
have this bestowed on them by the invocation of the Trinity, according to Matt. 28:19: "Going
therefore teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son and
of the Holy Ghost."

Reply Obj. 1: Explicit faith in those two things was necessary at all times and for all people:
but it was not sufficient at all times and for all people.

Reply Obj. 2: Before Christ's coming, faith in the Trinity lay hidden in the faith of the learned,
but through Christ and the apostles it was shown to the world.

Reply Obj. 3: God's sovereign goodness as we understand it now through its effects, can be
understood without the Trinity of Persons: but as understood in itself, and as seen by the
Blessed, it cannot be understood without the Trinity of Persons. Moreover the mission of the
Divine Persons brings us to heavenly happiness.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 9]

Whether to Believe Is Meritorious?

Objection 1: It would seem that to believe is not meritorious. For the principle of all merit
is charity, as stated above (I-II, Q. 114, A. 4). Now faith, like nature, is a preamble to
charity. Therefore, just as an act of nature is not meritorious, since we do not merit by our
natural gifts, so neither is an act of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, belief is a mean between opinion and scientific knowledge or the consideration
of things scientifically known [*Science is a certain knowledge of a demonstrated conclusion
through its demonstration.]. Now the considerations of science are not meritorious, nor on
the other hand is opinion. Therefore belief is not meritorious.

Obj. 3: Further, he who assents to a point of faith, either has a sufficient motive for believing,
or he has not. If he has a sufficient motive for his belief, this does not seem to imply any
merit on his part, since he is no longer free to believe or not to believe: whereas if he has
not a sufficient motive for believing, this is a mark of levity, according to Ecclus. 19:4:
"He that is hasty to give credit, is light of heart," so that, seemingly, he gains no merit
thereby. Therefore to believe is by no means meritorious.

On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:33) that the saints "by faith . . . obtained promises,"
which would not be the case if they did not merit by believing. Therefore to believe is meritorious.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 114, AA. 3, 4), our actions are meritorious in so
far as they proceed from the free-will moved with grace by God. Therefore every human act proceeding
from the free-will, if it be referred to God, can be meritorious. Now the act of believing
is an act of the intellect assenting to the Divine truth at the command of the will moved by
the grace of God, so that it is subject to the free-will in relation to God; and consequently
the act of faith can be meritorious.

Reply Obj. 1: Nature is compared to charity which is the principle of merit, as matter to form:
whereas faith is compared to charity as the disposition which precedes the ultimate form. Now
it is evident that the subject or the matter cannot act save by virtue of the form, nor can
a preceding disposition, before the advent of the form: but after the advent of the form, both
the subject and the preceding disposition act by virtue of the form, which is the chief principle
of action, even as the heat of fire acts by virtue of the substantial form of fire. Accordingly
neither nature nor faith can, without charity, produce a meritorious act; but, when accompanied
by charity, the act of faith is made meritorious thereby, even as an act of nature, and a natural
act of the free-will.

Reply Obj. 2: Two things may be considered in science: namely the scientist's assent to a scientific
fact and his consideration of that fact. Now the assent of science is not subject to free-will,
because the scientist is obliged to assent by force of the demonstration, wherefore scientific
assent is not meritorious. But the actual consideration of what a man knows scientifically
is subject to his free-will, for it is in his power to consider or not to consider. Hence scientific
consideration may be meritorious if it be referred to the end of charity, i.e. to the honor
of God or the good of our neighbor. On the other hand, in the case of faith, both these things
are subject to the free-will so that in both respects the act of faith can be meritorious:
whereas in the case of opinion, there is no firm assent, since it is weak and infirm, as the
Philosopher observes (Poster. i, 33), so that it does not seem to proceed from a perfect act
of the will: and for this reason, as regards the assent, it does not appear to be very meritorious,
though it can be as regards the actual consideration.

Reply Obj. 3: The believer has sufficient motive for believing, for he is moved by the authority
of Divine teaching confirmed by miracles, and, what is more, by the inward instinct of the
Divine invitation: hence he does not believe lightly. He has not, however, sufficient reason
for scientific knowledge, hence he does not lose the merit.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 2, Art. 10]

Whether Reasons in Support of What We Believe Lessen the Merit of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that reasons in support of what we believe lessen the merit of faith.
For Gregory says (Hom. xxvi in Evang.) that "there is no merit in believing what is shown by
reason." If, therefore, human reason provides sufficient proof, the merit of faith is altogether
taken away. Therefore it seems that any kind of human reasoning in support of matters of faith,
diminishes the merit of believing.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever lessens the measure of virtue, lessens the amount of merit, since
"happiness is the reward of virtue," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i, 9). Now human reasoning
seems to diminish the measure of the virtue of faith, since it is essential to faith to be
about the unseen, as stated above (Q. 1, AA. 4, 5). Now the more a thing is supported by reasons
the less is it unseen. Therefore human reasons in support of matters of faith diminish the
merit of faith.

Obj. 3: Further, contrary things have contrary causes. Now an inducement in opposition to faith
increases the merit of faith whether it consist in persecution inflicted by one who endeavors
to force a man to renounce his faith, or in an argument persuading him to do so. Therefore
reasons in support of faith diminish the merit of faith.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Pet. 3:15): "Being ready always to satisfy every one that
asketh you a reason of that faith [*Vulg.: 'Of that hope which is in you.' St. Thomas' reading
is apparently taken from Bede.] and hope which is in you." Now the Apostle would not give this
advice, if it would imply a diminution in the merit of faith. Therefore reason does not diminish
the merit of faith.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 9), the act of faith can be meritorious, in so far as it
is subject to the will, not only as to the use, but also as to the assent. Now human reason
in support of what we believe, may stand in a twofold relation to the will of the believer.
First, as preceding the act of the will; as, for instance, when a man either has not the will,
or not a prompt will, to believe, unless he be moved by human reasons: and in this way human
reason diminishes the merit of faith. In this sense it has been said above (I-II, Q. 24, A.
3, ad 1; Q. 77, A. 6, ad 2) that, in moral virtues, a passion which precedes choice makes the
virtuous act less praiseworthy. For just as a man ought to perform acts of moral virtue, on
account of the judgment of his reason, and not on account of a passion, so ought he to believe
matters of faith, not on account of human reason, but on account of the Divine authority. Secondly,
human reasons may be consequent to the will of the believer. For when a man's will is ready
to believe, he loves the truth he believes, he thinks out and takes to heart whatever reasons
he can find in support thereof; and in this way human reason does not exclude the merit of
faith but is a sign of greater merit. Thus again, in moral virtues a consequent passion is
the sign of a more prompt will, as stated above (I-II, Q. 24, A. 3, ad 1). We have an indication
of this in the words of the Samaritans to the woman, who is a type of human reason: "We now
believe, not for thy saying" (John 4:42).

Reply Obj. 1: Gregory is referring to the case of a man who has no will to believe what is
of faith, unless he be induced by reasons. But when a man has the will to believe what is of
faith on the authority of God alone, although he may have reasons in demonstration of some
of them, e.g. of the existence of God, the merit of his faith is not, for that reason, lost
or diminished.

Reply Obj. 2: The reasons which are brought forward in support of the authority of faith, are
not demonstrations which can bring intellectual vision to the human intellect, wherefore they
do not cease to be unseen. But they remove obstacles to faith, by showing that what faith proposes
is not impossible; wherefore such reasons do not diminish the merit or the measure of faith.
On the other hand, though demonstrative reasons in support of the preambles of faith [*The
Leonine Edition reads: 'in support of matters of faith which are however, preambles to the
articles of faith, diminish,' etc.], but not of the articles of faith, diminish the measure
of faith, since they make the thing believed to be seen, yet they do not diminish the measure
of charity, which makes the will ready to believe them, even if they were unseen; and so the
measure of merit is not diminished.

Reply Obj. 3: Whatever is in opposition to faith, whether it consist in a man's thoughts, or
in outward persecution, increases the merit of faith, in so far as the will is shown to be
more prompt and firm in believing. Hence the martyrs had more merit of faith, through not renouncing
faith on account of persecution; and even the wise have greater merit of faith, through not
renouncing their faith on account of the reasons brought forward by philosophers or heretics
in opposition to faith. On the other hand things that are favorable to faith, do not always
diminish the promptness of the will to believe, and therefore they do not always diminish the
merit of faith.

QUESTION 3

OF THE OUTWARD ACT OF FAITH (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the outward act, viz. the confession of faith: under which head there
are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether confession is an act of faith?

(2) Whether confession of faith is necessary for salvation?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 3, Art. 1]

Whether Confession Is an Act of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that confession is not an act of faith. For the same act does not
belong to different virtues. Now confession belongs to penance of which it is a part. Therefore
it is not an act of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, man is sometimes deterred by fear or some kind of confusion, from confessing
his faith: wherefore the Apostle (Eph. 6:19) asks for prayers that it may be granted him "with
confidence, to make known the mystery of the gospel." Now it belongs to fortitude, which moderates
daring and fear, not to be deterred from doing good on account of confusion or fear. Therefore
it seems that confession is not an act of faith, but rather of fortitude or constancy.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the ardor of faith makes one confess one's faith outwardly, so does
it make one do other external good works, for it is written (Gal. 5:6) that "faith . . . worketh
by charity." But other external works are not reckoned acts of faith. Therefore neither is
confession an act of faith.

On the contrary, A gloss explains the words of 2 Thess. 1:11, "and the work of faith in power"
as referring to "confession which is a work proper to faith."

I answer that, Outward actions belong properly to the virtue to whose end they are specifically
referred: thus fasting is referred specifically to the end of abstinence, which is to tame
the flesh, and consequently it is an act of abstinence.

Now confession of those things that are of faith is referred specifically as to its end, to
that which concerns faith, according to 2 Cor. 4:13: "Having the same spirit of faith . . .
we believe, and therefore we speak also." For the outward utterance is intended to signify
the inward thought. Wherefore, just as the inward thought of matters of faith is properly an
act of faith, so too is the outward confession of them.

Reply Obj. 1: A threefold confession is commended by the Scriptures. One is the confession
of matters of faith, and this is a proper act of faith, since it is referred to the end of
faith as stated above. Another is the confession of thanksgiving or praise, and this is an
act of "latria," for its purpose is to give outward honor to God, which is the end of "latria."
The third is the confession of sins, which is ordained to the blotting out of sins, which is
the end of penance, to which virtue it therefore belongs.

Reply Obj. 2: That which removes an obstacle is not a direct, but an indirect, cause, as the
Philosopher proves (Phys. viii, 4). Hence fortitude which removes an obstacle to the confession
of faith, viz. fear or shame, is not the proper and direct cause of confession, but an indirect
cause so to speak.

Reply Obj. 3: Inward faith, with the aid of charity, causes all outward acts of virtue, by
means of the other virtues, commanding, but not eliciting them; whereas it produces the act
of confession as its proper act, without the help of any other virtue.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 3, Art. 2]

Whether Confession of Faith Is Necessary for Salvation?

Objection 1: It would seem that confession of faith is not necessary for salvation. For, seemingly,
a thing is sufficient for salvation, if it is a means of attaining the end of virtue. Now the
proper end of faith is the union of the human mind with Divine truth, and this can be realized
without any outward confession. Therefore confession of faith is not necessary for salvation.

Obj. 2: Further, by outward confession of faith, a man reveals his faith to another man. But
this is unnecessary save for those who have to instruct others in the faith. Therefore it seems
that the simple folk are not bound to confess the faith.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever may tend to scandalize and disturb others, is not necessary for salvation,
for the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:32): "Be without offense to the Jews and to the gentiles and
to the Church of God." Now confession of faith sometimes causes a disturbance among unbelievers.
Therefore it is not necessary for salvation.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. 10:10): "With the heart we believe unto justice; but
with the mouth, confession is made unto salvation."

I answer that, Things that are necessary for salvation come under the precepts of the Divine
law. Now since confession of faith is something affirmative, it can only fall under an affirmative
precept. Hence its necessity for salvation depends on how it falls under an affirmative precept
of the Divine law. Now affirmative precepts as stated above (I-II, Q. 71, A. 5, ad 3; I-II,
Q. 88, A. 1, ad 2) do not bind for always, although they are always binding; but they bind
as to place and time according to other due circumstances, in respect of which human acts have
to be regulated in order to be acts of virtue.

Thus then it is not necessary for salvation to confess one's faith at all times and in all
places, but in certain places and at certain times, when, namely, by omitting to do so, we
would deprive God of due honor, or our neighbor of a service that we ought to render him: for
instance, if a man, on being asked about his faith, were to remain silent, so as to make people
believe either that he is without faith, or that the faith is false, or so as to turn others
away from the faith; for in such cases as these, confession of faith is necessary for salvation.

Reply Obj. 1: The end of faith, even as of the other virtues, must be referred to the end of
charity, which is the love of God and our neighbor. Consequently when God's honor and our neighbor's
good demand, man should not be contented with being united by faith to God's truth, but ought
to confess his faith outwardly.

Reply Obj. 2: In cases of necessity where faith is in danger, every one is bound to proclaim
his faith to others, either to give good example and encouragement to the rest of the faithful,
or to check the attacks of unbelievers: but at other times it is not the duty of all the faithful
to instruct others in the faith.

Reply Obj. 3: There is nothing commendable in making a public confession of one's faith, if
it causes a disturbance among unbelievers, without any profit either to the faith or to the
faithful. Hence Our Lord said (Matt. 7:6): "Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast
ye your pearls before swine . . . lest turning upon you, they tear you." Yet, if there is hope
of profit to the faith, or if there be urgency, a man should disregard the disturbance of unbelievers,
and confess his faith in public. Hence it is written (Matt. 15:12) that when the disciples
had said to Our Lord that "the Pharisee, when they heard this word, were scandalized," He answered:
"Let them alone, they are blind, and leaders of the blind."

QUESTION 4

OF THE VIRTUE ITSELF OF FAITH (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the virtue itself of faith, and, in the first place, faith itself; secondly,
those who have faith; thirdly, the cause of faith; fourthly, its effects.

Under the first head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) What is faith?

(2) In what power of the soul does it reside?

(3) Whether its form is charity?

(4) Whether living (formata) faith and lifeless (informis) faith are one identically?

(5) Whether faith is a virtue?

(6) Whether it is one virtue?

(7) Of its relation to the other virtues;

(8) Of its certitude as compared with the certitude of the intellectual virtues.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 1]

Whether This Is a Fitting Definition of Faith: "Faith Is the Substance of Things to Be Hoped
For, the Evidence of Things That Appear Not?"

Objection 1: It would seem that the Apostle gives an unfitting definition of faith (Heb. For
no quality is a substance: whereas faith is a quality, since it is a theological virtue, as
stated above (I-II, Q. 62, A. 3). Therefore it is not a substance.

Obj. 2: Further, different virtues have different objects. Now things to be hoped for are the
object of hope. Therefore they should not be included in a definition of faith, as though they
were its object.

Obj. 3: Further, faith is perfected by charity rather than by hope, since charity is the form
of faith, as we shall state further on (A. 3). Therefore the definition of faith should have
included the thing to be loved rather than the thing to be hoped for.

Obj. 4: Further, the same thing should not be placed in different genera. Now "substance" and
"evidence" are different genera, and neither is subalternate to the other. Therefore it is
unfitting to state that faith is both "substance" and "evidence."

Obj. 5: Further, evidence manifests the truth of the matter for which it is adduced. Now a
thing is said to be apparent when its truth is already manifest. Therefore it seems to imply
a contradiction to speak of "evidence of things that appear not": and so faith is unfittingly
defined.

On the contrary, The authority of the Apostle suffices.

I answer that, Though some say that the above words of the Apostle are not a definition of
faith, yet if we consider the matter aright, this definition overlooks none of the points in
reference to which faith can be defined, albeit the words themselves are not arranged in the
form of a definition, just as the philosophers touch on the principles of the syllogism, without
employing the syllogistic form.

In order to make this clear, we must observe that since habits are known by their acts, and
acts by their objects, faith, being a habit, should be defined by its proper act in relation
to its proper object. Now the act of faith is to believe, as stated above (Q. 2, AA. 2, 3),
which is an act of the intellect determinate to one object of the will's command. Hence an
act of faith is related both to the object of the will, i.e. to the good and the end, and to
the object of the intellect, i.e. to the true. And since faith, through being a theological
virtue, as stated above (I-II, Q. 62, A. 2), has one same thing for object and end, its object
and end must, of necessity, be in proportion to one another. Now it has been already stated
(Q. 1, AA. 1, 4) that the object of faith is the First Truth, as unseen, and whatever we hold
on account thereof: so that it must needs be under the aspect of something unseen that the
First Truth is the end of the act of faith, which aspect is that of a thing hoped for, according
to the Apostle (Rom. 8:25): "We hope for that which we see not": because to see the truth is
to possess it. Now one hopes not for what one has already, but for what one has not, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 67, A. 4). Accordingly the relation of the act of faith to its end which is
the object of the will, is indicated by the words: "Faith is the substance of things to be
hoped for." For we are wont to call by the name of substance, the first beginning of a thing,
especially when the whole subsequent thing is virtually contained in the first beginning; for
instance, we might say that the first self-evident principles are the substance of science,
because, to wit, these principles are in us the first beginnings of science, the whole of which
is itself contained in them virtually. In this way then faith is said to be the "substance
of things to be hoped for," for the reason that in us the first beginning of things to be hoped
for is brought about by the assent of faith, which contains virtually all things to be hoped
for. Because we hope to be made happy through seeing the unveiled truth to which our faith
cleaves, as was made evident when we were speaking of happiness (I-II, Q. 3, A. 8; I-II, Q.
4, A. 3).

The relationship of the act of faith to the object of the intellect, considered as the object
of faith, is indicated by the words, "evidence of things that appear not," where "evidence"
is taken for the result of evidence. For evidence induces the intellect to adhere to a truth,
wherefore the firm adhesion of the intellect to the non-apparent truth of faith is called "evidence"
here. Hence another reading has "conviction," because to wit, the intellect of the believer
is convinced by Divine authority, so as to assent to what it sees not. Accordingly if anyone
would reduce the foregoing words to the form of a definition, he may say that "faith is a habit
of the mind, whereby eternal life is begun in us, making the intellect assent to what is non-apparent."

In this way faith is distinguished from all other things pertaining to the intellect. For when
we describe it as "evidence," we distinguish it from opinion, suspicion, and doubt, which do
not make the intellect adhere to anything firmly; when we go on to say, "of things that appear
not," we distinguish it from science and understanding, the object of which is something apparent;
and when we say that it is "the substance of things to be hoped for," we distinguish the virtue
of faith from faith commonly so called, which has no reference to the beatitude we hope for.

Whatever other definitions are given of faith, are explanations of this one given by the Apostle.
For when Augustine says (Tract. xl in Joan.: QQ. Evang. ii, qu. 39) that "faith is a virtue
whereby we believe what we do not see," and when Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 11) that
"faith is an assent without research," and when others say that "faith is that certainty of
the mind about absent things which surpasses opinion but falls short of science," these all
amount to the same as the Apostle's words: "Evidence of things that appear not"; and when Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. vii) that "faith is the solid foundation of the believer, establishing him
in the truth, and showing forth the truth in him," comes to the same as "substance of things
to be hoped for."

Reply Obj. 1: "Substance" here does not stand for the supreme genus condivided with the other
genera, but for that likeness to substance which is found in each genus, inasmuch as the first
thing in a genus contains the others virtually and is said to be the substance thereof.

Reply Obj. 2: Since faith pertains to the intellect as commanded by the will, it must needs
be directed, as to its end, to the objects of those virtues which perfect the will, among which
is hope, as we shall prove further on (Q. 18, A. 1). For this reason the definition of faith
includes the object of hope.

Reply Obj. 3: Love may be of the seen and of the unseen, of the present and of the absent.
Consequently a thing to be loved is not so adapted to faith, as a thing to be hoped for, since
hope is always of the absent and the unseen.

Reply Obj. 4: "Substance" and "evidence" as included in the definition of faith, do not denote
various genera of faith, nor different acts, but different relationships of one act to different
objects, as is clear from what has been said.

Reply Obj. 5: Evidence taken from the proper principles of a thing, make[s] it apparent, whereas
evidence taken from Divine authority does not make a thing apparent in itself, and such is
the evidence referred to in the definition of faith.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 2]

Whether Faith Resides in the Intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith does not reside in the intellect. For Augustine says
(De Praedest. Sanct. v) that "faith resides in the believer's will." Now the will is a power
distinct from the intellect. Therefore faith does not reside in the intellect.

Obj. 2: Further, the assent of faith to believe anything, proceeds from the will obeying God.
Therefore it seems that faith owes all its praise to obedience. Now obedience is in the will.
Therefore faith is in the will, and not in the intellect.

Obj. 3: Further, the intellect is either speculative or practical. Now faith is not in the
speculative intellect, since this is not concerned with things to be sought or avoided, as
stated in De Anima iii, 9, so that it is not a principle of operation, whereas "faith . . .
worketh by charity" (Gal. 5:6). Likewise, neither is it in the practical intellect, the object
of which is some true, contingent thing, that can be made or done. For the object of faith
is the Eternal Truth, as was shown above (Q. 1, A. 1). Therefore faith does not reside in the
intellect. Therefore faith is likewise.

I answer that, Since faith is a virtue, its act must needs be perfect. Now, for the perfection
of an act proceeding from two active principles, each of these principles must be perfect:
for it is not possible for a thing to be sawn well, unless the sawyer possess the art, and
the saw be well fitted for sawing. Now, in a power of the soul, which is related to opposite
objects, a disposition to act well is a habit, as stated above (I-II, Q. 49, A. 4, ad 1, 2,
3). Wherefore an act that proceeds from two such powers must be perfected by a habit residing
in each of them. Again, it has been stated above (Q. 2, AA. 1, 2) that to believe is an act
of the intellect inasmuch as the will moves it to assent. And this act proceeds from the will
and the intellect, both of which have a natural aptitude to be perfected in this way. Consequently,
if the act of faith is to be perfect, there needs to be a habit in the will as well as in the
intellect: even as there needs to be the habit of prudence in the reason, besides the habit
of temperance in the concupiscible faculty, in order that the act of that faculty be perfect.
Now, to believe is immediately an act of the intellect, because the object of that act is "the
true," which pertains properly to the intellect. Consequently faith, which is the proper principle
of that act, must needs reside in the intellect.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine takes faith for the act of faith, which is described as depending on
the believer's will, in so far as his intellect assents to matters of faith at the command
of the will.

Reply Obj. 2: Not only does the will need to be ready to obey but also the intellect needs
to be well disposed to follow the command of the will, even as the concupiscible faculty needs
to be well disposed in order to follow the command of reason; hence there needs to be a habit
of virtue not only in the commanding will but also in the assenting intellect.

Reply Obj. 3: Faith resides in the speculative intellect, as evidenced by its object. But since
this object, which is the First Truth, is the end of all our desires and actions, as Augustine
proves (De Trin. i, 8), it follows that faith worketh by charity just as "the speculative intellect
becomes practical by extension" (De Anima iii, 10).

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 3]

Whether Charity Is the Form of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the form of faith. For each thing derives its
species from its form. When therefore two things are opposite members of a division, one cannot
be the form of the other. Now faith and charity are stated to be opposite members of a division,
as different species of virtue (1 Cor. 13:13). Therefore charity is not the form of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, a form and the thing of which it is the form are in one subject, since together
they form one simply. Now faith is in the intellect, while charity is in the will. Therefore
charity is not the form of faith.

Obj. 3: Further, the form of a thing is a principle thereof. Now obedience, rather than charity,
seems to be the principle of believing, on the part of the will, according to Rom. 1:5: "For
obedience to the faith in all nations." Therefore obedience rather than charity, is the form
of faith.

On the contrary, Each thing works through its form. Now faith works through charity. Therefore
the love of charity is the form of faith.

I answer that, As appears from what has been said above (I-II, Q. 1, A. 3; I-II, Q. 18, A.
6), voluntary acts take their species from their end which is the will's object. Now that which
gives a thing its species, is after the manner of a form in natural things. Wherefore the form
of any voluntary act is, in a manner, the end to which that act is directed, both because it
takes its species therefrom, and because the mode of an action should correspond proportionately
to the end. Now it is evident from what has been said (A. 1), that the act of faith is directed
to the object of the will, i.e. the good, as to its end: and this good which is the end of
faith, viz. the Divine Good, is the proper object of charity. Therefore charity is called the
form of faith in so far as the act of faith is perfected and formed by charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is called the form of faith because it quickens the act of faith. Now
nothing hinders one act from being quickened by different habits, so as to be reduced to various
species in a certain order, as stated above (I-II, Q. 18, AA. 6, 7; I-II, Q. 61, A. 2) when
we were treating of human acts in general.

Reply Obj. 2: This objection is true of an intrinsic form. But it is not thus that charity
is the form of faith, but in the sense that it quickens the act of faith, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: Even obedience, and hope likewise, and whatever other virtue might precede the
act of faith, is quickened by charity, as we shall show further on (Q. 23, A. 8), and consequently
charity is spoken of as the form of faith.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 4]

Whether Lifeless Faith Can Become Living, or Living Faith, Lifeless?

Objection 1: It would seem that lifeless faith does not become living, or living faith lifeless.
For, according to 1 Cor. 13:10, "when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part
shall be done away." Now lifeless faith is imperfect in comparison with living faith. Therefore
when living faith comes, lifeless faith is done away, so that they are not one identical habit.

Obj. 2: Further, a dead thing does not become a living thing. Now lifeless faith is dead, according
to James 2:20: "Faith without works is dead." Therefore lifeless faith cannot become living.

Obj. 3: Further, God's grace, by its advent, has no less effect in a believer than in an unbeliever.
Now by coming to an unbeliever it causes the habit of faith. Therefore when it comes to a believer,
who hitherto had the habit of lifeless faith, it causes another habit of faith in him.

Obj. 4: Further, as Boethius says (In Categ. Arist. i), "accidents cannot be altered." Now
faith is an accident. Therefore the same faith cannot be at one time living, and at another,
lifeless.

On the contrary, A gloss on the words, "Faith without works is dead" (James 2:20) adds, "by
which it lives once more." Therefore faith which was lifeless and without form hitherto, becomes
formed and living.

I answer that, There have been various opinions on this question. For some [*William of Auxerre,
Sum. Aur. III, iii, 15] have said that living and lifeless faith are distinct habits, but that
when living faith comes, lifeless faith is done away, and that, in like manner, when a man
sins mortally after having living faith, a new habit of lifeless faith is infused into him
by God. But it seems unfitting that grace should deprive man of a gift of God by coming to
him, and that a gift of God should be infused into man, on account of a mortal sin.

Consequently others [*Alexander of Hales, Sum. Theol. iii, 64] have said that living and lifeless
faith are indeed distinct habits, but that, all the same, when living faith comes the habit
of lifeless faith is not taken away, and that it remains together with the habit of living
faith in the same subject. Yet again it seems unreasonable that the habit of lifeless faith
should remain inactive in a person having living faith.

We must therefore hold differently that living and lifeless faith are one and the same habit.
The reason is that a habit is differentiated by that which directly pertains to that habit.
Now since faith is a perfection of the intellect, that pertains directly to faith, which pertains
to the intellect. Again, what pertains to the will, does not pertain directly to faith, so
as to be able to differentiate the habit of faith. But the distinction of living from lifeless
faith is in respect of something pertaining to the will, i.e. charity, and not in respect of
something pertaining to the intellect. Therefore living and lifeless faith are not distinct habits.

Reply Obj. 1: The saying of the Apostle refers to those imperfect things from which imperfection
is inseparable, for then, when the perfect comes the imperfect must needs be done away. Thus
with the advent of clear vision, faith is done away, because it is essentially "of the things
that appear not." When, however, imperfection is not inseparable from the imperfect thing,
the same identical thing which was imperfect becomes perfect. Thus childhood is not essential
to man and consequently the same identical subject who was a child, becomes a man. Now lifelessness
is not essential to faith, but is accidental thereto as stated above. Therefore lifeless faith
itself becomes living.

Reply Obj. 2: That which makes an animal live is inseparable from an animal, because it is
its substantial form, viz. the soul: consequently a dead thing cannot become a living thing,
and a living and a dead thing differ specifically. On the other hand that which gives faith
its form, or makes it live, is not essential to faith. Hence there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: Grace causes faith not only when faith begins anew to be in a man, but also as
long as faith lasts. For it has been said above (I, Q. 104, A. 1; I-II, Q. 109, A. 9) that
God is always working man's justification, even as the sun is always lighting up the air. Hence
grace is not less effective when it comes to a believer than when it comes to an unbeliever:
since it causes faith in both, in the former by confirming and perfecting it, in the latter
by creating it anew.

We might also reply that it is accidental, namely on account of the disposition of the subject,
that grace does not cause faith in one who has it already: just as, on the other hand, a second
mortal sin does not take away grace from one who has already lost it through a previous mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 4: When living faith becomes lifeless, faith is not changed, but its subject, the
soul, which at one time has faith without charity, and at another time, with charity.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 5]

Whether Faith Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not a virtue. For virtue is directed to the good,
since "it is virtue that makes its subject good," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 6).
But faith is directed to the true. Therefore faith is not a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, infused virtue is more perfect than acquired virtue. Now faith, on account
of its imperfection, is not placed among the acquired intellectual virtues, as the Philosopher
states (Ethic. vi, 3). Much less, therefore, can it be considered an infused virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, living and lifeless faith are the same species, as stated above (A. 4). Now
lifeless faith is not a virtue, since it is not connected with the other virtues. Therefore
neither is living faith a virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, the gratuitous graces and the fruits are distinct from the virtues. But faith
is numbered among the gratuitous graces (1 Cor. 12:9) and likewise among the fruits (Gal. 5:23).
Therefore faith is not a virtue.

On the contrary, Man is justified by the virtues, since "justice is all virtue," as the Philosopher
states (Ethic. v, 1). Now man is justified by faith according to Rom. 5:1: "Being justified
therefore by faith let us have peace," etc. Therefore faith is a virtue.

I answer that, As shown above, it is by human virtue that human acts are rendered good; hence,
any habit that is always the principle of a good act, may be called a human virtue. Such a
habit is living faith. For since to believe is an act of the intellect assenting to the truth
at the command of the will, two things are required that this act may be perfect: one of which
is that the intellect should infallibly tend to its object, which is the true; while the other
is that the will should be infallibly directed to the last end, on account of which it assents
to the true: and both of these are to be found in the act of living faith. For it belongs to
the very essence of faith that the intellect should ever tend to the true, since nothing false
can be the object of faith, as proved above (Q. 1, A. 3): while the effect of charity, which
is the form of faith, is that the soul ever has its will directed to a good end. Therefore
living faith is a virtue.

On the other hand, lifeless faith is not a virtue, because, though the act of lifeless faith
is duly perfect on the part of the intellect, it has not its due perfection as regards the
will: just as if temperance be in the concupiscible, without prudence being in the rational
part, temperance is not a virtue, as stated above (I-II, Q. 65, A. 1), because the act of temperance
requires both an act of reason, and an act of the concupiscible faculty, even as the act of
faith requires an act of the will, and an act of the intellect.

Reply Obj. 1: The truth is itself the good of the intellect, since it is its perfection: and
consequently faith has a relation to some good in so far as it directs the intellect to the
true. Furthermore, it has a relation to the good considered as the object of the will, inasmuch
as it is formed by charity.

Reply Obj. 2: The faith of which the Philosopher speaks is based on human reasoning in a conclusion
which does not follow, of necessity, from its premisses; and which is subject to be false:
hence such like faith is not a virtue. On the other hand, the faith of which we are speaking
is based on the Divine Truth, which is infallible, and consequently its object cannot be anything
false; so that faith of this kind can be a virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Living and lifeless faith do not differ specifically, as though they belonged
to different species. But they differ as perfect and imperfect within the same species. Hence
lifeless faith, being imperfect, does not satisfy the conditions of a perfect virtue, for "virtue
is a kind of perfection" (Phys. vii, text. 18).

Reply Obj. 4: Some say that faith which is numbered among the gratuitous graces is lifeless
faith. But this is said without reason, since the gratuitous graces, which are mentioned in
that passage, are not common to all the members of the Church: wherefore the Apostle says:
"There are diversities of graces," and again, "To one is given" this grace and "to another"
that. Now lifeless faith is common to all members of the Church, because its lifelessness is
not part of its substance, if we consider it as a gratuitous gift. We must, therefore, say
that in that passage, faith denotes a certain excellency of faith, for instance, "constancy
in faith," according to a gloss, or the "word of faith."

Faith is numbered among the fruits, in so far as it gives a certain pleasure in its act by
reason of its certainty, wherefore the gloss on the fifth chapter to the Galatians, where the
fruits are enumerated, explains faith as being "certainty about the unseen."

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 6]

Whether Faith Is One Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not one. For just as faith is a gift of God according
to Eph. 2:8, so also wisdom and knowledge are numbered among God's gifts according to Isa.
11:2. Now wisdom and knowledge differ in this, that wisdom is about eternal things, and knowledge
about temporal things, as Augustine states (De Trin. xii, 14, 15). Since, then, faith is about
eternal things, and also about some temporal things, it seems that faith is not one virtue,
but divided into several parts.

Obj. 2: Further, confession is an act of faith, as stated above (Q. 3, A. 1). Now confession
of faith is not one and the same for all: since what we confess as past, the fathers of old
confessed as yet to come, as appears from Isa. 7:14: "Behold a virgin shall conceive." Therefore
faith is not one.

Obj. 3: Further, faith is common to all believers in Christ. But one accident cannot be in
many subjects. Therefore all cannot have one faith.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 4:5): "One Lord, one faith."

I answer that, If we take faith as a habit, we can consider it in two ways. First on the part
of the object, and thus there is one faith. Because the formal object of faith is the First
Truth, by adhering to which we believe whatever is contained in the faith. Secondly, on the
part of the subject, and thus faith is differentiated according as it is in various subjects.
Now it is evident that faith, just as any other habit, takes its species from the formal aspect
of its object, but is individualized by its subject. Hence if we take faith for the habit whereby
we believe, it is one specifically, but differs numerically according to its various subjects.

If, on the other hand, we take faith for that which is believed, then, again, there is one
faith, since what is believed by all is one same thing: for though the things believed, which
all agree in believing, be diverse from one another, yet they are all reduced to one.

Reply Obj. 1: Temporal matters which are proposed to be believed, do not belong to the object
of faith, except in relation to something eternal, viz. the First Truth, as stated above (Q.
1, A. 1). Hence there is one faith of things both temporal and eternal. It is different with
wisdom and knowledge, which consider temporal and eternal matters under their respective aspects.

Reply Obj. 2: This difference of past and future arises, not from any difference in the thing
believed, but from the different relationships of believers to the one thing believed, as also
we have mentioned above (I-II, Q. 103, A. 4; I-II, Q. 107, A. 1, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: This objection considers numerical diversity of faith.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 7]

Whether Faith Is the First of the Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not the first of the virtues. For a gloss on Luke
12:4, "I say to you My friends," says that fortitude is the foundation of faith. Now the foundation
precedes that which is founded thereon. Therefore faith is not the first of the virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss on Ps. 36, "Be not emulous," says that hope "leads on to faith." Now
hope is a virtue, as we shall state further on (Q. 17, A. 1). Therefore faith is not the first
of the virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, it was stated above (A. 2) that the intellect of the believer is moved, out
of obedience to God, to assent to matters of faith. Now obedience also is a virtue. Therefore
faith is not the first virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, not lifeless but living faith is the foundation, as a gloss remarks on 1 Cor.
3:11 [*Augustine, De Fide et Oper. xvi.]. Now faith is formed by charity, as stated above (A.
3). Therefore it is owing to charity that faith is the foundation: so that charity is the foundation
yet more than faith is (for the foundation is the first part of a building) and consequently
it seems to precede faith.

Obj. 5: Further, the order of habits is taken from the order of acts. Now, in the act of faith,
the act of the will which is perfected by charity, precedes the act of the intellect, which
is perfected by faith, as the cause which precedes its effect. Therefore charity precedes faith.
Therefore faith is not the first of the virtues. Now the substance of a thing is that which
comes first. Therefore faith is first among the virtues.

I answer that, One thing can precede another in two ways: first, by its very nature; secondly,
by accident. Faith, by its very nature, precedes all other virtues. For since the end is the
principle in matters of action, as stated above (I-II, Q. 13, A. 3; I-II, Q. 34, A. 4, ad 1),
the theological virtues, the object of which is the last end, must needs precede all the others.
Again, the last end must of necessity be present to the intellect before it is present to the
will, since the will has no inclination for anything except in so far as it is apprehended
by the intellect. Hence, as the last end is present in the will by hope and charity, and in
the intellect, by faith, the first of all the virtues must, of necessity, be faith, because
natural knowledge cannot reach God as the object of heavenly bliss, which is the aspect under
which hope and charity tend towards Him.

On the other hand, some virtues can precede faith accidentally. For an accidental cause precedes
its effect accidentally. Now that which removes an obstacle is a kind of accidental cause,
according to the Philosopher (Phys. viii, 4): and in this sense certain virtues may be said
to precede faith accidentally, in so far as they remove obstacles to belief. Thus fortitude
removes the inordinate fear that hinders faith; humility removes pride, whereby a man refuses
to submit himself to the truth of faith. The same may be said of some other virtues, although
there are no real virtues, unless faith be presupposed, as Augustine states (Contra Julian. iv, 3).

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Hope cannot lead to faith absolutely. For one cannot hope to obtain eternal happiness,
unless one believes this possible, since hope does not tend to the impossible, as stated above
(I-II, Q. 40, A. 1). It is, however, possible for one to be led by hope to persevere in faith,
or to hold firmly to faith; and it is in this sense that hope is said to lead to faith.

Reply Obj. 3: Obedience is twofold: for sometimes it denotes the inclination of the will to
fulfil God's commandments. In this way it is not a special virtue, but is a general condition
of every virtue; since all acts of virtue come under the precepts of the Divine law, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 100, A. 2); and thus it is requisite for faith. In another way, obedience denotes
an inclination to fulfil the commandments considered as a duty. In this way it is a special
virtue, and a part of justice: for a man does his duty by his superior when he obeys him: and
thus obedience follows faith, whereby man knows that God is his superior, Whom he must obey.

Reply Obj. 4: To be a foundation a thing requires not only to come first, but also to be connected
with the other parts of the building: since the building would not be founded on it unless
the other parts adhered to it. Now the connecting bond of the spiritual edifice is charity,
according to Col. 3:14: "Above all . . . things have charity which is the bond of perfection."
Consequently faith without charity cannot be the foundation: and yet it does not follow that
charity precedes faith.

Reply Obj. 5: Some act of the will is required before faith, but not an act of the will quickened
by charity. This latter act presupposes faith, because the will cannot tend to God with perfect
love, unless the intellect possesses right faith about Him.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 4, Art. 8]

Whether Faith Is More Certain Than Science and the Other Intellectual Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not more certain than science and the other intellectual
virtues. For doubt is opposed to certitude, wherefore a thing would seem to be the more certain,
through being less doubtful, just as a thing is the whiter, the less it has of an admixture
of black. Now understanding, science and also wisdom are free of any doubt about their objects;
whereas the believer may sometimes suffer a movement of doubt, and doubt about matters of faith.
Therefore faith is no more certain than the intellectual virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, sight is more certain than hearing. But "faith is through hearing" according
to Rom. 10:17; whereas understanding, science and wisdom imply some kind of intellectual sight.
Therefore science and understanding are more certain than faith.

Obj. 3: Further, in matters concerning the intellect, the more perfect is the more certain.
Now understanding is more perfect than faith, since faith is the way to understanding, according
to another version [*The Septuagint] of Isa. 7:9: "If you will not believe, you shall not understand
[Vulg.: 'continue']": and Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1) that "faith is strengthened by science."
Therefore it seems that science or understanding is more certain than faith.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Thess. 2:15): "When you had received of us the word of
the hearing," i.e. by faith . . . "you received it not as the word of men, but, as it is indeed,
the word of God." Now nothing is more certain than the word of God. Therefore science is not
more certain than faith; nor is anything else.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 57, A. 4, ad 2) two of the intellectual virtues are
about contingent matter, viz. prudence and art; to which faith is preferable in point of certitude,
by reason of its matter, since it is about eternal things, which never change, whereas the
other three intellectual virtues, viz. wisdom, science [*In English the corresponding 'gift'
is called knowledge] and understanding, are about necessary things, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 57, A. 5, ad 3). But it must be observed that wisdom, science and understanding may be taken
in two ways: first, as intellectual virtues, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 2, 3);
secondly, for the gifts of the Holy Ghost. If we consider them in the first way, we must note
that certitude can be looked at in two ways. First, on the part of its cause, and thus a thing
which has a more certain cause, is itself more certain. In this way faith is more certain than
those three virtues, because it is founded on the Divine truth, whereas the aforesaid three
virtues are based on human reason. Secondly, certitude may be considered on the part of the
subject, and thus the more a man's intellect lays hold of a thing, the more certain it is.
In this way, faith is less certain, because matters of faith are above the human intellect,
whereas the objects of the aforesaid three virtues are not. Since, however, a thing is judged
simply with regard to its cause, but relatively, with respect to a disposition on the part
of the subject, it follows that faith is more certain simply, while the others are more certain
relatively, i.e. for us. Likewise if these three be taken as gifts received in this present
life, they are related to faith as to their principle which they presuppose: so that again,
in this way, faith is more certain.

Reply Obj. 1: This doubt is not on the side of the cause of faith, but on our side, in so far
as we do not fully grasp matters of faith with our intellect.

Reply Obj. 2: Other things being equal sight is more certain than hearing; but if (the authority
of) the person from whom we hear greatly surpasses that of the seer's sight, hearing is more
certain than sight: thus a man of little science is more certain about what he hears on the
authority of an expert in science, than about what is apparent to him according to his own
reason: and much more is a man certain about what he hears from God, Who cannot be deceived,
than about what he sees with his own reason, which can be mistaken.

Reply Obj. 3: The gifts of understanding and knowledge are more perfect than the knowledge
of faith in the point of their greater clearness, but not in regard to more certain adhesion:
because the whole certitude of the gifts of understanding and knowledge, arises from the certitude
of faith, even as the certitude of the knowledge of conclusions arises from the certitude of
premisses. But in so far as science, wisdom and understanding are intellectual virtues, they
are based upon the natural light of reason, which falls short of the certitude of God's word,
on which faith is founded.

QUESTION 5

OF THOSE WHO HAVE FAITH (In Four Articles)

We must now consider those who have faith: under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there was faith in the angels, or in man, in their original state?

(2) Whether the demons have faith?

(3) Whether those heretics who err in one article, have faith in others?

(4) Whether among those who have faith, one has it more than another?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 5, Art. 1]

Whether There Was Faith in the Angels, or in Man, in Their Original State?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was no faith, either in the angels, or in man, in their
original state. For Hugh of S. Victor says in his Sentences (De Sacram. i, 10) that "man cannot
see God or things that are in God, because he closes his eyes to contemplation." Now the angels,
in their original state, before they were either confirmed in grace, or had fallen from it,
had their eyes opened to contemplation, since "they saw things in the Word," according to Augustine
(Gen. ad lit. ii, 8). Likewise the first man, while in the state of innocence, seemingly had
his eyes open to contemplation; for Hugh St. Victor says (De Sacram. i, 6) that "in his original
state man knew his Creator, not by the mere outward perception of hearing, but by inward inspiration,
not as now believers seek an absent God by faith, but by seeing Him clearly present to their
contemplation." Therefore there was no faith in the angels and man in their original state.

Obj. 2: Further, the knowledge of faith is dark and obscure, according to 1 Cor. 13:13: "We
see now through a glass in a dark manner." Now in their original state there was not obscurity
either in the angels or in man, because it is a punishment of sin. Therefore there could be
no faith in the angels or in man, in their original state.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 10:17) that "faith . . . cometh by hearing." Now this
could not apply to angels and man in their original state; for then they could not hear anything
from another. Therefore, in that state, there was no faith either in man or in the angels.

On the contrary, It is written (Heb. 11:6): "He that cometh to God, must believe." Now the
original state of angels and man was one of approach to God. Therefore they had need of faith.

I answer that, Some say that there was no faith in the angels before they were confirmed in
grace or fell from it, and in man before he sinned, by reason of the manifest contemplation
that they had of Divine things. Since, however, "faith is the evidence of things that appear
not," according to the Apostle (Heb. Now the principal object of faith is the First Truth,
the sight of which gives the happiness of heaven and takes the place of faith. Consequently,
as the angels before their confirmation in grace, and man before sin, did not possess the happiness
whereby God is seen in His Essence, it is evident that the knowledge they possessed was not
such as to exclude faith.

It follows then, that the absence of faith in them could only be explained by their being altogether
ignorant of the object of faith. And if man and the angels were created in a purely natural
state, as some [*St. Bonaventure, Sent. ii, D, 29] hold, perhaps one might hold that there
was no faith in the angels before their confirmation in grace, or in man before sin, because
the knowledge of faith surpasses not only a man's but even an angel's natural knowledge about God.

Since, however, we stated in the First Part (Q. 62, A. 3; Q. 95, A. 1) that man and the angels
were created with the gift of grace, we must needs say that there was in them a certain beginning
of hoped-for happiness, by reason of grace received but not yet consummated, which happiness
was begun in their will by hope and charity, and in the intellect by faith, as stated above
(Q. 4, A. 7). Consequently we must hold that the angels had faith before they were confirmed,
and man, before he sinned. Nevertheless we must observe that in the object of faith, there
is something formal, as it were, namely the First Truth surpassing all the natural knowledge
of a creature, and something material, namely, the thing to which we assent while adhering
to the First Truth. With regard to the former, before obtaining the happiness to come, faith
is common to all who have knowledge of God, by adhering to the First Truth: whereas with regard
to the things which are proposed as the material object of faith, some are believed by one,
and known manifestly by another, even in the present state, as we have shown above (Q. 1, A.
5; Q. 2, A. 4, ad 2). In this respect, too, it may be said that the angels before being confirmed,
and man, before sin, possessed manifest knowledge about certain points in the Divine mysteries,
which now we cannot know except by believing them.

Reply Obj. 1: Although the words of Hugh of S. Victor are those of a master, and have the force
of an authority, yet it may be said that the contemplation which removes the need of faith
is heavenly contemplation, whereby the supernatural truth is seen in its essence. Now the angels
did not possess this contemplation before they were confirmed, nor did man before he sinned:
yet their contemplation was of a higher order than ours, for by its means they approached nearer
to God, and had manifest knowledge of more of the Divine effects and mysteries than we can
have knowledge of. Hence faith was not in them so that they sought an absent God as we seek
Him: since by the light of wisdom He was more present to them than He is to us, although He
was not so present to them as He is to the Blessed by the light of glory.

Reply Obj. 2: There was no darkness of sin or punishment in the original state of man and the
angels, but there was a certain natural obscurity in the human and angelic intellect, in so
far as every creature is darkness in comparison with the immensity of the Divine light: and
this obscurity suffices for faith.

Reply Obj. 3: In the original state there was no hearing anything from man speaking outwardly,
but there was from God inspiring inwardly: thus the prophets heard, as expressed by the Ps.
84:9: "I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 5, Art. 2]

Whether in the Demons There Is Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that the demons have no faith. For Augustine says (De Praedest.
Sanct. v) that "faith depends on the believer's will": and this is a good will, since by it
man wishes to believe in God. Since then no deliberate will of the demons is good, as stated
above (I, Q. 64, A. 2, ad 5), it seems that in the demons there is no faith.

Obj. 2: Further, faith is a gift of Divine grace, according to Eph. 2:8: "By grace you are
saved through faith . . . for it is the gift of God." Now, according to a gloss on Osee 3:1,
"They look to strange gods, and love the husks of the grapes," the demons lost their gifts
of grace by sinning. Therefore faith did not remain in the demons after they sinned.

Obj. 3: Further, unbelief would seem to be graver than other sins, as Augustine observes (Tract.
lxxxix in Joan.) on John 15:22, "If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have
sin: but now they have no excuse for their sin." Now the sin of unbelief is in some men. Consequently,
if the demons have faith, some men would be guilty of a sin graver than that of the demons,
which seems unreasonable. Therefore in the demons there is no faith.

On the contrary, It is written (James 2:19): "The devils . . . believe and tremble."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 1, A. 4; Q. 2, A. 1), the believer's intellect assents to
that which he believes, not because he sees it either in itself, or by resolving it to first
self-evident principles, but because his will commands his intellect to assent. Now, that the
will moves the intellect to assent, may be due to two causes. First, through the will being
directed to the good, and in this way, to believe is a praiseworthy action. Secondly, because
the intellect is convinced that it ought to believe what is said, though that conviction is
not based on objective evidence. Thus if a prophet, while preaching the word of God, were to
foretell something, and were to give a sign, by raising a dead person to life, the intellect
of a witness would be convinced so as to recognize clearly that God, Who lieth not, was speaking,
although the thing itself foretold would not be evident in itself, and consequently the essence
of faith would not be removed.

Accordingly we must say that faith is commended in the first sense in the faithful of Christ:
and in this way faith is not in the demons, but only in the second way, for they see many evident
signs, whereby they recognize that the teaching of the Church is from God, although they do
not see the things themselves that the Church teaches, for instance that there are three Persons
in God, and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: The demons are, in a way, compelled to believe, by the evidence of signs, and
so their will deserves no praise for their belief.

Reply Obj. 2: Faith, which is a gift of grace, inclines man to believe, by giving him a certain
affection for the good, even when that faith is lifeless. Consequently the faith which the
demons have, is not a gift of grace. Rather are they compelled to believe through their natural
intellectual acumen.

Reply Obj. 3: The very fact that the signs of faith are so evident, that the demons are compelled
to believe, is displeasing to them, so that their malice is by no means diminished by their belief.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 5, Art. 3]

Whether a Man Who Disbelieves One Article of Faith, Can Have Lifeless Faith in the Other Articles?

Objection 1: It would seem that a heretic who disbelieves one article of faith, can have lifeless
faith in the other articles. For the natural intellect of a heretic is not more able than that
of a catholic. Now a catholic's intellect needs the aid of the gift of faith in order to believe
any article whatever of faith. Therefore it seems that heretics cannot believe any articles
of faith without the gift of lifeless faith.

Obj. 2: Further, just as faith contains many articles, so does one science, viz. geometry,
contain many conclusions. Now a man may possess the science of geometry as to some geometrical
conclusions, and yet be ignorant of other conclusions. Therefore a man can believe some articles
of faith without believing the others.

Obj. 3: Further, just as man obeys God in believing the articles of faith, so does he also
in keeping the commandments of the Law. Now a man can obey some commandments, and disobey others.
Therefore he can believe some articles, and disbelieve others.

On the contrary, Just as mortal sin is contrary to charity, so is disbelief in one article
of faith contrary to faith. Now charity does not remain in a man after one mortal sin. Therefore
neither does faith, after a man disbelieves one article.

 I answer that, Neither living nor lifeless faith remains in a
heretic who disbelieves one article of faith.

The reason of this is that the species of every habit depends on the formal aspect of the object,
without which the species of the habit cannot remain. Now the formal object of faith is the
First Truth, as manifested in Holy Writ and the teaching of the Church, which proceeds from
the First Truth. Consequently whoever does not adhere, as to an infallible and Divine rule,
to the teaching of the Church, which proceeds from the First Truth manifested in Holy Writ,
has not the habit of faith, but holds that which is of faith otherwise than by faith. Even
so, it is evident that a man whose mind holds a conclusion without knowing how it is proved,
has not scientific knowledge, but merely an opinion about it. Now it is manifest that he who
adheres to the teaching of the Church, as to an infallible rule, assents to whatever the Church
teaches; otherwise, if, of the things taught by the Church, he holds what he chooses to hold,
and rejects what he chooses to reject, he no longer adheres to the teaching of the Church as
to an infallible rule, but to his own will. Hence it is evident that a heretic who obstinately
disbelieves one article of faith, is not prepared to follow the teaching of the Church in all
things; but if he is not obstinate, he is no longer in heresy but only in error. Therefore
it is clear that such a heretic with regard to one article has no faith in the other articles,
but only a kind of opinion in accordance with his own will.

Reply Obj. 1: A heretic does not hold the other articles of faith, about which he does not
err, in the same way as one of the faithful does, namely by adhering simply to the Divine Truth,
because in order to do so, a man needs the help of the habit of faith; but he holds the things
that are of faith, by his own will and judgment.

Reply Obj. 2: The various conclusions of a science have their respective means of demonstration,
one of which may be known without another, so that we may know some conclusions of a science
without knowing the others. On the other hand faith adheres to all the articles of faith by
reason of one mean, viz. on account of the First Truth proposed to us in Scriptures, according
to the teaching of the Church who has the right understanding of them. Hence whoever abandons
this mean is altogether lacking in faith.

Reply Obj. 3: The various precepts of the Law may be referred either to their respective proximate
motives, and thus one can be kept without another; or to their primary motive, which is perfect
obedience to God, in which a man fails whenever he breaks one commandment, according to James
2:10: "Whosoever shall . . . offend in one point is become guilty of all."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 5, Art. 4]

Whether Faith Can Be Greater in One Man Than in Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith cannot be greater in one man than in another. For the
quantity of a habit is taken from its object. Now whoever has faith believes everything that
is of faith, since by failing in one point, a man loses his faith altogether, as stated above
(A. 3). Therefore it seems that faith cannot be greater in one than in another.

Obj. 2: Further, those things which consist in something supreme cannot be "more" or "less."
Now faith consists in something supreme, because it requires that man should adhere to the
First Truth above all things. Therefore faith cannot be "more" or "less."

Obj. 3: Further, faith is to knowledge by grace, as the understanding of principles is to natural
knowledge, since the articles of faith are the first principles of knowledge by grace, as was
shown above (Q. 1, A. 7). Now the understanding of principles is possessed in equal degree
by all men. Therefore faith is possessed in equal degree by all the faithful.

On the contrary, Wherever we find great and little, there we find more or less. Now in the
matter of faith we find great and little, for Our Lord said to Peter (Matt. 14:31): "O thou
of little faith, why didst thou doubt?" And to the woman he said (Matt. 15: 28): "O woman,
great is thy faith!" Therefore faith can be greater in one than in another.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 52, AA. 1, 2; I-II, Q. 112, A. 4), the quantity of
a habit may be considered from two points of view: first, on the part of the object; secondly,
on the part of its participation by the subject.

Now the object of faith may be considered in two ways: first, in respect of its formal aspect;
secondly, in respect of the material object which is proposed to be believed. Now the formal
object of faith is one and simple, namely the First Truth, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 1). Hence
in this respect there is no diversity of faith among believers, but it is specifically one
in all, as stated above (Q. 4, A. 6). But the things which are proposed as the matter of our
belief are many and can be received more or less explicitly; and in this respect one man can
believe explicitly more things than another, so that faith can be greater in one man on account
of its being more explicit.

If, on the other hand, we consider faith from the point of view of its participation by the
subject, this happens in two ways, since the act of faith proceeds both from the intellect
and from the will, as stated above (Q. 2, AA. 1, 2; Q. 4, A. 2). Consequently a man's faith
may be described as being greater, in one way, on the part of his intellect, on account of
its greater certitude and firmness, and, in another way, on the part of his will, on account
of his greater promptitude, devotion, or confidence.

Reply Obj. 1: A man who obstinately disbelieves a thing that is of faith, has not the habit
of faith, and yet he who does not explicitly believe all, while he is prepared to believe all,
has that habit. In this respect, one man has greater faith than another, on the part of the
object, in so far as he believes more things, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: It is essential to faith that one should give the first place to the First Truth.
But among those who do this, some submit to it with greater certitude and devotion than others;
and in this way faith is greater in one than in another.

Reply Obj. 3: The understanding of principles results from man's very nature, which is equally
shared by all: whereas faith results from the gift of grace, which is not equally in all, as
explained above (I-II, Q. 112, A. 4). Hence the comparison fails.

Nevertheless the truth of principles is more known to one than to another, according to the
greater capacity of intellect.

(2) Whether lifeless faith is a gift of God?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 6, Art. 1]

Whether Faith Is Infused into Man by God?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith is not infused into man by God. For Augustine says (De
Trin. xiv) that "science begets faith in us, and nourishes, defends and strengthens it." Now
those things which science begets in us seem to be acquired rather than infused. Therefore
faith does not seem to be in us by Divine infusion.

Obj. 2: Further, that to which man attains by hearing and seeing, seems to be acquired by him.
Now man attains to belief, both by seeing miracles, and by hearing the teachings of faith:
for it is written (John 4:53): "The father . . . knew that it was at the same hour, that Jesus
said to him, Thy son liveth; and himself believed, and his whole house"; and (Rom. 10:17) it
is said that "faith is through hearing." Therefore man attains to faith by acquiring it.

Obj. 3: Further, that which depends on a man's will can be acquired by him. But "faith depends
on the believer's will," according to Augustine (De Praedest. Sanct. v). Therefore faith can
be acquired by man.

On the contrary, It is written (Eph. 2:8, 9): "By grace you are saved through faith, and that
not of yourselves . . . that no man may glory . . . for it is the gift of God."

I answer that, Two things are requisite for faith. First, that the things which are of faith
should be proposed to man: this is necessary in order that man believe anything explicitly.
The second thing requisite for faith is the assent of the believer to the things which are
proposed to him. Accordingly, as regards the first of these, faith must needs be from God.
Because those things which are of faith surpass human reason, hence they do not come to man's
knowledge, unless God reveal them. To some, indeed, they are revealed by God immediately, as
those things which were revealed to the apostles and prophets, while to some they are proposed
by God in sending preachers of the faith, according to Rom. 10:15: "How shall they preach,
unless they be sent?"

As regards the second, viz. man's assent to the things which are of faith, we may observe a
twofold cause, one of external inducement, such as seeing a miracle, or being persuaded by
someone to embrace the faith: neither of which is a sufficient cause, since of those who see
the same miracle, or who hear the same sermon, some believe, and some do not. Hence we must
assert another internal cause, which moves man inwardly to assent to matters of faith.

The Pelagians held that this cause was nothing else than man's free-will: and consequently
they said that the beginning of faith is from ourselves, inasmuch as, to wit, it is in our
power to be ready to assent to things which are of faith, but that the consummation of faith
is from God, Who proposes to us the things we have to believe. But this is false, for, since
man, by assenting to matters of faith, is raised above his nature, this must needs accrue to
him from some supernatural principle moving him inwardly; and this is God. Therefore faith,
as regards the assent which is the chief act of faith, is from God moving man inwardly by grace.

Reply Obj. 1: Science begets and nourishes faith, by way of external persuasion afforded by
science; but the chief and proper cause of faith is that which moves man inwardly to assent.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument again refers to the cause that proposes outwardly the things that
are of faith, or persuades man to believe by words or deeds.

Reply Obj. 3: To believe does indeed depend on the will of the believer: but man's will needs
to be prepared by God with grace, in order that he may be raised to things which are above
his nature, as stated above (Q. 2, A. 3).

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 6, Art. 2]

Whether Lifeless Faith Is a Gift of God?

Objection 1: It would seem that lifeless faith is not a gift of God. For it is written (Deut.
32:4) that "the works of God are perfect." Now lifeless faith is something imperfect. Therefore
it is not the work of God.

Obj. 2: Further, just as an act is said to be deformed through lacking its due form, so too
is faith called lifeless (informis) when it lacks the form due to it. Now the deformed act
of sin is not from God, as stated above (I-II, Q. 79, A. 2, ad 2). Therefore neither is lifeless
faith from God.

Obj. Now faith heals man from unbelief. Therefore whoever receives from God the gift of faith,
is at the same time healed from all his sins. But this is not done except by living faith.
Therefore living faith alone is a gift of God: and consequently lifeless faith is not from God.

On the contrary, A gloss on 1 Cor. 13:2 says that "the faith which lacks charity is a gift
of God." Now this is lifeless faith. Therefore lifeless faith is a gift of God.

I answer that, Lifelessness is a privation. Now it must be noted that privation is sometimes
essential to the species, whereas sometimes it is not, but supervenes in a thing already possessed
of its proper species: thus privation of the due equilibrium of the humors is essential to
the species of sickness, while darkness is not essential to a diaphanous body, but supervenes
in it. Since, therefore, when we assign the cause of a thing, we intend to assign the cause
of that thing as existing in its proper species, it follows that what is not the cause of privation,
cannot be assigned as the cause of the thing to which that privation belongs as being essential
to its species. For we cannot assign as the cause of a sickness, something which is not the
cause of a disturbance in the humors: though we can assign as cause of a diaphanous body, something
which is not the cause of the darkness, which is not essential to the diaphanous body.

Now the lifelessness of faith is not essential to the species of faith, since faith is said
to be lifeless through lack of an extrinsic form, as stated above (Q. 4, A. 4). Consequently
the cause of lifeless faith is that which is the cause of faith strictly so called: and this
is God, as stated above (A. 1). It follows, therefore, that lifeless faith is a gift of God.

Reply Obj. 1: Lifeless faith, though it is not simply perfect with the perfection of a virtue,
is, nevertheless, perfect with a perfection that suffices for the essential notion of faith.

Reply Obj. 2: The deformity of an act is essential to the act's species, considered as a moral
act, as stated above (I, Q. 48, A. 1, ad 2; I-II, Q. 18, A. 5): for an act is said to be deformed
through being deprived of an intrinsic form, viz. the due commensuration of the act's circumstances.
Hence we cannot say that God is the cause of a deformed act, for He is not the cause of its
deformity, though He is the cause of the act as such.

We may also reply that deformity denotes not only privation of a due form, but also a contrary
disposition, wherefore deformity is compared to the act, as falsehood is to faith. Hence, just
as the deformed act is not from God, so neither is a false faith; and as lifeless faith is
from God, so too, acts that are good generically, though not quickened by charity, as is frequently
the case in sinners, are from God.

Reply Obj. 3: He who receives faith from God without charity, is healed from unbelief, not
entirely (because the sin of his previous unbelief is not removed) but in part, namely, in
the point of ceasing from committing such and such a sin. Thus it happens frequently that a
man desists from one act of sin, through God causing him thus to desist, without desisting
from another act of sin, through the instigation of his own malice. And in this way sometimes
it is granted by God to a man to believe, and yet he is not granted the gift of charity: even
so the gift of prophecy, or the like, is given to some without charity.

QUESTION 7

OF THE EFFECTS OF FAITH (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the effects of faith: under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether fear is an effect of faith?

(2) Whether the heart is purified by faith?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 7, Art. 1]

Whether Fear Is an Effect of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear is not an effect of faith. For an effect does not precede
its cause. Now fear precedes faith: for it is written (Ecclus. 2:8): "Ye that fear the Lord,
believe in Him." Therefore fear is not an effect of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, the same thing is not the cause of contraries. Now fear and hope are contraries,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 23, A. 2): and faith begets hope, as a gloss observes on Matt. 1:2.
Therefore fear is not an effect of faith.

Obj. 3: Further, one contrary does not cause another. Now the object of faith is a good, which
is the First Truth, while the object of fear is an evil, as stated above (I-II, Q. 42, A. 1).
Again, acts take their species from the object, according to what was stated above (I-II, Q.
18, A. 2). Therefore faith is not a cause of fear. Now the principle of all appetitive movements
is the good or evil apprehended: and consequently the principle of fear and of every appetitive
movement must be an apprehension. Again, through faith there arises in us an apprehension of
certain penal evils, which are inflicted in accordance with the Divine judgment. In this way,
then, faith is a cause of the fear whereby one dreads to be punished by God; and this is servile
fear.

It is also the cause of filial fear, whereby one dreads to be separated from God, or whereby
one shrinks from equalling oneself to Him, and holds Him in reverence, inasmuch as faith makes
us appreciate God as an unfathomable and supreme good, separation from which is the greatest
evil, and to which it is wicked to wish to be equalled. Of the first fear, viz. servile fear,
lifeless faith is the cause, while living faith is the cause of the second, viz. filial fear,
because it makes man adhere to God and to be subject to Him by charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Fear of God cannot altogether precede faith, because if we knew nothing at all
about Him, with regard to rewards and punishments, concerning which faith teaches us, we should
nowise fear Him. If, however, faith be presupposed in reference to certain articles of faith,
for example the Divine excellence, then reverential fear follows, the result of which is that
man submits his intellect to God, so as to believe in all the Divine promises. Hence the text
quoted continues: "And your reward shall not be made void."

Reply Obj. 2: The same thing in respect of contraries can be the cause of contraries, but not
under the same aspect. Now faith begets hope, in so far as it enables us to appreciate the
prize which God awards to the just, while it is the cause of fear, in so far as it makes us
appreciate the punishments which He intends to inflict on sinners.

Reply Obj. 3: The primary and formal object of faith is the good which is the First Truth;
but the material object of faith includes also certain evils; for instance, that it is an evil
either not to submit to God, or to be separated from Him, and that sinners will suffer penal
evils from God: in this way faith can be the cause of fear.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 7, Art. 2]

Whether Faith Has the Effect of Purifying the Heart?

Objection 1: It would seem that faith does not purify the heart. For purity of the heart pertains
chiefly to the affections, whereas faith is in the intellect. Therefore faith has not the effect
of purifying the heart.

Obj. 2: Further, that which purifies the heart is incompatible with impurity. But faith is
compatible with the impurity of sin, as may be seen in those who have lifeless faith. Therefore
faith does not purify the heart.

Obj. 3: Further, if faith were to purify the human heart in any way, it would chiefly purify
the intellect of man. Now it does not purify the intellect from obscurity, since it is a veiled
knowledge. Therefore faith nowise purifies the heart.

On the contrary, Peter said (Acts 15:9): "Purifying their hearts by faith."

I answer that, A thing is impure through being mixed with baser things: for silver is not called
impure, when mixed with gold, which betters it, but when mixed with lead or tin. Now it is
evident that the rational creature is more excellent than all transient and corporeal creatures;
so that it becomes impure through subjecting itself to transient things by loving them. From
this impurity the rational creature is purified by means of a contrary movement, namely, by
tending to that which is above it, viz. God. The first beginning of this movement is faith:
since "he that cometh to God must believe that He is," according to Heb. 11:6. Hence the first
beginning of the heart's purifying is faith; and if this be perfected through being quickened
by charity, the heart will be perfectly purified thereby.

Reply Obj. 1: Things that are in the intellect are the principles of those which are in the
appetite, in so far as the apprehended good moves the appetite.

Reply Obj. 2: Even lifeless faith excludes a certain impurity which is contrary to it, viz.
that of error, and which consists in the human intellect, adhering inordinately to things below
itself, through wishing to measure Divine things by the rule of sensible objects. But when
it is quickened by charity, then it is incompatible with any kind of impurity, because "charity
covereth all sins" (Prov. 10:12).

Reply Obj. 3: The obscurity of faith does not pertain to the impurity of sin, but rather to
the natural defect of the human intellect, according to the present state of life.

QUESTION 8

OF THE GIFT OF UNDERSTANDING (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the gifts of understanding and knowledge, which respond to the virtue
of faith. With regard to the gift of understanding there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether understanding is a gift of the Holy Ghost?

(2) Whether it can be together with faith in the same person?

(3) Whether the understanding which is a gift of the Holy Ghost, is only speculative, or practical
also?

(4) Whether all who are in a state of grace have the gift of understanding?

(5) Whether this gift is to be found in those who are without grace?

(6) Of the relationship of the gift of understanding to the other gifts.

(7) Which of the beatitudes corresponds to this gift?

(8) Which of the fruits?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 1]

Whether Understanding Is a Gift of the Holy Ghost?

Objection 1: It would seem that understanding is not a gift of the Holy Ghost. For the gifts
of grace are distinct from the gifts of nature, since they are given in addition to the latter.
Now understanding is a natural habit of the soul, whereby self-evident principles are known,
as stated in Ethic. vi, 6. Therefore it should not be reckoned among the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, the Divine gifts are shared by creatures according to their capacity and mode,
as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Now the mode of human nature is to know the truth, not
simply (which is a sign of understanding), but discursively (which is a sign of reason), as
Dionysius explains (Div. Nom. vii). Therefore the Divine knowledge which is bestowed on man,
should be called a gift of reason rather than a gift of understanding.

Obj. 3: Further, in the powers of the soul the understanding is condivided with the will (De
Anima iii, 9, 10). Now no gift of the Holy Ghost is called after the will. Therefore no gift
of the Holy Ghost should receive the name of understanding.

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. 11:2): "The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the
Spirit of wisdom of understanding."

I answer that, Understanding implies an intimate knowledge, for "intelligere" [to understand]
is the same as "intus legere" [to read inwardly]. This is clear to anyone who considers the
difference between intellect and sense, because sensitive knowledge is concerned with external
sensible qualities, whereas intellective knowledge penetrates into the very essence of a thing,
because the object of the intellect is "what a thing is," as stated in De Anima iii, 6.

Now there are many kinds of things that are hidden within, to find which human knowledge has
to penetrate within so to speak. Thus, under the accidents lies hidden the nature of the substantial
reality, under words lies hidden their meaning; under likenesses and figures the truth they
denote lies hidden (because the intelligible world is enclosed within as compared with the
sensible world, which is perceived externally), and effects lie hidden in their causes, and
vice versa. Hence we may speak of understanding with regard to all these things.

Since, however, human knowledge begins with the outside of things as it were, it is evident
that the stronger the light of the understanding, the further can it penetrate into the heart
of things. Now the natural light of our understanding is of finite power; wherefore it can
reach to a certain fixed point. Consequently man needs a supernatural light in order to penetrate
further still so as to know what it cannot know by its natural light: and this supernatural
light which is bestowed on man is called the gift of understanding.

Reply Obj. 1: The natural light instilled within us, manifests only certain general principles,
which are known naturally. But since man is ordained to supernatural happiness, as stated above
(Q. 2, A. 3; I-II, Q. 3, A. 8), man needs to reach to certain higher truths, for which he requires
the gift of understanding.

Reply Obj. 2: The discourse of reason always begins from an understanding and ends at an understanding;
because we reason by proceeding from certain understood principles, and the discourse of reason
is perfected when we come to understand what hitherto we ignored. Hence the act of reasoning
proceeds from something previously understood. Now a gift of grace does not proceed from the
light of nature, but is added thereto as perfecting it. Wherefore this addition is not called
"reason" but "understanding," since the additional light is in comparison with what we know
supernaturally, what the natural light is in regard to those things which we know from the first.

Reply Obj. 3: "Will" denotes simply a movement of the appetite without indicating any excellence;
whereas "understanding" denotes a certain excellence of a knowledge that penetrates into the
heart of things. Hence the supernatural gift is called after the understanding rather than
after the will.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 2]

Whether the Gift of Understanding Is Compatible with Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of understanding is incompatible with faith. For Augustine
says (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 15) that "the thing which is understood is bounded by the comprehension
of him who understands it." But the thing which is believed is not comprehended, according
to the word of the Apostle to the Philippians 3:12: "Not as though I had already comprehended
[Douay: 'attained'], or were already perfect." Therefore it seems that faith and understanding
are incompatible in the same subject.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is understood is seen by the understanding. But faith is of things
that appear not, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 4; Q. 4, A. 1). Therefore faith is incompatible
with understanding in the same subject.

Obj. 3: Further, understanding is more certain than science. But science and faith are incompatible
in the same subject, as stated above (Q. 1, AA. 4, 5). Much less, therefore, can understanding
and faith be in the same subject.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. i, 15) that "understanding enlightens the mind concerning
the things it has heard." Now one who has faith can be enlightened in his mind concerning what
he has heard; thus it is written (Luke 24:27, 32) that Our Lord opened the scriptures to His
disciples, that they might understand them. Therefore understanding is compatible with faith.

I answer that, We need to make a twofold distinction here: one on the side of faith, the other
on the part of understanding.

On the side of faith the distinction to be made is that certain things, of themselves, come
directly under faith, such as the mystery to three Persons in one God, and the incarnation
of God the Son; whereas other things come under faith, through being subordinate, in one way
or another, to those just mentioned, for instance, all that is contained in the Divine Scriptures.

On the part of understanding the distinction to be observed is that there are two ways in which
we may be said to understand. In one way, we understand a thing perfectly, when we arrive at
knowing the essence of the thing we understand, and the very truth considered in itself of
the proposition understood. In this way, so long as the state of faith lasts, we cannot understand
those things which are the direct object of faith: although certain other things that are subordinate
to faith can be understood even in this way.

In another way we understand a thing imperfectly, when the essence of a thing or the truth
of a proposition is not known as to its quiddity or mode of being, and yet we know that whatever
be the outward appearances, they do not contradict the truth, in so far as we understand that
we ought not to depart from matters of faith, for the sake of things that appear externally.
In this way, even during the state of faith, nothing hinders us from understanding even those
things which are the direct object of faith.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections: for the first three argue in reference to
perfect understanding, while the last refers to the understanding of matters subordinate to faith.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 3]

Whether the Gift of Understanding Is Merely Speculative or Also Practical?

Objection 1: It would seem that understanding, considered as a gift of the Holy Ghost, is not
practical, but only speculative. For, according to Gregory (Moral. i, 32), "understanding penetrates
certain more exalted things." But the practical intellect is occupied, not with exalted, but
with inferior things, viz. singulars, about which actions are concerned. Therefore understanding,
considered as a gift, is not practical.

Obj. 2: Further, the gift of understanding is something more excellent than the intellectual
virtue of understanding. But the intellectual virtue of understanding is concerned with none
but necessary things, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 6). Much more, therefore, is
the gift of understanding concerned with none but necessary matters. Now the practical intellect
is not about necessary things, but about things which may be otherwise than they are, and which
may result from man's activity. Therefore the gift of understanding is not practical.

Obj. 3: Further, the gift of understanding enlightens the mind in matters which surpass natural
reason. Now human activities, with which the practical intellect is concerned, do not surpass
natural reason, which is the directing principle in matters of action, as was made clear above
(I-II, Q. 58, A. 2; I-II, Q. 71, A. 6). Therefore the gift of understanding is not practical.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 110:10): "A good understanding to all that do it."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), the gift of understanding is not only about those things
which come under faith first and principally, but also about all things subordinate to faith.
Now good actions have a certain relationship to faith: since "faith worketh through charity,"
according to the Apostle (Gal. 5:6). Hence the gift of understanding extends also to certain
actions, not as though these were its principal object, but in so far as the rule of our actions
is the eternal law, to which the higher reason, which is perfected by the gift of understanding,
adheres by contemplating and consulting it, as Augustine states (De Trin. xii, 7).

Reply Obj. 1: The things with which human actions are concerned are not surpassingly exalted
considered in themselves, but, as referred to the rule of the eternal law, and to the end of
Divine happiness, they are exalted so that they can be the matter of understanding.

Reply Obj. 2: The excellence of the gift of understanding consists precisely in its considering
eternal or necessary matters, not only as they are rules of human actions, because a cognitive
virtue is the more excellent, according to the greater extent of its object.

Reply Obj. 3: The rule of human actions is the human reason and the eternal law, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 71, A. 6). Now the eternal law surpasses human reason: so that the knowledge
of human actions, as ruled by the eternal law, surpasses the natural reason, and requires the
supernatural light of a gift of the Holy Ghost.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 4]

Whether the Gift of Understanding Is in All Who Are in a State of Grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of understanding is not in all who are in a state
of grace. For Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49) that "the gift of understanding is given as a remedy
against dulness of mind." Now many who are in a state of grace suffer from dulness of mind.
Therefore the gift of understanding is not in all who are in a state of grace.

Obj. 2: Further, of all the things that are connected with knowledge, faith alone seems to
be necessary for salvation, since by faith Christ dwells in our hearts, according to Eph. 3:17.
Now the gift of understanding is not in everyone that has faith; indeed, those who have faith
ought to pray that they may understand, as Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 27). Therefore the
gift of understanding is not necessary for salvation: and, consequently, is not in all who
are in a state of grace.

Obj. 3: Further, those things which are common to all who are in a state of grace, are never
withdrawn from them. Now the grace of understanding and of the other gifts sometimes withdraws
itself profitably, for, at times, "when the mind is puffed up with understanding sublime things,
it becomes sluggish and dull in base and vile things," as Gregory observes (Moral. ii, 49).
Therefore the gift of understanding is not in all who are in a state of grace.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 81:5): "They have not known or understood, they walk on
in darkness." But no one who is in a state of grace walks in darkness, according to John 8:12:
"He that followeth Me, walketh not in darkness." Therefore no one who is in a state of grace
is without the gift of understanding.

I answer that, In all who are in a state of grace, there must needs be rectitude of the will,
since grace prepares man's will for good, according to Augustine (Contra Julian. Pelag. iv,
3). Now the will cannot be rightly directed to good, unless there be already some knowledge
of the truth, since the object of the will is good understood, as stated in De Anima iii, 7.
Again, just as the Holy Ghost directs man's will by the gift of charity, so as to move it directly
to some supernatural good; so also, by the gift of understanding, He enlightens the human mind,
so that it knows some supernatural truth, to which the right will needs to tend.

Therefore, just as the gift of charity is in all of those who have sanctifying grace, so also
is the gift of understanding.

Reply Obj. 1: Some who have sanctifying grace may suffer dulness of mind with regard to things
that are not necessary for salvation; but with regard to those that are necessary for salvation,
they are sufficiently instructed by the Holy Ghost, according to 1 John 2:27: "His unction
teacheth you of all things."

Reply Obj. 2: Although not all who have faith understand fully the things that are proposed
to be believed, yet they understand that they ought to believe them, and that they ought nowise
to deviate from them.

Reply Obj. 3: With regard to things necessary for salvation, the gift of understanding never
withdraws from holy persons: but, in order that they may have no incentive to pride, it does
withdraw sometimes with regard to other things, so that their mind is unable to penetrate all
things clearly.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 5]

Whether the Gift of Understanding Is Found Also in Those Who Have Not Sanctifying Grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of understanding is found also in those who have not
sanctifying grace. For Augustine, in expounding the words of Ps. 118:20: "My soul hath coveted
to long for Thy justifications," says: "Understanding flies ahead, and man's will is weak and
slow to follow." But in all who have sanctifying grace, the will is prompt on account of charity.
Therefore the gift of understanding can be in those who have not sanctifying grace.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Dan. 10:1) that "there is need of understanding in a" prophetic
"vision," so that, seemingly, there is no prophecy without the gift of understanding. But there
can be prophecy without sanctifying grace, as evidenced by Matt. 7:22, where those who say:
"We have prophesied in Thy name [*Vulg.: 'Have we not prophesied in Thy name?']," are answered
with the words: "I never knew you." Therefore the gift of understanding can be without sanctifying
grace.

Obj. 3: Further, the gift of understanding responds to the virtue of faith, according to Isa.
7:9, following another reading [*The Septuagint]: "If you will not believe you shall not understand."
Now faith can be without sanctifying grace. Therefore the gift of understanding can be without
it. Now it is by the intellect, as Gregory observes (Moral. i, 32), that we learn or understand
what we hear. Therefore whoever has the gift of understanding, cometh to Christ, which is impossible
without sanctifying grace. Therefore the gift of understanding cannot be without sanctifying grace.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 68, AA. 1, 2) the gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect
the soul, according as it is amenable to the motion of the Holy Ghost. Accordingly then, the
intellectual light of grace is called the gift of understanding, in so far as man's understanding
is easily moved by the Holy Ghost, the consideration of which movement depends on a true apprehension
of the end. Wherefore unless the human intellect be moved by the Holy Ghost so far as to have
a right estimate of the end, it has not yet obtained the gift of understanding, however much
the Holy Ghost may have enlightened it in regard to other truths that are preambles to the faith.

Now to have a right estimate about the last end one must not be in error about the end, and
must adhere to it firmly as to the greatest good: and no one can do this without sanctifying
grace; even as in moral matters a man has a right estimate about the end through a habit of
virtue. Therefore no one has the gift of understanding without sanctifying grace.

Reply Obj. 1: By understanding Augustine means any kind of intellectual light, that, however,
does not fulfil all the conditions of a gift, unless the mind of man be so far perfected as
to have a right estimate about the end.

Reply Obj. 2: The understanding that is requisite for prophecy, is a kind of enlightenment
of the mind with regard to the things revealed to the prophet: but it is not an enlightenment
of the mind with regard to a right estimate about the last end, which belongs to the gift of
understanding.

Reply Obj. 3: Faith implies merely assent to what is proposed but understanding implies a certain
perception of the truth, which perception, except in one who has sanctifying grace, cannot
regard the end, as stated above. Hence the comparison fails between understanding and faith.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 6]

Whether the Gift of Understanding Is Distinct from the Other Gifts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of understanding is not distinct from the other gifts.
For there is no distinction between things whose opposites are not distinct. Now "wisdom is
contrary to folly, understanding is contrary to dulness, counsel is contrary to rashness, knowledge
is contrary to ignorance," as Gregory states (Moral. ii, 49). But there would seem to be no
difference between folly, dulness, ignorance and rashness. Therefore neither does understanding
differ from the other gifts.

Obj. 2: Further, the intellectual virtue of understanding differs from the other intellectual
virtues in that it is proper to it to be about self-evident principles. But the gift of understanding
is not about any self-evident principles, since the natural habit of first principles suffices
in respect of those matters which are naturally self-evident: while faith is sufficient in
respect of such things as are supernatural, since the articles of faith are like first principles
in supernatural knowledge, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 7). Therefore the gift of understanding
does not differ from the other intellectual gifts.

Obj. 3: Further, all intellectual knowledge is either speculative or practical. Now the gift
of understanding is related to both, as stated above (A. 3). Therefore it is not distinct from
the other intellectual gifts, but comprises them all.

On the contrary, When several things are enumerated together they must be, in some way, distinct
from one another, because distinction is the origin of number. Now the gift of understanding
is enumerated together with the other gifts, as appears from Isa. 11:2. Therefore the gift
of understanding is distinct from the other gifts.

I answer that, The difference between the gift of understanding and three of the others, viz.
piety, fortitude, and fear, is evident, since the gift of understanding belongs to the cognitive
power, while the three belong to the appetitive power.

But the difference between this gift of understanding and the remaining three, viz. wisdom,
knowledge, and counsel, which also belong to the cognitive power, is not so evident. To some
[*William of Auxerre, Sum. Aur. III, iii, 8], it seems that the gift of understanding differs
from the gifts of knowledge and counsel, in that these two belong to practical knowledge, while
the gift of understanding belongs to speculative knowledge; and that it differs from the gift
of wisdom, which also belongs to speculative knowledge, in that wisdom is concerned with judgment,
while understanding renders the mind apt to grasp the things that are proposed, and to penetrate
into their very heart. And in this sense we have assigned the number of the gifts, above (I-II,
Q. 68, A. 4).

But if we consider the matter carefully, the gift of understanding is concerned not only with
speculative, but also with practical matters, as stated above (A. 3), and likewise, the gift
of knowledge regards both matters, as we shall show further on (Q. 9, A. 3), and consequently,
we must take their distinction in some other way. For all these four gifts are ordained to
supernatural knowledge, which, in us, takes its foundation from faith. Now "faith is through
hearing" (Rom. 10:17). Hence some things must be proposed to be believed by man, not as seen,
but as heard, to which he assents by faith. But faith, first and principally, is about the
First Truth, secondarily, about certain considerations concerning creatures, and furthermore
extends to the direction of human actions, in so far as it works through charity, as appears
from what has been said above (Q. 4, A. 2, ad 3).

Accordingly on the part of the things proposed to faith for belief, two things are requisite
on our part: first that they be penetrated or grasped by the intellect, and this belongs to
the gift of understanding. Secondly, it is necessary that man should judge these things aright,
that he should esteem that he ought to adhere to these things, and to withdraw from their opposites:
and this judgment, with regard to Divine things belong to the gift of wisdom, but with regard
to created things, belongs to the gift of knowledge, and as to its application to individual
actions, belongs to the gift of counsel.

Reply Obj. 1: The foregoing difference between those four gifts is clearly in agreement with
the distinction of those things which Gregory assigns as their opposites. For dulness is contrary
to sharpness, since an intellect is said, by comparison, to be sharp, when it is able to penetrate
into the heart of the things that are proposed to it. Hence it is dulness of mind that renders
the mind unable to pierce into the heart of a thing. A man is said to be a fool if he judges
wrongly about the common end of life, wherefore folly is properly opposed to wisdom, which
makes us judge aright about the universal cause. Ignorance implies a defect in the mind, even
about any particular things whatever, so that it is contrary to knowledge, which gives man
a right judgment about particular causes, viz. about creatures. Rashness is clearly opposed
to counsel, whereby man does not proceed to action before deliberating with his reason.

Reply Obj. 2: The gift of understanding is about the first principles of that knowledge which
is conferred by grace; but otherwise than faith, because it belongs to faith to assent to them,
while it belongs to the gift of understanding to pierce with the mind the things that are said.

Reply Obj. 3: The gift of understanding is related to both kinds of knowledge, viz. speculative
and practical, not as to the judgment, but as to apprehension, by grasping what is said.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 7]

Whether the Sixth Beatitude, "Blessed Are the Clean of Heart," etc., Responds to the Gift of
Understanding?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sixth beatitude, "Blessed are the clean of heart, for they
shall see God," does not respond to the gift of understanding. Because cleanness of heart seems
to belong chiefly to the appetite. But the gift of understanding belongs, not to the appetite,
but rather to the intellectual power. Therefore the aforesaid beatitude does not respond to
the gift of understanding.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Acts 15:9): "Purifying their hearts by faith." Now cleanness
of heart is acquired by the heart being purified. Therefore the aforesaid beatitude is related
to the virtue of faith rather than to the gift of understanding.

Obj. 3: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost perfect man in the present state of life. But
the sight of God does not belong to the present life, since it is that which gives happiness
to the Blessed, as stated above (I-II, Q. 3, A. 8). Therefore the sixth beatitude which comprises
the sight of God, does not respond to the gift of understanding.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4): "The sixth work of the Holy
Ghost which is understanding, is applicable to the clean of heart, whose eye being purified,
they can see what eye hath not seen."

I answer that, Two things are contained in the sixth beatitude, as also in the others, one
by way of merit, viz. cleanness of heart; the other by way of reward, viz. the sight of God,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 69, AA. 2, 4), and each of these, in some way, responds to the gift
of understanding.

For cleanness is twofold. One is a preamble and a disposition to seeing God, and consists in
the heart being cleansed of inordinate affections: and this cleanness of heart is effected
by the virtues and gifts belonging to the appetitive power. The other cleanness of heart is
a kind of complement to the sight of God; such is the cleanness of the mind that is purged
of phantasms and errors, so as to receive the truths which are proposed to it about God, no
longer by way of corporeal phantasms, nor infected with heretical misrepresentations: and this
cleanness is the result of the gift of understanding.

Again, the sight of God is twofold. One is perfect, whereby God's Essence is seen: the other
is imperfect, whereby, though we see not what God is, yet we see what He is not; and whereby,
the more perfectly do we know God in this life, the more we understand that He surpasses all
that the mind comprehends. Each of these visions of God belongs to the gift of understanding;
the first, to the gift of understanding in its state of perfection, as possessed in heaven;
the second, to the gift of understanding in its state of inchoation, as possessed by wayfarers.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections: for the first two arguments refer to the first
kind of cleanness; while the third refers to the perfect vision of God. Moreover the gifts
both perfect us in this life by way of inchoation, and will be fulfilled, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 69, A. 2).

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 8, Art. 8]

Whether Faith, Among the Fruits, Responds to the Gift of Understanding?

Objection 1: It would seem that, among the fruits, faith does not respond to the gift of understanding.
For understanding is the fruit of faith, since it is written (Isa. 7:9) according to another
reading [*The Septuagint]: "If you will not believe you shall not understand," where our version
has: "If you will not believe, you shall not continue." Therefore fruit is not the fruit of
understanding.

Obj. 2: Further, that which precedes is not the fruit of what follows. But faith seems to precede
understanding, since it is the foundation of the entire spiritual edifice, as stated above
(Q. 4, AA. 1, 7). Therefore faith is not the fruit of understanding.

Obj. 3: Further, more gifts pertain to the intellect than to the appetite. Now, among the fruits,
only one pertains to the intellect; namely, faith, while all the others pertain to the appetite.
Therefore faith, seemingly, does not pertain to understanding more than to wisdom, knowledge
or counsel.

On the contrary, The end of a thing is its fruit. Now the gift of understanding seems to be
ordained chiefly to the certitude of faith, which certitude is reckoned a fruit. For a gloss
on Gal. 5:22 says that the "faith which is a fruit, is certitude about the unseen." Therefore
faith, among the fruits, responds to the gift of understanding.

I answer that, The fruits of the Spirit, as stated above (I-II, Q. 70, A. 1), when we were
discussing them, are so called because they are something ultimate and delightful, produced
in us by the power of the Holy Ghost. Now the ultimate and delightful has the nature of an
end, which is the proper object of the will: and consequently that which is ultimate and delightful
with regard to the will, must be, after a fashion, the fruit of all the other things that pertain
to the other powers.

Accordingly, therefore, to this kind of gift of virtue that perfects a power, we may distinguish
a double fruit: one, belonging to the same power; the other, the last of all as it were, belonging
to the will. In this way we must conclude that the fruit which properly responds to the gift
of understanding is faith, i.e. the certitude of faith; while the fruit that responds to it
last of all is joy, which belongs to the will.

Reply Obj. 1: Understanding is the fruit of faith, taken as a virtue. But we are not taking
faith in this sense here, but for a kind of certitude of faith, to which man attains by the
gift of understanding.

Reply Obj. 2: Faith cannot altogether precede understanding, for it would be impossible to
assent by believing what is proposed to be believed, without understanding it in some way.
However, the perfection of understanding follows the virtue of faith: which perfection of understanding
is itself followed by a kind of certainty of faith.

Reply Obj. 3: The fruit of practical knowledge cannot consist in that very knowledge, since
knowledge of that kind is known not for its own sake, but for the sake of something else. On
the other hand, speculative knowledge has its fruit in its very self, which fruit is the certitude
about the thing known. Hence the gift of counsel, which belongs only to practical knowledge,
has no corresponding fruit of its own: while the gifts of wisdom, understanding and knowledge,
which can belongs also to speculative knowledge, have but one corresponding fruit, which is
certainly denoted by the name of faith. The reason why there are several fruits pertaining
to the appetitive faculty, is because, as already stated, the character of end, which the word
fruit implies, pertains to the appetitive rather than to the intellective part.

QUESTION 9

OF THE GIFT OF KNOWLEDGE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the gift of knowledge, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether knowledge is a gift?

(2) Whether it is about Divine things?

(3) Whether it is speculative or practical?

(4) Which beatitude responds to it?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 9, Art. 1]

Whether Knowledge Is a Gift?

Objection 1: It would seem that knowledge is not a gift. For the gifts of the Holy Ghost surpass
the natural faculty. But knowledge implies an effect of natural reason: for the Philosopher
says (Poster. i, 2) that a "demonstration is a syllogism which produces knowledge." Therefore
knowledge is not a gift of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost are common to all holy persons, as stated above
(Q. 8, A. 4; I-II, Q. 68, A. 5). Now Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1) that "many of the faithful
lack knowledge though they have faith." Therefore knowledge is not a gift.

Obj. 3: Further, the gifts are more perfect than the virtues, as stated above (I-II, Q. 68,
A. 8). Therefore one gift suffices for the perfection of one virtue. Now the gift of understanding
responds to the virtue of faith, as stated above (Q. 8, A. 2). Therefore the gift of knowledge
does not respond to that virtue, nor does it appear to which other virtue it can respond. Since,
then, the gifts are perfections of virtues, as stated above (I-II, Q. 68, AA. 1, 2), it seems
that knowledge is not a gift.

On the contrary, Knowledge is reckoned among the seven gifts (Isa. 11:2).

I answer that, Grace is more perfect than nature, and, therefore, does not fail in those things
wherein man can be perfected by nature. Now, when a man, by his natural reason, assents by
his intellect to some truth, he is perfected in two ways in respect of that truth: first, because
he grasps it; secondly, because he forms a sure judgment on it.

Accordingly, two things are requisite in order that the human intellect may perfectly assent
to the truth of the faith: one of these is that he should have a sound grasp of the things
that are proposed to be believed, and this pertains to the gift of understanding, as stated
above (Q. 8, A. 6): while the other is that he should have a sure and right judgment on them,
so as to discern what is to be believed, from what is not to be believed, and for this the
gift of knowledge is required.

Reply Obj. 1: Certitude of knowledge varies in various natures, according to the various conditions
of each nature. Because man forms a sure judgment about a truth by the discursive process of
his reason: and so human knowledge is acquired by means of demonstrative reasoning. On the
other hand, in God, there is a sure judgment of truth, without any discursive process, by simple
intuition, as was stated in the First Part (Q. 14, A. 7); wherefore God's knowledge is not
discursive, or argumentative, but absolute and simple, to which that knowledge is likened which
is a gift of the Holy Ghost, since it is a participated likeness thereof.

Reply Obj. 2: A twofold knowledge may be had about matters of belief. One is the knowledge
of what one ought to believe by discerning things to be believed from things not to be believed:
in this way knowledge is a gift and is common to all holy persons. The other is a knowledge
about matters of belief, whereby one knows not only what one ought to believe, but also how
to make the faith known, how to induce others to believe, and confute those who deny the faith.
This knowledge is numbered among the gratuitous graces, which are not given to all, but to
some. Hence Augustine, after the words quoted, adds: "It is one thing for a man merely to know
what he ought to believe, and another to know how to dispense what he believes to the godly,
and to defend it against the ungodly."

Reply Obj. 3: The gifts are more perfect than the moral and intellectual virtues; but they
are not more perfect than the theological virtues; rather are all the gifts ordained to the
perfection of the theological virtues, as to their end. Hence it is not unreasonable if several
gifts are ordained to one theological virtue.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 9, Art. 2]

Whether the Gift of Knowledge Is About Divine Things?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of knowledge is about Divine things. For Augustine
says (De Trin. xiv, 1) that "knowledge begets, nourishes and strengthens faith." Now faith
is about Divine things, because its object is the First Truth, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 1).
Therefore the gift of knowledge also is about Divine things.

Obj. 2: Further, the gift of knowledge is more excellent than acquired knowledge. But there
is an acquired knowledge about Divine things, for instance, the science of metaphysics. Much
more therefore is the gift of knowledge about Divine things.

Obj. 3: Further, according to Rom. 1:20, "the invisible things of God . . . are clearly seen,
being understood by the things that are made." If therefore there is knowledge about created
things, it seems that there is also knowledge of Divine things.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. xiv, 1): "The knowledge of Divine things may be properly
called wisdom, and the knowledge of human affairs may properly receive the name of knowledge."

I answer that, A sure judgment about a thing is formed chiefly from its cause, and so the order
of judgments should be according to the order of causes. For just as the first cause is the
cause of the second, so ought the judgment about the second cause to be formed through the
first cause: nor is it possible to judge of the first cause through any other cause; wherefore
the judgment which is formed through the first cause, is the first and most perfect judgment.

Now in those things where we find something most perfect, the common name of the genus is appropriated
for those things which fall short of the most perfect, and some special name is adapted to
the most perfect thing, as is the case in Logic. For in the genus of convertible terms, that
which signifies "what a thing is," is given the special name of "definition," but the convertible
terms which fall short of this, retain the common name, and are called "proper" terms.

Accordingly, since the word knowledge implies certitude of judgment as stated above (A. 1),
if this certitude of the judgment is derived from the highest cause, the knowledge has a special
name, which is wisdom: for a wise man in any branch of knowledge is one who knows the highest
cause of that kind of knowledge, and is able to judge of all matters by that cause: and a wise
man "absolutely," is one who knows the cause which is absolutely highest, namely God. Hence
the knowledge of Divine things is called "wisdom," while the knowledge of human things is called
"knowledge," this being the common name denoting certitude of judgment, and appropriated to
the judgment which is formed through second causes. Accordingly, if we take knowledge in this
way, it is a distinct gift from the gift of wisdom, so that the gift of knowledge is only about
human or created things.

Reply Obj. 1: Although matters of faith are Divine and eternal, yet faith itself is something
temporal in the mind of the believer. Hence to know what one ought to believe, belongs to the
gift of knowledge, but to know in themselves the very things we believe, by a kind of union
with them, belongs to the gift of wisdom. Therefore the gift of wisdom corresponds more to
charity which unites man's mind to God.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument takes knowledge in the generic acceptation of the term: it is not
thus that knowledge is a special gift, but according as it is restricted to judgments formed
through created things.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 1, A. 1), every cognitive habit regards formally the mean
through which things are known, and materially, the things that are known through the mean.
And since that which is formal, is of most account, it follows that those sciences which draw
conclusions about physical matter from mathematical principles, are reckoned rather among the
mathematical sciences, though, as to their matter they have more in common with physical sciences:
and for this reason it is stated in Phys.  ii, 2 that they are more akin to physics. Accordingly,
since man knows God through His creatures, this seems to pertain to "knowledge," to which it
belongs formally, rather than to "wisdom," to which it belongs materially: and, conversely,
when we judge of creatures according to Divine things, this pertains to "wisdom" rather than
to "knowledge."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 9, Art. 3]

Whether the Gift of Knowledge Is Practical Knowledge?

Objection 1: It would seem that the knowledge, which is numbered among the gifts, is practical
knowledge. For Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 14) that "knowledge is concerned with the actions
in which we make use of external things." But the knowledge which is concerned about actions
is practical. Therefore the gift of knowledge is practical.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. i, 32): "Knowledge is nought if it hath not its use for
piety . . . and piety is very useless if it lacks the discernment of knowledge." Now it follows
from this authority that knowledge directs piety. But this cannot apply to a speculative science.
Therefore the gift of knowledge is not speculative but practical.

Obj. 3: Further, the gifts of the Holy Ghost are only in the righteous, as stated above (Q.
9, A. 5). But speculative knowledge can be also in the unrighteous, according to James 4:17:
"To him . . . who knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is a sin." Therefore the gift
of knowledge is not speculative but practical.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. i, 32): "Knowledge on her own day prepares a feast, because
she overcomes the fast of ignorance in the mind." Now ignorance is not entirely removed, save
by both kinds of knowledge, viz. speculative and practical. Therefore the gift of knowledge
is both speculative and practical.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 9, A. 8), the gift of knowledge, like the gift of understanding,
is ordained to the certitude of faith. Now faith consists primarily and principally in speculation,
in as much as it is founded on the First Truth. But since the First Truth is also the last
end for the sake of which our works are done, hence it is that faith extends to works, according
to Gal. 5:6: "Faith . . . worketh by charity."

The consequence is that the gift of knowledge also, primarily and principally indeed, regards
speculation, in so far as man knows what he ought to hold by faith; yet, secondarily, it extends
to works, since we are directed in our actions by the knowledge of matters of faith, and of
conclusions drawn therefrom.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking of the gift of knowledge, in so far as it extends to works;
for action is ascribed to knowledge, yet not action solely, nor primarily: and in this way
it directs piety.

Hence the Reply to the Second Objection is clear.

Reply Obj. 3: As we have already stated (Q. 8, A. 5) about the gift of understanding, not everyone
who understands, has the gift of understanding, but only he that understands through a habit
of grace: and so we must take note, with regard to the gift of knowledge, that they alone have
the gift of knowledge, who judge aright about matters of faith and action, through the grace
bestowed on them, so as never to wander from the straight path of justice. This is the knowledge
of holy things, according to Wis. 10:10: "She conducted the just . . . through the right ways
. . . and gave him the knowledge of holy things."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 9, Art. 4]

Whether the Third Beatitude, "Blessed Are They That Mourn," etc. Corresponds to the Gift of
Knowledge?

Objection 1: It would seem that the third beatitude, "Blessed are they that mourn," does not
correspond to the gift of knowledge. For, even as evil is the cause of sorrow and grief, so
is good the cause of joy. Now knowledge brings good to light rather than evil, since the latter
is known through evil: for "the straight line rules both itself and the crooked line" (De Anima
i, 5). Therefore the aforesaid beatitude does not suitably correspond to the gift of knowledge.

Obj. 2: Further, consideration of truth is an act of knowledge. Now there is no sorrow in the
consideration of truth; rather is there joy, since it is written (Wis. 8:16): "Her conversation
hath no bitterness, nor her company any tediousness, but joy and gladness." Therefore the aforesaid
beatitude does not suitably correspond with the gift of knowledge.

Obj. 3: Further, the gift of knowledge consists in speculation, before operation. Now, in so
far as it consists in speculation, sorrow does not correspond to it, since "the speculative
intellect is not concerned about things to be sought or avoided" (De Anima iii, 9). Therefore
the aforesaid beatitude is not suitably reckoned to correspond with the gift of knowledge.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte iv): "Knowledge befits the mourner,
who has discovered that he has been mastered by the evil which he coveted as though it were good."

I answer that, Right judgment about creatures belongs properly to knowledge. Now it is through
creatures that man's aversion from God is occasioned, according to Wis. 14:11: "Creatures .
. . are turned to an abomination . . . and a snare to the feet of the unwise," of those, namely,
who do not judge aright about creatures, since they deem the perfect good to consist in them.
Hence they sin by placing their last end in them, and lose the true good. It is by forming
a right judgment of creatures that man becomes aware of the loss (of which they may be the
occasion), which judgment he exercises through the gift of knowledge.

Hence the beatitude of sorrow is said to correspond to the gift of knowledge.

Reply Obj. 1: Created goods do not cause spiritual joy, except in so far as they are referred
to the Divine good, which is the proper cause of spiritual joy. Hence spiritual peace and the
resulting joy correspond directly to the gift of wisdom: but to the gift of knowledge there
corresponds, in the first place, sorrow for past errors, and, in consequence, consolation,
since, by his right judgment, man directs creatures to the Divine good. For this reason sorrow
is set forth in this beatitude, as the merit, and the resulting consolation, as the reward;
which is begun in this life, and is perfected in the life to come.

Reply Obj. 2: Man rejoices in the very consideration of truth; yet he may sometimes grieve
for the thing, the truth of which he considers: it is thus that sorrow is ascribed to knowledge.

Reply Obj. 3: No beatitude corresponds to knowledge, in so far as it consists in speculation,
because man's beatitude consists, not in considering creatures, but in contemplating God. But
man's beatitude does consist somewhat in the right use of creatures, and in well-ordered love
of them: and this I say with regard to the beatitude of a wayfarer. Hence beatitude relating
to contemplation is not ascribed to knowledge, but to understanding and wisdom, which are about
Divine things.

QUESTION 10

OF UNBELIEF IN GENERAL (In Twelve Articles)

In due sequence we must consider the contrary vices: first, unbelief, which is contrary to
faith; secondly, blasphemy, which is opposed to confession of faith; thirdly, ignorance and
dulness of mind, which are contrary to knowledge and understanding.

As to the first, we must consider (1) unbelief in general; (2) heresy; (3) apostasy from the faith.

Under the first head there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether unbelief is a sin?

(2) What is its subject?

(3) Whether it is the greatest of sins?

(4) Whether every action of unbelievers is a sin?

(5) Of the species of unbelief;

(6) Of their comparison, one with another;

(7) Whether we ought to dispute about faith with unbelievers?

(8) Whether they ought to be compelled to the faith?

(9) Whether we ought to have communications with them?

(10) Whether unbelievers can have authority over Christians?

(11) Whether the rites of unbelievers should be tolerated?

(12) Whether the children of unbelievers are to be baptized against their parents' will?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 1]

Whether Unbelief Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelief is not a sin. For every sin is contrary to nature,
as Damascene proves (De Fide Orth. ii, 4). Now unbelief seems not to be contrary to nature;
for Augustine says (De Praedest. Sanct. v) that "to be capable to having faith, just as to
be capable of having charity, is natural to all men; whereas to have faith, even as to have
charity, belongs to the grace of the faithful." Therefore not to have faith, which is to be
an unbeliever, is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no one sins that which he cannot avoid, since every sin is voluntary. Now
it is not in a man's power to avoid unbelief, for he cannot avoid it unless he have faith,
because the Apostle says (Rom. 10:14): "How shall they believe in Him, of Whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher?" Therefore unbelief does not seem to be a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, as stated above (I-II, Q. 84, A. 4), there are seven capital sins, to which
all sins are reduced. But unbelief does not seem to be comprised under any of them. Therefore
unbelief is not a sin.

On the contrary, Vice is opposed to virtue. Now faith is a virtue, and unbelief is opposed
to it. Therefore unbelief is a sin.

I answer that, Unbelief may be taken in two ways: first, by way of pure negation, so that a
man be called an unbeliever, merely because he has not the faith. Secondly, unbelief may be
taken by way of opposition to the faith; in which sense a man refuses to hear the faith, or
despises it, according to Isa. 53:1: "Who hath believed our report?" It is this that completes
the notion of unbelief, and it is in this sense that unbelief is a sin.

If, however, we take it by way of pure negation, as we find it in those who have heard nothing
about the faith, it bears the character, not of sin, but of punishment, because such like ignorance
of Divine things is a result of the sin of our first parent. If such like unbelievers are damned,
it is on account of other sins, which cannot be taken away without faith, but not on account
of their sin of unbelief. Hence Our Lord said (John 15:22) "If I had not come, and spoken to
them, they would not have sin"; which Augustine expounds (Tract. lxxxix in Joan.) as "referring
to the sin whereby they believed not in Christ."

Reply Obj. 1: To have the faith is not part of human nature, but it is part of human nature
that man's mind should not thwart his inner instinct, and the outward preaching of the truth.
Hence, in this way, unbelief is contrary to nature.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument takes unbelief as denoting a pure negation.

Reply Obj. 3: Unbelief, in so far as it is a sin, arises from pride, through which man is unwilling
to subject his intellect to the rules of faith, and to the sound interpretation of the Fathers.
Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "presumptuous innovations arise from vainglory."

It might also be replied that just as the theological virtues are not reduced to the cardinal
virtues, but precede them, so too, the vices opposed to the theological virtues are not reduced
to the capital vices.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 2]

Whether Unbelief Is in the Intellect As Its Subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelief is not in the intellect as its subject. For every
sin is in the will, according to Augustine (De Duabus Anim. x, xi). Now unbelief is a sin,
as stated above (A. 1). Therefore unbelief resides in the will and not in the intellect.

Obj. 2: Further, unbelief is sinful through contempt of the preaching of the faith. But contempt
pertains to the will. Therefore unbelief is in the will.

Obj. 3: Further, a gloss [*Augustine, Enchiridion lx.] on 2 Cor. 11:14 "Satan . . . transformeth
himself into an angel of light," says that if "a wicked angel pretend to be a good angel, and
be taken for a good angel, it is not a dangerous or an unhealthy error, if he does or says
what is becoming to a good angel." This seems to be because of the rectitude of the will of
the man who adheres to the angel, since his intention is to adhere to a good angel. Therefore
the sin of unbelief seems to consist entirely in a perverse will: and, consequently, it does
not reside in the intellect.

On the contrary, Things which are contrary to one another are in the same subject. Now faith,
to which unbelief is opposed, resides in the intellect. Therefore unbelief also is in the intellect.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 74, AA. 1, 2), sin is said to be in the power which
is the principle of the sinful act. Now a sinful act may have two principles: one is its first
and universal principle, which commands all acts of sin; and this is the will, because every
sin is voluntary. The other principle of the sinful act is the proper and proximate principle
which elicits the sinful act: thus the concupiscible is the principle of gluttony and lust,
wherefore these sins are said to be in the concupiscible. Now dissent, which is the act proper
to unbelief, is an act of the intellect, moved, however, by the will, just as assent is.

Therefore unbelief, like faith, is in the intellect as its proximate subject. But it is in
the will as its first moving principle, in which way every sin is said to be in the will.

Hence the Reply to the First Objection is clear.

Reply Obj. 2: The will's contempt causes the intellect's dissent, which completes the notion
of unbelief. Hence the cause of unbelief is in the will, while unbelief itself is in the intellect.

Reply Obj. 3: He that believes a wicked angel to be a good one, does not dissent from a matter
of faith, because "his bodily senses are deceived, while his mind does not depart from a true
and right judgment" as the gloss observes [*Augustine, Enchiridion lx]. But, according to the
same authority, to adhere to Satan when he begins to invite one to his abode, i.e. wickedness
and error, is not without sin.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 3]

Whether Unbelief Is the Greatest of Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelief is not the greatest of sins. For Augustine says (De
Bapt. contra Donat. iv, 20): "I should hesitate to decide whether a very wicked Catholic ought
to be preferred to a heretic, in whose life one finds nothing reprehensible beyond the fact
that he is a heretic." But a heretic is an unbeliever. Therefore we ought not to say absolutely
that unbelief is the greatest of sins.

Obj. 2: Further, that which diminishes or excuses a sin is not, seemingly, the greatest of
sins. Now unbelief excuses or diminishes sin: for the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:12, 13): "I .
. . before was a blasphemer, and a persecutor and contumelious; but I obtained . . . mercy
. . . because I did it ignorantly in unbelief." Therefore unbelief is not the greatest of sins.

Obj. 3: Further, the greater sin deserves the greater punishment, according to Deut. 25:2:
"According to the measure of the sin shall the measure also of the stripes be." Now a greater
punishment is due to believers than to unbelievers, according to Heb. 10:29: "How much more,
do you think, he deserveth worse punishments, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and
hath esteemed the blood of the testament unclean, by which he was sanctified?" Therefore unbelief
is not the greatest of sins.

On the contrary, Augustine, commenting on John 15:22, "If I had not come, and spoken to them,
they would not have sin," says (Tract. lxxxix in Joan.): "Under the general name, He refers
to a singularly great sin. For this," viz. infidelity, "is the sin to which all others may
be traced." Therefore unbelief is the greatest of sins.

I answer that, Every sin consists formally in aversion from God, as stated above (I-II, Q.
71, A. 6; I-II, Q. 73, A. 3). Hence the more a sin severs man from God, the graver it is. Now
man is more than ever separated from God by unbelief, because he has not even true knowledge
of God: and by false knowledge of God, man does not approach Him, but is severed from Him.

Nor is it possible for one who has a false opinion of God, to know Him in any way at all, because
the object of his opinion is not God. Therefore it is clear that the sin of unbelief is greater
than any sin that occurs in the perversion of morals. This does not apply to the sins that
are opposed to the theological virtues, as we shall state further on (Q. 20, A. 3; Q. 34, A.
2, ad 2; Q. 39, A. 2, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing hinders a sin that is more grave in its genus from being less grave in
respect of some circumstances. Hence Augustine hesitated to decide between a bad Catholic,
and a heretic not sinning otherwise, because although the heretic's sin is more grave generically,
it can be lessened by a circumstance, and conversely the sin of the Catholic can, by some circumstance,
be aggravated.

Reply Obj. 2: Unbelief includes both ignorance, as an accessory thereto, and resistance to
matters of faith, and in the latter respect it is a most grave sin. In respect, however, of
this ignorance, it has a certain reason for excuse, especially when a man sins not from malice,
as was the case with the Apostle.

Reply Obj. 3: An unbeliever is more severely punished for his sin of unbelief than another
sinner is for any sin whatever, if we consider the kind of sin. But in the case of another
sin, e.g. adultery, committed by a believer, and by an unbeliever, the believer, other things
being equal, sins more gravely than the unbeliever, both on account of his knowledge of the
truth through faith, and on account of the sacraments of faith with which he has been satiated,
and which he insults by committing sin.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 4]

Whether Every Act of an Unbeliever Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that each act of an unbeliever is a sin. Because a gloss on Rom.
14:23, "All that is not of faith is sin," says: "The whole life of unbelievers is a sin." Now
the life of unbelievers consists of their actions. Therefore every action of an unbeliever
is a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, faith directs the intention. Now there can be no good save what comes from
a right intention. Therefore, among unbelievers, no action can be good.

Obj. 3: Further, when that which precedes is corrupted, that which follows is corrupted also.
Now an act of faith precedes the acts of all the virtues. Therefore, since there is no act
of faith in unbelievers, they can do no good work, but sin in every action of theirs.

On the contrary, It is said of Cornelius, while yet an unbeliever (Acts 10:4, 31), that his
alms were acceptable to God. Therefore not every action of an unbeliever is a sin, but some
of his actions are good.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 85, AA. 2, 4) mortal sin takes away sanctifying grace,
but does not wholly corrupt the good of nature. Since therefore, unbelief is a mortal sin,
unbelievers are without grace indeed, yet some good of nature remains in them. Consequently
it is evident that unbelievers cannot do those good works which proceed from grace, viz. meritorious
works; yet they can, to a certain extent, do those good works for which the good of nature
suffices.

Hence it does not follow that they sin in everything they do; but whenever they do anything
out of their unbelief, then they sin. For even as one who has the faith, can commit an actual
sin, venial or even mortal, which he does not refer to the end of faith, so too, an unbeliever
can do a good deed in a matter which he does not refer to the end of his unbelief.

Reply Obj. 1: The words quoted must be taken to mean either that the life of unbelievers cannot
be sinless, since without faith no sin is taken away, or that whatever they do out of unbelief,
is a sin. Hence the same authority adds: "Because every one that lives or acts according to
his unbelief, sins grievously."

Reply Obj. 2: Faith directs the intention with regard to the supernatural last end: but even
the light of natural reason can direct the intention in respect of a connatural good.

Reply Obj. 3: Unbelief does not so wholly destroy natural reason in unbelievers, but that some
knowledge of the truth remains in them, whereby they are able to do deeds that are generically
good. With regard, however, to Cornelius, it is to be observed that he was not an unbeliever,
else his works would not have been acceptable to God, whom none can please without faith. Now
he had implicit faith, as the truth of the Gospel was not yet made manifest: hence Peter was
sent to him to give him fuller instruction in the faith.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 5]

Whether There Are Several Species of Unbelief?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are not several species of unbelief. For, since faith
and unbelief are contrary to one another, they must be about the same thing. Now the formal
object of faith is the First Truth, whence it derives its unity, although its matter contains
many points of belief. Therefore the object of unbelief also is the First Truth; while the
things which an unbeliever disbelieves are the matter of his unbelief. Now the specific difference
depends not on material but on formal principles. Therefore there are not several species of
unbelief, according to the various points which the unbeliever disbelieves.

Obj. 2: Further, it is possible to stray from the truth of faith in an infinite number of ways.
If therefore the various species of unbelief correspond to the number of various errors, it
would seem to follow that there is an infinite number of species of unbelief, and consequently,
that we ought not to make these species the object of our consideration.

Obj. 3: Further, the same thing does not belong to different species. Now a man may be an unbeliever
through erring about different points of truth. Therefore diversity of errors does not make
a diversity of species of unbelief: and so there are not several species of unbelief.

On the contrary, Several species of vice are opposed to each virtue, because "good happens
in one way, but evil in many ways," according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) and the Philosopher
(Ethic. ii, 6). Now faith is a virtue. Therefore several species of vice are opposed to it.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 55, A. 4; I-II, Q. 64, A. 1), every virtue consists
in following some rule of human knowledge or operation. Now conformity to a rule happens one
way in one matter, whereas a breach of the rule happens in many ways, so that many vices are
opposed to one virtue. The diversity of the vices that are opposed to each virtue may be considered
in two ways, first, with regard to their different relations to the virtue: and in this way
there are determinate species of vices contrary to a virtue: thus to a moral virtue one vice
is opposed by exceeding the virtue, and another, by falling short of the virtue. Secondly,
the diversity of vices opposed to one virtue may be considered in respect of the corruption
of the various conditions required for that virtue. In this way an infinite number of vices
are opposed to one virtue, e.g. temperance or fortitude, according to the infinite number of
ways in which the various circumstances of a virtue may be corrupted, so that the rectitude
of virtue is forsaken. For this reason the Pythagoreans held evil to be infinite.

Accordingly we must say that if unbelief be considered in comparison to faith, there are several
species of unbelief, determinate in number. For, since the sin of unbelief consists in resisting
the faith, this may happen in two ways: either the faith is resisted before it has been accepted,
and such is the unbelief of pagans or heathens; or the Christian faith is resisted after it
has been accepted, and this either in the figure, and such is the unbelief of the Jews, or
in the very manifestation of truth, and such is the unbelief of heretics. Hence we may, in
a general way, reckon these three as species of unbelief.

If, however, the species of unbelief be distinguished according to the various errors that
occur in matters of faith, there are not determinate species of unbelief: for errors can be
multiplied indefinitely, as Augustine observes (De Haeresibus).

Reply Obj. 1: The formal aspect of a sin can be considered in two ways. First, according to
the intention of the sinner, in which case the thing to which the sinner turns is the formal
object of his sin, and determines the various species of that sin. Secondly, it may be considered
as an evil, and in this case the good which is forsaken is the formal object of the sin; which
however does not derive its species from this point of view, in fact it is a privation. We
must therefore reply that the object of unbelief is the First Truth considered as that which
unbelief forsakes, but its formal aspect, considered as that to which unbelief turns, is the
false opinion that it follows: and it is from this point of view that unbelief derives its
various species. Hence, even as charity is one, because it adheres to the Sovereign Good, while
there are various species of vice opposed to charity, which turn away from the Sovereign Good
by turning to various temporal goods, and also in respect of various inordinate relations to
God, so too, faith is one virtue through adhering to the one First Truth, yet there are many
species of unbelief, because unbelievers follow many false opinions.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers the various species of unbelief according to various
points in which errors occur.

Reply Obj. 3: Since faith is one because it believes in many things in relation to one, so
may unbelief, although it errs in many things, be one in so far as all those things are related
to one. Yet nothing hinders one man from erring in various species of unbelief, even as one
man may be subject to various vices, and to various bodily diseases.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 6]

Whether the Unbelief of Pagans or Heathens Is Graver Than Other Kinds?

Objection 1: It would seem that the unbelief of heathens or pagans is graver than other kinds.
For just as bodily disease is graver according as it endangers the health of a more important
member of the body, so does sin appear to be graver, according as it is opposed to that which
holds a more important place in virtue. Now that which is most important in faith, is belief
in the unity of God, from which the heathens deviate by believing in many gods. Therefore their
unbelief is the gravest of all.

Obj. 2: Further, among heresies, the more detestable are those which contradict the truth of
faith in more numerous and more important points: thus, the heresy of Arius, who severed the
Godhead, was more detestable than that of Nestorius who severed the humanity of Christ from
the Person of God the Son. Now the heathens deny the faith in more numerous and more important
points than Jews and heretics; since they do not accept the faith at all. Therefore their unbelief
is the gravest.

Obj. 3: Further, every good diminishes evil. Now there is some good in the Jews, since they
believe in the Old Testament as being from God, and there is some good in heretics, since they
venerate the New Testament. Therefore they sin less grievously than heathens, who receive neither
Testament.

On the contrary, It is written (2 Pet. 2:21): "It had been better for them not to have known
the way of justice, than after they have known it, to turn back." Now the heathens have not
known the way of justice, whereas heretics and Jews have abandoned it after knowing it in some
way. Therefore theirs is the graver sin.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5), two things may be considered in unbelief. One of these
is its relation to faith: and from this point of view, he who resists the faith after accepting
it, sins more grievously against faith, than he who resists it without having accepted it,
even as he who fails to fulfil what he has promised, sins more grievously than if he had never
promised it. In this way the unbelief of heretics, who confess their belief in the Gospel,
and resist that faith by corrupting it, is a more grievous sin than that of the Jews, who have
never accepted the Gospel faith. Since, however, they accepted the figure of that faith in
the Old Law, which they corrupt by their false interpretations, their unbelief is a more grievous
sin than that of the heathens, because the latter have not accepted the Gospel faith in any
way at all.

The second thing to be considered in unbelief is the corruption of matters of faith. In this
respect, since heathens err on more points than Jews, and these in more points than heretics,
the unbelief of heathens is more grievous than the unbelief of the Jews, and that of the Jews
than that of the heretics, except in such cases as that of the Manichees, who, in matters of
faith, err even more than heathens do.

Of these two gravities the first surpasses the second from the point of view of guilt; since,
as stated above (A. 1) unbelief has the character of guilt, from its resisting faith rather
than from the mere absence of faith, for the latter as was stated (A. 1) seems rather to bear
the character of punishment. Hence, speaking absolutely, the unbelief of heretics is the worst.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 7]

Whether One Ought to Dispute with Unbelievers in Public?

Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not to dispute with unbelievers in public. For the
Apostle says (2 Tim. 2:14): "Contend not in words, for it is to no profit, but to the subverting
of the hearers." But it is impossible to dispute with unbelievers publicly without contending
in words. Therefore one ought not to dispute publicly with unbelievers.

Obj. 2: Further, the law of Martianus Augustus confirmed by the canons [*De Sum. Trin. Cod.
lib. i, leg. Nemo] expresses itself thus: "It is an insult to the judgment of the most religious
synod, if anyone ventures to debate or dispute in public about matters which have once been
judged and disposed of." Now all matters of faith have been decided by the holy councils. Therefore
it is an insult to the councils, and consequently a grave sin to presume to dispute in public
about matters of faith.

Obj. 3: Further, disputations are conducted by means of arguments. But an argument is a reason
in settlement of a dubious matter: whereas things that are of faith, being most certain, ought
not to be a matter of doubt. Therefore one ought not to dispute in public about matters of faith.

On the contrary, It is written (Acts 9:22, 29) that "Saul increased much more in strength,
and confounded the Jews," and that "he spoke . . . to the gentiles and disputed with the Greeks."

I answer that, In disputing about the faith, two things must be observed: one on the part of
the disputant; the other on the part of his hearers. On the part of the disputant, we must
consider his intention. For if he were to dispute as though he had doubts about the faith,
and did not hold the truth of faith for certain, and as though he intended to probe it with
arguments, without doubt he would sin, as being doubtful of the faith and an unbeliever. On
the other hand, it is praiseworthy to dispute about the faith in order to confute errors, or
for practice.

On the part of the hearers we must consider whether those who hear the disputation are instructed
and firm in the faith, or simple and wavering. As to those who are well instructed and firm
in the faith, there can be no danger in disputing about the faith in their presence. But as
to simple-minded people, we must make a distinction; because either they are provoked and molested
by unbelievers, for instance, Jews or heretics, or pagans who strive to corrupt the faith in
them, or else they are not subject to provocation in this matter, as in those countries where
there are no unbelievers. In the first case it is necessary to dispute in public about the
faith, provided there be those who are equal and adapted to the task of confuting errors; since
in this way simple people are strengthened in the faith, and unbelievers are deprived of the
opportunity to deceive, while if those who ought to withstand the perverters of the truth of
faith were silent, this would tend to strengthen error. Hence Gregory says (Pastor. ii, 4):
"Even as a thoughtless speech gives rise to error, so does an indiscreet silence leave those
in error who might have been instructed." On the other hand, in the second case it is dangerous
to dispute in public about the faith, in the presence of simple people, whose faith for this
very reason is more firm, that they have never heard anything differing from what they believe.
Hence it is not expedient for them to hear what unbelievers have to say against the faith.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle does not entirely forbid disputations, but such as are inordinate,
and consist of contentious words rather than of sound speeches.

Reply Obj. 2: That law forbade those public disputations about the faith, which arise from
doubting the faith, but not those which are for the safeguarding thereof.

Reply Obj. 3: One ought to dispute about matters of faith, not as though one doubted about
them, but in order to make the truth known, and to confute errors. Sometimes again, it is necessary,
in order to convince those who are in error, according to Titus 1:9: "That he may be able to
exhort in sound doctrine and to convince the gainsayers."

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 8]

Whether Unbelievers Ought to Be Compelled to the Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelievers ought by no means to be compelled to the faith.
For it is written (Matt. 13:28) that the servants of the householder, in whose field cockle
had been sown, asked him: "Wilt thou that we go and gather it up?" and that he answered: "No,
lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you root up the wheat also together with it": on which
passage Chrysostom says (Hom. xlvi in Matth.): "Our Lord says this so as to forbid the slaying
of men. For it is not right to slay heretics, because if you do you will necessarily slay many
innocent persons." Therefore it seems that for the same reason unbelievers ought not to be
compelled to the faith.

Obj. 2: Further, we read in the Decretals (Dist. xlv can., De Judaeis): "The holy synod prescribes,
with regard to the Jews, that for the future, none are to be compelled to believe." Therefore,
in like manner, neither should unbelievers be compelled to the faith.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.) that "it is possible for a man to do
other things against his will, but he cannot believe unless he is willing." Therefore it seems
that unbelievers ought not to be compelled to the faith.

Obj. 4: It is said in God's person (Ezech. 18:32 [*Ezech. 33:11]): "I desire not the death
of the sinner [Vulg.: 'of him that dieth']." Now we ought to conform our will to the Divine
will, as stated above (I-II, Q. 19, AA. 9, 10). Therefore we should not even wish unbelievers
to be put to death.

On the contrary, It is written (Luke 14:23): "Go out into the highways and hedges; and compel
them to come in." Now men enter into the house of God, i.e. into Holy Church, by faith. Therefore
some ought to be compelled to the faith.

I answer that, Among unbelievers there are some who have never received the faith, such as
the heathens and the Jews: and these are by no means to be compelled to the faith, in order
that they may believe, because to believe depends on the will: nevertheless they should be
compelled by the faithful, if it be possible to do so, so that they do not hinder the faith,
by their blasphemies, or by their evil persuasions, or even by their open persecutions. It
is for this reason that Christ's faithful often wage war with unbelievers, not indeed for the
purpose of forcing them to believe, because even if they were to conquer them, and take them
prisoners, they should still leave them free to believe, if they will, but in order to prevent
them from hindering the faith of Christ.

On the other hand, there are unbelievers who at some time have accepted the faith, and professed
it, such as heretics and all apostates: such should be submitted even to bodily compulsion,
that they may fulfil what they have promised, and hold what they, at one time, received.

Reply Obj. 1: Some have understood the authority quoted to forbid, not the excommunication
but the slaying of heretics, as appears from the words of Chrysostom. Augustine too, says (Ep.
ad Vincent. xciii) of himself: "It was once my opinion that none should be compelled to union
with Christ, that we should deal in words, and fight with arguments. However this opinion of
mine is undone, not by words of contradiction, but by convincing examples. Because fear of
the law was so profitable, that many say: Thanks be to the Lord Who has broken our chains asunder."
Accordingly the meaning of Our Lord's words, "Suffer both to grow until the harvest," must
be gathered from those which precede, "lest perhaps gathering up the cockle, you root the wheat
also together with it." For, Augustine says (Contra Ep. Parmen. iii, 2) "these words show that
when this is not to be feared, that is to say, when a man's crime is so publicly known, and
so hateful to all, that he has no defenders, or none such as might cause a schism, the severity
of discipline should not slacken."

Reply Obj. 2: Those Jews who have in no way received the faith, ought not by no means to be
compelled to the faith: if, however, they have received it, they ought to be compelled to keep
it, as is stated in the same chapter.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as taking a vow is a matter of will, and keeping a vow, a matter of obligation,
so acceptance of the faith is a matter of the will, whereas keeping the faith, when once one
has received it, is a matter of obligation. Wherefore heretics should be compelled to keep
the faith. Thus Augustine says to the Count Boniface (Ep. clxxxv): "What do these people mean
by crying out continually: 'We may believe or not believe just as we choose. Whom did Christ
compel?' They should remember that Christ at first compelled Paul and afterwards taught Him."

Reply Obj. 4: As Augustine says in the same letter, "none of us wishes any heretic to perish.
But the house of David did not deserve to have peace, unless his son Absalom had been killed
in the war which he had raised against his father. Thus if the Catholic Church gathers together
some of the perdition of others, she heals the sorrow of her maternal heart by the delivery
of so many nations."

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 9]

Whether It Is Lawful to Communicate with Unbelievers?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is lawful to communicate with unbelievers. For the Apostle
says (1 Cor. 10:27): "If any of them that believe not, invite you, and you be willing to go,
eat of anything that is set before you." And Chrysostom says (Hom. xxv super Epist. ad Heb.):
"If you wish to go to dine with pagans, we permit it without any reservation." Now to sit at
table with anyone is to communicate with him. Therefore it is lawful to communicate with unbelievers.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:12): "What have I to do to judge them that are
without?" Now unbelievers are without. When, therefore, the Church forbids the faithful to
communicate with certain people, it seems that they ought not to be forbidden to communicate
with unbelievers.

Obj. 3: Further, a master cannot employ his servant, unless he communicate with him, at least
by word, since the master moves his servant by command. Now Christians can have unbelievers,
either Jews, or pagans, or Saracens, for servants. Therefore they can lawfully communicate
with them.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 7:2, 3): "Thou shalt make no league with them, nor show
mercy to them; neither shalt thou make marriages with them": and a gloss on Lev. 15:19, "The
woman who at the return of the month," etc. says: "It is so necessary to shun idolatry, that
we should not come in touch with idolaters or their disciples, nor have any dealings with them."

I answer that, Communication with a particular person is forbidden to the faithful, in two
ways: first, as a punishment of the person with whom they are forbidden to communicate; secondly,
for the safety of those who are forbidden to communicate with others. Both motives can be gathered
from the Apostle's words (1 Cor. 5:6). For after he had pronounced sentence of excommunication,
he adds as his reason: "Know you not that a little leaven corrupts the whole lump?" and afterwards
he adds the reason on the part of the punishment inflicted by the sentence of the Church when
he says (1 Cor. 5:12): "Do not you judge them that are within?"

Accordingly, in the first way the Church does not forbid the faithful to communicate with unbelievers,
who have not in any way received the Christian faith, viz. with pagans and Jews, because she
has not the right to exercise spiritual judgment over them, but only temporal judgment, in
the case when, while dwelling among Christians they are guilty of some misdemeanor, and are
condemned by the faithful to some temporal punishment. On the other hand, in this way, i.e.
as a punishment, the Church forbids the faithful to communicate with those unbelievers who
have forsaken the faith they once received, either by corrupting the faith, as heretics, or
by entirely renouncing the faith, as apostates, because the Church pronounces sentence of excommunication
on both.

With regard to the second way, it seems that one ought to distinguish according to the various
conditions of persons, circumstances and time. For some are firm in the faith; and so it is
to be hoped that their communicating with unbelievers will lead to the conversion of the latter
rather than to the aversion of the faithful from the faith. These are not to be forbidden to
communicate with unbelievers who have not received the faith, such as pagans or Jews, especially
if there be some urgent necessity for so doing. But in the case of simple people and those
who are weak in the faith, whose perversion is to be feared as a probable result, they should
be forbidden to communicate with unbelievers, and especially to be on very familiar terms with
them, or to communicate with them without necessity.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: The Church does not exercise judgment against unbelievers in the point of inflicting
spiritual punishment on them: but she does exercise judgment over some of them in the matter
of temporal punishment. It is under this head that sometimes the Church, for certain special
sins, withdraws the faithful from communication with certain unbelievers.

Reply Obj. 3: There is more probability that a servant who is ruled by his master's commands,
will be converted to the faith of his master who is a believer, than if the case were the reverse:
and so the faithful are not forbidden to have unbelieving servants. If, however, the master
were in danger, through communicating with such a servant, he should send him away, according
to Our Lord's command (Matt. 18:8): "If . . . thy foot scandalize thee, cut it off, and cast
it from thee."

With regard to the argument in the contrary [*The Leonine Edition gives this solution before
the Reply Obj. 2] sense the reply is that the Lord gave this command in reference to those
nations into whose territory the Jews were about to enter. For the latter were inclined to
idolatry, so that it was to be feared lest, through frequent dealings with those nations, they
should be estranged from the faith: hence the text goes on (Deut. 7:4): "For she will turn
away thy son from following Me."

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 10]

Whether Unbelievers May Have Authority or Dominion Over the Faithful?

Objection 1: It would seem that unbelievers may have authority or dominion over the faithful.
For the Apostle says (1 Tim. 6:1): "Whosoever are servants under the yoke, let them count their
masters worthy of all honor": and it is clear that he is speaking of unbelievers, since he
adds (1 Tim. 6:2): "But they that have believing masters, let them not despise them." Moreover
it is written (1 Pet. 2:18): "Servants be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward." Now this command would not be contained in the
apostolic teaching unless unbelievers could have authority over the faithful. Therefore it
seems that unbelievers can have authority over the faithful.

Obj. 2: Further, all the members of a prince's household are his subjects. Now some of the
faithful were members of unbelieving princes' households, for we read in the Epistle to the
Philippians (4:22): "All the saints salute you, especially they that are of Caesar's household,"
referring to Nero, who was an unbeliever. Therefore unbelievers can have authority over the
faithful.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 2) a slave is his master's instrument
in matters concerning everyday life, even as a craftsman's laborer is his instrument in matters
concerning the working of his art. Now, in such matters, a believer can be subject to an unbeliever,
for he may work on an unbeliever's farm. Therefore unbelievers may have authority over the
faithful even as to dominion.

On the contrary, Those who are in authority can pronounce judgment on those over whom they
are placed. But unbelievers cannot pronounce judgment on the faithful, for the Apostle says
(1 Cor. 6:1): "Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to be judged before the
unjust," i.e. unbelievers, "and not before the saints?" Therefore it seems that unbelievers
cannot have authority over the faithful.

I answer that, That this question may be considered in two ways. First, we may speak of dominion
or authority of unbelievers over the faithful as of a thing to be established for the first
time. This ought by no means to be allowed, since it would provoke scandal and endanger the
faith, for subjects are easily influenced by their superiors to comply with their commands,
unless the subjects are of great virtue: moreover unbelievers hold the faith in contempt, if
they see the faithful fall away. Hence the Apostle forbade the faithful to go to law before
an unbelieving judge. And so the Church altogether forbids unbelievers to acquire dominion
over believers, or to have authority over them in any capacity whatever.

Secondly, we may speak of dominion or authority, as already in force: and here we must observe
that dominion and authority are institutions of human law, while the distinction between faithful
and unbelievers arises from the Divine law. Now the Divine law which is the law of grace, does
not do away with human law which is the law of natural reason. Wherefore the distinction between
faithful and unbelievers, considered in itself, does not do away with dominion and authority
of unbelievers over the faithful.

Nevertheless this right of dominion or authority can be justly done away with by the sentence
or ordination of the Church who has the authority of God: since unbelievers in virtue of their
unbelief deserve to forfeit their power over the faithful who are converted into children of God.

This the Church does sometimes, and sometimes not. For among those unbelievers who are subject,
even in temporal matters, to the Church and her members, the Church made the law that if the
slave of a Jew became a Christian, he should forthwith receive his freedom, without paying
any price, if he should be a "vernaculus," i.e. born in slavery; and likewise if, when yet
an unbeliever, he had been bought for his service: if, however, he had been bought for sale,
then he should be offered for sale within three months. Nor does the Church harm them in this,
because since those Jews themselves are subject to the Church, she can dispose of their possessions,
even as secular princes have enacted many laws to be observed by their subjects, in favor of
liberty. On the other hand, the Church has not applied the above law to those unbelievers who
are not subject to her or her members, in temporal matters, although she has the right to do
so: and this, in order to avoid scandal, for as Our Lord showed (Matt. 17:25, 26) that He could
be excused from paying the tribute, because "the children are free," yet He ordered the tribute
to be paid in order to avoid giving scandal. Thus Paul too, after saying that servants should
honor their masters, adds, "lest the name of the Lord and His doctrine be blasphemed."

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: The authority of Caesar preceded the distinction of faithful from unbelievers.
Hence it was not cancelled by the conversion of some to the faith. Moreover it was a good thing
that there should be a few of the faithful in the emperor's household, that they might defend
the rest of the faithful. Thus the Blessed Sebastian encouraged those whom he saw faltering
under torture, and, the while, remained hidden under the military cloak in the palace of Diocletian.

Reply Obj. 3: Slaves are subject to their masters for their whole lifetime, and are subject
to their overseers in everything: whereas the craftsman's laborer is subject to him for certain
special works. Hence it would be more dangerous for unbelievers to have dominion or authority
over the faithful, than that they should be allowed to employ them in some craft. Wherefore
the Church permits Christians to work on the land of Jews, because this does not entail their
living together with them. Thus Solomon besought the King of Tyre to send master workmen to
hew the trees, as related in 3 Kings 5:6. Yet, if there be reason to fear that the faithful
will be perverted by such communications and dealings, they should be absolutely forbidden.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 11]

Whether the Rites of Unbelievers Ought to Be Tolerated?

Objection 1: It would seem that rites of unbelievers ought not to be tolerated. For it is evident
that unbelievers sin in observing their rites: and not to prevent a sin, when one can, seems
to imply consent therein, as a gloss observes on Rom. 1:32: "Not only they that do them, but
they also that consent to them that do them." Therefore it is a sin to tolerate their rites.

Obj. 2: Further, the rites of the Jews are compared to idolatry, because a gloss on Gal. 5:1,
"Be not held again under the yoke of bondage," says: "The bondage of that law was not lighter
than that of idolatry." But it would not be allowable for anyone to observe the rites of idolatry,
in fact Christian princes at first caused the temples of idols to be closed, and afterwards,
to be destroyed, as Augustine relates (De Civ. Dei xviii, 54). Therefore it follows that even
the rites of Jews ought not to be tolerated.

Obj. 3: Further, unbelief is the greatest of sins, as stated above (A. 3). Now other sins such
as adultery, theft and the like, are not tolerated, but are punishable by law. Therefore neither
ought the rites of unbelievers to be tolerated.

On the contrary, Gregory [*Regist. xi, Ep. 15: cf. Decret., dist. xlv, can., Qui sincera] says,
speaking of the Jews: "They should be allowed to observe all their feasts, just as hitherto
they and their fathers have for ages observed them."

I answer that, Human government is derived from the Divine government, and should imitate it.
Now although God is all-powerful and supremely good, nevertheless He allows certain evils to
take place in the universe, which He might prevent, lest, without them, greater goods might
be forfeited, or greater evils ensue. Accordingly in human government also, those who are in
authority, rightly tolerate certain evils, lest certain goods be lost, or certain greater evils
be incurred: thus Augustine says (De Ordine ii, 4): "If you do away with harlots, the world
will be convulsed with lust." Hence, though unbelievers sin in their rites, they may be tolerated,
either on account of some good that ensues therefrom, or because of some evil avoided. Thus
from the fact that the Jews observe their rites, which, of old, foreshadowed the truth of the
faith which we hold, there follows this good--that our very enemies bear witness to our faith,
and that our faith is represented in a figure, so to speak. For this reason they are tolerated
in the observance of their rites.

On the other hand, the rites of other unbelievers, which are neither truthful nor profitable
are by no means to be tolerated, except perchance in order to avoid an evil, e.g. the scandal
or disturbance that might ensue, or some hindrance to the salvation of those who if they were
unmolested might gradually be converted to the faith. For this reason the Church, at times,
has tolerated the rites even of heretics and pagans, when unbelievers were very numerous.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 10, Art. 12]

Whether the Children of Jews and Other Unbelievers Ought to Be Baptized Against Their Parents'
Will?

Objection 1: It would seem that the children of Jews and of other unbelievers ought to be baptized
against their parents' will. For the bond of marriage is stronger than the right of parental
authority over children, since the right of parental authority can be made to cease, when a
son is set at liberty; whereas the marriage bond cannot be severed by man, according to Matt.
19:6: "What . . . God hath joined together let no man put asunder." And yet the marriage bond
is broken on account of unbelief: for the Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:15): "If the unbeliever depart,
let him depart. For a brother or sister is not under servitude in such cases": and a canon
[*Can. Uxor legitima, and Idololatria, qu. i] says that "if the unbelieving partner is unwilling
to abide with the other, without insult to their Creator, then the other partner is not bound
to cohabitation." Much more, therefore, does unbelief abrogate the right of unbelieving parents'
authority over their children: and consequently their children may be baptized against their
parents' will.

Obj. 2: Further, one is more bound to succor a man who is in danger of everlasting death, than
one who is in danger of temporal death. Now it would be a sin, if one saw a man in danger of
temporal death and failed to go to his aid. Since, then, the children of Jews and other unbelievers
are in danger of everlasting death, should they be left to their parents who would imbue them
with their unbelief, it seems that they ought to be taken away from them and baptized, and
instructed in the faith.

Obj. 3: Further, the children of a bondsman are themselves bondsmen, and under the power of
his master. Now the Jews are bondsmen of kings and princes: therefore their children are also.
Consequently kings and princes have the power to do what they will with Jewish children. Therefore
no injustice is committed if they baptize them against their parents' wishes.

Obj. 4: Further, every man belongs more to God, from Whom he has his soul, than to his carnal
father, from whom he has his body. Therefore it is not unjust if Jewish children be taken away
from their parents, and consecrated to God in Baptism.

Obj. 5: Further, Baptism avails for salvation more than preaching does, since Baptism removes
forthwith the stain of sin and the debt of punishment, and opens the gate of heaven. Now if
danger ensue through not preaching, it is imputed to him who omitted to preach, according to
the words of Ezech. 33:6 about the man who "sees the sword coming and sounds not the trumpet."
Much more therefore, if Jewish children are lost through not being baptized are they accounted
guilty of sin, who could have baptized them and did not.

On the contrary, Injustice should be done to no man. Now it would be an injustice to Jews if
their children were to be baptized against their will, since they would lose the rights of
parental authority over their children as soon as these were Christians. Therefore these should
not be baptized against their parents' will.

I answer that, The custom of the Church has very great authority and ought to be jealously
observed in all things, since the very doctrine of catholic doctors derives its authority from
the Church. Hence we ought to abide by the authority of the Church rather than by that of an
Augustine or a Jerome or of any doctor whatever. Now it was never the custom of the Church
to baptize the children of the Jews against the will of their parents, although at times past
there have been many very powerful catholic princes like Constantine and Theodosius, with whom
most holy bishops have been on most friendly terms, as Sylvester with Constantine, and Ambrose
with Theodosius, who would certainly not have failed to obtain this favor from them if it had
been at all reasonable. It seems therefore hazardous to repeat this assertion, that the children
of Jews should be baptized against their parents' wishes, in contradiction to the Church's
custom observed hitherto.

There are two reasons for this custom. One is on account of the danger to the faith. For children
baptized before coming to the use of reason, afterwards when they come to perfect age, might
easily be persuaded by their parents to renounce what they had unknowingly embraced; and this
would be detrimental to the faith.

The other reason is that it is against natural justice. For a child is by nature part of its
father: thus, at first, it is not distinct from its parents as to its body, so long as it is
enfolded within its mother's womb; and later on after birth, and before it has the use of its
free-will, it is enfolded in the care of its parents, which is like a spiritual womb, for so
long as man has not the use of reason, he differs not from an irrational animal; so that even
as an ox or a horse belongs to someone who, according to the civil law, can use them when he
likes, as his own instrument, so, according to the natural law, a son, before coming to the
use of reason, is under his father's care. Hence it would be contrary to natural justice, if
a child, before coming to the use of reason, were to be taken away from its parents' custody,
or anything done to it against its parents' wish. As soon, however, as it begins to have the
use of its free-will, it begins to belong to itself, and is able to look after itself, in matters
concerning the Divine or the natural law, and then it should be induced, not by compulsion
but by persuasion, to embrace the faith: it can then consent to the faith, and be baptized,
even against its parents' wish; but not before it comes to the use of reason. Hence it is said
of the children of the fathers of old that they were saved in the faith of their parents; whereby
we are given to understand that it is the parents' duty to look after the salvation of their
children, especially before they come to the use of reason.

Reply Obj. 1: In the marriage bond, both husband and wife have the use of the free-will, and
each can assent to the faith without the other's consent. But this does not apply to a child
before it comes to the use of reason: yet the comparison holds good after the child has come
to the use of reason, if it is willing to be converted.

Reply Obj. 2: No one should be snatched from natural death against the order of civil law:
for instance, if a man were condemned by the judge to temporal death, nobody ought to rescue
him by violence: hence no one ought to break the order of the natural law, whereby a child
is in the custody of its father, in order to rescue it from the danger of everlasting death.

Reply Obj. 3: Jews are bondsmen of princes by civil bondage, which does not exclude the order
of natural or Divine law.

Reply Obj. 4: Man is directed to God by his reason, whereby he can know Him. Hence a child
before coming to the use of reason, in the natural order of things, is directed to God by its
parents' reason, under whose care it lies by nature: and it is for them to dispose of the child
in all matters relating to God.

Reply Obj. 5: The peril that ensues from the omission of preaching, threatens only those who
are entrusted with the duty of preaching. Hence it had already been said (Ezech. 3:17): "I
have made thee a watchman to the children [Vulg.: 'house'] of Israel." On the other hand, to
provide the sacraments of salvation for the children of unbelievers is the duty of their parents. What
excited the rage of the Athenians against Socrates was his endeavor to detach religion from the
images of the gods.

When it comes to comparisons between meaning and expression, as adequate
or inadequate, it is evident their unity is gone;--the meaning is
first, and the expression only adjunct or illustration.

It did not impair the sacredness of the Greek deities that they were
the work of the poets and sculptors.

But the second Nicene Council forbade as impious any images of Christ
as God, and allowed only his human nature to be represented,--a strange
decree, if the Church had realized its own doctrine, that the humanity
of Christ is as real as his divinity.

But the meaning is, that the finite is not there to stand for the
infinite, but only to indicate it negatively and indirectly,--that
its glory is not to persist in its finiteness, not to hold on to its
form, but to be transformed.

The figure of Thersites would be very unsuitable for Achilles, but
is suitable enough for a saint; it was a pardonable exaggeration to
make it even more suitable.

The hero is now the saint; the ideal life a life of poverty, humility,
weakness, labor,--to be long-suffering, to despise and forsake the
world.

The present life, the heaven of Achilles, is now Hades, the forced
abode of phantoms having no reality but what is given to them by religion,
and the Hades of the Greek the only true and substantial world.

The new church fled the light of the sun, and sought impatiently to bury itself in the tomb.
The Roman catacombs were not the mere refuge of a persecuted sect,--their use as places of worship continued
long after such need had ceased. But "among the graves" they found the point nearest to the
happy land beyond, and the silence and the darkness made it easier to ignore for the few miserable
moments that yet remained the vain tumult of the surface. In such a mood the beauty of the outward
could awaken no delight, but only suspicion and aversion. Not the earth and its glories, but the
fading of these before the unseen and eternal, was the only possible
inspiration of Art.

The extreme of this direction we see in the Iconoclasm of the eighth century, but it has never completely
died out. Gibbon tells us of a Greek priest who refused to receive some pictures that Titian
had painted for him, because they were too real:--"Your scandalous figures," said he, "stand
quite out from the canvas; they are as bad as a group of statues." It is a tenderness towards
the idea, lest it should be dishonored by actuality. Matter is gross, obscure, evil, an obstacle
to spirit,--and material existence tolerable only as momentary, vanishing, and, as it were,
under constant protest, and with the suspicion that the Devil has
a hand in it.

It belongs especially to the Oriental mind, and its logical result is the Buddhist heaven of
annihilation.

The defect of this view is not that it is too ideal, but that it is not ideal enough. It is an incomplete
idealism that through weakness of faith does not hold fast its own
point of view, and so does not dispose of matter, but leaves it outside,
as negation, obstacle.

The body is allowed to exist, but remains in disgrace and reduced to the barest indication.
But it is honoring matter far too much to allow that it can be an obstacle. It is no obstacle,
for it is nothing of itself.

Rightly understood, this contempt of the body is directed only against the false emphasis placed
upon single aspects or manifestations. It is a feeling that the true ideal is not thus shut up in a
forced exception, as if it were the subtilized product of a distillation whereby the earthly
is to be purged of its dross; but that it is the all-pervading reality, which the finite can
neither hinder nor help, but only obey, which death and corruption
praise, which establishes itself through imperfection and transience.

Such comparisons mistake the point. These are not parallel attempts, but opposed from the
outset. The "Catholic image" was a declaration that the problem cannot be solved in that way.
An early legend relates, that a painter, undertaking to copy his Christ from a statue of Jove,
had his hand suddenly withered. The attempt is accused because of the pretence it makes to
coordinate body and spirit, Nature and God,--as if one configuration
of matter were more godlike than another.

The figure of the god claims to complete what Nature has partly done. But now the world is seen
to be not merely the product of Mind working upon Matter, but the Creation of God out of nothing,--thus
altogether His, in one part as much as in another. The only conceivable separateness, antagonism,
is that of the sinful Will, setting itself up in its vanity; this it must be that arrogates
to itself the ability to represent its Creator.

The Christian image is without form or comeliness,--rejects all outward graces, seemingly glories
in abasement and deformity, fearing only to attribute to Matter some
value of its own.

Henceforth the connection is no longer at arm's-length, as of the workman and the material. Resistance
to limitation is changed into joyful acceptance; for it is not in the limitation, but in the
resistance, that the misery of earth consists. The quarrel with imperfection is over. The finite
shall neither fortify itself in its finiteness, nor seek to abolish it, but only make it the
willing instrument of universal ends. Thus the true self first exists, and no longer needs to be
extenuated or apologised for.

Here we have in its compactest expression the difference between this age and the classic: that
I, the vilest of sinners, am the object of God's highest care,--not the failure and mistake
I seem, not the slag and refuse of Nature's working, but the object of this most stupendous mystery
of the Divine economy. It is no purification or idealizing that is needed,--any such attempt must
be abomination,--but a new birth of the self, by devotion of it to the purpose for which it
was made.

The astounding discovery is slowly realized, and the statement of it difficult, from the need
to distinguish between the true self and the false, and to declare
that this importance belongs to the individual in virtue of his spiritual
nature alone.

The sainthood of the saint is not to be confounded with his personality.

What have his virtues to do with his gown and shoes? what, indeed,
with his natural disposition, as courageous, irascible, avaricious?

The difficulty is pervading, not to be avoided; every aspect of him reveals only what is external,
dies from him daily, and, if isolated, has already lost its meaning. It is only in his work,
in his connection with the world, that we see him truly. Accordingly, the statue becomes the
group, and the group a member of a series, a cycle in which each
is incomplete without the rest.

The classic ideal is shivered into fragments, all to be taken together to make up the meaning. Of
the hundreds of statues and reliefs that surround the great Northern cathedrals, (Didron counts
eighteen hundred upon the outside of Chartres,--nine thousand in all, carved or painted, inside
and outside,) each has its appointed place in the sacred epos in stone that unfolds about the
building from left to right of the beholder the history of the world from the Creation to
the Judgment, and subordinated in parallel symbolism the daily life of the community, whatever
occupied and interested men,--their virtues and vices, trades and
recreations, the seasons and the elements, jokes, even, and sharp
hits at the great and at the clergy, scenes from popular romances,
and the radicalism of Reynard the Fox,--in short, all that touched
the mind of the age, an impartial reflex of the great drama of life,
wherein all exists alike to the glory of God.

It is not the glory of earth that is here celebrated. M. Didron says the statues which the mob
pulled down from the churches, at the first French Revolution, as
the images of their kings, were the kings and heroes of the Old Testament.

Had they known this, it might not have saved the statues, but it shows how wide a gulf separated
these men from their fathers, that their hands were not held by some instinct that here was the
first hint of the fundamental idea of Democracy,--the sovereign importance of man, not as powerful,
wise, beautiful, not in virtue of any chance advantage of birth, but in virtue of his religious
nature, of the infinite possibilities he infolds.

The need to indicate that the source of value is not the accident of Nature, but Nature redeemed,
regenerated by spirit, that all values are moral values, led to a certain abstractness of
treatment,--on one side qualities to be embodied, on the other figures to receive them, so that
the character seems adventitious, detachable, not thoroughly at one with the form. For instance, the
fiends in the Orvieto Inferno are not terror embodied, as the Jove
of Phidias embodied dignity and command; but the terrific is accumulated
on the outside of them, as tusks, claws, etc. One can easily believe
that the ancient sculptors, had it been lawful, could have put more
horror into the calm features of a Medusa than is contained in all
this apparatus and grimace.

The concreteness of the antique, the form and meaning existing only for each other, is gone;
the union is occasional only, and needs to be certified and kept up afresh on every new occasion.
The form must assert itself, must show itself alive and quick, not the dead sign of a meaning
that has fled. It would have been a poor compliment to a Greek sculptor to say that his work
was life-like; he might answer with the classically disposed visitor
of the Elgin marbles in Haydon's anecdote,--"Like life!

Well, what of that?" He meant it for something much better. But during the Middle Ages this
is constantly the highest encomium. Amid the utmost rudeness of conception and of execution, we
see the first trace of awakening Art in the unmistakable effort to
indicate that the figures are alive; and in the cathedral-sculpture
of the best time this is still a leading characteristic.

Even the single statues have for their outlines curves of contrary flexure, expressing motion;
they seem to wave in the air, and their faces to glow with passing emotion. The animals are often
uncouth, but the more life-like; a turn of the head or of the eye, a restless, unbalanced
attitude, brings us nearer to the actual living creature than the magnificent repose of the antique
lions and eagles,--as if they did not trust to our recognizing their character, but were prepared
to demonstrate it with beak and claws. Even in the plants, though strictly conventionalized,
it is the freedom and spring of their lines that more than anything else characterizes them
and defies copying.

The world of matter, being no longer endowed with independent reality,
is no longer felt as a contamination incurred by the idea in its descent
into existence.

The discrepancy is not final, so that the supremacy of the spirit is not shown by resistance,
but by taking it to heart, carrying it out, and thereby overcoming it. In a Crucifixion of
the twelfth century, Life is figured on one side crowned and victorious, and on the other Death
overcome and slain. The finiteness of the finite is not the barrier, but the liberation, of
the infinite.

But the statue remains stone; this unmeaning emphasis of weight and bulk, though diminished,
is not to be got rid of. The life that sculpture can give is superficial and abstract, does not
penetrate and possess the work; it is still the petrifaction of an instant, that does not instantly
pass away, but remains as a contradiction to the next. It is the struggle against this fixity
that gives to the sculpture of the Renaissance its aspect of unrest, of disdain of the present,
of endless unsatisfied search. Hence the air of conflict that we see in Giovanni Pisano, and
still more in later times,--the sculptor going to the edge of what the stone will allow, and
beyond it, and, still unsatisfied, seeking through all means to indicate a yet unexecuted possibility.
It is this that seethes in those strange, intense, unearthly figures of Donatello's, wasted as
by internal fire,--the rage for an expression that shall at the same time declare its own insufficiency.

All
that is done only makes the failure more evident. The fixity continues, and is only deepened into
contortion and grimace. What we see is the effort alone. Hence in modern statues the uneasy, self-distrustful
appeal to the spectator, in place of the lofty indifference of the
antique.

In Michel Angelo the same striving to indicate something in reserve,
not expended, led to the exaggerated emphasis of certain parts, (as
the length of the neck, depth of the eye-sockets, etc.,) and of general
muscularity,--a show of force, that gave to the Moses the build of
a Titan, and to the Christ of the Last Judgment the air of a gladiator.

Michel Angelo often seems immersed in mere anatomy and academic tours
de force, especially in his later works.

He seems to see in the subject only a fresh problem in attitude, foreshortening, muscular display,--and
this not only where he invents, but also where he borrows,--sometimes most strangely overlooking
the sentiment; as in the figure of Christ, which he borrows from Orcagna and the older painters,
even to the position of the arms, but with the touching gesture of reproof perverted into a savage
menace; or in the Expulsion, taken almost line for line from Masaccio,
but with the infinite grief expressed in Adam's figure turned into
melodrama by showing his face.

It was not for the delight of the eye, nor from over-reverence of the matter-of-fact. He despised
the copying of models, as the makeshift of ignorance.

His profound study of anatomy was not for greater accuracy of imitation, but for greater license
of invention. Of grace and pleasingness he became more and more careless, until he who at twenty
had carved the lovely angel of S. Domenico, came at last to make
all his men prize-fighters and his women viragos.

It is clear that we nowhere get his final meaning,--that he does not fairly get to his theme
at all, but is stopped at the outset, and loses himself in the search
for a mode of expression more adequate to that "immense beauty" ever
present to his mind,--so that the matter in hand occupies him only
in its superficial aspects.

What he sought on all hands, in his endless questioning of the human frame, his impatience
of drapery, the furious haste to reach the live surface, and the tender modulation of it when
it is reached, was to make the flesh itself speak and reveal the soul present at all points
alike and at once. Nothing could have satisfied him but to impart to the marble itself that
omnipresence of spirit of which animal life furnishes the hint. In this Titanic attempt the
means were in open and direct contradiction to the end. It was a violation of the wise moderation
of Sculpture, whose rigid and colorless material pointedly declines a rivalry it could not sustain.
Else why not color the stone?

The hue of flesh is the most direct assertion of life, but at the same time a direct negative to
that totality and emphasis of the particular shape on which Sculpture relies. The color of the
flesh comes from its transparency to the circulation,--the eternal flux of matter coming to
the surface in this its highest form. It is the display in matter itself of what its true nature
is,--not to resist, but to embody change,--to reduce itself to mere appearance, and be taken up
without residuum in the momentary manifestation, and then at once give place to fresh manifestations.

That
the earlier practice of coloring statues was given up just when the need would seem to be the
greatest shows its incompatibility with the fundamental conditions of the art. In the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries statues were still painted and gilded.

Afterwards, color is restricted to parts not directly affected by the circulation, the hair and
the eyes; and at last, when Sculpture is given over to pictorial effect and is about to yield
entirely to Painting, it is wholly relinquished.

Evidently it was felt that to color a statue in imitation of flesh would only enforce the fact
that it is stone.

What Art was now aiming at was not the mere appearance of life, but a unity like that which
life gives, in place of the abstractness and partiality inherent in Sculpture. This makes the
interest of the fact of life,--that it is the presence of the soul,--the
unity established amid the sundered particularity of matter.

In free motion a new centre is declared, whereby the inertia of the body, its gravitation to
a centre outside of it, is set aside. In sensibility this new centre declares itself supreme, superseding
the passive indifference of extension. The whole pervades each part, each testifies to the
whole and may stand for it. But the statue, having no such internal unity, is less able to dispense
with outward completeness. All the sides must be given, so that the whole cannot be seen at
one view, but only successively, as an aggregate.

In the earlier Greek statues the head remains lifeless, abstract,
whilst the limbs are full of expression.

In a contrary spirit, more akin to modern ideas, the Norse myth relates that Skadi, having her
choice of a husband from among all the gods, but having to choose by the feet alone, meaning to
take Baldur, got by mistake Niordr, an inferior deity. This does not seem so strange to us;
but a Greek would have wondered that the daughter of a wise Titan should not know the feet of Apollo
from those of Nereus. It was said of Taglioni that she put mind into her legs. But to the modern
way of thinking this is clearly exceptional. It is in the face, and especially in the eye, that we
look to see the soul present and at work, and not merely in its effects
as character.

As types of character, the lineaments of the face were explored by the later Greek Art as profoundly
as the rest of the body. But the statue is sightless,--its eyes do not meet ours, but seem forever
brooding over a world into which the present and its interests do not enter. To the Greek this
was no defect; but to us the omission seems to affect the most vital
point of all, since our conception of the soul involves its eternity,
that is, that it lives always in the present, is not too fine to exist,
secure that it is bound neither by past nor future, but capable of
revolutionizing the character at all moments.

Here is the ground of the remarkable difference that meets us already in the reliefs of the later
classic times. In the reliefs of the best age the figures are always
in profile and in action.

Complete personification being out of the question, it is expressly avoided,--each figure waives
attention to itself, merges itself in the plot. Later, when the profounder idea of a personality
that does not isolate or degrade has begun to make itself felt, this
constraint is given up,--the figures face the spectator, and enter
as it were into relation with the actual world.

The Church very early expressed this feeling of the higher significance of the head, by allowing
it to be sufficient if the head alone were buried in holy ground.


Reply Obj. 2: Our Lord was speaking to Peter of sins committed against oneself, for one should
always forgive such offenses and spare our brother when he repents. These words are not to
be applied to sins committed against one's neighbor or against God, for it is not left to our
discretion to forgive such offenses, as Jerome says on Matt. 18:15, "If thy brother shall offend
against thee." Yet even in this matter the law prescribes limits according as God's honor or
our neighbor's good demands.

Reply Obj. 3: When other unbelievers, who have never received the faith are converted, they
do not as yet show signs of inconstancy in faith, as relapsed heretics do; hence the comparison
fails.

QUESTION 12

OF APOSTASY (In Two Articles)

We must now consider apostasy: about which there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether apostasy pertains to unbelief?

(2) Whether, on account of apostasy from the faith, subjects are absolved from allegiance to
an apostate prince?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 12, Art. 1]

Whether Apostasy Pertains to Unbelief?

Objection 1: It would seem that apostasy does not pertain to unbelief. For that which is the
origin of all sins, does not, seemingly, pertain to unbelief, since many sins there are without
unbelief. Now apostasy seems to be the origin of every sin, for it is written (Ecclus. 10:14):
"The beginning of the pride of man is apostasy [Douay: 'to fall off'] from God," and further
on, (Ecclus. 10:15): "Pride is the beginning of all sin." Therefore apostasy does not pertain
to unbelief.

Obj. 2: Further, unbelief is an act of the understanding: whereas apostasy seems rather to
consist in some outward deed or utterance, or even in some inward act of the will, for it is
written (Prov. 6:12-14): "A man that is an apostate, an unprofitable man walketh with a perverse
mouth. He winketh with the eyes, presseth with the foot, speaketh with the finger. With a wicked
heart he deviseth evil, and at all times he soweth discord." Moreover if anyone were to have
himself circumcised, or to worship at the tomb of Mahomet, he would be deemed an apostate.
Therefore apostasy does not pertain to unbelief.

Obj. 3: Further, heresy, since it pertains to unbelief, is a determinate species of unbelief.
If then, apostasy pertained to unbelief, it would follow that it is a determinate species of
unbelief, which does not seem to agree with what has been said (Q. 10, A. 5). Therefore apostasy
does not pertain to unbelief.

On the contrary, It is written (John 6:67): "Many of his disciples went back," i.e. apostatized,
of whom Our Lord had said previously (John 6:65): "There are some of you that believe not."
Therefore apostasy pertains to unbelief.

I answer that, Apostasy denotes a backsliding from God. This may happen in various ways according
to the different kinds of union between man and God. For, in the first place, man is united
to God by faith; secondly, by having his will duly submissive in obeying His commandments;
thirdly, by certain special things pertaining to supererogation such as the religious life,
the clerical state, or Holy Orders. Now if that which follows be removed, that which precedes,
remains, but the converse does not hold. Accordingly a man may apostatize from God, by withdrawing
from the religious life to which he was bound by profession, or from the Holy Order which he
had received: and this is called "apostasy from religious life" or "Orders." A man may also
apostatize from God, by rebelling in his mind against the Divine commandments: and though man
may apostatize in both the above ways, he may still remain united to God by faith.

But if he give up the faith, then he seems to turn away from God altogether: and consequently,
apostasy simply and absolutely is that whereby a man withdraws from the faith, and is called
"apostasy of perfidy." In this way apostasy, simply so called, pertains to unbelief.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection refers to the second kind of apostasy, which denotes an act of
the will in rebellion against God's commandments, an act that is to be found in every mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 2: It belongs to faith not only that the heart should believe, but also that external
words and deeds should bear witness to the inward faith, for confession is an act of faith.
In this way too, certain external words or deeds pertain to unbelief, in so far as they are
signs of unbelief, even as a sign of health is said itself to be healthy. Now although the
authority quoted may be understood as referring to every kind of apostate, yet it applies most
truly to an apostate from the faith. For since faith is the first foundation of things to be
hoped for, and since, without faith it is "impossible to please God"; when once faith is removed,
man retains nothing that may be useful for the obtaining of eternal salvation, for which reason
it is written (Prov. 6:12): "A man that is an apostate, an unprofitable man": because faith
is the life of the soul, according to Rom. 1:17: "The just man liveth by faith." Therefore,
just as when the life of the body is taken away, man's every member and part loses its due
disposition, so when the life of justice, which is by faith, is done away, disorder appears
in all his members. First, in his mouth, whereby chiefly his mind stands revealed; secondly,
in his eyes; thirdly, in the instrument of movement; fourthly, in his will, which tends to
evil. The result is that "he sows discord," endeavoring to sever others from the faith even
as he severed himself.

Reply Obj. 3: The species of a quality or form are not diversified by the fact of its being
the term wherefrom or whereto of movement: on the contrary, it is the movement that takes its
species from the terms. Now apostasy regards unbelief as the term whereto of the movement of
withdrawal from the faith; wherefore apostasy does not imply a special kind of unbelief, but
an aggravating circumstance thereof, according to 2 Pet. 2:21: "It had been better for them
not to know the truth [Vulg.: 'the way of justice'], than after they had known it, to turn back."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 12, Art. 2]

Whether a Prince Forfeits His Dominion Over His Subjects, on Account of Apostasy from the Faith,
So That They No Longer Owe Him Allegiance? For Ambrose [*St. Augustine, Super Ps. 124:3] says
that the Emperor Julian, though an apostate, nevertheless had under him Christian soldiers,
who when he said to them, "Fall into line for the defense of the republic," were bound to obey.
Therefore subjects are not absolved from their allegiance to their prince on account of his
apostasy.

Obj. 2: Further, an apostate from the faith is an unbeliever. Now we find that certain holy
men served unbelieving masters; thus Joseph served Pharaoh, Daniel served Nabuchodonosor, and
Mardochai served Assuerus. Therefore apostasy from the faith does not release subjects from
allegiance to their sovereign.

Obj. 3: Further, just as by apostasy from the faith, a man turns away from God, so does every
sin. Consequently if, on account of apostasy from the faith, princes were to lose their right
to command those of their subjects who are believers, they would equally lose it on account
of other sins: which is evidently not the case. Therefore we ought not to refuse allegiance
to a sovereign on account of his apostatizing from the faith.

On the contrary, Gregory VII says (Council, Roman V): "Holding to the institutions of our holy
predecessors, we, by our apostolic authority, absolve from their oath those who through loyalty
or through the sacred bond of an oath owe allegiance to excommunicated persons: and we absolutely
forbid them to continue their allegiance to such persons, until these shall have made amends."
Now apostates from the faith, like heretics, are excommunicated, according to the Decretal
[*Extra, De Haereticis, cap. Ad abolendam]. Therefore princes should not be obeyed when they
have apostatized from the faith.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 10, A. 10), unbelief, in itself, is not inconsistent with
dominion, since dominion is a device of the law of nations which is a human law: whereas the
distinction between believers and unbelievers is of Divine right, which does not annul human
right. Nevertheless a man who sins by unbelief may be sentenced to the loss of his right of
dominion, as also, sometimes, on account of other sins.

Now it is not within the competency of the Church to punish unbelief in those who have never
received the faith, according to the saying of the Apostle (1 Cor. 5:12): "What have I to do
to judge them that are without?" She can, however, pass sentence of punishment on the unbelief
of those who have received the faith: and it is fitting that they should be punished by being
deprived of the allegiance of their subjects: for this same allegiance might conduce to great
corruption of the faith, since, as was stated above (A. 1, Obj. 2), "a man that is an apostate
. . . with a wicked heart deviseth evil, and . . . soweth discord," in order to sever others
from the faith. Consequently, as soon as sentence of excommunication is passed on a man on
account of apostasy from the faith, his subjects are "ipso facto" absolved from his authority
and from the oath of allegiance whereby they were bound to him.

Reply Obj. 1: At that time the Church was but recently instituted, and had not, as yet, the
power of curbing earthly princes; and so she allowed the faithful to obey Julian the apostate,
in matters that were not contrary to the faith, in order to avoid incurring a yet greater danger.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated in the article, it is not a question of those unbelievers who have
never received the faith.

Reply Obj. 3: Apostasy from the faith severs man from God altogether, as stated above (A. 1),
which is not the case in any other sin.

QUESTION 13

OF THE SIN OF BLASPHEMY, IN GENERAL (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the sin of blasphemy, which is opposed to the confession of faith; and
(1) blasphemy in general, (2) that blasphemy which is called the sin against the Holy Ghost.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether blasphemy is opposed to the confession of faith?

(2) Whether blasphemy is always a mortal sin?

(3) Whether blasphemy is the most grievous sin?

(4) Whether blasphemy is in the damned?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 13, Art. 1]

Whether Blasphemy Is Opposed to the Confession of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that blasphemy is not opposed to the confession of faith. Because
to blaspheme is to utter an affront or insult against the Creator. Now this pertains to ill-will
against God rather than to unbelief. Therefore blasphemy is not opposed to the confession of faith.

Obj. 2: Further, on Eph. 4:31, "Let blasphemy . . . be put away from you," a gloss says, "that
which is committed against God or the saints." But confession of faith, seemingly, is not about
other things than those pertaining to God, Who is the object of faith. Therefore blasphemy
is not always opposed to the confession of faith.

Obj. 3: Further, according to some, there are three kinds of blasphemy. The first of these
is when something unfitting is affirmed of God; the second is when something fitting is denied
of Him; and the third, when something proper to God is ascribed to a creature, so that, seemingly,
blasphemy is not only about God, but also about His creatures. Now the object of faith is God.
Therefore blasphemy is not opposed to confession of faith. Hence it seems that blasphemy pertains
to unbelief.

I answer that, The word blasphemy seems to denote the disparagement of some surpassing goodness,
especially that of God. Now God, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i), is the very essence of true
goodness. Hence whatever befits God, pertains to His goodness, and whatever does not befit
Him, is far removed from the perfection of goodness which is His Essence. Consequently whoever
either denies anything befitting God, or affirms anything unbefitting Him, disparages the Divine
goodness.

Now this may happen in two ways. In the first way it may happen merely in respect of the opinion
in the intellect; in the second way this opinion is united to a certain detestation in the
affections, even as, on the other hand, faith in God is perfected by love of Him. Accordingly
this disparagement of the Divine goodness is either in the intellect alone, or in the affections
also. If it is in thought only, it is blasphemy of the heart, whereas if it betrays itself
outwardly in speech it is blasphemy of the tongue. It is in this sense that blasphemy is opposed
to confession of faith.

Reply Obj. 1: He that speaks against God, with the intention of reviling Him, disparages the
Divine goodness, not only in respect of the falsehood in his intellect, but also by reason
of the wickedness of his will, whereby he detests and strives to hinder the honor due to God,
and this is perfect blasphemy.

Reply Obj. 2: Even as God is praised in His saints, in so far as praise is given to the works
which God does in His saints, so does blasphemy against the saints, redound, as a consequence,
against God.

Reply Obj. 3: Properly speaking, the sin of blasphemy is not in this way divided into three
species: since to affirm unfitting things, or to deny fitting things of God, differ merely
as affirmation and negation. For this diversity does not cause distinct species of habits,
since the falsehood of affirmations and negations is made known by the same knowledge, and
it is the same ignorance which errs in either way, since negatives are proved by affirmatives,
according to Poster. i, 25. Again to ascribe to creatures things that are proper to God, seems
to amount to the same as affirming something unfitting of Him, since whatever is proper to
God is God Himself: and to ascribe to a creature, that which is proper to God, is to assert
that God is the same as a creature.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 13, Art. 2]

Whether Blasphemy Is Always a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that blasphemy is not always a mortal sin. Because a gloss on the
words, "Now lay you also all away," etc. (Col. 3:8) says: "After prohibiting greater crimes
he forbids lesser sins": and yet among the latter he includes blasphemy. Therefore blasphemy
is comprised among the lesser, i.e. venial, sins.

Obj. 2: Further, every mortal sin is opposed to one of the precepts of the decalogue. But,
seemingly, blasphemy is not contrary to any of them. Therefore blasphemy is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, sins committed without deliberation, are not mortal: hence first movements
are not mortal sins, because they precede the deliberation of the reason, as was shown above
(I-II, Q. 74, AA. 3, 10). Now blasphemy sometimes occurs without deliberation of the reason.
Therefore it is not always a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 24:16): "He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying
let him die." Now the death punishment is not inflicted except for a mortal sin. Therefore
blasphemy is a mortal sin.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 72, A. 5), a mortal sin is one whereby a man is severed
from the first principle of spiritual life, which principle is the charity of God. Therefore
whatever things are contrary to charity, are mortal sins in respect of their genus. Now blasphemy,
as to its genus, is opposed to Divine charity, because, as stated above (A. 1), it disparages
the Divine goodness, which is the object of charity. Consequently blasphemy is a mortal sin,
by reason of its genus.

Reply Obj. 1: This gloss is not to be understood as meaning that all the sins which follow,
are mortal, but that whereas all those mentioned previously are more grievous sins, some of
those mentioned afterwards are less grievous; and yet among the latter some more grievous sins
are included.

Reply Obj. 2: Since, as stated above (A. 1), blasphemy is contrary to the confession of faith,
its prohibition is comprised under the prohibition of unbelief, expressed by the words: "I
am the Lord thy God," etc. (Ex. 20:1). Or else, it is forbidden by the words: "Thou shalt not
take the name of . . . God in vain" (Ex. 20:7). Because he who asserts something false about
God, takes His name in vain even more than he who uses the name of God in confirmation of a
falsehood.

Reply Obj. 3: There are two ways in which blasphemy may occur unawares and without deliberation.
In the first way, by a man failing to advert to the blasphemous nature of his words, and this
may happen through his being moved suddenly by passion so as to break out into words suggested
by his imagination, without heeding to the meaning of those words: this is a venial sin, and
is not a blasphemy properly so called. In the second way, by adverting to the meaning of his
words, and to their blasphemous nature: in which case he is not excused from mortal sin, even
as neither is he who, in a sudden movement of anger, kills one who is sitting beside him.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 13, Art. 3]

Whether the Sin of Blasphemy Is the Greatest Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of blasphemy is not the greatest sin. For, according
to Augustine (Enchiridion xii), a thing is said to be evil because it does harm. Now the sin
of murder, since it destroys a man's life, does more harm than the sin of blasphemy, which
can do no harm to God. Therefore the sin of murder is more grievous than that of blasphemy.

Obj. 2: Further, a perjurer calls upon God to witness to a falsehood, and thus seems to assert
that God is false. But not every blasphemer goes so far as to say that God is false. Therefore
perjury is a more grievous sin than blasphemy.

Obj. 3: Further, on Ps. 74:6, "Lift not up your horn on high," a gloss says: "To excuse oneself
for sin is the greatest sin of all." Therefore blasphemy is not the greatest sin.

On the contrary, On Isa. 18:2, "To a terrible people," etc. a gloss says: "In comparison with
blasphemy, every sin is slight."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), blasphemy is opposed to the confession of faith, so
that it contains the gravity of unbelief: while the sin is aggravated if the will's detestation
is added thereto, and yet more, if it breaks out into words, even as love and confession add
to the praise of faith.

Therefore, since, as stated above (Q. 10, A. 3), unbelief is the greatest of sins in respect
of its genus, it follows that blasphemy also is a very great sin, through belonging to the
same genus as unbelief and being an aggravated form of that sin.

Reply Obj. 1: If we compare murder and blasphemy as regards the objects of those sins, it is
clear that blasphemy, which is a sin committed directly against God, is more grave than murder,
which is a sin against one's neighbor. On the other hand, if we compare them in respect of
the harm wrought by them, murder is the graver sin, for murder does more harm to one's neighbor,
than blasphemy does to God. Since, however, the gravity of a sin depends on the intention of
the evil will, rather than on the effect of the deed, as was shown above (I-II, Q. 73, A. 8),
it follows that, as the blasphemer intends to do harm to God's honor, absolutely speaking,
he sins more grievously that the murderer. Nevertheless murder takes precedence, as to punishment,
among sins committed against our neighbor.

Reply Obj. 2: A gloss on the words, "Let . . . blasphemy be put away from you" (Eph. 4:31)
says: "Blasphemy is worse than perjury." The reason is that the perjurer does not say or think
something false about God, as the blasphemer does: but he calls God to witness to a falsehood,
not that he deems God a false witness, but in the hope, as it were, that God will not testify
to the matter by some evident sign.

Reply Obj. 3: To excuse oneself for sin is a circumstance that aggravates every sin, even blasphemy
itself: and it is called the most grievous sin, for as much as it makes every sin more grievous.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 13, Art. 4]

Whether the Damned Blaspheme?

Objection 1: It would seem that the damned do not blaspheme. Because some wicked men are deterred
from blaspheming now, on account of the fear of future punishment. But the damned are undergoing
these punishments, so that they abhor them yet more. Therefore, much more are they restrained
from blaspheming.

Obj. 2: Further, since blasphemy is a most grievous sin, it is most demeritorious. Now in the
life to come there is no state of meriting or demeriting. Therefore there will be no place
for blasphemy.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Eccles. 11:3) that "the tree . . . in what place soever it
shall fall, there shall it be": whence it clearly follows that, after this life, man acquires
neither merit nor sin, which he did not already possess in this life. Now many will be damned
who were not blasphemous in this life. Neither, therefore, will they blaspheme in the life to come.

On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. Now this would be blasphemy in their present state: and
consequently it will also be in their future state.

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 1, 3), detestation of the Divine goodness is a necessary
condition of blasphemy. Now those who are in hell retain their wicked will which is turned
away from God's justice, since they love the things for which they are punished, would wish
to use them if they could, and hate the punishments inflicted on them for those same sins.
They regret indeed the sins which they have committed, not because they hate them, but because
they are punished for them. Accordingly this detestation of the Divine justice is, in them,
the interior blasphemy of the heart: and it is credible that after the resurrection they will
blaspheme God with the tongue, even as the saints will praise Him with their voices.

Reply Obj. 1: In the present life men are deterred from blasphemy through fear of punishment
which they think they can escape: whereas, in hell, the damned have no hope of escape, so that,
in despair, they are borne towards whatever their wicked will suggests to them.

Reply Obj. 2: Merit and demerit belong to the state of a wayfarer, wherefore good is meritorious
in them, while evil is demeritorious. In the blessed, on the other hand, good is not meritorious,
but is part of their blissful reward, and, in like manner, in the damned, evil is not demeritorious,
but is part of the punishment of damnation.

Reply Obj. 3: Whoever dies in mortal sin, bears with him a will that detests the Divine justice
with regard to a certain thing, and in this respect there can be blasphemy in him.

QUESTION 14

OF BLASPHEMY AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST (In Four Articles)

We must now consider in particular blasphemy against the Holy Ghost: under which head there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether blasphemy or the sin against the Holy Ghost is the same as the sin committed through
certain malice?

(2) Of the species of this sin;

(3) Whether it can be forgiven?

(4) Whether it is possible to begin by sinning against the Holy Ghost before committing other sins?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 14, Art. 1]

Whether the Sin Against the Holy Ghost Is the Same As the Sin Committed Through Certain Malice?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin against the Holy Ghost is not the same as the sin committed
through certain malice. Because the sin against the Holy Ghost is the sin of blasphemy, according
to Matt. 12:32. But not every sin committed through certain malice is a sin of blasphemy: since
many other kinds of sin may be committed through certain malice. Therefore the sin against
the Holy Ghost is not the same as the sin committed through certain malice.

Obj. 2: Further, the sin committed through certain malice is condivided with sin committed
through ignorance, and sin committed through weakness: whereas the sin against the Holy Ghost
is condivided with the sin against the Son of Man (Matt. 12:32). Therefore the sin against
the Holy Ghost is not the same as the sin committed through certain malice, since things whose
opposites differ, are themselves different.

Obj. 3: Further, the sin against the Holy Ghost is itself a generic sin, having its own determinate
species: whereas sin committed through certain malice is not a special kind of sin, but a condition
or general circumstance of sin, which can affect any kind of sin at all. Therefore the sin
against the Holy Ghost is not the same as the sin committed through certain malice.

On the contrary, The Master says (Sent. ii, D, 43) that "to sin against the Holy Ghost is to
take pleasure in the malice of sin for its own sake." Now this is to sin through certain malice.
Therefore it seems that the sin committed through certain malice is the same as the sin against
the Holy Ghost.

I answer that, Three meanings have been given to the sin against the Holy Ghost. For the earlier
doctors, viz. Athanasius (Super Matth. xii, 32), Hilary (Can. xii in Matth.), Ambrose (Super
Luc. xii, 10), Jerome (Super Matth. xii), and Chrysostom (Hom. xli in Matth.), say that the
sin against the Holy Ghost is literally to utter a blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, whether
by Holy Spirit we understand the essential name applicable to the whole Trinity, each Person
of which is a Spirit and is holy, or the personal name of one of the Persons of the Trinity,
in which sense blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is distinct from the blasphemy against the
Son of Man (Matt. 12:32), for Christ did certain things in respect of His human nature, by
eating, drinking, and such like actions, while He did others in respect of His Godhead, by
casting out devils, raising the dead, and the like: which things He did both by the power of
His own Godhead and by the operation of the Holy Ghost, of Whom He was full, according to his
human nature. Now the Jews began by speaking blasphemy against the Son of Man, when they said
(Matt. 11:19) that He was "a glutton . . . a wine drinker," and a "friend of publicans": but
afterwards they blasphemed against the Holy Ghost, when they ascribed to the prince of devils
those works which Christ did by the power of His own Divine Nature and by the operation of
the Holy Ghost.

Augustine, however (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi), says that blasphemy or the sin against the
Holy Ghost, is final impenitence when, namely, a man perseveres in mortal sin until death,
and that it is not confined to utterance by word of mouth, but extends to words in thought
and deed, not to one word only, but to many. Now this word, in this sense, is said to be uttered
against the Holy Ghost, because it is contrary to the remission of sins, which is the work
of the Holy Ghost, Who is the charity both of the Father and of the Son. Nor did Our Lord say
this to the Jews, as though they had sinned against the Holy Ghost, since they were not yet
guilty of final impenitence, but He warned them, lest by similar utterances they should come
to sin against the Holy Ghost: and it is in this sense that we are to understand Mark 3:29,
30, where after Our Lord had said: "But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost," etc.
the Evangelist adds, "because they said: He hath an unclean spirit."

But others understand it differently, and say that the sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost,
is a sin committed against that good which is appropriated to the Holy Ghost: because goodness
is appropriated to the Holy Ghost, just a power is appropriated to the Father, and wisdom to
the Son. Hence they say that when a man sins through weakness, it is a sin "against the Father";
that when he sins through ignorance, it is a sin "against the Son"; and that when he sins through
certain malice, i.e. through the very choosing of evil, as explained above (I-II, Q. 78, AA.
1, 3), it is a sin "against the Holy Ghost."

Now this may happen in two ways. First by reason of the very inclination of a vicious habit
which we call malice, and, in this way, to sin through malice is not the same as to sin against
the Holy Ghost. In another way it happens that by reason of contempt, that which might have
prevented the choosing of evil, is rejected or removed; thus hope is removed by despair, and
fear by presumption, and so on, as we shall explain further on (QQ. 20, 21). Now all these
things which prevent the choosing of sin are effects of the Holy Ghost in us; so that, in this
sense, to sin through malice is to sin against the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as the confession of faith consists in a protestation not only of words
but also of deeds, so blasphemy against the Holy Ghost can be uttered in word, thought and deed.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the third interpretation, blasphemy against the Holy Ghost is condivided
with blasphemy against the Son of Man, forasmuch as He is also the Son of God, i.e. the "power
of God and the wisdom of God" (1 Cor. 1:24). Wherefore, in this sense, the sin against the
Son of Man will be that which is committed through ignorance, or through weakness.

Reply Obj. 3: Sin committed through certain malice, in so far as it results from the inclination
of a habit, is not a special sin, but a general condition of sin: whereas, in so far as it
results from a special contempt of an effect of the Holy Ghost in us, it has the character
of a special sin. According to this interpretation the sin against the Holy Ghost is a special
kind of sin, as also according to the first interpretation: whereas according to the second,
it is not a species of sin, because final impenitence may be a circumstance of any kind of sin.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 14, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Fitting to Distinguish Six Kinds of Sin Against the Holy Ghost?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting to distinguish six kinds of sin against the Holy Ghost,
viz. despair, presumption, impenitence, obstinacy, resisting the known truth, envy of our brother's
spiritual good, which are assigned by the Master (Sent. ii, D, 43). For to deny God's justice
or mercy belongs to unbelief. Now, by despair, a man rejects God's mercy, and by presumption,
His justice. Therefore each of these is a kind of unbelief rather than of the sin against the
Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, impenitence, seemingly, regards past sins, while obstinacy regards future
sins. Now past and future time do not diversify the species of virtues or vices, since it is
the same faith whereby we believe that Christ was born, and those of old believed that He would
be born. Therefore obstinacy and impenitence should not be reckoned as two species of sin against
the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 3: Further, "grace and truth came by Jesus Christ" (John 1:17). Therefore it seem that
resistance of the known truth, and envy of a brother's spiritual good, belong to blasphemy
against the Son rather than against the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 4: Further, Bernard says (De Dispens. et Praecept. xi) that "to refuse to obey is to resist
the Holy Ghost." Moreover a gloss on Lev. 10:16, says that "a feigned repentance is a blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost." Again, schism is, seemingly, directly opposed to the Holy Ghost by
Whom the Church is united together. Therefore it seems that the species of sins against the
Holy Ghost are insufficiently enumerated.

On the contrary, Augustine [*Fulgentius] (De Fide ad Petrum iii) says that "those who despair
of pardon for their sins, or who without merits presume on God's mercy, sin against the Holy
Ghost," and (Enchiridion lxxxiii) that "he who dies in a state of obstinacy is guilty of the
sin against the Holy Ghost," and (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi) that "impenitence is a sin against
the Holy Ghost," and (De Serm. Dom. in Monte xxii), that "to resist fraternal goodness with
the brands of envy is to sin against the Holy Ghost," and in his book De unico Baptismo (De
Bap. contra Donat. vi, 35) he says that "a man who spurns the truth, is either envious of his
brethren to whom the truth is revealed, or ungrateful to God, by Whose inspiration the Church
is taught," and therefore, seemingly, sins against the Holy Ghost.

I answer that, The above species are fittingly assigned to the sin against the Holy Ghost taken
in the third sense, because they are distinguished in respect of the removal or contempt of
those things whereby a man can be prevented from sinning through choice. These things are either
on the part of God's judgment, or on the part of His gifts, or on the part of sin. For, by
consideration of the Divine judgment, wherein justice is accompanied with mercy, man is hindered
from sinning through choice, both by hope, arising from the consideration of the mercy that
pardons sins and rewards good deeds, which hope is removed by "despair"; and by fear, arising
from the consideration of the Divine justice that punishes sins, which fear is removed by "presumption,"
when, namely, a man presumes that he can obtain glory without merits, or pardon without repentance.

God's gifts whereby we are withdrawn from sin, are two: one is the acknowledgment of the truth,
against which there is the "resistance of the known truth," when, namely, a man resists the
truth which he has acknowledged, in order to sin more freely: while the other is the assistance
of inward grace, against which there is "envy of a brother's spiritual good," when, namely,
a man is envious not only of his brother's person, but also of the increase of Divine grace
in the world.

On the part of sin, there are two things which may withdraw man therefrom: one is the inordinateness
and shamefulness of the act, the consideration of which is wont to arouse man to repentance
for the sin he has committed, and against this there is "impenitence," not as denoting permanence
in sin until death, in which sense it was taken above (for thus it would not be a special sin,
but a circumstance of sin), but as denoting the purpose of not repenting. The other thing is
the smallness or brevity of the good which is sought in sin, according to Rom. 6:21: "What
fruit had you therefore then in those things, of which you are now ashamed?" The consideration
of this is wont to prevent man's will from being hardened in sin, and this is removed by "obstinacy,"
whereby man hardens his purpose by clinging to sin. Of these two it is written (Jer. 8:6):
"There is none that doth penance for his sin, saying: What have I done?" as regards the first;
and, "They are all turned to their own course, as a horse rushing to the battle," as regards
the second.

Reply Obj. 1: The sins of despair and presumption consist, not in disbelieving in God's justice
and mercy, but in contemning them.

Reply Obj. 2: Obstinacy and impenitence differ not only in respect of past and future time,
but also in respect of certain formal aspects by reason of the diverse consideration of those
things which may be considered in sin, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: Grace and truth were the work of Christ through the gifts of the Holy Ghost which
He gave to men.

Reply Obj. 4: To refuse to obey belongs to obstinacy, while a feigned repentance belongs to
impenitence, and schism to the envy of a brother's spiritual good, whereby the members of the
Church are united together.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 14, Art. 3]

Whether the Sin Against the Holy Ghost Can Be Forgiven?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven. For Augustine
says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi): "We should despair of no man, so long as Our Lord's patience
brings him back to repentance." But if any sin cannot be forgiven, it would be possible to
despair of some sinners. Therefore the sin against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven.

Obj. 2: Further, no sin is forgiven, except through the soul being healed by God. But "no disease
is incurable to an all-powerful physician," as a gloss says on Ps. 102:3, "Who healeth all
thy diseases." Therefore the sin against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven.

Obj. 3: Further, the free-will is indifferent to either good or evil. Now, so long as man is
a wayfarer, he can fall away from any virtue, since even an angel fell from heaven, wherefore
it is written (Job 4:18, 19): "In His angels He found wickedness: how much more shall they
that dwell in houses of clay?" Therefore, in like manner, a man can return from any sin to
the state of justice. Therefore the sin against the Holy Ghost can be forgiven.

On the contrary, It is written (Matt. 12:32): "He that shall speak against the Holy Ghost,
it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come": and Augustine
says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 22) that "so great is the downfall of this sin that it cannot
submit to the humiliation of asking for pardon."

I answer that, According to the various interpretations of the sin against the Holy Ghost,
there are various ways in which it may be said that it cannot be forgiven. For if by the sin
against the Holy Ghost we understand final impenitence, it is said to be unpardonable, since
in no way is it pardoned: because the mortal sin wherein a man perseveres until death will
not be forgiven in the life to come, since it was not remitted by repentance in this life.

According to the other two interpretations, it is said to be unpardonable, not as though it
is nowise forgiven, but because, considered in itself, it deserves not to be pardoned: and
this in two ways. First, as regards the punishment, since he that sins through ignorance or
weakness, deserves less punishment, whereas he that sins through certain malice, can offer
no excuse in alleviation of his punishment. Likewise those who blasphemed against the Son of
Man before His Godhead was revealed, could have some excuse, on account of the weakness of
the flesh which they perceived in Him, and hence, they deserved less punishment; whereas those
who blasphemed against His very Godhead, by ascribing to the devil the works of the Holy Ghost,
had no excuse in diminution of their punishment. Wherefore, according to Chrysostom's commentary
(Hom. xlii in Matth.), the Jews are said not to be forgiven this sin, neither in this world
nor in the world to come, because they were punished for it, both in the present life, through
the Romans, and in the life to come, in the pains of hell. Thus also Athanasius adduces the
example of their forefathers who, first of all, wrangled with Moses on account of the shortage
of water and bread; and this the Lord bore with patience, because they were to be excused on
account of the weakness of the flesh: but afterwards they sinned more grievously when, by ascribing
to an idol the favors bestowed by God Who had brought them out of Egypt, they blasphemed, so
to speak, against the Holy Ghost, saying (Ex. (Ex. 32:28), and threatened them with punishment
in the life to come, saying, (Ex. 32:34): "I, in the day of revenge, will visit this sin .
. . of theirs."

Secondly, this may be understood to refer to the guilt: thus a disease is said to be incurable
in respect of the nature of the disease, which removes whatever might be a means of cure, as
when it takes away the power of nature, or causes loathing for food and medicine, although
God is able to cure such a disease. So too, the sin against the Holy Ghost is said to be unpardonable,
by reason of its nature, in so far as it removes those things which are a means towards the
pardon of sins. This does not, however, close the way of forgiveness and healing to an all-powerful
and merciful God, Who, sometimes, by a miracle, so to speak, restores spiritual health to such men.

Reply Obj. 1: We should despair of no man in this life, considering God's omnipotence and mercy.
But if we consider the circumstances of sin, some are called (Eph. 2:2) "children of despair"
[*Filios diffidentiae, which the Douay version renders "children of unbelief."].

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers the question on the part of God's omnipotence, not on
that of the circumstances of sin.

Reply Obj. 3: In this life the free-will does indeed ever remain subject to change: yet sometimes
it rejects that whereby, so far as it is concerned, it can be turned to good. Hence considered
in itself this sin is unpardonable, although God can pardon it.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 14, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Can Sin First of All Against the Holy Ghost?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man cannot sin first of all against the Holy Ghost, without
having previously committed other sins. For the natural order requires that one should be moved
to perfection from imperfection. This is evident as regards good things, according to Prov.
4:18: "The path of the just, as a shining light, goeth forwards and increases even to perfect
day." Now, in evil things, the perfect is the greatest evil, as the Philosopher states (Metaph.
v, text. 21). Since then the sin against the Holy Ghost is the most grievous sin, it seems
that man comes to commit this sin through committing lesser sins.

Obj. 2: Further, to sin against the Holy Ghost is to sin through certain malice, or through
choice. Now man cannot do this until he has sinned many times; for the Philosopher says (Ethic.
v, 6, 9) that "although a man is able to do unjust deeds, yet he cannot all at once do them
as an unjust man does," viz. from choice. Therefore it seems that the sin against the Holy
Ghost cannot be committed except after other sins.

Obj. 3: Further, repentance and impenitence are about the same object. But there is no repentance,
except about past sins. Therefore the same applies to impenitence which is a species of the
sin against the Holy Ghost. Therefore the sin against the Holy Ghost presupposes other sins.

On the contrary, "It is easy in the eyes of God on a sudden to make a poor man rich" (Ecclus.
11:23). Therefore, conversely, it is possible for a man, according to the malice of the devil
who tempts him, to be led to commit the most grievous of sins which is that against the Holy Ghost.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), in one way, to sin against the Holy Ghost is to sin
through certain malice. Now one may sin through certain malice in two ways, as stated in the
same place: first, through the inclination of a habit; but this is not, properly speaking,
to sin against the Holy Ghost, nor does a man come to commit this sin all at once, in as much
as sinful acts must precede so as to cause the habit that induces to sin. Secondly, one may
sin through certain malice, by contemptuously rejecting the things whereby a man is withdrawn
from sin. This is, properly speaking, to sin against the Holy Ghost, as stated above (A. 1);
and this also, for the most part, presupposes other sins, for it is written (Prov. 18:3) that
"the wicked man, when he is come into the depth of sins, contemneth."

Nevertheless it is possible for a man, in his first sinful act, to sin against the Holy Ghost
by contempt, both on account of his free-will, and on account of the many previous dispositions,
or again, through being vehemently moved to evil, while but feebly attached to good. Hence
never or scarcely ever does it happen that the perfect sin all at once against the Holy Ghost:
wherefore Origen says (Peri Archon. i, 3): "I do not think that anyone who stands on the highest
step of perfection, can fail or fall suddenly; this can only happen by degrees and bit by bit."

The same applies, if the sin against the Holy Ghost be taken literally for blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost. For such blasphemy as Our Lord speaks of, always proceeds from contemptuous malice.

If, however, with Augustine (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi) we understand the sin against the Holy
Ghost to denote final impenitence, it does not regard the question in point, because this sin
against the Holy Ghost requires persistence in sin until the end of life.

Reply Obj. 1: Movement both in good and in evil is made, for the most part, from imperfect
to perfect, according as man progresses in good or evil: and yet in both cases, one man can
begin from a greater (good or evil) than another man does. Consequently, that from which a
man begins can be perfect in good or evil according to its genus, although it may be imperfect
as regards the series of good or evil actions whereby a man progresses in good or evil.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers the sin which is committed through certain malice, when
it proceeds from the inclination of a habit.

Reply Obj. 3: If by impenitence we understand with Augustine (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxxi) persistence
in sin until the end, it is clear that it presupposes sin, just as repentance does. If, however,
we take it for habitual impenitence, in which sense it is a sin against the Holy Ghost, it
is evident that it can precede sin: for it is possible for a man who has never sinned to have
the purpose either of repenting or of not repenting, if he should happen to sin.

QUESTION 15

OF THE VICES OPPOSED TO KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING (In Three Articles)

We must now consider the vices opposed to knowledge and understanding. Since, however, we have
treated of ignorance which is opposed to knowledge, when we were discussing the causes of sins
(I-II, Q. 76), we must now inquire about blindness of mind and dulness of sense, which are
opposed to the gift of understanding; and under this head there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether blindness of mind is a sin?

(2) Whether dulness of sense is a sin distinct from blindness of mind?

(3) Whether these vices arise from sins of the flesh?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 15, Art. 1]

Whether Blindness of Mind Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that blindness of mind is not a sin. Because, seemingly, that which
excuses from sin is not itself a sin. Now blindness of mind excuses from sin; for it is written
(John 9:41): "If you were blind, you should not have sin." Therefore blindness of mind is not
a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, punishment differs from guilt. But blindness of mind is a punishment as appears
from Isa. 6:10, "Blind the heart of this people," for, since it is an evil, it could not be
from God, were it not a punishment. Therefore blindness of mind is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every sin is voluntary, according to Augustine (De Vera Relig. xiv). Now blindness
of mind is not voluntary, since, as Augustine says (Confess. x), "all love to know the resplendent
truth," and as we read in Eccles. 11:7, "the light is sweet and it is delightful for the eyes
to see the sun." Therefore blindness of mind is not a sin.

On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) reckons blindness of mind among the vices arising
from lust.

I answer that, Just as bodily blindness is the privation of the principle of bodily sight,
so blindness of mind is the privation of the principle of mental or intellectual sight. Now
this has a threefold principle. One is the light of natural reason, which light, since it pertains
to the species of the rational soul, is never forfeit from the soul, and yet, at times, it
is prevented from exercising its proper act, through being hindered by the lower powers which
the human intellect needs in order to understand, for instance in the case of imbeciles and
madmen, as stated in the First Part (Q. 84, AA. 7, 8).

Another principle of intellectual sight is a certain habitual light superadded to the natural
light of reason, which light is sometimes forfeit from the soul. This privation is blindness,
and is a punishment, in so far as the privation of the light of grace is a punishment. Hence
it is written concerning some (Wis. 2:21): "Their own malice blinded them."

A third principle of intellectual sight is an intelligible principle, through which a man understands
other things; to which principle a man may attend or not attend. That he does not attend thereto
happens in two ways. Sometimes it is due to the fact that a man's will is deliberately turned
away from the consideration of that principle, according to Ps. 35:4, "He would not understand,
that he might do well": whereas sometimes it is due to the mind being more busy about things
which it loves more, so as to be hindered thereby from considering this principle, according
to Ps. 57:9, "Fire," i.e. of concupiscence, "hath fallen on them and they shall not see the
sun." In either of these ways blindness of mind is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: The blindness that excuses from sin is that which arises from the natural defect
of one who cannot see.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers the second kind of blindness which is a punishment.

Reply Obj. 3: To understand the truth is, in itself, beloved by all; and yet, accidentally
it may be hateful to someone, in so far as a man is hindered thereby from having what he loves
yet more.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 15, Art. 2]

Whether Dulness of Sense Is a Sin Distinct from Blindness of Mind?

Objection 1: It seems that dulness of sense is not a distinct sin from blindness of mind. Because
one thing has one contrary. Now dulness is opposed to the gift of understanding, according
to Gregory (Moral. ii, 49); and so is blindness of mind, since understanding denotes a principle
of sight. Therefore dulness of sense is the same as blindness of mind.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) in speaking of dulness describes it as "dulness
of sense in respect of understanding." Now dulness of sense in respect of understanding seems
to be the same as a defect in understanding, which pertains to blindness of mind. Therefore
dulness of sense is the same as blindness of mind.

Obj. 3: Further, if they differ at all, it seems to be chiefly in the fact that blindness of
mind is voluntary, as stated above (A. 1), while dulness of sense is a natural defect. But
a natural defect is not a sin: so that, accordingly, dulness of sense would not be a sin, which
is contrary to what Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45), where he reckons it among the sins arising
from gluttony.

On the contrary, Different causes produce different effects. Now Gregory says (Moral. xxxi,
45) that dulness of sense arises from gluttony, and that blindness of mind arises from lust.
Now these others are different vices. Therefore those are different vices also.

I answer that, Dull is opposed to sharp: and a thing is said to be sharp because it can pierce;
so that a thing is called dull through being obtuse and unable to pierce. Now a bodily sense,
by a kind of metaphor, is said to pierce the medium, in so far as it perceives its object from
a distance or is able by penetration as it were to perceive the smallest details or the inmost
parts of a thing. Hence in corporeal things the senses are said to be acute when they can perceive
a sensible object from afar, by sight, hearing, or scent, while on the other hand they are
said to be dull, through being unable to perceive, except sensible objects that are near at
hand, or of great power.

Now, by way of similitude to bodily sense, we speak of sense in connection with the intellect;
and this latter sense is in respect of certain primals and extremes, as stated in Ethic. vi,
even as the senses are cognizant of sensible objects as of certain principles of knowledge.
Now this sense which is connected with understanding, does not perceive its object through
a medium of corporeal distance, but through certain other media, as, for instance, when it
perceives a thing's essence through a property thereof, and the cause through its effect. Consequently
a man is said to have an acute sense in connection with his understanding, if, as soon as he
apprehends a property or effect of a thing, he understands the nature or the thing itself,
and if he can succeed in perceiving its slightest details: whereas a man is said to have a
dull sense in connection with his understanding, if he cannot arrive at knowing the truth about
a thing, without many explanations; in which case, moreover, he is unable to obtain a perfect
perception of everything pertaining to the nature of that thing.

Accordingly dulness of sense in connection with understanding denotes a certain weakness of
the mind as to the consideration of spiritual goods; while blindness of mind implies the complete
privation of the knowledge of such things. Both are opposed to the gift of understanding, whereby
a man knows spiritual goods by apprehending them, and has a subtle penetration of their inmost
nature. This dulness has the character of sin, just as blindness of mind has, that is, in so
far as it is voluntary, as evidenced in one who, owing to his affection for carnal things,
dislikes or neglects the careful consideration of spiritual things.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 15, Art. 3]

Whether Blindness of Mind and Dulness of Sense Arise from Sins of the Flesh?

Objection 1: It would seem that blindness of mind and dulness of sense do not arise from sins
of the flesh. For Augustine (Retract. i, 4) retracts what he had said in his Soliloquies i,
1, "God Who didst wish none but the clean to know the truth," and says that one might reply
that "many, even those who are unclean, know many truths." Now men become unclean chiefly by
sins of the flesh. Therefore blindness of mind and dulness of sense are not caused by sins
of the flesh.

Obj. 2: Further, blindness of mind and dulness of sense are defects in connection with the
intellective part of the soul: whereas carnal sins pertain to the corruption of the flesh.
But the flesh does not act on the soul, but rather the reverse. Therefore the sins of the flesh
do not cause blindness of mind and dulness of sense.

Obj. 3: Further, all things are more passive to what is near them than to what is remote. Now
spiritual vices are nearer the mind than carnal vices are. Therefore blindness of mind and
dulness of sense are caused by spiritual rather than by carnal vices.

I answer that, The perfect intellectual operation in man consists in an abstraction from sensible
phantasms, wherefore the more a man's intellect is freed from those phantasms, the more thoroughly
will it be able to consider things intelligible, and to set in order all things sensible. Thus
Anaxagoras stated that the intellect requires to be "detached" in order to command, and that
the agent must have power over matter, in order to be able to move it. Now it is evident that
pleasure fixes a man's attention on that which he takes pleasure in: wherefore the Philosopher
says (Ethic. x, 4, 5) that we all do best that which we take pleasure in doing, while as to
other things, we do them either not at all, or in a faint-hearted fashion.

Now carnal vices, namely gluttony and lust, are concerned with pleasures of touch in matters
of food and sex; and these are the most impetuous of all pleasures of the body. For this reason
these vices cause man's attention to be very firmly fixed on corporeal things, so that in consequence
man's operation in regard to intelligible things is weakened, more, however, by lust than by
gluttony, forasmuch as sexual pleasures are more vehement than those of the table. Wherefore
lust gives rise to blindness of mind, which excludes almost entirely the knowledge of spiritual
things, while dulness of sense arises from gluttony, which makes a man weak in regard to the
same intelligible things. On the other hand, the contrary virtues, viz. abstinence and chastity,
dispose man very much to the perfection of intellectual operation. Hence it is written (Dan.
1:17) that "to these children" on account of their abstinence and continency, "God gave knowledge
and understanding in every book, and wisdom."

Reply Obj. 1: Although some who are the slaves of carnal vices are at times capable of subtle
considerations about intelligible things, on account of the perfection of their natural genius,
or of some habit superadded thereto, nevertheless, on account of the pleasures of the body,
it must needs happen that their attention is frequently withdrawn from this subtle contemplation:
wherefore the unclean can know some truths, but their uncleanness is a clog on their knowledge.

Reply Obj. 2: The flesh acts on the intellective faculties, not by altering them, but by impeding
their operation in the aforesaid manner.

Reply Obj. 3: It is owing to the fact that the carnal vices are further removed from the mind,
that they distract the mind's attention to more remote things, so that they hinder the mind's
contemplation all the more.

QUESTION 16

OF THE PRECEPTS OF FAITH, KNOWLEDGE AND UNDERSTANDING (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the precepts pertaining to the aforesaid, and under this head there are
two points of inquiry:

(1) The precepts concerning faith;

(2) The precepts concerning the gifts of knowledge and understanding.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 16, Art. 1]

Whether in the Old Law There Should Have Been Given Precepts of Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that, in the Old Law, there should have been given precepts of faith.
Because a precept is about something due and necessary. Now it is most necessary for man that
he should believe, according to Heb. 11:6, "Without faith it is impossible to please God."
Therefore there was very great need for precepts of faith to be given.

Obj. 2: Further, the New Testament is contained in the Old, as the reality in the figure, as
stated above (I-II, Q. 107, A. 3). Now the New Testament contains explicit precepts of faith,
for instance John 14:1: "You believe in God; believe also in Me." Therefore it seems that some
precepts of faith ought to have been given in the Old Law also.

Obj. 3: Further, to prescribe the act of a virtue comes to the same as to forbid the opposite
vices. Now the Old Law contained many precepts forbidding unbelief: thus (Ex. 20:3): "Thou
shalt not have strange gods before Me," and (Deut. 13:1-3) they were forbidden to hear the
words of the prophet or dreamer who might wish to turn them away from their faith in God. Therefore
precepts of faith should have been given in the Old Law also.

Obj. 4: Further, confession is an act of faith, as stated above (Q. 3, A. 1). Now the Old Law
contained precepts about the confession and the promulgation of faith: for they were commanded
(Ex. 12:27) that, when their children should ask them, they should tell them the meaning of
the paschal observance, and (Deut. 13:9) they were commanded to slay anyone who disseminated
doctrine contrary to faith. Therefore the Old Law should have contained precepts of faith.

Obj. 5: Further, all the books of the Old Testament are contained in the Old Law; wherefore
Our Lord said (John 15:25) that it was written in the Law: "They have hated Me without cause,"
although this is found written in Ps. 34 and 68. Now it is written (Ecclus. 2:8): "Ye that
fear the Lord, believe Him." Therefore the Old Law should have contained precepts of faith.

On the contrary, The Apostle (Rom. 3:27) calls the Old Law the "law of works" which he contrasts
with the "law of faith." Therefore the Old Law ought not to have contained precepts of faith.

I answer that, A master does not impose laws on others than his subjects; wherefore the precepts
of a law presuppose that everyone who receives the law is subject to the giver of the law.
Now the primary subjection of man to God is by faith, according to Heb. 11:6: "He that cometh
to God, must believe that He is." Hence faith is presupposed to the precepts of the Law: for
which reason (Ex. 20:2) that which is of faith, is set down before the legal precepts, in the
words, "I am the Lord thy God, Who brought thee out of the land of Egypt," and, likewise (Deut.
6:4), the words, "Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy [Vulg.: 'our'] God is one," precede the recording
of the precepts.

Since, however, faith contains many things subordinate to the faith whereby we believe that
God is, which is the first and chief of all articles of faith, as stated above (Q. 1, AA. 1,
7), it follows that, if we presuppose faith in God, whereby man's mind is subjected to Him,
it is possible for precepts to be given about other articles of faith. Thus Augustine expounding
the words: "This is My commandment" (John 15:12) says (Tract. lxxxiii in Joan.) that we have
received many precepts of faith. In the Old Law, however, the secret things of faith were not
to be set before the people, wherefore, presupposing their faith in one God, no other precepts
of faith were given in the Old Law.

Reply Obj. 1: Faith is necessary as being the principle of spiritual life, wherefore it is
presupposed before the receiving of the Law.

Reply Obj. 2: Even then Our Lord both presupposed something of faith, namely belief in one
God, when He said: "You believe in God," and commanded something, namely, belief in the Incarnation
whereby one Person is God and man. This explanation of faith belongs to the faith of the New
Testament, wherefore He added: "Believe also in Me."

Reply Obj. 3: The prohibitive precepts regard sins, which corrupt virtue. Now virtue is corrupted
by any particular defect, as stated above (I-II, Q. 18, A. 4, ad 3; I-II, Q. 19, A. 6, ad 1,
A. 7, ad 3). Therefore faith in one God being presupposed, prohibitive precepts had to be given
in the Old Law, so that men might be warned off those particular defects whereby their faith
might be corrupted.

Reply Obj. 4: Confession of faith and the teaching thereof also presuppose man's submission
to God by faith: so that the Old Law could contain precepts relating to the confession and
teaching of faith, rather than to faith itself.

Reply Obj. 5: In this passage again that faith is presupposed whereby we believe that God is;
hence it begins, "Ye that fear the Lord," which is not possible without faith. The words which
follow--"believe Him"--must be referred to certain special articles of faith, chiefly to those
things which God promises to them that obey Him, wherefore the passage concludes--"and your
reward shall not be made void."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 16, Art. 2]

Whether the Precepts Referring to Knowledge and Understanding Were Fittingly Set Down in the
Old Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts referring to knowledge and understanding were
unfittingly set down in the Old Law. For knowledge and understanding pertain to cognition.
Now cognition precedes and directs action. Therefore the precepts referring to knowledge and
understanding should precede the precepts of the Law referring to action. Since, then, the
first precepts of the Law are those of the decalogue, it seems that precepts of knowledge and
understanding should have been given a place among the precepts of the decalogue.

Obj. 2: Further, learning precedes teaching, for a man must learn from another before he teaches
another. Now the Old Law contains precepts about teaching--both affirmative precepts as, for
example, (Deut. 4:9), "Thou shalt teach them to thy sons"--and prohibitive precepts, as, for
instance, (Deut. 4:2), "You shall not add to the word that I speak to you, neither shall you
take away from it." Therefore it seems that man ought to have been given also some precepts
directing him to learn.

Obj. 3: Further, knowledge and understanding seem more necessary to a priest than to a king,
wherefore it is written (Malachi 2:7): "The lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, and they
shall seek the law at his mouth," and (Osee 4:6): "Because thou hast rejected knowledge, I
will reject thee, that thou shalt not do the office of priesthood to Me." Now the king is commanded
to learn knowledge of the Law (Deut. 17:18, 19). Much more therefore should the Law have commanded
the priests to learn the Law.

Obj. 4: Further, it is not possible while asleep to meditate on things pertaining to knowledge
and understanding: moreover it is hindered by extraneous occupations. Therefore it is unfittingly
commanded (Deut. 6:7): "Thou shalt meditate upon them sitting in thy house, and walking on
thy journey, sleeping and rising." Therefore the precepts relating to knowledge and understanding
are unfittingly set down in the Law.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 4:6): "That, hearing all these precepts, they may say,
Behold a wise and understanding people."

I answer that, Three things may be considered in relation to knowledge and understanding: first,
the reception thereof; secondly, the use; and thirdly, their preservation. Now the reception
of knowledge or understanding, is by means of teaching and learning, and both are prescribed
in the Law. For it is written (Deut. 6:6): "These words which I command thee . . . shall be
in thy heart." This refers to learning, since it is the duty of a disciple to apply his mind
to what is said, while the words that follow--"and thou shalt tell them to thy children"--refer
to teaching.

The use of knowledge and understanding is the meditation on those things which one knows or
understands. In reference to this, the text goes on: "thou shalt meditate upon them sitting
in thy house," etc.

Their preservation is effected by the memory, and, as regards this, the text continues--"and
thou shalt bind them as a sign on thy hand, and they shall be and shall move between thy eyes.
And thou shalt write them in the entry, and on the doors of thy house." Thus the continual
remembrance of God's commandments is signified, since it is impossible for us to forget those
things which are continually attracting the notice of our senses, whether by touch, as those
things we hold in our hands, or by sight, as those things which are ever before our eyes, or
to which we are continually returning, for instance, to the house door. Moreover it is clearly
stated (Deut. 4:9): "Forget not the words that thy eyes have seen and let them not go out of
thy heart all the days of thy life."

We read of these things also being commanded more notably in the New Testament, both in the
teaching of the Gospel and in that of the apostles.

Reply Obj. 1: According to Deut. 4:6, "this is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of
the nations." By this we are given to understand that the wisdom and understanding of those
who believe in God consist in the precepts of the Law. Wherefore the precepts of the Law had
to be given first, and afterwards men had to be led to know and understand them, and so it
was not fitting that the aforesaid precepts should be placed among the precepts of the decalogue
which take the first place.

Reply Obj. 2: There are also in the Law precepts relating to learning, as stated above. Nevertheless
teaching was commanded more expressly than learning, because it concerned the learned, who
were not under any other authority, but were immediately under the law, and to them the precepts
of the Law were given. On the other hand learning concerned the people of lower degree, and
these the precepts of the Law have to reach through the learned.

Reply Obj. 3: Knowledge of the Law is so closely bound up with the priestly office that being
charged with the office implies being charged to know the Law: hence there was no need for
special precepts to be given about the training of the priests. On the other hand, the doctrine
of God's law is not so bound up with the kingly office, because a king is placed over his people
in temporal matters: hence it is especially commanded that the king should be instructed by
the priests about things pertaining to the law of God.

Reply Obj. 4: That precept of the Law does not mean that man should meditate on God's law by
sleeping, but during sleep, i.e. that he should meditate on the law of God when he is preparing
to sleep, because this leads to his having better phantasms while asleep, in so far as our
movements pass from the state of vigil to the state of sleep, as the Philosopher explains (Ethic.
i, 13). In like manner we are commanded to meditate on the Law in every action of ours, not
that we are bound to be always actually thinking about the Law, but that we should regulate
all our actions according to it.

QUESTION 17

OF HOPE, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF (In Eight Articles)

After treating of faith, we must consider hope and (1) hope itself; (2) the gift of fear; (3)
the contrary vices; (4) the corresponding precepts. The first of these points gives rise to
a twofold consideration: (1) hope, considered in itself; (2) its subject.

Under the first head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether hope is a virtue?

(2) Whether its object is eternal happiness?

(3) Whether, by the virtue of hope, one man may hope for another's happiness?

(4) Whether a man may lawfully hope in man?

(5) Whether hope is a theological virtue?

(6) Of its distinction from the other theological virtues?

(7) Of its relation to faith;

(8) Of its relation to charity.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 1]

Whether Hope Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that hope is not a virtue. For "no man makes ill use of a virtue,"
as Augustine states (De Lib. Arb. ii, 18). But one may make ill use of hope, since the passion
of hope, like the other passions, is subject to a mean and extremes. Therefore hope is not
a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, no virtue results from merits, since "God works virtue in us without us,"
as Augustine states (De Grat. et Lib. Arb. xvii). But hope is caused by grace and merits, according
to the Master (Sent. iii, D, 26). Therefore hope is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, "virtue is the disposition of a perfect thing" (Phys. vii, text. 17, 18).
But hope is the disposition of an imperfect thing, of one, namely, that lacks what it hopes
to have. Therefore hope is not a virtue.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. i, 33) that the three daughters of Job signify these
three virtues, faith, hope and charity. Therefore hope is a virtue.

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6) "the virtue of a thing is that which
makes its subject good, and its work good likewise." Consequently wherever we find a good human
act, it must correspond to some human virtue. Now in all things measured and ruled, the good
is that which attains its proper rule: thus we say that a coat is good if it neither exceeds
nor falls short of its proper measurement. But, as we stated above (Q. 8, A. 3, ad 3) human
acts have a twofold measure; one is proximate and homogeneous, viz. the reason, while the other
is remote and excelling, viz. God: wherefore every human act is good, which attains reason
or God Himself. Now the act of hope, whereof we speak now, attains God. For, as we have already
stated (I-II, Q. 40, A. 1), when we were treating of the passion of hope, the object of hope
is a future good, difficult but possible to obtain. Now a thing is possible to us in two ways:
first, by ourselves; secondly, by means of others, as stated in Ethic. iii. Wherefore, in so
far as we hope for anything as being possible to us by means of the Divine assistance, our
hope attains God Himself, on Whose help it leans. It is therefore evident that hope is a virtue,
since it causes a human act to be good and to attain its due rule.

Reply Obj. 1: In the passions, the mean of virtue depends on right reason being attained, wherein
also consists the essence of virtue. Wherefore in hope too, the good of virtue depends on a
man's attaining, by hoping, the due rule, viz. God. Consequently man cannot make ill use of
hope which attains God, as neither can he make ill use of moral virtue which attains the reason,
because to attain thus is to make good use of virtue. Nevertheless, the hope of which we speak
now, is not a passion but a habit of the mind, as we shall show further on (A. 5; Q. 18, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 2: Hope is said to arise from merits, as regards the thing hoped for, in so far
as we hope to obtain happiness by means of grace and merits; or as regards the act of living
hope. The habit itself of hope, whereby we hope to obtain happiness, does not flow from our
merits, but from grace alone.

Reply Obj. 3: He who hopes is indeed imperfect in relation to that which he hopes to obtain,
but has not as yet; yet he is perfect, in so far as he already attains his proper rule, viz.
God, on Whose help he leans.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 2]

Whether Eternal Happiness Is the Proper Object of Hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that eternal happiness is not the proper object of hope. For a man
does not hope for that which surpasses every movement of the soul, since hope itself is a movement
of the soul. Now eternal happiness surpasses every movement of the human soul, for the Apostle
says (1 Cor. 2:9) that it hath not "entered into the heart of man." Therefore happiness is
not the proper object of hope.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer is an expression of hope, for it is written (Ps. 36:5): "Commit thy
way to the Lord, and trust in Him, and He will do it." Now it is lawful for man to pray God
not only for eternal happiness, but also for the goods, both temporal and spiritual, of the
present life, and, as evidenced by the Lord's Prayer, to be delivered from evils which will
no longer be in eternal happiness. Therefore eternal happiness is not the proper object of hope.

Obj. 3: Further, the object of hope is something difficult. Now many things besides eternal
happiness are difficult to man. Therefore eternal happiness is not the proper object of hope.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Heb. 6:19) that we have hope "which entereth in," i.e. maketh
us to enter . . . "within the veil," i.e. into the happiness of heaven, according to the interpretation
of a gloss on these words. Therefore the object of hope is eternal happiness.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), the hope of which we speak now, attains God by leaning
on His help in order to obtain the hoped for good. Now an effect must be proportionate to its
cause. Wherefore the good which we ought to hope for from God properly and chiefly is the infinite
good, which is proportionate to the power of our divine helper, since it belongs to an infinite
power to lead anyone to an infinite good. Such a good is eternal life, which consists in the
enjoyment of God Himself. For we should hope from Him for nothing less than Himself, since
His goodness, whereby He imparts good things to His creature, is no less than His Essence.
Therefore the proper and principal object of hope is eternal happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: Eternal happiness does not enter into the heart of man perfectly, i.e. so that
it be possible for a wayfarer to know its nature and quality; yet, under the general notion
of the perfect good, it is possible for it to be apprehended by a man, and it is in this way
that the movement of hope towards it arises. Hence the Apostle says pointedly (Heb. 6:19) that
hope "enters in, even within the veil," because that which we hope for is as yet veiled, so
to speak.

Reply Obj. 2: We ought not to pray God for any other goods, except in reference to eternal
happiness. Hence hope regards eternal happiness chiefly, and other things, for which we pray
God, it regards secondarily and as referred to eternal happiness: just as faith regards God
principally, and, secondarily, those things which are referred to God, as stated above (Q.
1, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 3: To him that longs for something great, all lesser things seem small; wherefore
to him that hopes for eternal happiness, nothing else appears arduous, as compared with that
hope; although, as compared with the capability of the man who hopes, other things besides
may be arduous to him, so that he may have hope for such things in reference to its principal
object.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 3]

Whether One Man May Hope for Another's Eternal Happiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that one may hope for another's eternal happiness. For the Apostle
says (Phil. 1:6): "Being confident of this very thing, that He Who hath begun a good work in
you, will perfect it unto the day of Jesus Christ." Now the perfection of that day will be
eternal happiness. Therefore one man may hope for another's eternal happiness.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever we ask of God, we hope to obtain from Him. But we ask God to bring
others to eternal happiness, according to James 5:16: "Pray for one another that you may be
saved." Therefore we can hope for another's eternal happiness.

Obj. 3: Further, hope and despair are about the same object. Now it is possible to despair
of another's eternal happiness, else Augustine would have no reason for saying (De Verb. Dom.,
Serm. lxxi) that we should not despair of anyone so long as he lives. Therefore one can also
hope for another's eternal salvation.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion viii) that "hope is only of such things as belong
to him who is supposed to hope for them."

I answer that, We can hope for something in two ways: first, absolutely, and thus the object
of hope is always something arduous and pertaining to the person who hopes. Secondly, we can
hope for something, through something else being presupposed, and in this way its object can
be something pertaining to someone else. In order to explain this we must observe that love
and hope differ in this, that love denotes union between lover and beloved, while hope denotes
a movement or a stretching forth of the appetite towards an arduous good. Now union is of things
that are distinct, wherefore love can directly regard the other whom a man unites to himself
by love, looking upon him as his other self: whereas movement is always towards its own term
which is proportionate to the subject moved. Therefore hope regards directly one's own good,
and not that which pertains to another. Yet if we presuppose the union of love with another,
a man can hope for and desire something for another man, as for himself; and, accordingly,
he can hope for another's eternal life, inasmuch as he is united to him by love, and just as
it is the same virtue of charity whereby a man loves God, himself, and his neighbor, so too
it is the same virtue of hope, whereby a man hopes for himself and for another.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Can Lawfully Hope in Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that one may lawfully hope in man. For the object of hope is eternal
happiness. Now we are helped to obtain eternal happiness by the patronage of the saints, for
Gregory says (Dial. i, 8) that "predestination is furthered by the saints' prayers." Therefore
one may hope in man.

Obj. 2: Further, if a man may not hope in another man, it ought not to be reckoned a sin in
a man, that one should not be able to hope in him. Yet this is reckoned a vice in some, as
appears from Jer. 9:4: "Let every man take heed of his neighbor, and let him not trust in any
brother of his." Therefore it is lawful to trust in a man.

Obj. 3: Further, prayer is the expression of hope, as stated above (A. 2, Obj. 2). But it is
lawful to pray to a man for something. Therefore it is lawful to trust in him.

On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 17:5): "Cursed be the man that trusteth in man."

I answer that, Hope, as stated above (A. 1; I-II, Q. 40, A. 7), regards two things, viz. the
good which it intends to obtain, and the help by which that good is obtained. Now the good
which a man hopes to obtain, has the aspect of a final cause, while the help by which one hopes
to obtain that good, has the character of an efficient cause. Now in each of these kinds of
cause we find a principal and a secondary cause. For the principal end is the last end, while
the secondary end is that which is referred to an end. In like manner the principal efficient
cause is the first agent, while the secondary efficient cause is the secondary and instrumental
agent. Now hope regards eternal happiness as its last end, and the Divine assistance as the
first cause leading to happiness.

Accordingly, just as it is not lawful to hope for any good save happiness, as one's last end,
but only as something referred to final happiness, so too, it is unlawful to hope in any man,
or any creature, as though it were the first cause of movement towards happiness. It is, however,
lawful to hope in a man or a creature as being the secondary and instrumental agent through
whom one is helped to obtain any goods that are ordained to happiness. It is in this way that
we turn to the saints, and that we ask men also for certain things; and for this reason some
are blamed in that they cannot be trusted to give help.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 5]

Whether Hope Is a Theological Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that hope is not a theological virtue. For a theological virtue
is one that has God for its object. Now hope has for its object not only God but also other
goods which we hope to obtain from God. Therefore hope is not a theological virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, a theological virtue is not a mean between two vices, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 64, A. 4). But hope is a mean between presumption and despair. Therefore hope is not a theological
virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, expectation belongs to longanimity which is a species of fortitude. Since,
then, hope is a kind of expectation, it seems that hope is not a theological, but a moral virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, the object of hope is something arduous. But it belongs to magnanimity, which
is a moral virtue, to tend to the arduous. Therefore hope is a moral, and not a theological virtue.

On the contrary, Hope is enumerated (1 Cor. 13) together with faith and charity, which are
theological virtues.

I answer that, Since specific differences, by their very nature, divide a genus, in order to
decide under what division we must place hope, we must observe whence it derives its character
of virtue.

Now it has been stated above (A. 1) that hope has the character of virtue from the fact that
it attains the supreme rule of human actions: and this it attains both as its first efficient
cause, in as much as it leans on its assistance, and as its last final cause, in as much as
it expects happiness in the enjoyment thereof. Hence it is evident that God is the principal
object of hope, considered as a virtue. Since, then, the very idea of a theological virtue
is one that has God for its object, as stated above (I-II, Q. 62, A. 1), it is evident that
hope is a theological virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Whatever else hope expects to obtain, it hopes for it in reference to God as
the last end, or as the first efficient cause, as stated above (A. 4).

Reply Obj. 2: In things measured and ruled the mean consists in the measure or rule being attained;
if we go beyond the rule, there is excess, if we fall short of the rule, there is deficiency.
But in the rule or measure itself there is no such thing as a mean or extremes. Now a moral
virtue is concerned with things ruled by reason, and these things are its proper object; wherefore
it is proper to it to follow the mean as regards its proper object. On the other hand, a theological
virtue is concerned with the First Rule not ruled by another rule, and that Rule is its proper
object. Wherefore it is not proper for a theological virtue, with regard to its proper object,
to follow the mean, although this may happen to it accidentally with regard to something that
is referred to its principal object. Thus faith can have no mean or extremes in the point of
trusting to the First Truth, in which it is impossible to trust too much; whereas on the part
of the things believed, it may have a mean and extremes; for instance one truth is a mean between
two falsehoods. So too, hope has no mean or extremes, as regards its principal object, since
it is impossible to trust too much in the Divine assistance; yet it may have a mean and extremes,
as regards those things a man trusts to obtain, in so far as he either presumes above his capability,
or despairs of things of which he is capable.

Reply Obj. 3: The expectation which is mentioned in the definition of hope does not imply delay,
as does the expectation which belongs to longanimity. It implies a reference to the Divine
assistance, whether that which we hope for be delayed or not.

Reply Obj. 4: Magnanimity tends to something arduous in the hope of obtaining something that
is within one's power, wherefore its proper object is the doing of great things. On the other
hand hope, as a theological virtue, regards something arduous, to be obtained by another's
help, as stated above (A. 1).

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 6]

Whether Hope Is Distinct from the Other Theological Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that hope is not distinct from the other theological virtues. For
habits are distinguished by their objects, as stated above (I-II, Q. 54, A. 2). Now the object
of hope is the same as of the other theological virtues. Therefore hope is not distinct from
the other theological virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, in the symbol of faith, whereby we make profession of faith, we say: "I expect
the resurrection of the dead and the life of the world to come." Now expectation of future
happiness belongs to hope, as stated above (A. 5). Therefore hope is not distinct from faith.

Obj. 3: Further, by hope man tends to God. But this belongs properly to charity. Therefore
hope is not distinct from charity.

On the contrary, There cannot be number without distinction. Now hope is numbered with the
other theological virtues: for Gregory says (Moral. i, 16) that the three virtues are faith,
hope, and charity. Therefore hope is distinct from the theological virtues.

I answer that, A virtue is said to be theological from having God for the object to which it
adheres. Now one may adhere to a thing in two ways: first, for its own sake; secondly, because
something else is attained thereby. Accordingly charity makes us adhere to God for His own
sake, uniting our minds to God by the emotion of love.

On the other hand, hope and faith make man adhere to God as to a principle wherefrom certain
things accrue to us. Now we derive from God both knowledge of truth and the attainment of perfect
goodness. Accordingly faith makes us adhere to God, as the source whence we derive the knowledge
of truth, since we believe that what God tells us is true: while hope makes us adhere to God,
as the source whence we derive perfect goodness, i.e. in so far as, by hope, we trust to the
Divine assistance for obtaining happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: God is the object of these virtues under different aspects, as stated above:
and a different aspect of the object suffices for the distinction of habits, as stated above
(I-II, Q. 54, A. 2).

Reply Obj. 2: Expectation is mentioned in the symbol of faith, not as though it were the proper
act of faith, but because the act of hope presupposes the act of faith, as we shall state further
on (A. 7). Hence an act of faith is expressed in the act of hope.

Reply Obj. 3: Hope makes us tend to God, as to a good to be obtained finally, and as to a helper
strong to assist: whereas charity, properly speaking, makes us tend to God, by uniting our
affections to Him, so that we live, not for ourselves, but for God.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 7]

Whether Hope Precedes Faith?

Objection 1: It would seem that hope precedes faith. Because a gloss on Ps. 36:3, "Trust in
the Lord, and do good," says: "Hope is the entrance to faith and the beginning of salvation."
But salvation is by faith whereby we are justified. Therefore hope precedes faith.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is included in a definition should precede the thing defined and
be more known. But hope is included in the definition of faith (Heb. 11:1): "Faith is the substance
of things to be hoped for." Therefore hope precedes faith.

Obj. 3: Further, hope precedes a meritorious act, for the Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:10): "He that
plougheth should plough in hope . . . to receive fruit." But the act of faith is meritorious.
Therefore hope precedes faith.

On the contrary, It is written (Matt. 1:2): "Abraham begot Isaac," i.e. "Faith begot hope,"
according to a gloss.

I answer that, Absolutely speaking, faith precedes hope. For the object of hope is a future
good, arduous but possible to obtain. In order, therefore, that we may hope, it is necessary
for the object of hope to be proposed to us as possible. Now the object of hope is, in one
way, eternal happiness, and in another way, the Divine assistance, as explained above (A. 2;
A. 6, ad 3): and both of these are proposed to us by faith, whereby we come to know that we
are able to obtain eternal life, and that for this purpose the Divine assistance is ready for
us, according to Heb. 11:6: "He that cometh to God, must believe that He is, and is a rewarder
to them that seek Him." Therefore it is evident that faith precedes hope.

Reply Obj. 1: As the same gloss observes further on, "hope" is called "the entrance" to faith,
i.e. of the thing believed, because by hope we enter in to see what we believe. Or we may reply
that it is called the "entrance to faith," because thereby man begins to be established and
perfected in faith.

Reply Obj. 2: The thing to be hoped for is included in the definition of faith, because the
proper object of faith, is something not apparent in itself. Hence it was necessary to express
it in a circumlocution by something resulting from faith.

Reply Obj. 3: Hope does not precede every meritorious act; but it suffices for it to accompany
or follow it.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 17, Art. 8]

Whether Charity Precedes Hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity precedes hope. For Ambrose says on Luke 27:6, "If you
had faith like to a grain of mustard seed," etc.: "Charity flows from faith, and hope from
charity." But faith precedes charity. Therefore charity precedes hope.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 9) that "good emotions and affections proceed
from love and holy charity." Now to hope, considered as an act of hope, is a good emotion of
the soul. Therefore it flows from charity.

Obj. 3: Further, the Master says (Sent. iii, D, 26) that hope proceeds from merits, which precede
not only the thing hoped for, but also hope itself, which, in the order of nature, is preceded
by charity. Therefore charity precedes hope.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:5): "The end of the commandment is charity from
a pure heart, and a good conscience," i.e. "from hope," according to a gloss. Therefore hope
precedes charity.

I answer that, Order is twofold. One is the order of generation and of matter, in respect of
which the imperfect precedes the perfect: the other is the order of perfection and form, in
respect of which the perfect naturally precedes the imperfect. In respect of the first order
hope precedes charity: and this is clear from the fact that hope and all movements of the appetite
flow from love, as stated above (I-II, Q. 27, A. 4; I-II, Q. 28, A. 6, ad 2; I-II, Q. 40, A.
7) in the treatise on the passions.

Now there is a perfect, and an imperfect love. Perfect love is that whereby a man is loved
in himself, as when someone wishes a person some good for his own sake; thus a man loves his
friend. Imperfect love is that whereby a man love something, not for its own sake, but that
he may obtain that good for himself; thus a man loves what he desires. The first love of God
pertains to charity, which adheres to God for His own sake; while hope pertains to the second
love, since he that hopes, intends to obtain possession of something for himself.

Hence in the order of generation, hope precedes charity. For just as a man is led to love God,
through fear of being punished by Him for his sins, as Augustine states (In primam canon. Joan.
Tract. ix), so too, hope leads to charity, in as much as a man through hoping to be rewarded
by God, is encouraged to love God and obey His commandments. On the other hand, in the order
of perfection charity naturally precedes hope, wherefore, with the advent of charity, hope
is made more perfect, because we hope chiefly in our friends. It is in this sense that Ambrose
states (Obj. 1) that charity flows from hope: so that this suffices for the Reply to the First
Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Hope and every movement of the appetite proceed from some kind of love, whereby
the expected good is loved. But not every kind of hope proceeds from charity, but only the
movement of living hope, viz. that whereby man hopes to obtain good from God, as from a friend.

Reply Obj. 3: The Master is speaking of living hope, which is naturally preceded by charity
and the merits caused by charity.

QUESTION 18

OF THE SUBJECT OF HOPE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the subject of hope, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the virtue of hope is in the will as its subject?

(2) Whether it is in the blessed?

(3) Whether it is in the damned?

(4) Whether there is certainty in the hope of the wayfarer?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 18, Art. 1]

Whether Hope Is in the Will As Its Subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that hope is not in the will as its subject. For the object of hope
is an arduous good, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 1; I-II, Q. 40, A. 1). Now the arduous is the
object, not of the will, but of the irascible. Therefore hope is not in the will but in the
irascible.

Obj. 2: Further, where one suffices it is superfluous to add another. Now charity suffices
for the perfecting of the will, which is the most perfect of the virtues. Therefore hope is
not in the will.

Obj. 3: Further, the one same power cannot exercise two acts at the same time; thus the intellect
cannot understand many things simultaneously. Now the act of hope can be at the same time as
an act of charity. Since, then, the act of charity evidently belongs to the will, it follows
that the act of hope does not belong to that power: so that, therefore, hope is not in the will.

On the contrary, The soul is not apprehensive of God save as regards the mind in which is memory,
intellect and will, as Augustine declares (De Trin. xiv, 3, 6). Now hope is a theological virtue
having God for its object. Since therefore it is neither in the memory, nor in the intellect,
which belong to the cognitive faculty, it follows that it is in the will as its subject.

I answer that, As shown above (I, Q. 87, A. 2), habits are known by their acts. Now the act
of hope is a movement of the appetitive faculty, since its object is a good. And, since there
is a twofold appetite in man, namely, the sensitive which is divided into irascible and concupiscible,
and the intellective appetite, called the will, as stated in the First Part (Q. 82, A. 5),
those movements which occur in the lower appetite, are with passion, while those in the higher
appetite are without passion, as shown above (I, Q. 87, A. 2, ad 1; I-II, Q. 22, A. 3, ad 3).
Now the act of the virtue of hope cannot belong to the sensitive appetite, since the good which
is the principal object of this virtue, is not a sensible but a Divine good. Therefore hope
resides in the higher appetite called the will, and not in the lower appetite, of which the
irascible is a part.

Reply Obj. 1: The object of the irascible is an arduous sensible: whereas the object of the
virtue of hope is an arduous intelligible, or rather superintelligible.

Reply Obj. 2: Charity perfects the will sufficiently with regard to one act, which is the act
of loving: but another virtue is required in order to perfect it with regard to its other act,
which is that of hoping.

Reply Obj. 3: The movement of hope and the movement of charity are mutually related, as was
shown above (Q. 17, A. 8). Hence there is no reason why both movements should not belong at
the same time to the same power: even as the intellect can understand many things at the same
time if they be related to one another, as stated in the First Part (Q. 85, A. 4).

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 18, Art. 2]

Whether in the Blessed There Is Hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that in the blessed there is hope. For Christ was a perfect comprehensor
from the first moment of His conception. Now He had hope, since, according to a gloss, the
words of Ps. 30:2, "In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped," are said in His person. Therefore in the
blessed there can be hope.

Obj. 2: Further, even as the obtaining of happiness is an arduous good, so is its continuation.
Now, before they obtain happiness, men hope to obtain it. Therefore, after they have obtained
it, they can hope to continue in its possession.

Obj. 3: Further, by the virtue of hope, a man can hope for happiness, not only for himself,
but also for others, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 3). But the blessed who are in heaven hope
for the happiness of others, else they would not pray for them. Therefore there can be hope
in them.

Obj. 4: Further, the happiness of the saints implies not only glory of the soul but also glory
of the body. Now the souls of the saints in heaven, look yet for the glory of their bodies
(Apoc. 6:10; Augustine, Gen. ad lit. xii, 35). Therefore in the blessed there can be hope.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. 8:24): "What a man seeth, why doth he hope for?" Now
the blessed enjoy the sight of God. Therefore hope has no place in them.

I answer that, If what gives a thing its species be removed, the species is destroyed, and
that thing cannot remain the same; just as when a natural body loses its form, it does not
remain the same specifically. Now hope takes its species from its principal object, even as
the other virtues do, as was shown above (Q. 17, AA. 5, 6; I-II, Q. 54, A. 2): and its principal
object is eternal happiness as being possible to obtain by the assistance of God, as stated
above (Q. 17, A. 2).

Since then the arduous possible good cannot be an object of hope except in so far as it is
something future, it follows that when happiness is no longer future, but present, it is incompatible
with the virtue of hope. Consequently hope, like faith, is voided in heaven, and neither of
them can be in the blessed.

Reply Obj. 1: Although Christ was a comprehensor and therefore blessed as to the enjoyment
of God, nevertheless He was, at the same time, a wayfarer, as regards the passibility of nature,
to which He was still subject. Hence it was possible for Him to hope for the glory of impassibility
and immortality, yet not so as to have the virtue of hope, the principal object of which is
not the glory of the body but the enjoyment of God.

Reply Obj. 2: The happiness of the saints is called eternal life, because through enjoying
God they become partakers, as it were, of God's eternity which surpasses all time: so that
the continuation of happiness does not differ in respect of present, past and future. Hence
the blessed do not hope for the continuation of their happiness (for as regards this there
is no future), but are in actual possession thereof.

Reply Obj. 3: So long as the virtue of hope lasts, it is by the same hope that one hopes for
one's own happiness, and for that of others. But when hope is voided in the blessed, whereby
they hoped for their own happiness, they hope for the happiness of others indeed, yet not by
the virtue of hope, but rather by the love of charity. Even so, he that has Divine charity,
by that same charity loves his neighbor, without having the virtue of charity, but by some
other love.

Reply Obj. 4: Since hope is a theological virtue having God for its object, its principal object
is the glory of the soul, which consists in the enjoyment of God, and not the glory of the
body. Moreover, although the glory of the body is something arduous in comparison with human
nature, yet it is not so for one who has the glory of the soul; both because the glory of the
body is a very small thing as compared with the glory of the soul, and because one who has
the glory of the soul has already the sufficient cause of the glory of the body.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 18, Art. 3]

Whether Hope Is in the Damned?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is hope in the damned. For the devil is damned and prince
of the damned, according to Matt. 25:41: "Depart . . . you cursed, into everlasting fire, which
was prepared for the devil and his angels." But the devil has hope, according to Job 40:28,
"Behold his hope shall fail him." Therefore it seems that the damned have hope.

Obj. 2: Further, just as faith is either living or dead, so is hope. But lifeless faith can
be in the devils and the damned, according to James 2:19: "The devils . . . believe and tremble."
Therefore it seems that lifeless hope also can be in the damned.

Obj. 3: Further, after death there accrues to man no merit or demerit that he had not before,
according to Eccles. 11:3, "If the tree fall to the south, or to the north, in what place soever
it shall fall, there shall it be." Now many who are damned, in this life hoped and never despaired.
Therefore they will hope in the future life also.

On the contrary, Hope causes joy, according to Rom. 12:12, "Rejoicing in hope." Now the damned
have no joy, but sorrow and grief, according to Isa. 65:14, "My servants shall praise for joyfulness
of heart, and you shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for grief of spirit." Therefore
no hope is in the damned.

I answer that, Just as it is a condition of happiness that the will should find rest therein,
so is it a condition of punishment, that what is inflicted in punishment, should go against
the will. Now that which is not known can neither be restful nor repugnant to the will: wherefore
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xi, 17) that the angels could not be perfectly happy in their
first state before their confirmation, or unhappy before their fall, since they had no foreknowledge
of what would happen to them. For perfect and true happiness requires that one should be certain
of being happy for ever, else the will would not rest.

In like manner, since the everlastingness of damnation is a necessary condition of the punishment
of the damned, it would not be truly penal unless it went against the will; and this would
be impossible if they were ignorant of the everlastingness of their damnation. Hence it belongs
to the unhappy state of the damned, that they should know that they cannot by any means escape
from damnation and obtain happiness. Wherefore it is written (Job 15:22): "He believeth not
that he may return from darkness to light." It is, therefore, evident that they cannot apprehend
happiness as a possible good, as neither can the blessed apprehend it as a future good. Consequently
there is no hope either in the blessed or in the damned. On the other hand, hope can be in
wayfarers, whether of this life or in purgatory, because in either case they apprehend happiness
as a future possible thing.

Reply Obj. 1: As Gregory says (Moral. xxxiii, 20) this is said of the devil as regards his
members, whose hope will fail utterly: or, if it be understood of the devil himself, it may
refer to the hope whereby he expects to vanquish the saints, in which sense we read just before
(Job 40:18): "He trusteth that the Jordan may run into his mouth": this is not, however, the
hope of which we are speaking.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (Enchiridion viii), "faith is about things, bad or good, past,
present, or future, one's own or another's; whereas hope is only about good things, future
and concerning oneself." Hence it is possible for lifeless faith to be in the damned, but not
hope, since the Divine goods are not for them future possible things, but far removed from them.

Reply Obj. 3: Lack of hope in the damned does not change their demerit, as neither does the
voiding of hope in the blessed increase their merit: but both these things are due to the change
in their respective states.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 18, Art. 4]

Whether There Is Certainty in the Hope of a Wayfarer?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no certainty in the hope of a wayfarer. For hope resides
in the will. But certainty pertains not to the will but to the intellect. Therefore there is
no certainty in hope.

Obj. 2: Further, hope is based on grace and merits, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 1). Now it is
impossible in this life to know for certain that we are in a state of grace, as stated above
(I-II, Q. 112, A. 5). Therefore there is no certainty in the hope of a wayfarer.

Obj. 3: Further, there can be no certainty about that which may fail. Now many a hopeful wayfarer
fails to obtain happiness. Therefore wayfarer's hope has no certainty.

On the contrary, "Hope is the certain expectation of future happiness," as the Master states
(Sent. iii, D, 26): and this may be gathered from 2 Tim. 1:12, "I know Whom I have believed,
and I am certain that He is able to keep that which I have committed to Him."

I answer that, Certainty is found in a thing in two ways, essentially and by participation.
It is found essentially in the cognitive power; by participation in whatever is moved infallibly
to its end by the cognitive power. In this way we say that nature works with certainty, since
it is moved by the Divine intellect which moves everything with certainty to its end. In this
way too, the moral virtues are said to work with greater certainty than art, in as much as,
like a second nature, they are moved to their acts by the reason: and thus too, hope tends
to its end with certainty, as though sharing in the certainty of faith which is in the cognitive
faculty.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Hope does not trust chiefly in grace already received, but on God's omnipotence
and mercy, whereby even he that has not grace, can obtain it, so as to come to eternal life.
Now whoever has faith is certain of God's omnipotence and mercy.

Reply Obj. 3: That some who have hope fail to obtain happiness, is due to a fault of the free
will in placing the obstacle of sin, but not to any deficiency in God's power or mercy, in
which hope places its trust. Hence this does not prejudice the certainty of hope.

QUESTION 19

OF THE GIFT OF FEAR (In Twelve Articles)

We must now consider the gift of fear, about which there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether God is to be feared?

(2) Of the division of fear into filial, initial, servile and worldly;

(3) Whether worldly fear is always evil?

(4) Whether servile fear is good?

(5) Whether it is substantially the same as filial fear?

(6) Whether servile fear departs when charity comes?

(7) Whether fear is the beginning of wisdom?

(8) Whether initial fear is substantially the same as filial fear?

(9) Whether fear is a gift of the Holy Ghost?

(10) Whether it grows when charity grows?

(11) Whether it remains in heaven?

(12) Which of the beatitudes and fruits correspond to it?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 1]

Whether God Can Be Feared?

Objection 1: It would seem that God cannot be feared. For the object of fear is a future evil,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 41, AA. 2, 3). But God is free of all evil, since He is goodness
itself. Therefore God cannot be feared.

Obj. 2: Further, fear is opposed to hope. Now we hope in God. Therefore we cannot fear Him
at the same time.

Obj. 3: Further, as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 5), "we fear those things whence evil
comes to us." But evil comes to us, not from God, but from ourselves, according to Osee 13:9:
"Destruction is thy own, O Israel: thy help is . . . in Me." Therefore God is not to be feared.

On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 10:7): "Who shall not fear Thee, O King of nations?" and
(Malachi 1:6): "If I be a master, where is My fear?"

I answer that, Just as hope has two objects, one of which is the future good itself, that one
expects to obtain, while the other is someone's help, through whom one expects to obtain what
one hopes for, so, too, fear may have two objects, one of which is the very evil which a man
shrinks from, while the other is that from which the evil may come. Accordingly, in the first
way God, Who is goodness itself, cannot be an object of fear; but He can be an object of fear
in the second way, in so far as there may come to us some evil either from Him or in relation
to Him.

From Him there comes the evil of punishment, but this is evil not absolutely but relatively,
and, absolutely speaking, is a good. Because, since a thing is said to be good through being
ordered to an end, while evil implies lack of this order, that which excludes the order to
the last end is altogether evil, and such is the evil of fault. On the other hand the evil
of punishment is indeed an evil, in so far as it is the privation of some particular good,
yet absolutely speaking, it is a good, in so far as it is ordained to the last end.

In relation to God the evil of fault can come to us, if we be separated from Him: and in this
way God can and ought to be feared.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection considers the object of fear as being the evil which a man shuns.

Reply Obj. 2: In God, we may consider both His justice, in respect of which He punishes those
who sin, and His mercy, in respect of which He sets us free: in us the consideration of His
justice gives rise to fear, but the consideration of His mercy gives rise to hope, so that,
accordingly, God is the object of both hope and fear, but under different aspects.

Reply Obj. 3: The evil of fault is not from God as its author but from us, in for far as we
forsake God: while the evil of punishment is from God as its author, in so far as it has character
of a good, since it is something just, through being inflicted on us justly; although originally
this is due to the demerit of sin: thus it is written (Wis. 1:13, 16): "God made not death
. . . but the wicked with works and words have called it to them."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 2]

Whether Fear Is Fittingly Divided into Filial, Initial, Servile and Worldly Fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear is unfittingly divided into filial, initial, servile and
worldly fear. For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 15) that there are six kinds of fear, viz.
"laziness, shamefacedness," etc. of which we have treated above (I-II, Q. 41, A. 4), and which
are not mentioned in the division in question. Therefore this division of fear seems unfitting.

Obj. 2: Further, each of these fears is either good or evil. But there is a fear, viz. natural
fear, which is neither morally good, since it is in the demons, according to James 2:19, "The
devils . . . believe and tremble," nor evil, since it is in Christ, according to Mk. 14:33,
Jesus "began to fear and be heavy." Therefore the aforesaid division of fear is insufficient.

Obj. 3: Further, the relation of son to father differs from that of wife to husband, and this
again from that of servant to master. Now filial fear, which is that of the son in comparison
with his father, is distinct from servile fear, which is that of the servant in comparison
with his master. Therefore chaste fear, which seems to be that of the wife in comparison with
her husband, ought to be distinguished from all these other fears.

Obj. 4: Further, even as servile fear fears punishment, so do initial and worldly fear. Therefore
no distinction should be made between them.

Obj. 5: Further, even as concupiscence is about some good, so is fear about some evil. Now
"concupiscence of the eyes," which is the desire for things of this world, is distinct from
"concupiscence of the flesh," which is the desire for one's own pleasure. Therefore "worldly
fear," whereby one fears to lose external goods, is distinct from "human fear," whereby one
fears harm to one's own person.

On the contrary stands the authority of the Master (Sent. iii, D, 34).

I answer that, We are speaking of fear now, in so far as it makes us turn, so to speak, to
God or away from Him. For, since the object of fear is an evil, sometimes, on account of the
evils he fears, man withdraws from God, and this is called human fear; while sometimes, on
account of the evils he fears, he turns to God and adheres to Him. This latter evil is twofold,
viz. evil of punishment, and evil of fault.

Accordingly if a man turn to God and adhere to Him, through fear of punishment, it will be
servile fear; but if it be on account of fear of committing a fault, it will be filial fear,
for it becomes a child to fear offending its father. If, however, it be on account of both,
it will be initial fear, which is between both these fears. As to whether it is possible to
fear the evil of fault, the question has been treated above (I-II, Q. 42, A. 3) when we were
considering the passion of fear.

Reply Obj. 1: Damascene divides fear as a passion of the soul: whereas this division of fear
is taken from its relation to God, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 2: Moral good consists chiefly in turning to God, while moral evil consists chiefly
in turning away from Him: wherefore all the fears mentioned above imply either moral evil or
moral good. Now natural fear is presupposed to moral good and evil, and so it is not numbered
among these kinds of fear.

Reply Obj. 3: The relation of servant to master is based on the power which the master exercises
over the servant; whereas, on the contrary, the relation of a son to his father or of a wife
to her husband is based on the son's affection towards his father to whom he submits himself,
or on the wife's affection towards her husband to whom she binds herself in the union of love.
Hence filial and chaste fear amount to the same, because by the love of charity God becomes
our Father, according to Rom. 8:15, "You have received the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby
we cry: Abba (Father)"; and by this same charity He is called our spouse, according to 2 Cor.
11:2, "I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ":
whereas servile fear has no connection with these, since it does not include charity in its
definition.

Reply Obj. 4: These three fears regard punishment but in different ways. For worldly or human
fear regards a punishment which turns man away from God, and which God's enemies sometimes
inflict or threaten: whereas servile and initial fear regard a punishment whereby men are drawn
to God, and which is inflicted or threatened by God. Servile fear regards this punishment chiefly,
while initial fear regards it secondarily.

Reply Obj. 5: It amounts to the same whether man turns away from God through fear of losing
his worldly goods, or through fear of forfeiting the well-being of his body, since external
goods belong to the body. Hence both these fears are reckoned as one here, although they fear
different evils, even as they correspond to the desire of different goods. This diversity causes
a specific diversity of sins, all of which alike however lead man away from God.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 3]

Whether Worldly Fear Is Always Evil?

Objection 1: It would seem that worldly fear is not always evil. Because regard for men seems
to be a kind of human fear. Now some are blamed for having no regard for man, for instance,
the unjust judge of whom we read (Luke 18:2) that he "feared not God, nor regarded man." Therefore
it seems that worldly fear is not always evil.

Obj. 2: Further, worldly fear seems to have reference to the punishments inflicted by the secular
power. Now such like punishments incite us to good actions, according to Rom. Therefore worldly
fear is not always evil.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems that what is in us naturally, is not evil, since our natural gifts
are from God. Now it is natural to man to fear detriment to his body, and loss of his worldly
goods, whereby the present life is supported. Therefore it seems that worldly fear is not always
evil.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. 10:28): "Fear ye not them that kill the body," thus forbidding
worldly fear. Now nothing but what is evil is forbidden by God. Therefore worldly fear is evil.

I answer that, As shown above (I-II, Q. 1, A. 3; I-II, Q. 18, A. 1; I-II, Q. 54, A. 2) moral
acts and habits take their name and species from their objects. Now the proper object of the
appetite's movement is the final good: so that, in consequence, every appetitive movement is
both specified and named from its proper end. For if anyone were to describe covetousness as
love of work because men work on account of covetousness, this description would be incorrect,
since the covetous man seeks work not as end but as a means: the end that he seeks is wealth,
wherefore covetousness is rightly described as the desire or the love of wealth, and this is
evil. Accordingly worldly love is, properly speaking, the love whereby a man trusts in the
world as his end, so that worldly love is always evil. Now fear is born of love, since man
fears the loss of what he loves, as Augustine states (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 33). Now worldly fear
is that which arises from worldly love as from an evil root, for which reason worldly fear
is always evil.

Reply Obj. 1: One may have regard for men in two ways. First in so far as there is in them
something divine, for instance, the good of grace or of virtue, or at least of the natural
image of God: and in this way those are blamed who have no regard for man. Secondly, one may
have regard for men as being in opposition to God, and thus it is praiseworthy to have no regard
for men, according as we read of Elias or Eliseus (Ecclus. 48:13): "In his days he feared not
the prince."

Reply Obj. 2: When the secular power inflicts punishment in order to withdraw men from sin,
it is acting as God's minister, according to Rom. 13:4, "For he is God's minister, an avenger
to execute wrath upon him that doth evil." To fear the secular power in this way is part, not
of worldly fear, but of servile or initial fear.

Reply Obj. 3: It is natural for man to shrink from detriment to his own body and loss of worldly
goods, but to forsake justice on that account is contrary to natural reason. Hence the Philosopher
says (Ethic. iii, 1) that there are certain things, viz. sinful deeds, which no fear should
drive us to do, since to do such things is worse than to suffer any punishment whatever.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 4]

Whether Servile Fear Is Good?

Objection 1: It would seem that servile fear is not good. For if the use of a thing is evil,
the thing itself is evil. Now the use of servile fear is evil, for according to a gloss on
Rom. 8:15, "if a man do anything through fear, although the deed be good, it is not well done."
Therefore servile fear is not good.

Obj. 2: Further, no good grows from a sinful root. Now servile fear grows from a sinful root,
because when commenting on Job 3:11, "Why did I not die in the womb?" Gregory says (Moral.
iv, 25): "When a man dreads the punishment which confronts him for his sin and no longer loves
the friendship of God which he has lost, his fear is born of pride, not of humility." Therefore
servile fear is evil.

Obj. 3: Further, just as mercenary love is opposed to the love of charity, so is servile fear,
apparently, opposed to chaste fear. But mercenary love is always evil. Therefore servile fear
is also.

On the contrary, Nothing evil is from the Holy Ghost. But servile fear is from the Holy Ghost,
since a gloss on Rom. 8:15, "You have not received the spirit of bondage," etc. says: "It is
the one same spirit that bestows two fears, viz. servile and chaste fear." Therefore servile
fear is not evil.

I answer that, It is owing to its servility that servile fear may be evil. For servitude is
opposed to freedom. Since, then, "what is free is cause of itself" (Metaph. i, 2), a slave
is one who does not act as cause of his own action, but as though moved from without. Now whoever
does a thing through love, does it of himself so to speak, because it is by his own inclination
that he is moved to act: so that it is contrary to the very notion of servility that one should
act from love. Consequently servile fear as such is contrary to charity: so that if servility
were essential to fear, servile fear would be evil simply, even as adultery is evil simply,
because that which makes it contrary to charity belongs to its very species.

This servility, however, does not belong to the species of servile fear, even as neither does
lifelessness to the species of lifeless faith. For the species of a moral habit or act is taken
from the object. Now the object of servile fear is punishment, and it is by accident that,
either the good to which the punishment is contrary, is loved as the last end, and that consequently
the punishment is feared as the greatest evil, which is the case with one who is devoid of
charity, or that the punishment is directed to God as its end, and that, consequently, it is
not feared as the greatest evil, which is the case with one who has charity. For the species
of a habit is not destroyed through its object or end being directed to a further end. Consequently
servile fear is substantially good, but is servility is evil.

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of Augustine is to be applied to a man who does something through
servile fear as such, so that he loves not justice, and fears nothing but the punishment.

Reply Obj. 2: Servile fear as to its substance is not born of pride, but its servility is,
inasmuch as man is unwilling, by love, to subject his affections to the yoke of justice.

Reply Obj. 3: Mercenary love is that whereby God is loved for the sake of worldly goods, and
this is, of itself, contrary to charity, so that mercenary love is always evil. But servile
fear, as to its substance, implies merely fear of punishment, whether or not this be feared
as the principal evil.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 5]

Whether Servile Fear Is Substantially the Same As Filial Fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that servile fear is substantially the same as filial fear. For
filial fear is to servile fear the same apparently as living faith is to lifeless faith, since
the one is accompanied by mortal sin and the other not. Now living faith and lifeless faith
are substantially the same. Therefore servile and filial fear are substantially the same.

Obj. 2: Further, habits are diversified by their objects. Now the same thing is the object
of servile and of filial fear, since they both fear God. Therefore servile and filial fear
are substantially the same.

Obj. 3: Further, just as man hopes to enjoy God and to obtain favors from Him, so does he fear
to be separated from God and to be punished by Him. Now it is the same hope whereby we hope
to enjoy God, and to receive other favors from Him, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 2, ad 2). Therefore
filial fear, whereby we fear separation from God, is the same as servile fear whereby we fear
His punishments.

On the contrary, Augustine (In prim. canon. Joan. Tract. ix) says that there are two fears,
one servile, another filial or chaste fear.

I answer that, The proper object of fear is evil. And since acts and habits are diversified
by their objects, as shown above (I-II, Q. 54, A. 2), it follows of necessity that different
kinds of fear correspond to different kinds of evil.

Now the evil of punishment, from which servile fear shrinks, differs specifically from evil
of fault, which filial fear shuns, as shown above (A. 2). Hence it is evident that servile
and filial fear are not the same substantially but differ specifically.

Reply Obj. 1: Living and lifeless faith differ, not as regards the object, since each of them
believes God and believes in a God, but in respect of something extrinsic, viz. the presence
or absence of charity, and so they do not differ substantially. On the other hand, servile
and filial fear differ as to their objects: and hence the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 2: Servile fear and filial fear do not regard God in the same light. For servile
fear looks upon God as the cause of the infliction of punishment, whereas filial fear looks
upon Him, not as the active cause of guilt, but rather as the term wherefrom it shrinks to
be separated by guilt. Consequently the identity of object, viz. God, does not prove a specific
identity of fear, since also natural movements differ specifically according to their different
relationships to some one term, for movement from whiteness is not specifically the same as
movement towards whiteness.

Reply Obj. 3: Hope looks upon God as the principle not only of the enjoyment of God, but also
of any other favor whatever. This cannot be said of fear; and so there is no comparison.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 6]

Whether Servile Fear Remains with Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that servile fear does not remain with charity. For Augustine says
(In prim. canon. Joan. Tract. ix) that "when charity takes up its abode, it drives away fear
which had prepared a place for it."

Obj. 2: Further, "The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, Who
is given to us" (Rom. 5:5). Now "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" (2 Cor.
3:17). Since then freedom excludes servitude, it seems that servile fear is driven away when
charity comes.

Obj. 3: Further, servile fear is caused by self-love, in so far as punishment diminishes one's
own good. Now love of God drives away self-love, for it makes us despise ourselves: thus Augustine
testifies (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28) that "the love of God unto the contempt of self builds up the
city of God." Therefore it seems that servile fear is driven out when charity comes.

On the contrary, Servile fear is a gift of the Holy Ghost, as stated above (A. 4). Now the
gifts of the Holy Ghost are not forfeited through the advent of charity, whereby the Holy Ghost
dwells in us. Therefore servile fear is not driven out when charity comes.

I answer that, Servile fear proceeds from self-love, because it is fear of punishment which
is detrimental to one's own good. Hence the fear of punishment is consistent with charity,
in the same way as self-love is: because it comes to the same that a man love his own good
and that he fear to be deprived of it.

Now self-love may stand in a threefold relationship to charity. In one way it is contrary to
charity, when a man places his end in the love of his own good. In another way it is included
in charity, when a man loves himself for the sake of God and in God. In a third way, it is
indeed distinct from charity, but is not contrary thereto, as when a man loves himself from
the point of view of his own good, yet not so as to place his end in this his own good: even
as one may have another special love for one's neighbor, besides the love of charity which
is founded on God, when we love him by reason of usefulness, consanguinity, or some other human
consideration, which, however, is referable to charity.

Accordingly fear of punishment is, in one way, included in charity, because separation from
God is a punishment, which charity shuns exceedingly; so that this belongs to chaste fear.
In another way, it is contrary to charity, when a man shrinks from the punishment that is opposed
to his natural good, as being the principal evil in opposition to the good which he loves as
an end; and in this way fear of punishment is not consistent with charity. In another way fear
of punishment is indeed substantially distinct from chaste fear, when, to wit, a man fears
a penal evil, not because it separates him from God, but because it is hurtful to his own good,
and yet he does not place his end in this good, so that neither does he dread this evil as
being the principal evil. Such fear of punishment is consistent with charity; but it is not
called servile, except when punishment is dreaded as a principal evil, as explained above (AA.
2, 4). Hence fear considered as servile, does not remain with charity, but the substance of
servile fear can remain with charity, even as self-love can remain with charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking of fear considered as servile: and such is the sense of
the two other objections.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 6]

Whether Fear Is the Beginning of Wisdom?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear is not the beginning of wisdom. For the beginning of a
thing is a part thereof. But fear is not a part of wisdom, since fear is seated in the appetitive
faculty, while wisdom is in the intellect. Therefore it seems that fear is not the beginning
of wisdom.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing is the beginning of itself. "Now fear of the Lord, that is wisdom,"
according to Job 28:28. Therefore it seems that fear of God is not the beginning of wisdom.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing is prior to the beginning. But something is prior to fear, since faith
precedes fear. Therefore it seems that fear is not the beginning of wisdom.

On the contrary, It is written in the Ps. 110:10: "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom."

I answer that, A thing may be called the beginning of wisdom in two ways: in one way because
it is the beginning of wisdom itself as to its essence; in another way, as to its effect. Thus
the beginning of an art as to its essence consists in the principles from which that art proceeds,
while the beginning of an art as to its effect is that wherefrom it begins to operate: for
instance we might say that the beginning of the art of building is the foundation because that
is where the builder begins his work.

Now, since wisdom is the knowledge of Divine things, as we shall state further on (Q. 45, A.
1), it is considered by us in one way, and in another way by philosophers. For, seeing that
our life is ordained to the enjoyment of God, and is directed thereto according to a participation
of the Divine Nature, conferred on us through grace, wisdom, as we look at it, is considered
not only as being cognizant of God, as it is with the philosophers, but also as directing human
conduct; since this is directed not only by the human law, but also by the Divine law, as Augustine
shows (De Trin. xii, 14). Accordingly the beginning of wisdom as to its essence consists in
the first principles of wisdom, i.e. the articles of faith, and in this sense faith is said
to be the beginning of wisdom. But as regards the effect, the beginning of wisdom is the point
where wisdom begins to work, and in this way fear is the beginning of wisdom, yet servile fear
in one way, and filial fear, in another. For servile fear is like a principle disposing a man
to wisdom from without, in so far as he refrains from sin through fear of punishment, and is
thus fashioned for the effect of wisdom, according to Ecclus. 1:27, "The fear of the Lord driveth
out sin." On the other hand, chaste or filial fear is the beginning of wisdom, as being the
first effect of wisdom. For since the regulation of human conduct by the Divine law belongs
to wisdom, in order to make a beginning, man must first of all fear God and submit himself
to Him: for the result will be that in all things he will be ruled by God.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument proves that fear is not the beginning of wisdom as to the essence
of wisdom.

Reply Obj. 2: The fear of God is compared to a man's whole life that is ruled by God's wisdom,
as the root to the tree: hence it is written (Ecclus. 1:25): "The root of wisdom is to fear
the Lord, for [Vulg.: 'and'] the branches thereof are longlived." Consequently, as the root
is said to be virtually the tree, so the fear of God is said to be wisdom.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above, faith is the beginning of wisdom in one way, and fear, in another.
Hence it is written (Ecclus. 25:16): "The fear of God is the beginning of love: and the beginning
of faith is to be fast joined to it."

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 7]

Whether Initial Fear Differs Substantially from Filial Fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that initial fear differs substantially from filial fear. For filial
fear is caused by love. Now initial fear is the beginning of love, according to Ecclus. 25:16,
"The fear of God is the beginning of love." Therefore initial fear is distinct from filial fear.

Obj. 2: Further, initial fear dreads punishment, which is the object of servile fear, so that
initial and servile fear would seem to be the same. But servile fear is distinct from filial
fear. Therefore initial fear also is substantially distinct from initial fear.

Obj. 3: Further, a mean differs in the same ratio from both the extremes. Now initial fear
is the mean between servile and filial fear. Therefore it differs from both filial and servile
fear.

On the contrary, Perfect and imperfect do not diversify the substance of a thing. Now initial
and filial fear differ in respect of perfection and imperfection of charity, as Augustine states
(In prim. canon. Joan. Tract. ix). Therefore initial fear does not differ substantially from
filial fear.

I answer that, Initial fear is so called because it is a beginning (initium). Since, however,
both servile and filial fear are, in some way, the beginning of wisdom, each may be called
in some way, initial.

It is not in this sense, however, that we are to understand initial fear in so far as it is
distinct from servile and filial fear, but in the sense according to which it belongs to the
state of beginners, in whom there is a beginning of filial fear resulting from a beginning
of charity, although they do not possess the perfection of filial fear, because they have not
yet attained to the perfection of charity. Consequently initial fear stands in the same relation
to filial fear as imperfect to perfect charity. Now perfect and imperfect charity differ, not
as to essence but as to state. Therefore we must conclude that initial fear, as we understand
it here, does not differ essentially from filial fear.

Reply Obj. 1: The fear which is a beginning of love is servile fear, which is the herald of
charity, just as the bristle introduces the thread, as Augustine states (Tract. ix in Ep. i
Joan.). Or else, if it be referred to initial fear, this is said to be the beginning of love,
not absolutely, but relatively to the state of perfect charity.

Reply Obj. 2: Initial fear does not dread punishment as its proper object, but as having something
of servile fear connected with it: for this servile fear, as to its substance, remains indeed,
with charity, its servility being cast aside; whereas its act remains with imperfect charity
in the man who is moved to perform good actions not only through love of justice, but also
through fear of punishment, though this same act ceases in the man who has perfect charity,
which "casteth out fear," according to 1 John 4:18.

Reply Obj. 3: Initial fear is a mean between servile and filial fear, not as between two things
of the same genus, but as the imperfect is a mean between a perfect being and a non-being,
as stated in Metaph. ii, for it is the same substantially as the perfect being, while it differs
altogether from non-being.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 9]

Whether Fear Is a Gift of the Holy Ghost?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear is not a gift of the Holy Ghost. For no gift of the Holy
Ghost is opposed to a virtue, which is also from the Holy Ghost; else the Holy Ghost would
be in opposition to Himself. Now fear is opposed to hope, which is a virtue. Therefore fear
is not a gift of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, it is proper to a theological virtue to have God for its object. But fear
has God for its object, in so far as God is feared. Therefore fear is not a gift, but a theological
virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, fear arises from love. But love is reckoned a theological virtue. Therefore
fear also is a theological virtue, being connected with the same matter, as it were.

Obj. 4: Further, Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49) that "fear is bestowed as a remedy against pride."
But the virtue of humility is opposed to pride. Therefore again, fear is a kind of virtue.

Obj. 5: Further, the gifts are more perfect than the virtues, since they are bestowed in support
of the virtues as Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49). Now hope is more perfect than fear, since hope
regards good, while fear regards evil. Since, then, hope is a virtue, it should not be said
that fear is a gift.

On the contrary, The fear of the Lord is numbered among the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost (Isa.
11:3).

I answer that, Fear is of several kinds, as stated above (A. 2). Now it is not "human fear,"
according to Augustine (De Gratia et Lib. Arb. xviii), "that is a gift of God"--for it was
by this fear that Peter denied Christ--but that fear of which it was said (Matt. 10:28): "Fear
Him that can destroy both soul and body into hell."

Again servile fear is not to be reckoned among the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost, though it
is from Him, because according to Augustine (De Nat. et Grat. lvii) it is compatible with the
will to sin: whereas the gifts of the Holy Ghost are incompatible with the will to sin, as
they are inseparable from charity, as stated above (I-II, Q. 68, A. 5).

It follows, therefore, that the fear of God, which is numbered among the seven gifts of the
Holy Ghost, is filial or chaste fear. For it was stated above (I-II, Q. 68, AA. 1, 3) that
the gifts of the Holy Ghost are certain habitual perfections of the soul's powers, whereby
these are rendered amenable to the motion of the Holy Ghost, just as, by the moral virtues,
the appetitive powers are rendered amenable to the motion of reason. Now for a thing to be
amenable to the motion of a certain mover, the first condition required is that it be a non-resistant
subject of that mover, because resistance of the movable subject to the mover hinders the movement.
This is what filial or chaste fear does, since thereby we revere God and avoid separating ourselves
from Him. Hence, according to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4) filial fear holds the
first place, as it were, among the gifts of the Holy Ghost, in the ascending order, and the
last place, in the descending order.

Reply Obj. 1: Filial fear is not opposed to the virtue of hope: since thereby we fear, not
that we may fail of what we hope to obtain by God's help, but lest we withdraw ourselves from
this help. Wherefore filial fear and hope cling together, and perfect one another.

Reply Obj. 2: The proper and principal object of fear is the evil shunned, and in this way,
as stated above (A. 1), God cannot be an object of fear. Yet He is, in this way, the object
of hope and the other theological virtues, since, by the virtue of hope, we trust in God's
help, not only to obtain any other goods, but, chiefly, to obtain God Himself, as the principal
good. The same evidently applies to the other theological virtues.

Reply Obj. 3: From the fact that love is the origin of fear, it does not follow that the fear
of God is not a distinct habit from charity which is the love of God, since love is the origin
of all the emotions, and yet we are perfected by different habits in respect of different emotions.
Yet love is more of a virtue than fear is, because love regards good, to which virtue is principally
directed by reason of its own nature, as was shown above (I-II, Q. 55, AA. 3, 4); for which
reason hope is also reckoned as a virtue; whereas fear principally regards evil, the avoidance
of which it denotes, wherefore it is something less than a theological virtue.

Reply Obj. 4: According to Ecclus. 10:14, "the beginning of the pride of man is to fall off
from God," that is to refuse submission to God, and this is opposed to filial fear, which reveres
God. Thus fear cuts off the source of pride for which reason it is bestowed as a remedy against
pride. Yet it does not follow that it is the same as the virtue of humility, but that it is
its origin. For the gifts of the Holy Ghost are the origin of the intellectual and moral virtues,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 68, A. 4), while the theological virtues are the origin of the gifts,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 69, A. 4, ad 3).

This suffices for the Reply to the Fifth Objection.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 10]

Whether Fear Decreases When Charity Increases?

Objection 1: It seems that fear decreases when charity increases. For Augustine says (In prim.
canon. Joan. Tract. ix): "The more charity increases, the more fear decreases."

Obj. 2: Further, fear decreases when hope increases. But charity increases when hope increases,
as stated above (Q. 17, A. 8). Therefore fear decreases when charity increases.

Obj. 3: Further, love implies union, whereas fear implies separation. Now separation decreases
when union increases. Therefore fear decreases when the love of charity increases.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 36) that "the fear of God not only begins
but also perfects wisdom, whereby we love God above all things, and our neighbor as ourselves."

I answer that, Fear is twofold, as stated above (AA. 2, 4); one is filial fear, whereby a son
fears to offend his father or to be separated from him; the other is servile fear, whereby
one fears punishment.

Now filial fear must needs increase when charity increases, even as an effect increases with
the increase of its cause. For the more one loves a man, the more one fears to offend him and
to be separated from him.

On the other hand servile fear, as regards its servility, is entirely cast out when charity
comes, although the fear of punishment remains as to its substance, as stated above (A. 6).
This fear decreases as charity increases, chiefly as regards its act, since the more a man
loves God, the less he fears punishment; first, because he thinks less of his own good, to
which punishment is opposed; secondly, because, the faster he clings, the more confident he
is of the reward, and, consequently the less fearful of punishment.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine speaks there of the fear of punishment.

Reply Obj. 2: It is fear of punishment that decreases when hope increases; but with the increase
of the latter filial fear increases, because the more certainly a man expects to obtain a good
by another's help, the more he fears to offend him or to be separated from him.

Reply Obj. 3: Filial fear does not imply separation from God, but submission to Him, and shuns
separation from that submission. Yet, in a way, it implies separation, in the point of not
presuming to equal oneself to Him, and of submitting to Him, which separation is to be observed
even in charity, in so far as a man loves God more than himself and more than aught else. Hence
the increase of the love of charity implies not a decrease but an increase in the reverence
of fear.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 11]

Whether Fear Remains in Heaven?

Objection 1: It would seem that fear does not remain in heaven. For it is written (Prov. 1:33):
"He . . . shall enjoy abundance, without fear of evils," which is to be understood as referring
to those who already enjoy wisdom in everlasting happiness. Now every fear is about some evil,
since evil is the object of fear, as stated above (AA. 2, 5; I-II, Q. 42, A. 1). Therefore
there will be no fear in heaven.

Obj. 2: Further, in heaven men will be conformed to God, according to 1 John 3:2, "When He
shall appear, we shall be like to Him." But God fears nothing. Therefore, in heaven, men will
have no fear.

Obj. Therefore neither will there be fear in heaven.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 18:10): "The fear of the Lord is holy, enduring for ever
and ever."

I answer that, Servile fear, or fear of punishment, will by no means be in heaven, since such
a fear is excluded by the security which is essential to everlasting happiness, as stated above
(I-II, Q. 5, A. 4).

But with regard to filial fear, as it increases with the increase of charity, so is it perfected
when charity is made perfect; hence, in heaven, it will not have quite the same act as it has now.

In order to make this clear, we must observe that the proper object of fear is a possible evil,
just as the proper object of hope is a possible good: and since the movement of fear is like
one of avoidance, fear implies avoidance of a possible arduous evil, for little evils inspire
no fear. Now as a thing's good consists in its staying in its own order, so a thing's evil
consists in forsaking its order. Again, the order of a rational creature is that it should
be under God and above other creatures. Hence, just as it is an evil for a rational creature
to submit, by love, to a lower creature, so too is it an evil for it, if it submit not to God,
but presumptuously revolt against Him or contemn Him. Now this evil is possible to a rational
creature considered as to its nature on account of the natural flexibility of the free-will;
whereas in the blessed, it becomes impossible, by reason of the perfection of glory. Therefore
the avoidance of this evil that consists in non-subjection to God, and is possible to nature,
but impossible in the state of bliss, will be in heaven; while in this life there is avoidance
of this evil as of something altogether possible. Hence Gregory, expounding the words of Job
(26:11), "The pillars of heaven tremble, and dread at His beck," says (Moral. xvii, 29): "The
heavenly powers that gaze on Him without ceasing, tremble while contemplating: but their awe,
lest it should be of a penal nature, is one not of fear but of wonder," because, to wit, they
wonder at God's supereminence and incomprehensibility. Augustine also (De Civ. Dei xiv, 9)
in this sense, admits fear in heaven, although he leaves the question doubtful. "If," he says,
"this chaste fear that endureth for ever and ever is to be in the future life, it will not
be a fear that is afraid of an evil which might possibly occur, but a fear that holds fast
to a good which we cannot lose. For when we love the good which we have acquired, with an unchangeable
love, without doubt, if it is allowable to say so, our fear is sure of avoiding evil. Because
chaste fear denotes a will that cannot consent to sin, and whereby we avoid sin without trembling
lest, in our weakness, we fall, and possess ourselves in the tranquillity born of charity.
Else, if no kind of fear is possible there, perhaps fear is said to endure for ever and ever,
because that which fear will lead us to, will be everlasting."

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted excludes from the blessed, the fear that denotes solicitude,
and anxiety about evil, but not the fear which is accompanied by security.

Reply Obj. 2: As Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ix) "the same things are both like and unlike God.
They are like by reason of a variable imitation of the Inimitable"--that is, because, so far
as they can, they imitate God Who cannot be imitated perfectly--"they are unlike because they
are the effects of a Cause of Whom they fall short infinitely and immeasurably." Hence, if
there be no fear in God (since there is none above Him to whom He may be subject) it does not
follow that there is none in the blessed, whose happiness consists in perfect subjection to God.

Reply Obj. 3: Hope implies a certain defect, namely the futurity of happiness, which ceases
when happiness is present: whereas fear implies a natural defect in a creature, in so far as
it is infinitely distant from God, and this defect will remain even in heaven. Hence fear will
not be cast out altogether.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 19, Art. 12]

Whether Poverty of Spirit Is the Beatitude Corresponding to the Gift of Fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that poverty of spirit is not the beatitude corresponding to the
gift of fear. For fear is the beginning of the spiritual life, as explained above (A. 7): whereas
poverty belongs to the perfection of the spiritual life, according to Matt. Therefore poverty
of spirit does not correspond to the gift of fear.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ps. 118:120): "Pierce Thou my flesh with Thy fear," whence
it seems to follow that it belongs to fear to restrain the flesh. But the curbing of the flesh
seems to belong rather to the beatitude of mourning. Therefore the beatitude of mourning corresponds
to the gift of fear, rather than the beatitude of poverty.

Obj. 3: Further, the gift of fear corresponds to the virtue of hope, as stated above (A. 9,
ad 1). Now the last beatitude which is, "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called
the children of God," seems above all to correspond to hope, because according to Rom. 5:2,
"we . . . glory in the hope of the glory of the sons of God." Therefore that beatitude corresponds
to the gift of fear, rather than poverty of spirit.

Obj. 4: Further, it was stated above (I-II, Q. 70, A. 2) that the fruits correspond to the
beatitudes. Now none of the fruits correspond to the gift of fear. Neither, therefore, does
any of the beatitudes.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4): "The fear of the Lord is befitting
the humble of whom it is said: Blessed are the poor in spirit."

I answer that, Poverty of spirit properly corresponds to fear. Because, since it belongs to
filial fear to show reverence and submission to God, whatever results from this submission
belongs to the gift of fear. Now from the very fact that a man submits to God, it follows that
he ceases to seek greatness either in himself or in another but seeks it only in God. For that
would be inconsistent with perfect subjection to God, wherefore it is written (Ps. 19:8): "Some
trust in chariots and some in horses; but we will call upon the name of . . . our God." It
follows that if a man fear God perfectly, he does not, by pride, seek greatness either in himself
or in external goods, viz. honors and riches. In either case, this proceeds from poverty of
spirit, in so far as the latter denotes either the voiding of a puffed up and proud spirit,
according to Augustine's interpretation (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4), or the renunciation
of worldly goods which is done in spirit, i.e. by one's own will, through the instigation of
the Holy Spirit, according to the expounding of Ambrose on Luke 6:20 and Jerome on Matt. 5:3.

Reply Obj. 1: Since a beatitude is an act of perfect virtue, all the beatitudes belong to the
perfection of spiritual life. And this perfection seems to require that whoever would strive
to obtain a perfect share of spiritual goods, needs to begin by despising earthly goods, wherefore
fear holds the first place among the gifts. Perfection, however, does not consist in the renunciation
itself of temporal goods; since this is the way to perfection: whereas filial fear, to which
the beatitude of poverty corresponds, is consistent with the perfection of wisdom, as stated
above (AA. 7, 10).

Reply Obj. 2: The undue exaltation of man either in himself or in another is more directly
opposed to that submission to God which is the result of filial fear, than is external pleasure.
Yet this is, in consequence, opposed to fear, since whoever fears God and is subject to Him,
takes no delight in things other than God. Nevertheless, pleasure is not concerned, as exaltation
is, with the arduous character of a thing which fear regards: and so the beatitude of poverty
corresponds to fear directly, and the beatitude of mourning, consequently.

Reply Obj. 3: Hope denotes a movement by way of a relation of tendency to a term, whereas fear
implies movement by way of a relation of withdrawal from a term: wherefore the last beatitude
which is the term of spiritual perfection, fittingly corresponds to hope, by way of ultimate
object; while the first beatitude, which implies withdrawal from external things which hinder
submission to God, fittingly corresponds to fear.

Reply Obj. 4: As regards the fruits, it seems that those things correspond to the gift of fear,
which pertain to the moderate use of temporal things or to abstinence therefrom; such are modesty,
continency and chastity.

QUESTION 20

OF DESPAIR (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the contrary vices; (1) despair; (2) presumption. Under the first head
there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether despair is a sin?

(2) Whether it can be without unbelief?

(3) Whether it is the greatest of sins?

(4) Whether it arises from sloth?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 20, Art. 1]

Whether Despair Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that despair is not a sin. For every sin includes conversion to
a mutable good, together with aversion from the immutable good, as Augustine states (De Lib.
Arb. ii, 19). But despair includes no conversion to a mutable good. Therefore it is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, that which grows from a good root, seems to be no sin, because "a good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit" (Matt. 7:18). Now despair seems to grow from a good root, viz.
fear of God, or from horror at the greatness of one's own sins. Therefore despair is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, if despair were a sin, it would be a sin also for the damned to despair. But
this is not imputed to them as their fault but as part of their damnation. Therefore neither
is it imputed to wayfarers as their fault, so that it is not a sin.

On the contrary, That which leads men to sin, seems not only to be a sin itself, but a source
of sins. Now such is despair, for the Apostle says of certain men (Eph. 4:19): "Who, despairing,
have given themselves up to lasciviousness, unto the working of all uncleanness and [Vulg.:
'unto'] covetousness." Therefore despair is not only a sin but also the origin of other sins.

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 2) affirmation and negation in the
intellect correspond to search and avoidance in the appetite; while truth and falsehood in
the intellect correspond to good and evil in the appetite. Consequently every appetitive movement
which is conformed to a true intellect, is good in itself, while every appetitive movement
which is conformed to a false intellect is evil in itself and sinful. Now the true opinion
of the intellect about God is that from Him comes salvation to mankind, and pardon to sinners,
according to Ezech. 18:23, "I desire not the death of the sinner, but that he should be converted,
and live" [*Vulg.: 'Is it My will that a sinner should die . . . and not that he should be
converted and live?' Cf. Ezech. 33:11]: while it is a false opinion that He refuses pardon
to the repentant sinner, or that He does not turn sinners to Himself by sanctifying grace.
Therefore, just as the movement of hope, which is in conformity with the true opinion, is praiseworthy
and virtuous, so the contrary movement of despair, which is in conformity with the false opinion
about God, is vicious and sinful.

Reply Obj. 1: In every mortal sin there is, in some way, aversion from the immutable good,
and conversion to a mutable good, but not always in the same way. Because, since the theological
virtues have God for their object, the sins which are contrary to them, such as hatred of God,
despair and unbelief, consist principally in aversion from the immutable good; but, consequently,
they imply conversion to a mutable good, in so far as the soul that is a deserter from God,
must necessarily turn to other things. Other sins, however, consist principally in conversion
to a mutable good, and, consequently, in aversion from the immutable good: because the fornicator
intends, not to depart from God, but to enjoy carnal pleasure, the result of which is that
he departs from God.

Reply Obj. 2: A thing may grow from a virtuous root in two ways: first, directly and on the
part of the virtue itself; even as an act proceeds from a habit: and in this way no sin can
grow from a virtuous root, for in this sense Augustine declared (De Lib. Arb. ii, 18, 19) that
"no man makes evil use of virtue." Secondly, a thing proceeds from a virtue indirectly, or
is occasioned by a virtue, and in this way nothing hinders a sin proceeding from a virtue:
thus sometimes men pride themselves of their virtues, according to Augustine (Ep. ccxi): "Pride
lies in wait for good works that they may die." In this way fear of God or horror of one's
own sins may lead to despair, in so far as man makes evil use of those good things, by allowing
them to be an occasion of despair.

Reply Obj. 3: The damned are outside the pale of hope on account of the impossibility of returning
to happiness: hence it is not imputed to them that they hope not, but it is a part of their
damnation. Even so, it would be no sin for a wayfarer to despair of obtaining that which he
had no natural capacity for obtaining, or which was not due to be obtained by him; for instance,
if a physician were to despair of healing some sick man, or if anyone were to despair of ever
becoming rich.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 20, Art. 2]

Whether There Can Be Despair Without Unbelief?

Objection 1: It would seem that there can be no despair without unbelief. For the certainty
of hope is derived from faith; and so long as the cause remains the effect is not done away.
Therefore a man cannot lose the certainty of hope, by despairing, unless his faith be removed.

Obj. 2: Further, to prefer one's own guilt to God's mercy and goodness, is to deny the infinity
of God's goodness and mercy, and so savors of unbelief. But whoever despairs, prefers his own
guilt to the Divine mercy and goodness, according to Gen. 4:13: "My iniquity is greater than
that I may deserve pardon." Therefore whoever despairs, is an unbeliever.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever falls into a condemned heresy, is an unbeliever. But he that despairs
seems to fall into a condemned heresy, viz. that of the Novatians, who say that there is no
pardon for sins after Baptism. Therefore it seems that whoever despairs, is an unbeliever.

On the contrary, If we remove that which follows, that which precedes remains. But hope follows
faith, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 7). Therefore when hope is removed, faith can remain; so
that, not everyone who despairs, is an unbeliever.

I answer that, Unbelief pertains to the intellect, but despair, to the appetite: and the intellect
is about universals, while the appetite is moved in connection with particulars, since the
appetitive movement is from the soul towards things, which, in themselves, are particular.
Now it may happen that a man, while having a right opinion in the universal, is not rightly
disposed as to his appetitive movement, his estimate being corrupted in a particular matter,
because, in order to pass from the universal opinion to the appetite for a particular thing,
it is necessary to have a particular estimate (De Anima iii, 2), just as it is impossible to
infer a particular conclusion from an universal proposition, except through the holding of
a particular proposition. Hence it is that a man, while having right faith, in the universal,
fails in an appetitive movement, in regard to some particular, his particular estimate being
corrupted by a habit or a passion, just as the fornicator, by choosing fornication as a good
for himself at this particular moment, has a corrupt estimate in a particular matter, although
he retains the true universal estimate according to faith, viz. that fornication is a mortal
sin. In the same way, a man while retaining in the universal, the true estimate of faith, viz.
that there is in the Church the power of forgiving sins, may suffer a movement of despair,
to wit, that for him, being in such a state, there is no hope of pardon, his estimate being
corrupted in a particular matter. In this way there can be despair, just as there can be other
mortal sins, without belief.

Reply Obj. 1: The effect is done away, not only when the first cause is removed, but also when
the secondary cause is removed. Hence the movement of hope can be done away, not only by the
removal of the universal estimate of faith, which is, so to say, the first cause of the certainty
of hope, but also by the removal of the particular estimate, which is the secondary cause,
as it were.

Reply Obj. 2: If anyone were to judge, in universal, that God's mercy is not infinite, he would
be an unbeliever. But he who despairs judges not thus, but that, for him in that state, on
account of some particular disposition, there is no hope of the Divine mercy.

The same answer applies to the Third Objection, since the Novatians denied, in universal, that
there is remission of sins in the Church.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 20, Art. 3]

Whether Despair Is the Greatest of Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that despair is not the greatest of sins. For there can be despair
without unbelief, as stated above (A. 2). But unbelief is the greatest of sins because it overthrows
the foundation of the spiritual edifice. Therefore despair is not the greatest of sins.

Obj. 2: Further, a greater evil is opposed to a greater good, as the Philosopher states (Ethic.
viii, 10). But charity is greater than hope, according to 1 Cor. 13:13. Therefore hatred of
God is a greater sin than despair.

Obj. 3: Further, in the sin of despair there is nothing but inordinate aversion from God: whereas
in other sins there is not only inordinate aversion from God, but also an inordinate conversion.
Therefore the sin of despair is not more but less grave than other sins.

On the contrary, An incurable sin seems to be most grievous, according to Jer. 30:12: "Thy
bruise is incurable, thy wound is very grievous." Now the sin of despair is incurable, according
to Jer. 15:18: "My wound is desperate so as to refuse to be healed." [*Vulg.: "Why is my wound,"
etc.] Therefore despair is a most grievous sin.

I answer that, Those sins which are contrary to the theological virtues are in themselves more
grievous than others: because, since the theological virtues have God for their object, the
sins which are opposed to them imply aversion from God directly and principally. Now every
mortal sin takes its principal malice and gravity from the fact of its turning away from God,
for if it were possible to turn to a mutable good, even inordinately, without turning away
from God, it would not be a mortal sin. Consequently a sin which, first and of its very nature,
includes aversion from God, is most grievous among mortal sins.

Now unbelief, despair and hatred of God are opposed to the theological virtues: and among them,
if we compare hatred of God and unbelief to despair, we shall find that, in themselves, that
is, in respect of their proper species, they are more grievous. For unbelief is due to a man
not believing God's own truth; while the hatred of God arises from man's will being opposed
to God's goodness itself; whereas despair consists in a man ceasing to hope for a share of
God's goodness. Hence it is clear that unbelief and hatred of God are against God as He is
in Himself, while despair is against Him, according as His good is partaken of by us. Wherefore
strictly speaking it is a more grievous sin to disbelieve God's truth, or to hate God, than
not to hope to receive glory from Him.

If, however, despair be compared to the other two sins from our point of view, then despair
is more dangerous, since hope withdraws us from evils and induces us to seek for good things,
so that when hope is given up, men rush headlong into sin, and are drawn away from good works.
Wherefore a gloss on Prov. 24:10, "If thou lose hope being weary in the day of distress, thy
strength shall be diminished," says: "Nothing is more hateful than despair, for the man that
has it loses his constancy both in the every day toils of this life, and, what is worse, in
the battle of faith." And Isidore says (De Sum. Bono ii, 14): "To commit a crime is to kill
the soul, but to despair is to fall into hell."

[And from this the response to the objections is evident.]

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 20, Art. 4]

Whether Despair Arises from Sloth?

Objection 1: It would seem that despair does not arise from sloth. Because different causes
do not give rise to one same effect. Now despair of the future life arises from lust, according
to Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45). Therefore it does not arise from sloth.

Obj. 2: Further, just as despair is contrary to hope, so is sloth contrary to spiritual joy.
But spiritual joy arises from hope, according to Rom. 12:12, "rejoicing in hope." Therefore
sloth arises from despair, and not vice versa.

Obj. 3: Further, contrary effects have contrary causes. Now hope, the contrary of which is
despair, seems to proceed from the consideration of Divine favors, especially the Incarnation,
for Augustine says (De Trin. xiii, 10): "Nothing was so necessary to raise our hope, than that
we should be shown how much God loves us. Now what greater proof could we have of this than
that God's Son should deign to unite Himself to our nature?" Therefore despair arises rather
from the neglect of the above consideration than from sloth.

On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) reckons despair among the effects of sloth.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 17, A. 1; I-II, Q. 40, A. 1), the object of hope is a good,
difficult but possible to obtain by oneself or by another. Consequently the hope of obtaining
happiness may be lacking in a person in two ways: first, through his not deeming it an arduous
good; secondly, through his deeming it impossible to obtain either by himself, or by another.
Now, the fact that spiritual goods taste good to us no more, or seem to be goods of no great
account, is chiefly due to our affections being infected with the love of bodily pleasures,
among which, sexual pleasures hold the first place: for the love of those pleasures leads man
to have a distaste for spiritual things, and not to hope for them as arduous goods. In this
way despair is caused by lust.

On the other hand, the fact that a man deems an arduous good impossible to obtain, either by
himself or by another, is due to his being over downcast, because when this state of mind dominates
his affections, it seems to him that he will never be able to rise to any good. And since sloth
is a sadness that casts down the spirit, in this way despair is born of sloth.

Now this is the proper object of hope--that the thing is possible, because the good and the
arduous regard other passions also. Hence despair is born of sloth in a more special way: though
it may arise from lust, for the reason given above.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (Rhet. i, 11), just as hope gives rise to joy, so,
when a man is joyful he has greater hope: and, accordingly, those who are sorrowful fall the
more easily into despair, according to 2 Cor. 2:7: "Lest . . . such an one be swallowed up
by overmuch sorrow." Yet, since the object of hope is good, to which the appetite tends naturally,
and which it shuns, not naturally but only on account of some supervening obstacle, it follows
that, more directly, hope gives birth to joy, while on the contrary despair is born of sorrow.

Reply Obj. 3: This very neglect to consider the Divine favors arises from sloth. For when a
man is influenced by a certain passion he considers chiefly the things which pertain to that
passion: so that a man who is full of sorrow does not easily think of great and joyful things,
but only of sad things, unless by a great effort he turn his thoughts away from sadness.

QUESTION 21

OF PRESUMPTION (In Four Articles)

We must now consider presumption, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) What is the object in which presumption trusts?

(2) Whether presumption is a sin?

(3) To what is it opposed?

(4) From what vice does it arise?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 21, Art. 1]

Whether Presumption Trusts in God or in Our Own Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that presumption, which is a sin against the Holy Ghost, trusts,
not in God, but in our own power. For the lesser the power, the more grievously does he sin
who trusts in it too much. But man's power is less than God's. Therefore it is a more grievous
sin to presume on human power than to presume on the power of God. Now the sin against the
Holy Ghost is most grievous. Therefore presumption, which is reckoned a species of sin against
the Holy Ghost, trusts to human rather than to Divine power.

Obj. 2: Further, other sins arise from the sin against the Holy Ghost, for this sin is called
malice which is a source from which sins arise. Now other sins seem to arise from the presumption
whereby man presumes on himself rather than from the presumption whereby he presumes on God,
since self-love is the origin of sin, according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28). Therefore
it seems that presumption which is a sin against the Holy Ghost, relies chiefly on human power.

Obj. 3: Further, sin arises from the inordinate conversion to a mutable good. Now presumption
is a sin. Therefore it arises from turning to human power, which is a mutable good, rather
than from turning to the power of God, which is an immutable good.

On the contrary, Just as, through despair, a man despises the Divine mercy, on which hope relies,
so, through presumption, he despises the Divine justice, which punishes the sinner. Now justice
is in God even as mercy is. Therefore, just as despair consists in aversion from God, so presumption
consists in inordinate conversion to Him.

I answer that, Presumption seems to imply immoderate hope. Now the object of hope is an arduous
possible good: and a thing is possible to a man in two ways: first by his own power; secondly,
by the power of God alone. With regard to either hope there may be presumption owing to lack
of moderation. As to the hope whereby a man relies on his own power, there is presumption if
he tends to a good as though it were possible to him, whereas it surpasses his powers, according
to Judith 6:15: "Thou humblest them that presume of themselves." This presumption is contrary
to the virtue of magnanimity which holds to the mean in this kind of hope.

But as to the hope whereby a man relies on the power of God, there may be presumption through
immoderation, in the fact that a man tends to some good as though it were possible by the power
and mercy of God, whereas it is not possible, for instance, if a man hope to obtain pardon
without repenting, or glory without merits. This presumption is, properly, the sin against
the Holy Ghost, because, to wit, by presuming thus a man removes or despises the assistance
of the Holy Spirit, whereby he is withdrawn from sin.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 20, A. 3; I-II, Q. 73, A. 3) a sin which is against God is,
in its genus, graver than other sins. Hence presumption whereby a man relies on God inordinately,
is a more grievous sin than the presumption of trusting in one's own power, since to rely on
the Divine power for obtaining what is unbecoming to God, is to depreciate the Divine power,
and it is evident that it is a graver sin to detract from the Divine power than to exaggerate
one's own.

Reply Obj. 2: The presumption whereby a man presumes inordinately on God, includes self-love,
whereby he loves his own good inordinately. For when we desire a thing very much, we think
we can easily procure it through others, even though we cannot.

Reply Obj. 3: Presumption on God's mercy implies both conversion to a mutable good, in so far
as it arises from an inordinate desire of one's own good, and aversion from the immutable good,
in as much as it ascribes to the Divine power that which is unbecoming to it, for thus man
turns away from God's power.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 21, Art. 2]

Whether Presumption Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that presumption is not a sin. For no sin is a reason why man should
be heard by God. Yet, through presumption some are heard by God, for it is written (Judith
9:17): "Hear me a poor wretch making supplication to Thee, and presuming of Thy mercy." Therefore
presumption on God's mercy is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, presumption denotes excessive hope. But there cannot be excess of that hope
which is in God, since His power and mercy are infinite. Therefore it seems that presumption
is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is a sin does not excuse from sin: for the Master says (Sent. ii,
D, 22) that "Adam sinned less, because he sinned in the hope of pardon," which seems to indicate
presumption. Therefore presumption is not a sin.

On the contrary, It is reckoned a species of sin against the Holy Ghost.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 20, A. 1) with regard to despair, every appetitive movement
that is conformed to a false intellect, is evil in itself and sinful. Now presumption is an
appetitive movement, since it denotes an inordinate hope. Moreover it is conformed to a false
intellect, just as despair is: for just as it is false that God does not pardon the repentant,
or that He does not turn sinners to repentance, so is it false that He grants forgiveness to
those who persevere in their sins, and that He gives glory to those who cease from good works:
and it is to this estimate that the movement of presumption is conformed.

Consequently presumption is a sin, but less grave than despair, since, on account of His infinite
goodness, it is more proper to God to have mercy and to spare, than to punish: for the former
becomes God in Himself, the latter becomes Him by reason of our sins.

Reply Obj. 1: Presumption sometimes stands for hope, because even the right hope which we have
in God seems to be presumption, if it be measured according to man's estate: yet it is not,
if we look at the immensity of the goodness of God.

Reply Obj. 2: Presumption does not denote excessive hope, as though man hoped too much in God;
but through man hoping to obtain from God something unbecoming to Him; which is the same as
to hope too little in Him, since it implies a depreciation of His power; as stated above (A.
1, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: To sin with the intention of persevering in sin and through the hope of being
pardoned, is presumptuous, and this does not diminish, but increases sin. To sin, however,
with the hope of obtaining pardon some time, and with the intention of refraining from sin
and of repenting of it, is not presumptuous, but diminishes sin, because this seems to indicate
a will less hardened in sin.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 21, Art. 3]

Whether Presumption Is More Opposed to Fear Than to Hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that presumption is more opposed to fear than to hope. Because inordinate
fear is opposed to right fear. Now presumption seems to pertain to inordinate fear, for it
is written (Wis. 17:10): "A troubled conscience always presumes [Douay: 'forecasteth'] grievous
things," and (Wis. 17:11) that "fear is a help to presumption [*Vulg.: 'Fear is nothing else
but a yielding up of the succours from thought.']." Therefore presumption is opposed to fear
rather than to hope.

Obj. 2: Further, contraries are most distant from one another. Now presumption is more distant
from fear than from hope, because presumption implies movement to something, just as hope does,
whereas fear denotes movement from a thing. Therefore presumption is contrary to fear rather
than to hope.

Obj. 3: Further, presumption excludes fear altogether, whereas it does not exclude hope altogether,
but only the rectitude of hope. Since therefore contraries destroy one another, it seems that
presumption is contrary to fear rather than to hope.

On the contrary, When two vices are opposed to one another they are contrary to the same virtue,
as timidity and audacity are opposed to fortitude. Now the sin of presumption is contrary to
the sin of despair, which is directly opposed to hope. Therefore it seems that presumption
also is more directly opposed to hope.

I answer that, As Augustine states (Contra Julian. iv, 3), "every virtue not only has a contrary
vice manifestly distinct from it, as temerity is opposed to prudence, but also a sort of kindred
vice, alike, not in truth but only in its deceitful appearance, as cunning is opposed to prudence."
This agrees with the Philosopher who says (Ethic. ii, 8) that a virtue seems to have more in
common with one of the contrary vices than with the other, as temperance with insensibility,
and fortitude with audacity.

Accordingly presumption appears to be manifestly opposed to fear, especially servile fear,
which looks at the punishment arising from God's justice, the remission of which presumption
hopes for; yet by a kind of false likeness it is more opposed to hope, since it denotes an
inordinate hope in God. And since things are more directly opposed when they belong to the
same genus, than when they belong to different genera, it follows that presumption is more
directly opposed to hope than to fear. For they both regard and rely on the same object, hope
inordinately, presumption inordinately.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as hope is misused in speaking of evils, and properly applied in speaking
of good, so is presumption: it is in this way that inordinate fear is called presumption.

Reply Obj. 2: Contraries are things that are most distant from one another within the same
genus. Now presumption and hope denote a movement of the same genus, which can be either ordinate
or inordinate. Hence presumption is more directly opposed to hope than to fear, since it is
opposed to hope in respect of its specific difference, as an inordinate thing to an ordinate
one, whereas it is opposed to fear, in respect of its generic difference, which is the movement
of hope.

Reply Obj. 3: Presumption is opposed to fear by a generic contrariety, and to the virtue of
hope by a specific contrariety. Hence presumption excludes fear altogether even generically,
whereas it does not exclude hope except by reason of its difference, by excluding its ordinateness.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 21, Art. 4]

Whether Presumption Arises from Vainglory?

Objection 1: It would seem that presumption does not arise from vainglory. For presumption
seems to rely most of all on the Divine mercy. Now mercy (misericordia) regards unhappiness
(miseriam) which is contrary to glory. Therefore presumption does not arise from vainglory.

Obj. 2: Further, presumption is opposed to despair. Now despair arises from sorrow, as stated
above (Q. 20, A. 4, ad 2). Since therefore opposites have opposite causes, presumption would
seem to arise from pleasure, and consequently from sins of the flesh, which give the most absorbing
pleasure.

Obj. 3: Further, the vice of presumption consists in tending to some impossible good, as though
it were possible. Now it is owing to ignorance that one deems an impossible thing to be possible.
Therefore presumption arises from ignorance rather than from vainglory.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "presumption of novelties is a daughter
of vainglory."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), presumption is twofold; one whereby a man relies on
his own power, when he attempts something beyond his power, as though it were possible to him.
Such like presumption clearly arises from vainglory; for it is owing to a great desire for
glory, that a man attempts things beyond his power, and especially novelties which call for
greater admiration. Hence Gregory states explicitly that presumption of novelties is a daughter
of vainglory.

The other presumption is an inordinate trust in the Divine mercy or power, consisting in the
hope of obtaining glory without merits, or pardon without repentance. Such like presumption
seems to arise directly from pride, as though man thought so much of himself as to esteem that
God would not punish him or exclude him from glory, however much he might be a sinner.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

QUESTION 22

OF THE PRECEPTS RELATING TO HOPE AND FEAR (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the precepts relating to hope and fear: under which head there are two
points of inquiry:

(1) The precepts relating to hope;

(2) The precepts relating to fear.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 22, Art. 1]

Whether There Should Be a Precept of Hope?

Objection 1: It would seem that no precept should be given relating to the virtue of hope.
For when an effect is sufficiently procured by one cause, there is no need to induce it by
another. Now man is sufficiently induced by his natural inclination to hope for good. Therefore
there is no need of a precept of the Law to induce him to do this.

Obj. 2: Further, since precepts are given about acts of virtue, the chief precepts are about
the acts of the chief virtues. Now the chief of all the virtues are the three theological virtues,
viz. hope, faith and charity. Consequently, as the chief precepts of the Law are those of the
decalogue, to which all others may be reduced, as stated above (I-II, Q. 100, A. 3), it seems
that if any precept of hope were given, it should be found among the precepts of the decalogue.
But it is not to be found there. Therefore it seems that the Law should contain no precept of hope.

Obj. 3: Further, to prescribe an act of virtue is equivalent to a prohibition of the act of
the opposite vice. Now no precept is to be found forbidding despair which is contrary to hope.
Therefore it seems that the Law should contain no precept of hope.

On the contrary, Augustine says on John 15:12, "This is My commandment, that you love one another"
(Tract. lxxxiii in Joan.): "How many things are commanded us about faith! How many relating
to hope!" Therefore it is fitting that some precepts should be given about hope.

I answer that, Among the precepts contained in Holy Writ, some belong to the substance of the
Law, others are preambles to the Law. The preambles to the Law are those without which no law
is possible: such are the precepts relating to the act of faith and the act of hope, because
the act of faith inclines man's mind so that he believes the Author of the Law to be One to
Whom he owes submission, while, by the hope of a reward, he is induced to observe the precepts.
The precepts that belong to the substance of the Law are those which relate to right conduct
and are imposed on man already subject and ready to obey: wherefore when the Law was given
these precepts were set forth from the very outset under the form of a command.

Yet the precepts of hope and faith were not to be given under the form of a command, since,
unless man already believed and hoped, it would be useless to give him the Law: but, just as
the precept of faith had to be given under the form of an announcement or reminder, as stated
above (Q. 16, A. 1), so too, the precept of hope, in the first promulgation of the Law, had
to be given under the form of a promise. For he who promises rewards to them that obey him,
by that very fact, urges them to hope: hence all the promises contained in the Law are incitements
to hope.

Since, however, when once the Law has been given, it is for a wise man to induce men not only
to observe the precepts, but also, and much more, to safeguard the foundation of the Law, therefore,
after the first promulgation of the Law, Holy Writ holds out to man many inducements to hope,
even by way of warning or command, and not merely by way of promise, as in the Law; for instance,
in the Ps. 61:9: "Hope [Douay: 'Trust'] in Him all ye congregation of the people," and in many
other passages of the Scriptures.

Reply Obj. 1: Nature inclines us to hope for the good which is proportionate to human nature;
but for man to hope for a supernatural good he had to be induced by the authority of the Divine
law, partly by promises, partly by admonitions and commands. Nevertheless there was need for
precepts of the Divine law to be given even for those things to which natural reason inclines
us, such as the acts of the moral virtues, for sake of insuring a greater stability, especially
since the natural reason of man was clouded by the lusts of sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The precepts of the law of the decalogue belong to the first promulgation of
the Law: hence there was no need for a precept of hope among the precepts of the decalogue,
and it was enough to induce men to hope by the inclusion of certain promises, as in the case
of the first and fourth commandments.

Reply Obj. 3: In those observances to which man is bound as under a duty, it is enough that
he receive an affirmative precept as to what he has to do, wherein is implied the prohibition
of what he must avoid doing: thus he is given a precept concerning the honor due to parents,
but not a prohibition against dishonoring them, except by the law inflicting punishment on
those who dishonor their parents. And since in order to be saved it is man's duty to hope in
God, he had to be induced to do so by one of the above ways, affirmatively, so to speak, wherein
is implied the prohibition of the opposite.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 22, Art. 2]

Whether There Should Have Been Given a Precept of Fear?

Objection 1: It would seem that, in the Law, there should not have been given a precept of
fear. For the fear of God is about things which are a preamble to the Law, since it is the
"beginning of wisdom." Now things which are a preamble to the Law do not come under a precept
of the Law. Therefore no precept of fear should be given in the Law.

Obj. 2: Further, given the cause, the effect is also given. Now love is the cause of fear,
since "every fear proceeds from some kind of love," as Augustine states (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 33).
Therefore given the precept of love, it would have been superfluous to command fear.

Obj. 3: Further, presumption, in a way, is opposed to fear. But the Law contains no prohibition
against presumption. Therefore it seems that neither should any precept of fear have been given.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 10:12): "And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God
require of thee, but that thou fear the Lord thy God?" But He requires of us that which He
commands us to do. Therefore it is a matter of precept that man should fear God.

I answer that, Fear is twofold, servile and filial. Now just as man is induced, by the hope
of rewards, to observe precepts of law, so too is he induced thereto by the fear of punishment,
which fear is servile.

And just as according to what has been said (A. 1), in the promulgation of the Law there was
no need for a precept of the act of hope, and men were to be induced thereto by promises, so
neither was there need for a precept, under form of command, of fear which regards punishment,
and men were to be induced thereto by the threat of punishment: and this was realized both
in the precepts of the decalogue, and afterwards, in due sequence, in the secondary precepts
of the Law.

Yet, just as wise men and the prophets who, consequently, strove to strengthen man in the observance
of the Law, delivered their teaching about hope under the form of admonition or command, so
too did they in the matter of fear.

On the other hand filial fear which shows reverence to God, is a sort of genus in respect of
the love of God, and a kind of principle of all observances connected with reverence for God.
Hence precepts of filial fear are given in the Law, even as precepts of love, because each
is a preamble to the external acts prescribed by the Law and to which the precepts of the decalogue
refer. Hence in the passage quoted in the argument On the contrary, man is required "to have
fear, to walk in God's ways," by worshipping Him, and "to love Him."

Reply Obj. 1: Filial fear is a preamble to the Law, not as though it were extrinsic thereto,
but as being the beginning of the Law, just as love is. Hence precepts are given of both, since
they are like general principles of the whole Law.

Reply Obj. 2: From love proceeds filial fear as also other good works that are done from charity.
Hence, just as after the precept of charity, precepts are given of the other acts of virtue,
so at the same time precepts are given of fear and of the love of charity, just as, in demonstrative
sciences, it is not enough to lay down the first principles, unless the conclusions also are
given which follow from them proximately or remotely.

Reply Obj. 3: Inducement to fear suffices to exclude presumption, even as inducement to hope
suffices to exclude despair, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3).

QUESTION 23

OF CHARITY, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF (In Eight Articles)

In proper sequence, we must consider charity; and (1) charity itself; (2) the corresponding
gift of wisdom. The first consideration will be fivefold: (1) Charity itself; (2) The object
of charity; (3) Its acts; (4) The opposite vices; (5) The precepts relating thereto.

The first of these considerations will be twofold: (1) Charity, considered as regards itself;
(2) Charity, considered in its relation to its subject. Under the first head there are eight
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether charity is friendship?

(2) Whether it is something created in the soul?

(3) Whether it is a virtue?

(4) Whether it is a special virtue?

(5) Whether it is one virtue?

(6) Whether it is the greatest of the virtues?

(7) Whether any true virtue is possible without it?

(8) Whether it is the form of the virtues?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 1]

Whether Charity Is Friendship?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not friendship. For nothing is so appropriate to
friendship as to dwell with one's friend, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 5). Now
charity is of man towards God and the angels, "whose dwelling [Douay: 'conversation'] is not
with men" (Dan. 2:11). Therefore charity is not friendship.

Obj. 2: Further, there is no friendship without return of love (Ethic. viii, 2). But charity
extends even to one's enemies, according to Matt. 5:44: "Love your enemies." Therefore charity
is not friendship.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 3) there are three kinds of friendship,
directed respectively towards the delightful, the useful, or the virtuous. Now charity is not
the friendship for the useful or delightful; for Jerome says in his letter to Paulinus which
is to be found at the beginning of the Bible: "True friendship cemented by Christ, is where
men are drawn together, not by household interests, not by mere bodily presence, not by crafty
and cajoling flattery, but by the fear of God, and the study of the Divine Scriptures." No
more is it friendship for the virtuous, since by charity we love even sinners, whereas friendship
based on the virtuous is only for virtuous men (Ethic. viii). Therefore charity is not friendship.

On the contrary, It is written (John 15:15): "I will not now call you servants . . . but My
friends." Now this was said to them by reason of nothing else than charity. Therefore charity
is friendship.

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 2, 3) not every love has the character
of friendship, but that love which is together with benevolence, when, to wit, we love someone
so as to wish good to him. If, however, we do not wish good to what we love, but wish its good
for ourselves, (thus we are said to love wine, or a horse, or the like), it is love not of
friendship, but of a kind of concupiscence. For it would be absurd to speak of having friendship
for wine or for a horse.

Yet neither does well-wishing suffice for friendship, for a certain mutual love is requisite,
since friendship is between friend and friend: and this well-wishing is founded on some kind
of communication.

Accordingly, since there is a communication between man and God, inasmuch as He communicates
His happiness to us, some kind of friendship must needs be based on this same communication,
of which it is written (1 Cor. 1:9): "God is faithful: by Whom you are called unto the fellowship
of His Son." The love which is based on this communication, is charity: wherefore it is evident
that charity is the friendship of man for God.

Reply Obj. 1: Man's life is twofold. There is his outward life in respect of his sensitive
and corporeal nature: and with regard to this life there is no communication or fellowship
between us and God or the angels. The other is man's spiritual life in respect of his mind,
and with regard to this life there is fellowship between us and both God and the angels, imperfectly
indeed in this present state of life, wherefore it is written (Phil. 3:20): "Our conversation
is in heaven." But this "conversation" will be perfected in heaven, when "His servants shall
serve Him, and they shall see His face" (Apoc. 22:3, 4). Therefore charity is imperfect here,
but will be perfected in heaven.

Reply Obj. 2: Friendship extends to a person in two ways: first in respect of himself, and
in this way friendship never extends but to one's friends: secondly, it extends to someone
in respect of another, as, when a man has friendship for a certain person, for his sake he
loves all belonging to him, be they children, servants, or connected with him in any way. Indeed
so much do we love our friends, that for their sake we love all who belong to them, even if
they hurt or hate us; so that, in this way, the friendship of charity extends even to our enemies,
whom we love out of charity in relation to God, to Whom the friendship of charity is chiefly
directed.

Reply Obj. 3: The friendship that is based on the virtuous is directed to none but a virtuous
man as the principal person, but for his sake we love those who belong to him, even though
they be not virtuous: in this way charity, which above all is friendship based on the virtuous,
extends to sinners, whom, out of charity, we love for God's sake.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 2]

Whether Charity Is Something Created in the Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not something created in the soul. For Augustine
says (De Trin. viii, 7): "He that loveth his neighbor, consequently, loveth love itself." Now
God is love. Therefore it follows that he loves God in the first place. Again he says (De Trin.
xv, 17): "It was said: God is Charity, even as it was said: God is a Spirit." Therefore charity
is not something created in the soul, but is God Himself.

Obj. 2: Further, God is the life of the soul spiritually just as the soul is the life of the
body, according to Deut. 30:20: "He is thy life." Now the soul by itself quickens the body.
Therefore God quickens the soul by Himself. But He quickens it by charity, according to 1 John
3:14: "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren." Therefore
God is charity itself.

Obj. 3: Further, no created thing is of infinite power; on the contrary every creature is vanity.
But charity is not vanity, indeed it is opposed to vanity; and it is of infinite power, since
it brings the human soul to the infinite good. Therefore charity is not something created in
the soul.

On the charity, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. iii, 10): "By charity I mean the movement
of the soul towards the enjoyment of God for His own sake." But a movement of the soul is something
created in the soul. Therefore charity is something created in the soul.

I answer that, The Master looks thoroughly into this question in Q. 17 of the First Book, and
concludes that charity is not something created in the soul, but is the Holy Ghost Himself
dwelling in the mind. Nor does he mean to say that this movement of love whereby we love God
is the Holy Ghost Himself, but that this movement is from the Holy Ghost without any intermediary
habit, whereas other virtuous acts are from the Holy Ghost by means of the habits of other
virtues, for instance the habit of faith or hope or of some other virtue: and this he said
on account of the excellence of charity.

But if we consider the matter aright, this would be, on the contrary, detrimental to charity.
For when the Holy Ghost moves the human mind the movement of charity does not proceed from
this motion in such a way that the human mind be merely moved, without being the principle
of this movement, as when a body is moved by some extrinsic motive power. For this is contrary
to the nature of a voluntary act, whose principle needs to be in itself, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 6, A. 1): so that it would follow that to love is not a voluntary act, which involves a
contradiction, since love, of its very nature, implies an act of the will.

Likewise, neither can it be said that the Holy Ghost moves the will in such a way to the act
of loving, as though the will were an instrument, for an instrument, though it be a principle
of action, nevertheless has not the power to act or not to act, for then again the act would
cease to be voluntary and meritorious, whereas it has been stated above (I-II, Q. 114, A. 4)
that the love of charity is the root of merit: and, given that the will is moved by the Holy
Ghost to the act of love, it is necessary that the will also should be the efficient cause
of that act.

Now no act is perfectly produced by an active power, unless it be connatural to that power
by reason of some form which is the principle of that action. Wherefore God, Who moves all
things to their due ends, bestowed on each thing the form whereby it is inclined to the end
appointed to it by Him; and in this way He "ordereth all things sweetly" (Wis. 8:1). But it
is evident that the act of charity surpasses the nature of the power of the will, so that,
therefore, unless some form be superadded to the natural power, inclining it to the act of
love, this same act would be less perfect than the natural acts and the acts of the other powers;
nor would it be easy and pleasurable to perform. And this is evidently untrue, since no virtue
has such a strong inclination to its act as charity has, nor does any virtue perform its act
with so great pleasure. Therefore it is most necessary that, for us to perform the act of charity,
there should be in us some habitual form superadded to the natural power, inclining that power
to the act of charity, and causing it to act with ease and pleasure.

Reply Obj. 1: The Divine Essence Itself is charity, even as It is wisdom and goodness. Wherefore
just as we are said to be good with the goodness which is God, and wise with the wisdom which
is God (since the goodness whereby we are formally good is a participation of Divine goodness,
and the wisdom whereby we are formally wise, is a share of Divine wisdom), so too, the charity
whereby formally we love our neighbor is a participation of Divine charity. For this manner
of speaking is common among the Platonists, with whose doctrines Augustine was imbued; and
the lack of adverting to this has been to some an occasion of error.

Reply Obj. 2: God is effectively the life both of the soul by charity, and of the body by the
soul: but formally charity is the life of the soul, even as the soul is the life of the body.
Consequently we may conclude from this that just as the soul is immediately united to the body,
so is charity to the soul.

Reply Obj. 3: Charity works formally. Now the efficacy of a form depends on the power of the
agent, who instills the form, wherefore it is evident that charity is not vanity. But because
it produces an infinite effect, since, by justifying the soul, it unites it to God, this proves
the infinity of the Divine power, which is the author of charity.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 3]

Whether Charity Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not a virtue. For charity is a kind of friendship.
Now philosophers do not reckon friendship a virtue, as may be gathered from Ethic. viii, 1;
nor is it numbered among the virtues whether moral or intellectual. Neither, therefore, is
charity a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, "virtue is the ultimate limit of power" (De Coelo et Mundo i, 11). But charity
is not something ultimate, this applies rather to joy and peace. Therefore it seems that charity
is not a virtue, and that this should be said rather of joy and peace.

Obj. 3: Further, every virtue is an accidental habit. But charity is not an accidental habit,
since it is a more excellent thing than the soul itself: whereas no accident is more excellent
than its subject. Therefore charity is not a virtue.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. xi): "Charity is a virtue which, when our
affections are perfectly ordered, unites us to God, for by it we love Him."

I answer that, Human acts are good according as they are regulated by their due rule and measure.
Wherefore human virtue which is the principle of all man's good acts consists in following
the rule of human acts, which is twofold, as stated above (Q. 17, A. 1), viz. human reason and God.

Consequently just as moral virtue is defined as being "in accord with right reason," as stated
in Ethic. ii, 6, so too, the nature of virtue consists in attaining God, as also stated above
with regard to faith, (Q. 4, A. 5) and hope (Q. 17, A. 1). Wherefore, it follows that charity
is a virtue, for, since charity attains God, it unites us to God, as evidenced by the authority
of Augustine quoted above.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher (Ethic. viii) does not deny that friendship is a virtue, but
affirms that it is "either a virtue or with a virtue." For we might say that it is a moral
virtue about works done in respect of another person, but under a different aspect from justice.
For justice is about works done in respect of another person, under the aspect of the legal
due, whereas friendship considers the aspect of a friendly and moral duty, or rather that of
a gratuitous favor, as the Philosopher explains (Ethic. viii, 13). Nevertheless it may be admitted
that it is not a virtue distinct of itself from the other virtues. For its praiseworthiness
and virtuousness are derived merely from its object, in so far, to wit, as it is based on the
moral goodness of the virtues. This is evident from the fact that not every friendship is praiseworthy
and virtuous, as in the case of friendship based on pleasure or utility. Wherefore friendship
for the virtuous is something consequent to virtue rather than a virtue. Moreover there is
no comparison with charity since it is not founded principally on the virtue of a man, but
on the goodness of God.

Reply Obj. 2: It belongs to the same virtue to love a man and to rejoice about him, since joy
results from love, as stated above (I-II, Q. 25, A. 2) in the treatise on the passions: wherefore
love is reckoned a virtue, rather than joy, which is an effect of love. And when virtue is
described as being something ultimate, we mean that it is last, not in the order of effect,
but in the order of excess, just as one hundred pounds exceed sixty.

Reply Obj. 3: Every accident is inferior to substance if we consider its being, since substance
has being in itself, while an accident has its being in another: but considered as to its species,
an accident which results from the principles of its subject is inferior to its subject, even
as an effect is inferior to its cause; whereas an accident that results from a participation
of some higher nature is superior to its subject, in so far as it is a likeness of that higher
nature, even as light is superior to the diaphanous body. In this way charity is superior to
the soul, in as much as it is a participation of the Holy Ghost.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 4]

Whether Charity Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not a special virtue. For Jerome says: "Let me briefly
define all virtue as the charity whereby we love God" [*The reference should be to Augustine,
Ep. clxvii]: and Augustine says (De Moribus Eccl. xv) [*De Civ. Dei xv, 22] that "virtue is
the order of love." Now no special virtue is included in the definition of virtue in general.
Therefore charity is not a special virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, that which extends to all works of virtue, cannot be a special virtue. But
charity extends to all works of virtue, according to 1 Cor. 13:4: "Charity is patient, is kind,"
etc.; indeed it extends to all human actions, according to 1 Cor. 16:14: "Let all your things
be done in charity." Therefore charity is not a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the precepts of the Law refer to acts of virtue. Now Augustine says (De Perfect.
Human. Justit. v) that, "Thou shalt love" is "a general commandment," and "Thou shalt not covet,"
"a general prohibition." Therefore charity is a general virtue.

On the contrary, Nothing general is enumerated together with what is special. But charity is
enumerated together with special virtues, viz. hope and faith, according to 1 Cor. 13:13: "And
now there remain faith, hope, charity, these three." Therefore charity is a special virtue.

I answer that, Acts and habits are specified by their objects, as shown above (I-II, Q. 18,
A. 2; I-II, Q. 54, A. 2). Now the proper object of love is the good, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 27, A. 1), so that wherever there is a special aspect of good, there is a special kind of
love. But the Divine good, inasmuch as it is the object of happiness, has a special aspect
of good, wherefore the love of charity, which is the love of that good, is a special kind of
love. Therefore charity is a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is included in the definition of every virtue, not as being essentially
every virtue, but because every virtue depends on it in a way, as we shall state further on
(AA. 7, 8). In this way prudence is included in the definition of the moral virtues, as explained
in Ethic. ii, vi, from the fact that they depend on prudence.

Reply Obj. 2: The virtue or art which is concerned about the last end, commands the virtues
or arts which are concerned about other ends which are secondary, thus the military art commands
the art of horse-riding (Ethic. i). Accordingly since charity has for its object the last end
of human life, viz. everlasting happiness, it follows that it extends to the acts of a man's
whole life, by commanding them, not by eliciting immediately all acts of virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: The precept of love is said to be a general command, because all other precepts
are reduced thereto as to their end, according to 1 Tim. 1:5: "The end of the commandment is
charity."

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 5]

Whether Charity Is One Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not one virtue. For habits are distinct according
to their objects. Now there are two objects of charity--God and our neighbor--which are infinitely
distant from one another. Therefore charity is not one virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, different aspects of the object diversify a habit, even though that object
be one in reality, as shown above (Q. 17, A. 6; I-II, Q. 54, A. 2, ad 1). Now there are many
aspects under which God is an object of love, because we are debtors to His love by reason
of each one of His favors. Therefore charity is not one virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, charity comprises friendship for our neighbor. But the Philosopher reckons
several species of friendship (Ethic. viii, 3, 11, 12). Therefore charity is not one virtue,
but is divided into a number of various species.

On the contrary, Just as God is the object of faith, so is He the object of charity. Now faith
is one virtue by reason of the unity of the Divine truth, according to Eph. 4:5: "One faith."
Therefore charity also is one virtue by reason of the unity of the Divine goodness.

I answer that, Charity, as stated above (A. 1) is a kind of friendship of man for God. Now
the different species of friendship are differentiated, first of all, in respect of a diversity
of end, and in this way there are three species of friendship, namely friendship for the useful,
for the delightful, and for the virtuous; secondly, in respect of the different kinds of communion
on which friendships are based; thus there is one species of friendship between kinsmen, and
another between fellow citizens or fellow travellers, the former being based on natural communion,
the latter on civil communion or on the comradeship of the road, as the Philosopher explains
(Ethic. viii, 12).

Now charity cannot be differentiated in either of these ways: for its end is one, namely, the
goodness of God; and the fellowship of everlasting happiness, on which this friendship is based,
is also one. Hence it follows that charity is simply one virtue, and not divided into several
species.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument would hold, if God and our neighbor were equally objects of charity.
But this is not true: for God is the principal object of charity, while our neighbor is loved
out of charity for God's sake.

Reply Obj. 2: God is loved by charity for His own sake: wherefore charity regards principally
but one aspect of lovableness, namely God's goodness, which is His substance, according to
Ps. 105:1: "Give glory to the Lord for He is good." Other reasons that inspire us with love
for Him, or which make it our duty to love Him, are secondary and result from the first.

Reply Obj. 3: Human friendship of which the Philosopher treats has various ends and various
forms of fellowship. This does not apply to charity, as stated above: wherefore the comparison
fails.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 6]

Whether Charity Is the Most Excellent of the Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the most excellent of the virtues. Because the
higher power has the higher virtue even as it has a higher operation. Now the intellect is
higher than the will, since it directs the will. Therefore, faith, which is in the intellect,
is more excellent than charity which is in the will.

Obj. 2: Further, the thing by which another works seems the less excellent of the two, even
as a servant, by whom his master works, is beneath his master. Now "faith . . . worketh by
charity," according to Gal. 5:6. Therefore faith is more excellent than charity.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is by way of addition to another seems to be the more perfect of
the two. Now hope seems to be something additional to charity: for the object of charity is
good, whereas the object of hope is an arduous good. Therefore hope is more excellent than charity.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Cor. 13:13): "The greater of these is charity."

I answer that, Since good, in human acts, depends on their being regulated by the due rule,
it must needs be that human virtue, which is a principle of good acts, consists in attaining
the rule of human acts. Now the rule of human acts is twofold, as stated above (A. 3), namely,
human reason and God: yet God is the first rule, whereby, even human reason must be regulated.
Consequently the theological virtues, which consist in attaining this first rule, since their
object is God, are more excellent than the moral, or the intellectual virtues, which consist
in attaining human reason: and it follows that among the theological virtues themselves, the
first place belongs to that which attains God most.

Now that which is of itself always ranks before that which is by another. But faith and hope
attain God indeed in so far as we derive from Him the knowledge of truth or the acquisition
of good, whereas charity attains God Himself that it may rest in Him, but not that something
may accrue to us from Him. Hence charity is more excellent than faith or hope, and, consequently,
than all the other virtues, just as prudence, which by itself attains reason, is more excellent
than the other moral virtues, which attain reason in so far as it appoints the mean in human
operations or passions.

Reply Obj. 1: The operation of the intellect is completed by the thing understood being in
the intellectual subject, so that the excellence of the intellectual operation is assessed
according to the measure of the intellect. On the other hand, the operation of the will and
of every appetitive power is completed in the tendency of the appetite towards a thing as its
term, wherefore the excellence of the appetitive operation is gauged according to the thing
which is the object of the operation. Now those things which are beneath the soul are more
excellent in the soul than they are in themselves, because a thing is contained according to
the mode of the container (De Causis xii). On the other hand, things that are above the soul,
are more excellent in themselves than they are in the soul. Consequently it is better to know
than to love the things that are beneath us; for which reason the Philosopher gave the preference
to the intellectual virtues over the moral virtues (Ethic. x, 7, 8): whereas the love of the
things that are above us, especially of God, ranks before the knowledge of such things. Therefore
charity is more excellent than faith.

Reply Obj. 2: Faith works by love, not instrumentally, as a master by his servant, but as by
its proper form: hence the argument does not prove.

Reply Obj. 3: The same good is the object of charity and of hope: but charity implies union
with that good, whereas hope implies distance therefrom. Hence charity does not regard that
good as being arduous, as hope does, since what is already united has not the character of
arduous: and this shows that charity is more perfect than hope.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 7]

Whether Any True Virtue Is Possible Without Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that there can be true virtue without charity. For it is proper
to virtue to produce a good act. Now those who have not charity, do some good actions, as when
they clothe the naked, or feed the hungry and so forth. Therefore true virtue is possible without
charity.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is not possible without faith, since it comes of "an unfeigned faith,"
as the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:5). Now, in unbelievers, there can be true chastity, if they
curb their concupiscences, and true justice, if they judge rightly. Therefore true virtue is
possible without charity.

Obj. 3: Further, science and art are virtues, according to Ethic. vi. But they are to be found
in sinners who lack charity. Therefore true virtue can be without charity.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:3): "If I should distribute all my goods to the
poor, and if I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing."
And yet true virtue is very profitable, according to Wis. 8:7: "She teacheth temperance, and
prudence, and justice, and fortitude, which are such things as men can have nothing more profitable
in life." Therefore no true virtue is possible without charity.

I answer that, Virtue is ordered to the good, as stated above (I-II, Q. 55, A. 4). Now the
good is chiefly an end, for things directed to the end are not said to be good except in relation
to the end. Accordingly, just as the end is twofold, the last end, and the proximate end, so
also, is good twofold, one, the ultimate and universal good, the other proximate and particular.
The ultimate and principal good of man is the enjoyment of God, according to Ps. 72:28: "It
is good for me to adhere to God," and to this good man is ordered by charity. Man's secondary
and, as it were, particular good may be twofold: one is truly good, because, considered in
itself, it can be directed to the principal good, which is the last end; while the other is
good apparently and not truly, because it leads us away from the final good. Accordingly it
is evident that simply true virtue is that which is directed to man's principal good; thus
also the Philosopher says (Phys. vii, text. 17) that "virtue is the disposition of a perfect
thing to that which is best": and in this way no true virtue is possible without charity.

If, however, we take virtue as being ordered to some particular end, then we speak of virtue
being where there is no charity, in so far as it is directed to some particular good. But if
this particular good is not a true, but an apparent good, it is not a true virtue that is ordered
to such a good, but a counterfeit virtue. Even so, as Augustine says (Contra Julian. iv, 3),
"the prudence of the miser, whereby he devises various roads to gain, is no true virtue; nor
the miser's justice, whereby he scorns the property of another through fear of severe punishment;
nor the miser's temperance, whereby he curbs his desire for expensive pleasures; nor the miser's
fortitude, whereby as Horace, says, 'he braves the sea, he crosses mountains, he goes through
fire, in order to avoid poverty'" (Epis. lib, 1; Ep. i, 45). If, on the other hand, this particular
good be a true good, for instance the welfare of the state, or the like, it will indeed be
a true virtue, imperfect, however, unless it be referred to the final and perfect good. Accordingly
no strictly true virtue is possible without charity.

Reply Obj. 1: The act of one lacking charity may be of two kinds; one is in accordance with
his lack of charity, as when he does something that is referred to that whereby he lacks charity.
Such an act is always evil: thus Augustine says (Contra Julian. iv, 3) that the actions which
an unbeliever performs as an unbeliever, are always sinful, even when he clothes the naked,
or does any like thing, and directs it to his unbelief as end.

There is, however, another act of one lacking charity, not in accordance with his lack of charity,
but in accordance with his possession of some other gift of God, whether faith, or hope, or
even his natural good, which is not completely taken away by sin, as stated above (Q. 10, A.
4; I-II, Q. 85, A. 2). In this way it is possible for an act, without charity, to be generically
good, but not perfectly good, because it lacks its due order to the last end.

Reply Obj. 2: Since the end is in practical matters, what the principle is in speculative matters,
just as there can be no strictly true science, if a right estimate of the first indemonstrable
principle be lacking, so, there can be no strictly true justice, or chastity, without that
due ordering to the end, which is effected by charity, however rightly a man may be affected
about other matters.

Reply Obj. 3: Science and art of their very nature imply a relation to some particular good,
and not to the ultimate good of human life, as do the moral virtues, which make man good simply,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 56, A. 3). Hence the comparison fails.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 23, Art. 8]

Whether Charity Is the Form of the Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the true form of the virtues. Because the form
of a thing is either exemplar or essential. Now charity is not the exemplar form of the other
virtues, since it would follow that the other virtues are of the same species as charity: nor
is it the essential form of the other virtues, since then it would not be distinct from them.
Therefore it is in no way the form of the virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is compared to the other virtues as their root and foundation, according
to Eph. 3:17: "Rooted and founded in charity." Now a root or foundation is not the form, but
rather the matter of a thing, since it is the first part in the making. Therefore charity is
not the form of the virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, formal, final, and efficient causes do not coincide with one another (Phys.
ii, 7). Now charity is called the end and the mother of the virtues. Therefore it should not
be called their form.

On the contrary, Ambrose [*Lombard, Sent. iii, D, 23] says that charity is the form of the virtues.

I answer that, In morals the form of an act is taken chiefly from the end. The reason of this
is that the principal of moral acts is the will, whose object and form, so to speak, are the
end. Now the form of an act always follows from a form of the agent. Consequently, in morals,
that which gives an act its order to the end, must needs give the act its form. Now it is evident,
in accordance with what has been said (A. 7), that it is charity which directs the acts of
all other virtues to the last end, and which, consequently, also gives the form to all other
acts of virtue: and it is precisely in this sense that charity is called the form of the virtues,
for these are called virtues in relation to "informed" acts.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is called the form of the other virtues not as being their exemplar or
their essential form, but rather by way of efficient cause, in so far as it sets the form on
all, in the aforesaid manner.

Reply Obj. 2: Charity is compared to the foundation or root in so far as all other virtues
draw their sustenance and nourishment therefrom, and not in the sense that the foundation and
root have the character of a material cause.

Reply Obj. 3: Charity is said to be the end of other virtues, because it directs all other
virtues to its own end. And since a mother is one who conceives within herself and by another,
charity is called the mother of the other virtues, because, by commanding them, it conceives
the acts of the other virtues, by the desire of the last end.

QUESTION 24

OF THE SUBJECT OF CHARITY (In Twelve Articles)

We must now consider charity in relation to its subject, under which head there are twelve
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether charity is in the will as its subject?

(2) Whether charity is caused in man by preceding acts or by a Divine infusion?

(3) Whether it is infused according to the capacity of our natural gifts?

(4) Whether it increases in the person who has it?

(5) Whether it increases by addition?

(6) Whether it increases by every act?

(7) Whether it increases indefinitely?

(8) Whether the charity of a wayfarer can be perfect?

(9) Of the various degrees of charity;

(10) Whether charity can diminish?

(11) Whether charity can be lost after it has been possessed?

(12) Whether it is lost through one mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 1]

Whether the Will Is the Subject of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not the subject of charity. For charity is a kind
of love. Now, according to the Philosopher (Topic. ii, 3) love is in the concupiscible part.
Therefore charity is also in the concupiscible and not in the will.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is the foremost of the virtues, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 6). But
the reason is the subject of virtue. Therefore it seems that charity is in the reason and not
in the will.

Obj. 3: Further, charity extends to all human acts, according to 1 Cor. 16:14: "Let all your
things be done in charity." Now the principle of human acts is the free-will. Therefore it
seems that charity is chiefly in the free-will as its subject and not in the will.

On the contrary, The object of charity is the good, which is also the object of the will. Therefore
charity is in the will as its subject.

I answer that, Since, as stated in the First Part (Q. 80, A. 2), the appetite is twofold, namely
the sensitive, and the intellective which is called the will, the object of each is the good,
but in different ways: for the object of the sensitive appetite is a good apprehended by sense,
whereas the object of the intellective appetite or will is good under the universal aspect
of good, according as it can be apprehended by the intellect. Now the object of charity is
not a sensible good, but the Divine good which is known by the intellect alone. Therefore the
subject of charity is not the sensitive, but the intellective appetite, i.e. the will.

Reply Obj. 1: The concupiscible is a part of the sensitive, not of the intellective appetite,
as proved in the First Part (Q. 81, A. 2): wherefore the love which is in the concupiscible,
is the love of sensible good: nor can the concupiscible reach to the Divine good which is an
intelligible good; the will alone can. Consequently the concupiscible cannot be the subject
of charity.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (De Anima iii, 9), the will also is in the reason:
wherefore charity is not excluded from the reason through being in the will. Yet charity is
regulated, not by the reason, as human virtues are, but by God's wisdom, and transcends the
rule of human reason, according to Eph. 3:19: "The charity of Christ, which surpasseth all
knowledge." Hence it is not in the reason, either as its subject, like prudence is, or as its
rule, like justice and temperance are, but only by a certain kinship of the will to the reason.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated in the First Part (Q. 83, A. 4), the free-will is not a distinct power
from the will. Yet charity is not in the will considered as free-will, the act of which is
to choose. For choice is of things directed to the end, whereas the will is of the end itself
(Ethic. iii, 2). Hence charity, whose object is the last end, should be described as residing
in the will rather than in the free-will.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 2]

Whether Charity Is Caused in Us by Infusion?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not caused in us by infusion. For that which is
common to all creatures, is in man naturally. Now, according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv), the
"Divine good," which is the object of charity, "is for all an object of dilection and love."
Therefore charity is in us naturally, and not by infusion.

Obj. 2: Further, the more lovable a thing is the easier it is to love it. Now God is supremely
lovable, since He is supremely good. Therefore it is easier to love Him than other things.
But we need no infused habit in order to love other things. Neither, therefore, do we need
one in order to love God.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Tim. Now these three have reference to human acts. Therefore
charity is caused in us from preceding acts, and not from infusion.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. 5:5): "The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost, Who is given to us."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 23, A. 1), charity is a friendship of man for God, founded
upon the fellowship of everlasting happiness. Now this fellowship is in respect, not of natural,
but of gratuitous gifts, for, according to Rom. 6:23, "the grace of God is life everlasting":
wherefore charity itself surpasses our natural facilities. Now that which surpasses the faculty
of nature, cannot be natural or acquired by the natural powers, since a natural effect does
not transcend its cause.

Therefore charity can be in us neither naturally, nor through acquisition by the natural powers,
but by the infusion of the Holy Ghost, Who is the love of the Father and the Son, and the participation
of Whom in us is created charity, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 2).

Reply Obj. 1: Dionysius is speaking of the love of God, which is founded on the fellowship
of natural goods, wherefore it is in all naturally. On the other hand, charity is founded on
a supernatural fellowship, so the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as God is supremely knowable in Himself yet not to us, on account of a defect
in our knowledge which depends on sensible things, so too, God is supremely lovable in Himself,
in as much as He is the object of happiness. But He is not supremely lovable to us in this
way, on account of the inclination of our appetite towards visible goods. Hence it is evident
that for us to love God above all things in this way, it is necessary that charity be infused
into our hearts.

Reply Obj. Or again, this is said because the aforesaid acts dispose man to receive the infusion
of charity. The same remark applies to the saying of Augustine (Tract. ix in prim. canon. Joan.):
"Fear leads to charity," and of a gloss on Matt. 1:2: "Faith begets hope, and hope charity."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 3]

Whether Charity Is Infused According to the Capacity of Our Natural Gifts?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is infused according to the capacity of our natural
gifts. For it is written (Matt. 25:15) that "He gave to every one according to his own virtue
[Douay: 'proper ability']." Now, in man, none but natural virtue precedes charity, since there
is no virtue without charity, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 7). Therefore God infuses charity
into man according to the measure of his natural virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, among things ordained towards one another, the second is proportionate to
the first: thus we find in natural things that the form is proportionate to the matter, and
in gratuitous gifts, that glory is proportionate to grace. Now, since charity is a perfection
of nature, it is compared to the capacity of nature as second to first. Therefore it seems
that charity is infused according to the capacity of nature.

Obj. 3: Further, men and angels partake of happiness according to the same measure, since happiness
is alike in both, according to Matt. 22:30 and Luke 20:36. Now charity and other gratuitous
gifts are bestowed on the angels, according to their natural capacity, as the Master teaches
(Sent. ii, D, 3). Therefore the same apparently applies to man.

On the contrary, It is written (John 3:8): "The Spirit breatheth where He will," and (1 Cor.
12:11): "All these things one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing to every one according
as He will." Therefore charity is given, not according to our natural capacity, but according
as the Spirit wills to distribute His gifts.

I answer that, The quantity of a thing depends on the proper cause of that thing, since the
more universal cause produces a greater effect. Now, since charity surpasses the proportion
of human nature, as stated above (A. 2) it depends, not on any natural virtue, but on the sole
grace of the Holy Ghost Who infuses charity. Wherefore the quantity of charity depends neither
on the condition of nature nor on the capacity of natural virtue, but only on the will of the
Holy Ghost Who "divides" His gifts "according as He will." Hence the Apostle says (Eph. 4:7):
"To every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the giving of Christ."

Reply Obj. 1: The virtue in accordance with which God gives His gifts to each one, is a disposition
or previous preparation or effort of the one who receives grace. But the Holy Ghost forestalls
even this disposition or effort, by moving man's mind either more or less, according as He
will. Wherefore the Apostle says (Col. 1:12): "Who hath made us worthy to be partakers of the
lot of the saints in light."

Reply Obj. 2: The form does not surpass the proportion of the matter. In like manner grace
and glory are referred to the same genus, for grace is nothing else than a beginning of glory
in us. But charity and nature do not belong to the same genus, so that the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 3: The angel's is an intellectual nature, and it is consistent with his condition
that he should be borne wholly whithersoever he is borne, as stated in the First Part (Q. 61,
A. 6). Hence there was a greater effort in the higher angels, both for good in those who persevered,
and for evil in those who fell, and consequently those of the higher angels who remained steadfast
became better than the others, and those who fell became worse. But man's is a rational nature,
with which it is consistent to be sometimes in potentiality and sometimes in act: so that it
is not necessarily borne wholly whithersoever it is borne, and where there are greater natural
gifts there may be less effort, and vice versa. Thus the comparison fails.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 4]

Whether Charity Can Increase?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity cannot increase. For nothing increases save what has
quantity. Now quantity is twofold, namely dimensive and virtual. The former does not befit
charity which is a spiritual perfection, while virtual quantity regards the objects in respect
of which charity does not increase, since the slightest charity loves all that is to be loved
out of charity. Therefore charity does not increase.

Obj. 2: Further, that which consists in something extreme receives no increase. But charity
consists in something extreme, being the greatest of the virtues, and the supreme love of the
greatest good. Therefore charity cannot increase.

Obj. 3: Further, increase is a kind of movement. Therefore wherever there is increase there
is movement, and if there be increase of essence there is movement of essence. Now there is
no movement of essence save either by corruption or generation. Therefore charity cannot increase
essentially, unless it happen to be generated anew or corrupted, which is unreasonable.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. lxxiv in Joan.) [*Cf. Ep. clxxxv.] that "charity merits
increase that by increase it may merit perfection."

I answer that, The charity of a wayfarer can increase. For we are called wayfarers by reason
of our being on the way to God, Who is the last end of our happiness. In this way we advance
as we get nigh to God, Who is approached, "not by steps of the body but by the affections of
the soul" [*St. Augustine, Tract. in Joan. xxxii]: and this approach is the result of charity,
since it unites man's mind to God. Consequently it is essential to the charity of a wayfarer
that it can increase, for if it could not, all further advance along the way would cease. Hence
the Apostle calls charity the way, when he says (1 Cor. 12:31): "I show unto you yet a more
excellent way."

Reply Obj. 1: Charity is not subject to dimensive, but only to virtual quantity: and the latter
depends not only on the number of objects, namely whether they be in greater number or of greater
excellence, but also on the intensity of the act, namely whether a thing is loved more, or
less; it is in this way that the virtual quantity of charity increases.

Reply Obj. 2: Charity consists in an extreme with regard to its object, in so far as its object
is the Supreme Good, and from this it follows that charity is the most excellent of the virtues.
Yet not every charity consists in an extreme, as regards the intensity of the act.

Reply Obj. 3: Some have said that charity does not increase in its essence, but only as to
its radication in its subject, or according to its fervor.

But these people did not know what they were talking about. For since charity is an accident,
its being is to be in something. So that an essential increase of charity means nothing else
but that it is yet more in its subject, which implies a greater radication in its subject.
Furthermore, charity is essentially a virtue ordained to act, so that an essential increase
of charity implies ability to produce an act of more fervent love. Hence charity increases
essentially, not by beginning anew, or ceasing to be in its subject, as the objection imagines,
but by beginning to be more and more in its subject.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 5]

Whether Charity Increases by Addition?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity increases by addition. For just as increase may be
in respect of bodily quantity, so may it be according to virtual quantity. Now increase in
bodily quantity results from addition; for the Philosopher says (De Gener. i, 5) that "increase
is addition to pre-existing magnitude." Therefore the increase of charity which is according
to virtual quantity is by addition.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is a kind of spiritual light in the soul, according to 1 John 2:10:
"He that loveth his brother abideth in the light." Now light increases in the air by addition;
thus the light in a house increases when another candle is lit. Therefore charity also increases
in the soul by addition.

Obj. 3: Further, the increase of charity is God's work, even as the causing of it, according
to 2 Cor. 9:10: "He will increase the growth of the fruits of your justice." Now when God first
infuses charity, He puts something in the soul that was not there before. Therefore also, when
He increases charity, He puts something there which was not there before. Therefore charity
increases by addition.

On the contrary, Charity is a simple form. Now nothing greater results from the addition of
one simple thing to another, as proved in Phys. iii, text. 59, and Metaph. ii, 4. Therefore
charity does not increase by addition.

I answer that, Every addition is of something to something else: so that in every addition
we must at least presuppose that the things added together are distinct before the addition.
Consequently if charity be added to charity, the added charity must be presupposed as distinct
from charity to which it is added, not necessarily by a distinction of reality, but at least
by a distinction of thought. For God is able to increase a bodily quantity by adding a magnitude
which did not exist before, but was created at that very moment; which magnitude, though not
pre-existent in reality, is nevertheless capable of being distinguished from the quantity to
which it is added. Wherefore if charity be added to charity we must presuppose the distinction,
at least logical, of the one charity from the other.

Now distinction among forms is twofold: specific and numeric. Specific distinction of habits
follows diversity of objects, while numeric distinction follows distinction of subjects. Consequently
a habit may receive increase through extending to objects to which it did not extend before:
thus the science of geometry increases in one who acquires knowledge of geometrical matters
which he ignored hitherto. But this cannot be said of charity, for even the slightest charity
extends to all that we have to love by charity. Hence the addition which causes an increase
of charity cannot be understood, as though the added charity were presupposed to be distinct
specifically from that to which it is added.

It follows therefore that if charity be added to charity, we must presuppose a numerical distinction
between them, which follows a distinction of subjects: thus whiteness receives an increase
when one white thing is added to another, although such an increase does not make a thing whiter.
This, however, does not apply to the case in point, since the subject of charity is none other
than the rational mind, so that such like an increase of charity could only take place by one
rational mind being added to another; which is impossible. Moreover, even if it were possible,
the result would be a greater lover, but not a more loving one. It follows, therefore, that
charity can by no means increase by addition of charity to charity, as some have held to be
the case.

Accordingly charity increases only by its subject partaking of charity more and more subject
thereto. For this is the proper mode of increase in a form that is intensified, since the being
of such a form consists wholly in its adhering to its subject. Consequently, since the magnitude
of a thing follows on its being, to say that a form is greater is the same as to say that it
is more in its subject, and not that another form is added to it: for this would be the case
if the form, of itself, had any quantity, and not in comparison with its subject. Therefore
charity increases by being intensified in its subject, and this is for charity to increase
in its essence; and not by charity being added to charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Bodily quantity has something as quantity, and something else, in so far as it
is an accidental form. As quantity, it is distinguishable in respect of position or number,
and in this way we have the increase of magnitude by addition, as may be seen in animals. But
in so far as it is an accidental form, it is distinguishable only in respect of its subject,
and in this way it has its proper increase, like other accidental forms, by way of intensity
in its subject, for instance in things subject to rarefaction, as is proved in Phys. iv, 9.
In like manner science, as a habit, has its quantity from its objects, and accordingly it increases
by addition, when a man knows more things; and again, as an accidental form, it has a certain
quantity through being in its subject, and in this way it increases in a man who knows the
same scientific truths with greater certainty now than before. In the same way charity has
a twofold quantity; but with regard to that which it has from its object, it does not increase,
as stated above: hence it follows that it increases solely by being intensified.

Reply Obj. 2: The addition of light to light can be understood through the light being intensified
in the air on account of there being several luminaries giving light: but this distinction
does not apply to the case in point, since there is but one luminary shedding forth the light
of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: The infusion of charity denotes a change to the state of having charity from
the state of not having it, so that something must needs come which was not there before. On
the other hand, the increase of charity denotes a change to more having from less having, so
that there is need, not for anything to be there that was not there before, but for something
to be more there that previously was less there. This is what God does when He increases charity,
that is He makes it to have a greater hold on the soul, and the likeness of the Holy Ghost
to be more perfectly participated by the soul.

SIXTH ARTICLE

Whether Charity Increases Through Every Act of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity increases through every act of charity. For that which
can do what is more, can do what is less. But every act of charity can merit everlasting life;
and this is more than a simple addition of charity, since it includes the perfection of charity.
Much more, therefore, does every act of charity increase charity.

Obj. 2: Further, just as the habits of acquired virtue are engendered by acts, so too an increase
of charity is caused by an act of charity. Now each virtuous act conduces to the engendering
of virtue. Therefore also each virtuous act of charity conduces to the increase of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory [*St. Bernard, Serm. ii in Festo Purif.] says that "to stand still
in the way to God is to go back." Now no man goes back when he is moved by an act of charity.
Therefore whoever is moved by an act of charity goes forward in the way to God. Therefore charity
increases through every act of charity.

On the contrary, The effect does not surpass the power of its cause. But an act of charity
is sometimes done with tepidity or slackness. Therefore it does not conduce to a more excellent
charity, rather does it dispose one to a lower degree.

I answer that, The spiritual increase of charity is somewhat like the increase of a body. Now
bodily increase in animals and plants is not a continuous movement, so that, to wit, if a thing
increase so much in so much time, it need to increase proportionally in each part of that time,
as happens in local movement; but for a certain space of time nature works by disposing for
the increase, without causing any actual increase, and afterwards brings into effect that to
which it had disposed, by giving the animal or plant an actual increase. In like manner charity
does not actually increase through every act of charity, but each act of charity disposes to
an increase of charity, in so far as one act of charity makes man more ready to act again according
to charity, and this readiness increasing, man breaks out into an act of more fervent love,
and strives to advance in charity, and then his charity increases actually.

Reply Obj. 1: Every act of charity merits everlasting life, which, however, is not to be bestowed
then and there, but at its proper time. In like manner every act of charity merits an increase
of charity; yet this increase does not take place at once, but when we strive for that increase.

Reply Obj. 2: Even when an acquired virtue is being engendered, each act does not complete
the formation of the virtue, but conduces towards that effect by disposing to it, while the
last act, which is the most perfect, and acts in virtue of all those that preceded it, reduces
the virtue into act, just as when many drops hollow out a stone.

Reply Obj. 3: Man advances in the way to God, not merely by actual increase of charity, but
also by being disposed to that increase.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 7]

Whether Charity Increases Indefinitely?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity does not increase indefinitely. For every movement
is towards some end and term, as stated in Metaph. ii, text. 8, 9. But the increase of charity
is a movement. Therefore it tends to an end and term. Therefore charity does not increase indefinitely.

Obj. 2: Further, no form surpasses the capacity of its subject. But the capacity of the rational
creature who is the subject of charity is finite. Therefore charity cannot increase indefinitely.

Obj. 3: Further, every finite thing can, by continual increase, attain to the quantity of another
finite thing however much greater, unless the amount of its increase be ever less and less.
Thus the Philosopher states (Phys. iii, 6) that if we divide a line into an indefinite number
of parts, and take these parts away and add them indefinitely to another line, we shall never
arrive at any definite quantity resulting from those two lines, viz. the one from which we
subtracted and the one to which we added what was subtracted. But this does not occur in the
case in point: because there is no need for the second increase of charity to be less than
the first, since rather is it probable that it would be equal or greater. As, therefore, the
charity of the blessed is something finite, if the charity of the wayfarer can increase indefinitely,
it would follow that the charity of the way can equal the charity of heaven; which is absurd.
Therefore the wayfarer's charity cannot increase indefinitely.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Phil. 3:12): "Not as though I had already attained, or were
already perfect; but I follow after, if I may, by any means apprehend," on which words a gloss
says: "Even if he has made great progress, let none of the faithful say: 'Enough.' For whosoever
says this, leaves the road before coming to his destination." Therefore the wayfarer's charity
can ever increase more and more.

I answer that, A term to the increase of a form may be fixed in three ways: first by reason
of the form itself having a fixed measure, and when this has been reached it is no longer possible
to go any further in that form, but if any further advance is made, another form is attained.
An example of this is paleness, the bounds of which may, by continual alteration, be passed,
either so that whiteness ensues, or so that blackness results. Secondly, on the part of the
agent, whose power does not extend to a further increase of the form in its subject. Thirdly,
on the part of the subject, which is not capable of ulterior perfection.

Now, in none of these ways, is a limit imposed to the increase of man's charity, while he is
in the state of the wayfarer. For charity itself considered as such has no limit to its increase,
since it is a participation of the infinite charity which is the Holy Ghost. In like manner
the cause of the increase of charity, viz. God, is possessed of infinite power. Furthermore,
on the part of its subject, no limit to this increase can be determined, because whenever charity
increases, there is a corresponding increased ability to receive a further increase. It is
therefore evident that it is not possible to fix any limits to the increase of charity in this
life.

Reply Obj. 1: The increase of charity is directed to an end, which is not in this, but in a
future life.

Reply Obj. 2: The capacity of the rational creature is increased by charity, because the heart
is enlarged thereby, according to 2 Cor. 6:11: "Our heart is enlarged"; so that it still remains
capable of receiving a further increase.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument holds good in those things which have the same kind of quantity,
but not in those which have different kinds: thus however much a line may increase it does
not reach the quantity of a superficies. Now the quantity of a wayfarer's charity which follows
the knowledge of faith is not of the same kind as the quantity of the charity of the blessed,
which follows open vision. Hence the argument does not prove.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 8]

Whether Charity Can Be Perfect in This Life?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity cannot be perfect in this life. For this would have
been the case with the apostles before all others. Yet it was not so, since the Apostle says
(Phil. 3:12): "Not as though I had already attained, or were already perfect." Therefore charity
cannot be perfect in this life.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 36) that "whatever kindles charity quenches
cupidity, but where charity is perfect, cupidity is done away altogether." But this cannot
be in this world, wherein it is impossible to live without sin, according to 1 John 1:8: "If
we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." Now all sin arises from some inordinate
cupidity. Therefore charity cannot be perfect in this life.

Obj. 3: Further, what is already perfect cannot be perfected any more. But in this life charity
can always increase, as stated above (A. 7). Therefore charity cannot be perfect in this life.

On the contrary, Augustine says (In prim. canon. Joan. Tract. v) "Charity is perfected by being
strengthened; and when it has been brought to perfection, it exclaims, 'I desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ.'" Now this is possible in this life, as in the case of Paul. Therefore
charity can be perfect in this life.

I answer that, The perfection of charity may be understood in two ways: first with regard to
the object loved, secondly with regard to the person who loves. With regard to the object loved,
charity is perfect, if the object be loved as much as it is lovable. Now God is as lovable
as He is good, and His goodness is infinite, wherefore He is infinitely lovable. But no creature
can love Him infinitely since all created power is finite. Consequently no creature's charity
can be perfect in this way; the charity of God alone can, whereby He loves Himself.

On the part of the person who loves, charity is perfect, when he loves as much as he can. This
happens in three ways. First, so that a man's whole heart is always actually borne towards
God: this is the perfection of the charity of heaven, and is not possible in this life, wherein,
by reason of the weakness of human life, it is impossible to think always actually of God,
and to be moved by love towards Him. Secondly, so that man makes an earnest endeavor to give
his time to God and Divine things, while scorning other things except in so far as the needs
of the present life demand. This is the perfection of charity that is possible to a wayfarer;
but is not common to all who have charity. Thirdly, so that a man gives his whole heart to
God habitually, viz. by neither thinking nor desiring anything contrary to the love of God;
and this perfection is common to all who have charity.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle denies that he has the perfection of heaven, wherefore a gloss on
the same passage says that "he was a perfect wayfarer, but had not yet achieved the perfection
to which the way leads."

Reply Obj. 2: This is said on account of venial sins, which are contrary, not to the habit,
but to the act of charity: hence they are incompatible, not with the perfection of the way,
but with that of heaven.

Reply Obj. 3: The perfection of the way is not perfection simply, wherefore it can always increase.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 9]

Whether Charity Is Rightly Distinguished into Three Degrees, Beginning,  Progress, and Perfection?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting to distinguish three degrees of charity, beginning, progress,
and perfection. For there are many degrees between the beginning of charity and its ultimate
perfection. Therefore it is not right to put only one.

Obj. 2: Further, charity begins to progress as soon as it begins to be. Therefore we ought
not to distinguish between charity as progressing and as beginning.

Obj. 3: Further, in this world, however perfect a man's charity may be, it can increase, as
stated above (A. 7). Now for charity to increase is to progress. Therefore perfect charity
ought not to be distinguished from progressing charity: and so the aforesaid degrees are unsuitably
assigned to charity.

On the contrary, Augustine says (In prim. canon. Joan. Tract. v) "As soon as charity is born
it takes food," which refers to beginners, "after taking food, it waxes strong," which refers
to those who are progressing, "and when it has become strong it is perfected," which refers
to the perfect. Therefore there are three degrees of charity.

I answer that, The spiritual increase of charity may be considered in respect of a certain
likeness to the growth of the human body. For although this latter growth may be divided into
many parts, yet it has certain fixed divisions according to those particular actions or pursuits
to which man is brought by this same growth. Thus we speak of a man being an infant until he
has the use of reason, after which we distinguish another state of man wherein he begins to
speak and to use his reason, while there is again a third state, that of puberty when he begins
to acquire the power of generation, and so on until he arrives at perfection.

In like manner the divers degrees of charity are distinguished according to the different pursuits
to which man is brought by the increase of charity. For at first it is incumbent on man to
occupy himself chiefly with avoiding sin and resisting his concupiscences, which move him in
opposition to charity: this concerns beginners, in whom charity has to be fed or fostered lest
it be destroyed: in the second place man's chief pursuit is to aim at progress in good, and
this is the pursuit of the proficient, whose chief aim is to strengthen their charity by adding
to it: while man's third pursuit is to aim chiefly at union with and enjoyment of God: this
belongs to the perfect who "desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ."

In like manner we observe in local motion that at first there is withdrawal from one term,
then approach to the other term, and thirdly, rest in this term.

Reply Obj. 1: All these distinct degrees which can be discerned in the increase of charity,
are comprised in the aforesaid three, even as every division of continuous things is included
in these three--the beginning, the middle, and the end, as the Philosopher states (De Coelo i, 1).

Reply Obj. 2: Although those who are beginners in charity may progress, yet the chief care
that besets them is to resist the sins which disturb them by their onslaught. Afterwards, however,
when they come to feel this onslaught less, they begin to tend to perfection with greater security;
yet with one hand doing the work, and with the other holding the sword as related in 2 Esdr.
4:17 about those who built up Jerusalem.

Reply Obj. 3: Even the perfect make progress in charity: yet this is not their chief care,
but their aim is principally directed towards union with God. And though both the beginner
and the proficient seek this, yet their solicitude is chiefly about other things, with the
beginner, about avoiding sin, with the proficient, about progressing in virtue.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 10]

Whether Charity Can Decrease?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity can decrease. For contraries by their nature affect
the same subject. Now increase and decrease are contraries. Since then charity increases, as
stated above (A. 4), it seems that it can also decrease.

Obj. From this it seems to follow that, on the contrary, what arouses cupidity quenches charity.
But cupidity, whereby a man loves something besides God, can increase in man. Therefore charity
can decrease.

Obj. 3: Further, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. viii, 12) "God makes the just man, by justifying
him, but in such a way, that if the man turns away from God, he no longer retains the effect
of the Divine operation." From this we may gather that when God preserves charity in man, He
works in the same way as when He first infuses charity into him. Now at the first infusion
of charity God infuses less charity into him that prepares himself less. Therefore also in
preserving charity, He preserves less charity in him that prepares himself less. Therefore
charity can decrease.

On the contrary, In Scripture, charity is compared to fire, according to Cant 8:6: "The lamps
thereof," i.e. of charity, "are fire and flames." Now fire ever mounts upward so long as it
lasts. Therefore as long as charity endures, it can ascend, but cannot descend, i.e. decrease.

I answer that, The quantity which charity has in comparison with its proper object, cannot
decrease, even as neither can it increase, as stated above (A. 4, ad 2).

Since, however, it increases in that quantity which it has in comparison with its subject,
here is the place to consider whether it can decrease in this way. Now, if it decrease, this
must needs be either through an act, or by the mere cessation from act. It is true that virtues
acquired through acts decrease and sometimes cease altogether through cessation from act, as
stated above (I-II, Q. 53, A. 3). Wherefore the Philosopher says, in reference to friendship
(Ethic. viii, 5) "that want of intercourse," i.e. the neglect to call upon or speak with one's
friends, "has destroyed many a friendship." Now this is because the safe-keeping of a thing
depends on its cause, and the cause of human virtue is a human act, so that when human acts
cease, the virtue acquired thereby decreases and at last ceases altogether. Yet this does not
occur to charity, because it is not the result of human acts, but is caused by God alone, as
stated above (A. 2). Hence it follows that even when its act ceases, it does not for this reason
decrease, or cease altogether, unless the cessation involves a sin.

The consequence is that a decrease of charity cannot be caused except either by God or by some
sinful act. Now no defect is caused in us by God, except by way of punishment, in so far as
He withdraws His grace in punishment of sin. Hence He does not diminish charity except by way
of punishment: and this punishment is due on account of sin.

It follows, therefore, that if charity decrease, the cause of this decrease must be sin either
effectively or by way of merit. But mortal sin does not diminish charity, in either of these
ways, but destroys it entirely, both effectively, because every mortal sin is contrary to charity,
as we shall state further on (A. 12), and by way of merit, since when, by sinning mortally,
a man acts against charity, he deserves that God should withdraw charity from him.

In like manner, neither can venial sin diminish charity either effectively or by way of merit.
Not effectively, because it does not touch charity, since charity is about the last end, whereas
venial sin is a disorder about things directed to the end: and a man's love for the end is
none the less through his committing an inordinate act as regards the things directed to the
end. Thus sick people sometimes, though they love health much, are irregular in keeping to
their diet: and thus again, in speculative sciences, the false opinions that are derived from
the principles, do not diminish the certitude of the principles. So too, venial sin does not
merit diminution of charity; for when a man offends in a small matter he does not deserve to
be mulcted in a great matter. For God does not turn away from man, more than man turns away
from Him: wherefore he that is out of order in respect of things directed to the end, does
not deserve to be mulcted in charity whereby he is ordered to the last end.

The consequence is that charity can by no means be diminished, if we speak of direct causality,
yet whatever disposes to its corruption may be said to conduce indirectly to its diminution,
and such are venial sins, or even the cessation from the practice of works of charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Contraries affect the same subject when that subject stands in equal relation
to both. But charity does not stand in equal relation to increase and decrease. For it can
have a cause of increase, but not of decrease, as stated above. Hence the argument does not prove.

Reply Obj. 2: Cupidity is twofold, one whereby man places his end in creatures, and this kills
charity altogether, since it is its poison, as Augustine states (Confess. x). This makes us
love God less (i.e. less than we ought to love Him by charity), not indeed by diminishing charity
but by destroying it altogether. It is thus that we must understand the saying: "He loves Thee
less, who loves aught beside Thee," for he adds these words, "which he loveth not for Thee."
This does not apply to venial sin, but only to mortal sin: since that which we love in venial
sin, is loved for God's sake habitually though not actually. There is another cupidity, that
of venial sin, which is always diminished by charity: and yet this cupidity cannot diminish
charity, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 3: A movement of the free-will is requisite in the infusion of charity, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 113, A. 3). Wherefore that which diminishes the intensity of the free-will
conduces dispositively to a diminution in the charity to be infused. On the other hand, no
movement of the free-will is required for the safe-keeping of charity, else it would not remain
in us while we sleep. Hence charity does not decrease on account of an obstacle on the part
of the intensity of the free-will's movement.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 11]

Whether We Can Lose Charity When Once We Have It?

Objection 1: It would seem that we cannot lose charity when once we have it. For if we lose
it, this can only be through sin. Now he who has charity cannot sin, for it is written (1 John
3:9): "Whosoever is born of God, committeth not sin; for His seed abideth in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God." But none save the children of God have charity, for it is
this which distinguishes "the children of God from the children of perdition," as Augustine
says (De Trin. xv, 17). Therefore he that has charity cannot lose it.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. viii, 7) that "if love be not true, it should not
be called love." Now, as he says again in a letter to Count Julian, "charity which can fail
was never true." [*The quotation is from De Salutaribus Documentis ad quemdam comitem, vii.,
among the works of Paul of Friuli, more commonly known as Paul the Deacon, a monk of Monte
Cassino.] Therefore it was no charity at all. Therefore, when once we have charity, we cannot
lose it.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says in a homily for Pentecost (In Evang. xxx) that "God's love works
great things where it is; if it ceases to work it is not charity." Now no man loses charity
by doing great things. Therefore if charity be there, it cannot be lost.

Obj. 4: Further, the free-will is not inclined to sin unless by some motive for sinning. Now
charity excludes all motives for sinning, both self-love and cupidity, and all such things.
Therefore charity cannot be lost.

On the contrary, It is written (Apoc. 2:4): "I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast
left thy first charity."

I answer that, The Holy Ghost dwells in us by charity, as shown above (A. 2; QQ. 23, 24). We
can, accordingly, consider charity in three ways: first on the part of the Holy Ghost, Who
moves the soul to love God, and in this respect charity is incompatible with sin through the
power of the Holy Ghost, Who does unfailingly whatever He wills to do. Hence it is impossible
for these two things to be true at the same time--that the Holy Ghost should will to move a
certain man to an act of charity, and that this man, by sinning, should lose charity. For the
gift of perseverance is reckoned among the blessings of God whereby "whoever is delivered,
is most certainly delivered," as Augustine says in his book on the Predestination of the saints
(De Dono Persev. xiv).

Secondly, charity may be considered as such, and thus it is incapable of anything that is against
its nature. Wherefore charity cannot sin at all, even as neither can heat cool, nor unrighteousness
do good, as Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 24).

Thirdly, charity can be considered on the part of its subject, which is changeable on account
of the free-will. Moreover charity may be compared with this subject, both from the general
point of view of form in comparison with matter, and from the specific point of view of habit
as compared with power. Now it is natural for a form to be in its subject in such a way that
it can be lost, when it does not entirely fill the potentiality of matter: this is evident
in the forms of things generated and corrupted, because the matter of such things receives
one form in such a way, that it retains the potentiality to another form, as though its potentiality
were not completely satisfied with the one form. Hence the one form may be lost by the other
being received. On the other hand the form of a celestial body which entirely fills the potentiality
of its matter, so that the latter does not retain the potentiality to another form, is in its
subject inseparably. Accordingly the charity of the blessed, because it entirely fills the
potentiality of the rational mind, since every actual movement of that mind is directed to
God, is possessed by its subject inseparably: whereas the charity of the wayfarer does not
so fill the potentiality of its subject, because the latter is not always actually directed
to God: so that when it is not actually directed to God, something may occur whereby charity
is lost.

It is proper to a habit to incline a power to act, and this belongs to a habit, in so far as
it makes whatever is suitable to it, to seem good, and whatever is unsuitable, to seem evil.
For as the taste judges of savors according to its disposition, even so does the human mind
judge of things to be done, according to its habitual disposition. Hence the Philosopher says
(Ethic. iii, 5) that "such as a man is, so does the end appear to him." Accordingly charity
is inseparable from its possessor, where that which pertains to charity cannot appear otherwise
than good, and that is in heaven, where God is seen in His Essence, which is the very essence
of goodness. Therefore the charity of heaven cannot be lost, whereas the charity of the way
can, because in this state God is not seen in His Essence, which is the essence of goodness.

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted speaks from the point of view of the power of the Holy Ghost,
by Whose safeguarding, those whom He wills to move are rendered immune from sin, as much as
He wills.

Reply Obj. 2: The charity which can fail by reason of itself is no true charity; for this would
be the case, were its love given only for a time, and afterwards were to cease, which would
be inconsistent with true love. If, however, charity be lost through the changeableness of
the subject, and against the purpose of charity included in its act, this is not contrary to
true charity.

Reply Obj. 3: The love of God ever works great things in its purpose, which is essential to
charity; but it does not always work great things in its act, on account of the condition of
its subject.

Reply Obj. 4: Charity by reason of its act excludes every motive for sinning. But it happens
sometimes that charity is not acting actually, and then it is possible for a motive to intervene
for sinning, and if we consent to this motive, we lose charity.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 24, Art. 12]

Whether Charity Is Lost Through One Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not lost through one mortal sin. For Origen says
(Peri Archon i): "When a man who has mounted to the stage of perfection, is satiated, I do
not think that he will become empty or fall away suddenly; but he must needs do so gradually
and by little and little." But man falls away by losing charity. Therefore charity is not lost
through only one mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, Pope Leo in a sermon on the Passion (lx) addresses Peter thus: "Our Lord saw
in thee not a conquered faith, not an averted love, but constancy shaken. Tears abounded where
love never failed, and the words uttered in trepidation were washed away by the fount of charity."
From this Bernard [*William of St. Thierry, De Nat. et Dig. Amoris. vi.] drew his assertion
that "charity in Peter was not quenched, but cooled." But Peter sinned mortally in denying
Christ. Therefore charity is not lost through one mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is stronger than an acquired virtue. Now a habit of acquired virtue
is not destroyed by one contrary sinful act. Much less, therefore, is charity destroyed by
one contrary mortal sin.

Obj. 4: Further, charity denotes love of God and our neighbor. Now, seemingly, one may commit
a mortal sin, and yet retain the love of God and one's neighbor; because an inordinate affection
for things directed to the end, does not remove the love for the end, as stated above (A. 10).
Therefore charity towards God can endure, though there be a mortal sin through an inordinate
affection for some temporal good.

Obj. 5: Further, the object of a theological virtue is the last end. Now the other theological
virtues, namely faith and hope, are not done away by one mortal sin, in fact they remain though
lifeless. Therefore charity can remain without a form, even when a mortal sin has been committed.

On the contrary, By mortal sin man becomes deserving of eternal death, according to Rom. 6:23:
"The wages of sin is death." Now no man can be worthy, at the same time, of eternal life and
of eternal death. Therefore it is impossible for a man to have charity with a mortal sin. Therefore
charity is destroyed by one mortal sin.

I answer that, That one contrary is removed by the other contrary supervening. Now every mortal
sin is contrary to charity by its very nature, which consists in man's loving God above all
things, and subjecting himself to Him entirely, by referring all that is his to God. It is
therefore essential to charity that man should so love God as to wish to submit to Him in all
things, and always to follow the rule of His commandments; since whatever is contrary to His
commandments is manifestly contrary to charity, and therefore by its very nature is capable
of destroying charity.

If indeed charity were an acquired habit dependent on the power of its subject, it would not
necessarily be removed by one mortal sin, for act is directly contrary, not to habit but to
act. Now the endurance of a habit in its subject does not require the endurance of its act,
so that when a contrary act supervenes the acquired habit is not at once done away. But charity,
being an infused habit, depends on the action of God Who infuses it, Who stands in relation
to the infusion and safekeeping of charity, as the sun does to the diffusion of light in the
air, as stated above (A. 10, Obj. 3). Consequently, just as the light would cease at once in
the air, were an obstacle placed to its being lit up by the sun, even so charity ceases at
once to be in the soul through the placing of an obstacle to the outpouring of charity by God
into the soul.

Now it is evident that through every mortal sin which is contrary to God's commandments, an
obstacle is placed to the outpouring of charity, since from the very fact that a man chooses
to prefer sin to God's friendship, which requires that we should obey His will, it follows
that the habit of charity is lost at once through one mortal sin. Hence Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. viii, 12) that "man is enlightened by God's presence, but he is darkened at once by
God's absence, because distance from Him is effected not by change of place but by aversion
of the will."

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of Origen may be understood, in one way, that a man who is in the
state of perfection, does not suddenly go so far as to commit a mortal sin, but is disposed
thereto by some previous negligence, for which reason venial sins are said to be dispositions
to mortal sin, as stated above (I-II, Q. 88, A. 3). Nevertheless he falls, and loses charity
through the one mortal sin if he commits it.

Since, however, he adds: "If some slight slip should occur, and he recover himself quickly
he does not appear to fall altogether," we may reply in another way, that when he speaks of
a man being emptied and falling away altogether, he means one who falls so as to sin through
malice; and this does not occur in a perfect man all at once.

Reply Obj. 2: Charity may be lost in two ways; first, directly, by actual contempt, and, in
this way, Peter did not lose charity. Secondly, indirectly, when a sin is committed against
charity, through some passion of desire or fear; it was by sinning against charity in this
way, that Peter lost charity; yet he soon recovered it.

The Reply to the Third Objection is evident from what has been said.

Reply Obj. 4: Not every inordinate affection for things directed to the end, i.e., for created
goods, constitutes a mortal sin, but only such as is directly contrary to the Divine will;
and then the inordinate affection is contrary to charity, as stated.

Reply Obj. 5: Charity denotes union with God, whereas faith and hope do not. Now every mortal
sin consists in aversion from God, as stated above (Gen. ad lit. viii, 12). Consequently every
mortal sin is contrary to charity, but not to faith and hope, but only certain determinate
sins, which destroy the habit of faith or of hope, even as charity is destroyed by every moral
sin. Hence it is evident that charity cannot remain lifeless, since it is itself the ultimate
form regarding God under the aspect of last end as stated above (Q. 23, A. 8).

QUESTION 25

OF THE OBJECT OF CHARITY (TWELVE ARTICLES)

We must now consider the object of charity; which consideration will be twofold: (1) The things
we ought to love out of charity: (2) The order in which they ought to be loved. Under the first
head there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether we should love God alone, out of charity, or should we love our neighbor also?

(2) Whether charity should be loved out of charity?

(3) Whether irrational creatures ought to be loved out of charity?

(4) Whether one may love oneself out of charity?

(5) Whether one's own body?

(6) Whether sinners should be loved out of charity?

(7) Whether sinners love themselves?

(8) Whether we should love our enemies out of charity?

(9) Whether we are bound to show them tokens of friendship?

(10) Whether we ought to love the angels out of charity?

(11) Whether we ought to love the demons?

(12) How to enumerate the things we are bound to love out of charity.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 1]

Whether the Love of Charity Stops at God, or Extends to Our Neighbor?

Objection 1: It would seem that the love of charity stops at God and does not extend to our
neighbor. Now the fear with which we fear man, and which is called human fear, is distinct
from the fear with which we fear God, and which is either servile or filial, as is evident
from what has been stated above (Q. 10, A. 2). Therefore also the love with which we love God,
is distinct from the love with which we love our neighbor.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 8) that "to be loved is to be honored."
Now the honor due to God, which is known as latria, is distinct from the honor due to a creature,
and known as dulia. Therefore again the love wherewith we love God, is distinct from that with
which we love our neighbor.

Obj. 3: Further, hope begets charity, as a gloss states on Matt. 1:2. Now hope is so due to
God that it is reprehensible to hope in man, according to Jer. 17:5: "Cursed be the man that
trusteth in man." Therefore charity is so due to God, as not to extend to our neighbor.

On the contrary, It is written (1 John 4:21): "This commandment we have from God, that he,
who loveth God, love also his brother."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 17, A. 6; Q. 19, A. 3; I-II, Q. 54, A. 3) habits are not
differentiated except their acts be of different species. For every act of the one species
belongs to the same habit. Now since the species of an act is derived from its object, considered
under its formal aspect, it follows of necessity that it is specifically the same act that
tends to an aspect of the object, and that tends to the object under that aspect: thus it is
specifically the same visual act whereby we see the light, and whereby we see the color under
the aspect of light.

Now the aspect under which our neighbor is to be loved, is God, since what we ought to love
in our neighbor is that he may be in God. Hence it is clear that it is specifically the same
act whereby we love God, and whereby we love our neighbor. Consequently the habit of charity
extends not only to the love of God, but also to the love of our neighbor.

Reply Obj. 1: We may fear our neighbor, even as we may love him, in two ways: first, on account
of something that is proper to him, as when a man fears a tyrant on account of his cruelty,
or loves him by reason of his own desire to get something from him. Such like human fear is
distinct from the fear of God, and the same applies to love. Secondly, we fear a man, or love
him on account of what he has of God; as when we fear the secular power by reason of its exercising
the ministry of God for the punishment of evildoers, and love it for its justice: such like
fear of man is not distinct from fear of God, as neither is such like love.

Reply Obj. 2: Love regards good in general, whereas honor regards the honored person's own
good, for it is given to a person in recognition of his own virtue. Hence love is not differentiated
specifically on account of the various degrees of goodness in various persons, so long as it
is referred to one good common to all, whereas honor is distinguished according to the good
belonging to individuals. Consequently we love all our neighbors with the same love of charity,
in so far as they are referred to one good common to them all, which is God; whereas we give
various honors to various people, according to each one's own virtue, and likewise to God we
give the singular honor of latria on account of His singular virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: It is wrong to hope in man as though he were the principal author of salvation,
but not, to hope in man as helping us ministerially under God. In like manner it would be wrong
if a man loved his neighbor as though he were his last end, but not, if he loved him for God's
sake; and this is what charity does.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 2]

Whether We Should Love Charity Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity need not be loved out of charity. For the things to
be loved out of charity are contained in the two precepts of charity (Matt. 22:37-39): and
neither of them includes charity, since charity is neither God nor our neighbor. Therefore
charity need not be loved out of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is founded on the fellowship of happiness, as stated above (Q. 23,
A. 1). But charity cannot participate in happiness. Therefore charity need not be loved out
of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is a kind of friendship, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1). But no man
can have friendship for charity or for an accident, since such things cannot return love for
love, which is essential to friendship, as stated in Ethic. viii. Therefore charity need not
be loved out of charity.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. viii, 8): "He that loves his neighbor, must, in consequence,
love love itself." But we love our neighbor out of charity. Therefore it follows that charity
also is loved out of charity.

I answer that, Charity is love. Now love, by reason of the nature of the power whose act it
is, is capable of reflecting on itself; for since the object of the will is the universal good,
whatever has the aspect of good, can be the object of an act of the will: and since to will
is itself a good, man can will himself to will. Even so the intellect, whose object is the
true, understands that it understands, because this again is something true. Love, however,
even by reason of its own species, is capable of reflecting on itself, because it is a spontaneous
movement of the lover towards the beloved, wherefore from the moment a man loves, he loves
himself to love.

Yet charity is not love simply, but has the nature of friendship, as stated above (Q. 23, A.
1). Now by friendship a thing is loved in two ways: first, as the friend for whom we have friendship,
and to whom we wish good things: secondly, as the good which we wish to a friend. It is in
the latter and not in the former way that charity is loved out of charity, because charity
is the good which we desire for all those whom we love out of charity. The same applies to
happiness, and to the other virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: God and our neighbor are those with whom we are friends, but love of them includes
the loving of charity, since we love both God and our neighbor, in so far as we love ourselves
and our neighbor to love God, and this is to love charity.

Reply Obj. 2: Charity is itself the fellowship of the spiritual life, whereby we arrive at
happiness: hence it is loved as the good which we desire for all whom we love out of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers friendship as referred to those with whom we are friends.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 3]

Whether Irrational Creatures Also Ought to Be Loved Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that irrational creatures also ought to be loved out of charity.
For it is chiefly by charity that we are conformed to God. Now God loves irrational creatures
out of charity, for He loves "all things that are" (Wis. 11:25), and whatever He loves, He
loves by Himself Who is charity. Therefore we also should love irrational creatures out of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, charity is referred to God principally, and extends to other things as referable
to God. Now just as the rational creature is referable to God, in as much as it bears the resemblance
of image, so too, are the irrational creatures, in as much as they bear the resemblance of
a trace [*Cf. I, Q. 45, A. 7]. Therefore charity extends also to irrational creatures.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the object of charity is God. so is the object of faith. Now faith
extends to irrational creatures, since we believe that heaven and earth were created by God,
that the fishes and birds were brought forth out of the waters, and animals that walk, and
plants, out of the earth. Therefore charity extends also to irrational creatures.

On the contrary, The love of charity extends to none but God and our neighbor. But the word
neighbor cannot be extended to irrational creatures, since they have no fellowship with man
in the rational life. Therefore charity does not extend to irrational creatures.

I answer that, According to what has been stated above (Q. 13, A. 1) charity is a kind of friendship.
Now the love of friendship is twofold: first, there is the love for the friend to whom our
friendship is given, secondly, the love for those good things which we desire for our friend.
With regard to the first, no irrational creature can be loved out of charity; and for three
reasons. Two of these reasons refer in a general way to friendship, which cannot have an irrational
creature for its object: first because friendship is towards one to whom we wish good things,
while, properly speaking, we cannot wish good things to an irrational creature, because it
is not competent, properly speaking, to possess good, this being proper to the rational creature
which, through its free-will, is the master of its disposal of the good it possesses. Hence
the Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 6) that we do not speak of good or evil befalling such like
things, except metaphorically. Secondly, because all friendship is based on some fellowship
in life; since "nothing is so proper to friendship as to live together," as the Philosopher
proves (Ethic. viii, 5). Now irrational creatures can have no fellowship in human life which
is regulated by reason. Hence friendship with irrational creatures is impossible, except metaphorically
speaking. The third reason is proper to charity, for charity is based on the fellowship of
everlasting happiness, to which the irrational creature cannot attain. Therefore we cannot
have the friendship of charity towards an irrational creature.

Nevertheless we can love irrational creatures out of charity, if we regard them as the good
things that we desire for others, in so far, to wit, as we wish for their preservation, to
God's honor and man's use; thus too does God love them out of charity.

Wherefore the Reply to the First Objection is evident.

Reply Obj. 2: The likeness by way of trace does not confer the capacity for everlasting life,
whereas the likeness of image does: and so the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 3: Faith can extend to all that is in any way true, whereas the friendship of charity
extends only to such things as have a natural capacity for everlasting life; wherefore the
comparison fails.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Ought to Love Himself Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is [not] bound to love himself out of charity. For Gregory
says in a homily (In Evang. xvii) that there "can be no charity between less than two." Therefore
no man has charity towards himself.

Obj. 2: Further, friendship, by its very nature, implies mutual love and equality (Ethic. viii,
2, 7), which cannot be of one man towards himself. But charity is a kind of friendship, as
stated above (Q. 23, A. 1). Therefore a man cannot have charity towards himself.

Obj. 3: Further, anything relating to charity cannot be blameworthy, since charity "dealeth
not perversely" (1 Cor. 23:4). Now a man deserves to be blamed for loving himself, since it
is written (2 Tim. 3:1, 2): "In the last days shall come dangerous times, men shall be lovers
of themselves." Therefore a man cannot love himself out of charity.

On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 19:18): "Thou shalt love thy friend as thyself." Now we
love our friends out of charity. Therefore we should love ourselves too out of charity.

I answer that, Since charity is a kind of friendship, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1), we may
consider charity from two standpoints: first, under the general notion of friendship, and in
this way we must hold that, properly speaking, a man is not a friend to himself, but something
more than a friend, since friendship implies union, for Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that
"love is a unitive force," whereas a man is one with himself which is more than being united
to another. Hence, just as unity is the principle of union, so the love with which a man loves
himself is the form and root of friendship. For if we have friendship with others it is because
we do unto them as we do unto ourselves, hence we read in Ethic. ix, 4, 8, that "the origin
of friendly relations with others lies in our relations to ourselves." Thus too with regard
to principles we have something greater than science, namely understanding.

Secondly, we may speak of charity in respect of its specific nature, namely as denoting man's
friendship with God in the first place, and, consequently, with the things of God, among which
things is man himself who has charity. Hence, among these other things which he loves out of
charity because they pertain to God, he loves also himself out of charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Gregory speaks there of charity under the general notion of friendship: and the
Second Objection is to be taken in the same sense.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who love themselves are to be blamed, in so far as they love themselves
as regards their sensitive nature, which they humor. This is not to love oneself truly according
to one's rational nature, so as to desire for oneself the good things which pertain to the
perfection of reason: and in this way chiefly it is through charity that a man loves himself.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 5]

Whether a Man Ought to Love His Body Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man ought not to love his body out of charity. For we do
not love one with whom we are unwilling to associate. But those who have charity shun the society
of the body, according to Rom. 7:24: "Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" and
Phil. 1:23: "Having a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ." Therefore our bodies are
not to be loved out of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, the friendship of charity is based on fellowship in the enjoyment of God.
But the body can have no share in that enjoyment. Therefore the body is not to be loved out
of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, since charity is a kind of friendship it is towards those who are capable
of loving in return. But our body cannot love us out of charity. Therefore it should not be
loved out of charity.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 23, 26) that there are four things that
we should love out of charity, and among them he reckons our own body.

I answer that, Our bodies can be considered in two ways: first, in respect of their nature,
secondly, in respect of the corruption of sin and its punishment.

Now the nature of our body was created, not by an evil principle, as the Manicheans pretend,
but by God. Hence we can use it for God's service, according to Rom. 6:13: "Present . . . your
members as instruments of justice unto God." Consequently, out of the love of charity with
which we love God, we ought to love our bodies also, but we ought not to love the evil effects
of sin and the corruption of punishment; we ought rather, by the desire of charity, to long
for the removal of such things.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle did not shrink from the society of his body, as regards the nature
of the body, in fact in this respect he was loth to be deprived thereof, according to 2 Cor.
5:4: "We would not be unclothed, but clothed over." He did, however, wish to escape from the
taint of concupiscence, which remains in the body, and from the corruption of the body which
weighs down the soul, so as to hinder it from seeing God. Hence he says expressly: "From the
body of this death."

Reply Obj. 2: Although our bodies are unable to enjoy God by knowing and loving Him, yet by
the works which we do through the body, we are able to attain to the perfect knowledge of God.
Hence from the enjoyment in the soul there overflows a certain happiness into the body, viz.,
"the flush of health and incorruption," as Augustine states (Ep. ad Dioscor. cxviii). Hence,
since the body has, in a fashion, a share of happiness, it can be loved with the love of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: Mutual love is found in the friendship which is for another, but not in that
which a man has for himself, either in respect of his soul, or in respect of his body.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 6]

Whether We Ought to Love Sinners Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to love sinners out of charity. For it is written
(Ps. 118:113): "I have hated the unjust." But David had perfect charity. Therefore sinners
should be hated rather than loved, out of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, "love is proved by deeds" as Gregory says in a homily for Pentecost (In Evang.
xxx). But good men do no works of the unjust: on the contrary, they do such as would appear
to be works of hate, according to Ps. 100:8: "In the morning I put to death all the wicked
of the land": and God commanded (Ex. 22:18): "Wizards thou shalt not suffer to live." Therefore
sinners should not be loved out of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, it is part of friendship that one should desire and wish good things for one's
friends. Now the saints, out of charity, desire evil things for the wicked, according to Ps.
9:18: "May the wicked be turned into hell [*Douay and A. V.: 'The wicked shall be,' etc. See
Reply to this Objection.]." Therefore sinners should not be loved out of charity.

Obj. 4: Further, it is proper to friends to rejoice in, and will the same things. Now charity
does not make us will what sinners will, nor to rejoice in what gives them joy, but rather
the contrary. Therefore sinners should not be loved out of charity.

Obj. 5: Further, it is proper to friends to associate together, according to Ethic. viii. But
we ought not to associate with sinners, according to 2 Cor. 6:17: "Go ye out from among them."
Therefore we should not love sinners out of charity.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 30) that "when it is said: 'Thou shalt
love thy neighbor,' it is evident that we ought to look upon every man as our neighbor." Now
sinners do not cease to be men, for sin does not destroy nature. Therefore we ought to love
sinners out of charity.

I answer that, Two things may be considered in the sinner: his nature and his guilt. According
to his nature, which he has from God, he has a capacity for happiness, on the fellowship of
which charity is based, as stated above (A. 3; Q. 23, AA. 1, 5), wherefore we ought to love
sinners, out of charity, in respect of their nature.

On the other hand their guilt is opposed to God, and is an obstacle to happiness. Wherefore,
in respect of their guilt whereby they are opposed to God, all sinners are to be hated, even
one's father or mother or kindred, according to Luke 12:26. For it is our duty to hate, in
the sinner, his being a sinner, and to love in him, his being a man capable of bliss; and this
is to love him truly, out of charity, for God's sake.

Reply Obj. 1: The prophet hated the unjust, as such, and the object of his hate was their injustice,
which was their evil. Such hatred is perfect, of which he himself says (Ps. 138:22): "I have
hated them with a perfect hatred." Now hatred of a person's evil is equivalent to love of his
good. Hence also this perfect hatred belongs to charity.

Reply Obj. 2: As the Philosopher observes (Ethic. ix, 3), when our friends fall into sin, we
ought not to deny them the amenities of friendship, so long as there is hope of their mending
their ways, and we ought to help them more readily to regain virtue than to recover money,
had they lost it, for as much as virtue is more akin than money to friendship. When, however,
they fall into very great wickedness, and become incurable, we ought no longer to show them
friendliness. It is for this reason that both Divine and human laws command such like sinners
to be put to death, because there is greater likelihood of their harming others than of their
mending their ways. Nevertheless the judge puts this into effect, not out of hatred for the
sinners, but out of the love of charity, by reason of which he prefers the public good to the
life of the individual. Moreover the death inflicted by the judge profits the sinner, if he
be converted, unto the expiation of his crime; and, if he be not converted, it profits so as
to put an end to the sin, because the sinner is thus deprived of the power to sin any more.

Reply Obj. 3: Such like imprecations which we come across in Holy Writ, may be understood in
three ways: first, by way of prediction, not by way of wish, so that the sense is: "May the
wicked be," that is, "The wicked shall be, turned into hell." Secondly, by way of wish, yet
so that the desire of the wisher is not referred to the man's punishment, but to the justice
of the punisher, according to Ps. 57:11: "The just shall rejoice when he shall see the revenge,"
since, according to Wis. 1:13, not even God "hath pleasure in the destruction of the wicked
[Vulg.: 'living']" when He punishes them, but He rejoices in His justice, according to Ps.
10:8: "The Lord is just and hath loved justice." Thirdly, so that this desire is referred to
the removal of the sin, and not to the punishment itself, to the effect, namely, that the sin
be destroyed, but that the man may live.

Reply Obj. 4: We love sinners out of charity, not so as to will what they will, or to rejoice
in what gives them joy, but so as to make them will what we will, and rejoice in what rejoices
us. Hence it is written (Jer. 15:19): "They shall be turned to thee, and thou shalt not to
be turned to them."

Reply Obj. 5: The weak should avoid associating with sinners, on account of the danger in which
they stand of being perverted by them. But it is commendable for the perfect, of whose perversion
there is no fear, to associate with sinners that they may convert them. For thus did Our Lord
eat and drink with sinners as related by Matt. 9:11-13. Yet all should avoid the society of
sinners, as regards fellowship in sin; in this sense it is written (2 Cor. 6:17): "Go out from
among them . . . and touch not the unclean thing," i.e. by consenting to sin.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 7]

Whether Sinners Love Themselves?

Objection 1: It would seem that sinners love themselves. For that which is the principle of
sin, is most of all in the sinner. Now love of self is the principle of sin, since Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xiv, 28) that it "builds up the city of Babylon." Therefore sinners most
of all love themselves.

Obj. 2: Further, sin does not destroy nature. Now it is in keeping with nature that every man
should love himself: wherefore even irrational creatures naturally desire their own good, for
instance, the preservation of their being, and so forth. Therefore sinners love themselves.

Obj. 3: Further, good is beloved by all, as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Now many sinners
reckon themselves to be good. Therefore many sinners love themselves.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 10:6): "He that loveth iniquity, hateth his own soul."

I answer that, Love of self is common to all, in one way; in another way it is proper to the
good; in a third way, it is proper to the wicked. For it is common to all for each one to love
what he thinks himself to be. Now a man is said to be a thing, in two ways: first, in respect
of his substance and nature, and, this way all think themselves to be what they are, that is,
composed of a soul and body. In this way too, all men, both good and wicked, love themselves,
in so far as they love their own preservation.

Secondly, a man is said to be something in respect of some predominance, as the sovereign of
a state is spoken of as being the state, and so, what the sovereign does, the state is said
to do. In this way, all do not think themselves to be what they are. For the reasoning mind
is the predominant part of man, while the sensitive and corporeal nature takes the second place,
the former of which the Apostle calls the "inward man," and the latter, the "outward man" (2
Cor. 4:16). Now the good look upon their rational nature or the inward man as being the chief
thing in them, wherefore in this way they think themselves to be what they are. On the other
hand, the wicked reckon their sensitive and corporeal nature, or the outward man, to hold the
first place. Wherefore, since they know not themselves aright, they do not love themselves
aright, but love what they think themselves to be. But the good know themselves truly, and
therefore truly love themselves.

The Philosopher proves this from five things that are proper to friendship. For in the first
place, every friend wishes his friend to be and to live; secondly, he desires good things for
him; thirdly, he does good things to him; fourthly, he takes pleasure in his company; fifthly,
he is of one mind with him, rejoicing and sorrowing in almost the same things. In this way
the good love themselves, as to the inward man, because they wish the preservation thereof
in its integrity, they desire good things for him, namely spiritual goods, indeed they do their
best to obtain them, and they take pleasure in entering into their own hearts, because they
find there good thoughts in the present, the memory of past good, and the hope of future good,
all of which are sources of pleasure. Likewise they experience no clashing of wills, since
their whole soul tends to one thing.

On the other hand, the wicked have no wish to be preserved in the integrity of the inward man,
nor do they desire spiritual goods for him, nor do they work for that end, nor do they take
pleasure in their own company by entering into their own hearts, because whatever they find
there, present, past and future, is evil and horrible; nor do they agree with themselves, on
account of the gnawings of conscience, according to Ps. 49:21: "I will reprove thee and set
before thy face."

In the same manner it may be shown that the wicked love themselves, as regards the corruption
of the outward man, whereas the good do not love themselves thus.

Reply Obj. 1: The love of self which is the principle of sin is that which is proper to the
wicked, and reaches "to the contempt of God," as stated in the passage quoted, because the
wicked so desire external goods as to despise spiritual goods.

Reply Obj. 2: Although natural love is not altogether forfeited by wicked men, yet it is perverted
in them, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 3: The wicked have some share of self-love, in so far as they think themselves good.
Yet such love of self is not true but apparent: and even this is not possible in those who
are very wicked.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 8]

Whether Charity Requires That We Should Love Our Enemies?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity does not require us to love our enemies. For Augustine
says (Enchiridion lxxiii) that "this great good," namely, the love of our enemies, is "not
so universal in its application, as the object of our petition when we say: Forgive us our
trespasses." Now no one is forgiven sin without he have charity, because, according to Prov.
10:12, "charity covereth all sins." Therefore charity does not require that we should love
our enemies.

Obj. 2: Further, charity does not do away with nature. Now everything, even an irrational being,
naturally hates its contrary, as a lamb hates a wolf, and water fire. Therefore charity does
not make us love our enemies.

Obj. 3: Further, charity "doth nothing perversely" (1 Cor. 13:4). Now it seems perverse to
love one's enemies, as it would be to hate one's friends: hence Joab upbraided David by saying
(2 Kings 19:6): "Thou lovest them that hate thee, and thou hatest them that love thee." Therefore
charity does not make us love our enemies.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. 4:44): "Love your enemies."

I answer that, Love of one's enemies may be understood in three ways. First, as though we were
to love our enemies as such: this is perverse, and contrary to charity, since it implies love
of that which is evil in another.

Secondly love of one's enemies may mean that we love them as to their nature, but in general:
and in this sense charity requires that we should love our enemies, namely, that in loving
God and our neighbor, we should not exclude our enemies from the love given to our neighbor
in general.

Thirdly, love of one's enemies may be considered as specially directed to them, namely, that
we should have a special movement of love towards our enemies. Charity does not require this
absolutely, because it does not require that we should have a special movement of love to every
individual man, since this would be impossible. Nevertheless charity does require this, in
respect of our being prepared in mind, namely, that we should be ready to love our enemies
individually, if the necessity were to occur. That man should actually do so, and love his
enemy for God's sake, without it being necessary for him to do so, belongs to the perfection
of charity. For since man loves his neighbor, out of charity, for God's sake, the more he loves
God, the more does he put enmities aside and show love towards his neighbor: thus if we loved
a certain man very much, we would love his children though they were unfriendly towards us.
This is the sense in which Augustine speaks in the passage quoted in the First Objection, the
Reply to which is therefore evident.

Reply Obj. 2: Everything naturally hates its contrary as such. Now our enemies are contrary
to us, as enemies, wherefore this itself should be hateful to us, for their enmity should displease
us. They are not, however, contrary to us, as men and capable of happiness: and it is as such
that we are bound to love them.

Reply Obj. 3: It is wrong to love one's enemies as such: charity does not do this, as stated above.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 9]

Whether It Is Necessary for Salvation That We Should Show Our Enemies the Signs and Effects
of Love?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity demands of a man to show his enemy the signs or effects
of love. For it is written (1 John 3:18): "Let us not love in word nor in tongue, but in deed
and in truth." Now a man loves in deed by showing the one he loves signs and effects of love.
Therefore charity requires that a man show his enemies such signs and effects of love.

Obj. 2: Further, Our Lord said in the same breath (Matt. 5:44): "Love your enemies," and, "Do
good to them that hate you." Now charity demands that we love our enemies. Therefore it demands
also that we should "do good to them."

Obj. 3: Further, not only God but also our neighbor is the object of charity. Now Gregory says
in a homily for Pentecost (In Evang. xxx), that "love of God cannot be idle for wherever it
is it does great things, and if it ceases to work, it is no longer love." Hence charity towards
our neighbor cannot be without producing works. But charity requires us to love our neighbor
without exception, though he be an enemy. Therefore charity requires us to show the signs and
effects of love towards our enemies.

On the contrary, A gloss on Matt. 5:44, "Do good to them that hate you," says: "To do good
to one's enemies is the height of perfection" [*Augustine, Enchiridion lxxiii]. Now charity
does not require us to do that which belongs to its perfection. Therefore charity does not
require us to show the signs and effects of love to our enemies.

I answer that, The effects and signs of charity are the result of inward love, and are in proportion
with it. Now it is absolutely necessary, for the fulfilment of the precept, that we should
inwardly love our enemies in general, but not individually, except as regards the mind being
prepared to do so, as explained above (A. 8).

We must accordingly apply this to the showing of the effects and signs of love. For some of
the signs and favors of love are shown to our neighbors in general, as when we pray for all
the faithful, or for a whole people, or when anyone bestows a favor on a whole community: and
the fulfilment of the precept requires that we should show such like favors or signs of love
towards our enemies. For if we did not so, it would be a proof of vengeful spite, and contrary
to what is written (Lev. 19:18): "Seek not revenge, nor be mindful of the injury of thy citizens."
But there are other favors or signs of love, which one shows to certain persons in particular:
and it is not necessary for salvation that we show our enemies such like favors and signs of
love, except as regards being ready in our minds, for instance to come to their assistance
in a case of urgency, according to Prov. 25:21: "If thy enemy be hungry, give him to eat; if
he thirst, give him . . . drink."

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 10]

Whether We Ought to Love the Angels Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that we are not bound to love the angels out of charity. For, as
Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i), charity is a twofold love: the love of God and of our
neighbor. Now love of the angels is not contained in the love of God, since they are created
substances; nor is it, seemingly, contained in the love of our neighbor, since they do not
belong with us to a common species. Therefore we are not bound to love them out of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, dumb animals have more in common with us than the angels have, since they
belong to the same proximate genus as we do. But we have not charity towards dumb animals,
as stated above (A. 3). Neither, therefore, have we towards the angels.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing is so proper to friends as companionship with one another (Ethic.
viii, 5). But the angels are not our companions; we cannot even see them. Therefore we are
unable to give them the friendship of charity.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 30): "If the name of neighbor is given
either to those whom we pity, or to those who pity us, it is evident that the precept binding
us to love our neighbor includes also the holy angels from whom we receive many merciful favors."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 23, A. 1), the friendship of charity is founded upon the
fellowship of everlasting happiness, in which men share in common with the angels. For it is
written (Matt. 22:30) that "in the resurrection . . . men shall be as the angels of God in
heaven." It is therefore evident that the friendship of charity extends also to the angels.

Reply Obj. 1: Our neighbor is not only one who is united to us in a common species, but also
one who is united to us by sharing in the blessings pertaining to everlasting life, and it
is on the latter fellowship that the friendship of charity is founded.

Reply Obj. 2: Dumb animals are united to us in the proximate genus, by reason of their sensitive
nature; whereas we are partakers of everlasting happiness, by reason not of our sensitive nature
but of our rational mind wherein we associate with the angels.

Reply Obj. 3: The companionship of the angels does not consist in outward fellowship, which
we have in respect of our sensitive nature; it consists in a fellowship of the mind, imperfect
indeed in this life, but perfect in heaven, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1, ad 1).

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 11]

Whether We Are Bound to Love the Demons Out of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to love the demons out of charity. For the angels
are our neighbors by reason of their fellowship with us in a rational mind. But the demons
also share in our fellowship thus, since natural gifts, such as life and understanding, remain
in them unimpaired, as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore we ought to love the demons
out of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, the demons differ from the blessed angels in the matter of sin, even as sinners
from just men. Now the just man loves the sinner out of charity. Therefore he ought to love
the demons also out of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, we ought, out of charity, to love, as being our neighbors, those from whom
we receive favors, as appears from the passage of Augustine quoted above (A. 9). Now the demons
are useful to us in many things, for "by tempting us they work crowns for us," as Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei xi, 17). Therefore we ought to love the demons out of charity.

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. 28:18): "Your league with death shall be abolished, and
your covenant with hell shall not stand." Now the perfection of a peace and covenant is through
charity. Therefore we ought not to have charity for the demons who live in hell and compass death.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), in the sinner, we are bound, out of charity, to love
his nature, but to hate his sin. But the name of demon is given to designate a nature deformed
by sin, wherefore demons should not be loved out of charity. Without however laying stress
on the word, the question as to whether the spirits called demons ought to be loved out of
charity, must be answered in accordance with the statement made above (AA. 2, 3), that a thing
may be loved out of charity in two ways. First, a thing may be loved as the person who is the
object of friendship, and thus we cannot have the friendship of charity towards the demons.
For it is an essential part of friendship that one should be a well-wisher towards one's friend;
and it is impossible for us, out of charity, to desire the good of everlasting life, to which
charity is referred, for those spirits whom God has condemned eternally, since this would be
in opposition to our charity towards God whereby we approve of His justice.

Secondly, we love a thing as being that which we desire to be enduring as another's good. In
this way we love irrational creatures out of charity, in as much as we wish them to endure,
to give glory to God and be useful to man, as stated above (A. 3): and in this way too we can
love the nature of the demons even out of charity, in as much as we desire those spirits to
endure, as to their natural gifts, unto God's glory.

Reply Obj. 1: The possession of everlasting happiness is not impossible for the angelic mind
as it is for the mind of a demon; consequently the friendship of charity which is based on
the fellowship of everlasting life, rather than on the fellowship of nature, is possible towards
the angels, but not towards the demons.

Reply Obj. 2: In this life, men who are in sin retain the possibility of obtaining everlasting
happiness: not so those who are lost in hell, who, in this respect, are in the same case as
the demons.

Reply Obj. 3: That the demons are useful to us is due not to their intention but to the ordering
of Divine providence; hence this leads us to be friends, not with them, but with God, Who turns
their perverse intention to our profit.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 25, Art. 12]

Whether Four Things Are Rightly Reckoned As to Be Loved Out of Charity, Viz. God, Our Neighbor,
Our Body and Ourselves?

Objection 1: It would seem that these four things are not rightly reckoned as to be loved out
of charity, to wit: God, our neighbor, our body, and ourselves. For, as Augustine states (Tract.
super Joan. lxxxiii), "he that loveth not God, loveth not himself." Hence love of oneself is
included in the love of God. Therefore love of oneself is not distinct from the love of God.

Obj. 2: Further, a part ought not to be condivided with the whole. But our body is part of
ourselves. Therefore it ought not to be condivided with ourselves as a distinct object of love.

Obj. 3: Further, just as a man has a body, so has his neighbor. Since then the love with which
a man loves his neighbor, is distinct from the love with which a man loves himself, so the
love with which a man loves his neighbor's body, ought to be distinct from the love with which
he loves his own body.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 23, AA. 1, 5), the friendship of charity is based on the
fellowship of happiness. Now, in this fellowship, one thing is considered as the principle
from which happiness flows, namely God; a second is that which directly partakes of happiness,
namely men and angels; a third is a thing to which happiness comes by a kind of overflow, namely
the human body.

Now the source from which happiness flows is lovable by reason of its being the cause of happiness:
that which is a partaker of happiness, can be an object of love for two reasons, either through
being identified with ourselves, or through being associated with us in partaking of happiness,
and in this respect, there are two things to be loved out of charity, in as much as man loves
both himself and his neighbor.

Reply Obj. 1: The different relations between a lover and the various things loved make a different
kind of lovableness. Accordingly, since the relation between the human lover and God is different
from his relation to himself, these two are reckoned as distinct objects of love, for the love
of the one is the cause of the love of the other, so that the former love being removed the
latter is taken away.

Reply Obj. 2: The subject of charity is the rational mind that can be capable of obtaining
happiness, to which the body does not reach directly, but only by a kind of overflow. Hence,
by his reasonable mind which holds the first place in him, man, out of charity, loves himself
in one way, and his own body in another.

Reply Obj. 3: Man loves his neighbor, both as to his soul and as to his body, by reason of
a certain fellowship in happiness. Wherefore, on the part of his neighbor, there is only one
reason for loving him; and our neighbor's body is not reckoned as a special object of love.

QUESTION 26

OF THE ORDER OF CHARITY (In Thirteen Articles)

We must now consider the order of charity, under which head there are thirteen points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there is an order in charity?

(2) Whether man ought to love God more than his neighbor?

(3) Whether more than himself?

(4) Whether he ought to love himself more than his neighbor?

(5) Whether man ought to love his neighbor more than his own body?

(6) Whether he ought to love one neighbor more than another?

(7) Whether he ought to love more, a neighbor who is better, or one who is more closely united
to him?

(8) Whether he ought to love more, one who is akin to him by blood, or one who is united to
him by other ties?

(9) Whether, out of charity, a man ought to love his son more than his father?

(10) Whether he ought to love his mother more than his father?

(11) Whether he ought to love his wife more than his father or mother?

(12) Whether we ought to love those who are kind to us more than those whom we are kind to?

(13) Whether the order of charity endures in heaven?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 1]

Whether There Is Order in Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is no order in charity. For charity is a virtue. But
no order is assigned to the other virtues. Neither, therefore, should any order be assigned
to charity.

Obj. 2: Further, just as the object of faith is the First Truth, so is the object of charity
the Sovereign Good. Now no order is appointed for faith, but all things are believed equally.
Neither, therefore, ought there to be any order in charity.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is in the will: whereas ordering belongs, not to the will, but to
the reason. Therefore no order should be ascribed to charity.

On the contrary, It is written (Cant 2:4): "He brought me into the cellar of wine, he set in
order charity in me."

I answer that, As the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 16), the terms "before" and "after"
are used in reference to some principle. Now order implies that certain things are, in some
way, before or after. Hence wherever there is a principle, there must needs be also order of
some kind. But it has been said above (Q. 23, A. 1; Q. 25, A. 12) that the love of charity
tends to God as to the principle of happiness, on the fellowship of which the friendship of
charity is based. Consequently there must needs be some order in things loved out of charity,
which order is in reference to the first principle of that love, which is God.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity tends towards the last end considered as last end: and this does not
apply to any other virtue, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 6). Now the end has the character of
principle in matters of appetite and action, as was shown above (Q. 23, A. 7, ad 2; I-II, A.
1, ad 1). Wherefore charity, above all, implies relation to the First Principle, and consequently,
in charity above all, we find an order in reference to the First Principle.

Reply Obj. 2: Faith pertains to the cognitive power, whose operation depends on the thing known
being in the knower. On the other hand, charity is in an appetitive power, whose operation
consists in the soul tending to things themselves. Now order is to be found in things themselves,
and flows from them into our knowledge. Hence order is more appropriate to charity than to faith.

And yet there is a certain order in faith, in so far as it is chiefly about God, and secondarily
about things referred to God.

Reply Obj. 3: Order belongs to reason as the faculty that orders, and to the appetitive power
as to the faculty which is ordered. It is in this way that order is stated to be in charity.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 2]

Whether God Ought to Be Loved More Than Our Neighbor?

Objection 1: It would seem that God ought not to be loved more than our neighbor. For it is
written (1 John 4:20): "He that loveth not his brother whom he seeth, how can he love God,
Whom he seeth not?" Whence it seems to follow that the more a thing is visible the more lovable
it is, since loving begins with seeing, according to Ethic. ix, 5, 12. Now God is less visible
than our neighbor. Therefore He is less lovable, out of charity, than our neighbor.

Obj. 2: Further, likeness causes love, according to Ecclus. 13:19: "Every beast loveth its
like." Now man bears more likeness to his neighbor than to God. Therefore man loves his neighbor,
out of charity, more than he loves God.

Obj. 3: Further, what charity loves in a neighbor, is God, according to Augustine (De Doctr.
Christ. i, 22, 27). Now God is not greater in Himself than He is in our neighbor. Therefore
He is not more to be loved in Himself than in our neighbor. Therefore we ought not to love
God more than our neighbor.

On the contrary, A thing ought to be loved more, if others ought to be hated on its account.
Now we ought to hate our neighbor for God's sake, if, to wit, he leads us astray from God,
according to Luke 14:26: "If any man come to Me and hate not his father, and mother, and wife,
end children, and brethren, and sisters . . . he cannot be My disciple." Therefore we ought
to love God, out of charity, more than our neighbor.

I answer that, Each kind of friendship regards chiefly the subject in which we chiefly find
the good on the fellowship of which that friendship is based: thus civil friendship regards
chiefly the ruler of the state, on whom the entire common good of the state depends; hence
to him before all, the citizens owe fidelity and obedience. Now the friendship of charity is
based on the fellowship of happiness, which consists essentially in God, as the First Principle,
whence it flows to all who are capable of happiness.

Therefore God ought to be loved chiefly and before all out of charity: for He is loved as the
cause of happiness, whereas our neighbor is loved as receiving together with us a share of
happiness from Him.

Reply Obj. 1: A thing is a cause of love in two ways: first, as being the reason for loving.
In this way good is the cause of love, since each thing is loved according to its measure of
goodness. Secondly, a thing causes love, as being a way to acquire love. It is in this way
that seeing is the cause of loving, not as though a thing were lovable according as it is visible,
but because by seeing a thing we are led to love it. Hence it does not follow that what is
more visible is more lovable, but that as an object of love we meet with it before others:
and that is the sense of the Apostle's argument. For, since our neighbor is more visible to
us, he is the first lovable object we meet with, because "the soul learns, from those things
it knows, to love what it knows not," as Gregory says in a homily (In Evang. xi). Hence it
can be argued that, if any man loves not his neighbor, neither does he love God, not because
his neighbor is more lovable, but because he is the first thing to demand our love: and God
is more lovable by reason of His greater goodness.

Reply Obj. 2: The likeness we have to God precedes and causes the likeness we have to our neighbor:
because from the very fact that we share along with our neighbor in something received from
God, we become like to our neighbor. Hence by reason of this likeness we ought to love God
more than we love our neighbor.

Reply Obj. 3: Considered in His substance, God is equally in all, in whomsoever He may be,
for He is not lessened by being in anything. And yet our neighbor does not possess God's goodness
equally with God, for God has it essentially, and our neighbor by participation.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 3]

Whether Out of Charity, Man Is Bound to Love God More Than Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that man is not bound, out of charity, to love God more than himself.
For the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 8) that "a man's friendly relations with others arise
from his friendly relations with himself." Now the cause is stronger than its effect. Therefore
man's friendship towards himself is greater than his friendship for anyone else. Therefore
he ought to love himself more than God.

Obj. 2: Further, one loves a thing in so far as it is one's own good. Now the reason for loving
a thing is more loved than the thing itself which is loved for that reason, even as the principles
which are the reason for knowing a thing are more known. Therefore man loves himself more than
any other good loved by him. Therefore he does not love God more than himself.

Obj. 3: Further, a man loves God as much as he loves to enjoy God. But a man loves himself
as much as he loves to enjoy God; since this is the highest good a man can wish for himself.
Therefore man is not bound, out of charity, to love God more than himself.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 22): "If thou oughtest to love thyself,
not for thy own sake, but for the sake of Him in Whom is the rightest end of thy love, let
no other man take offense if him also thou lovest for God's sake." Now "the cause of a thing
being such is yet more so." Therefore man ought to love God more than himself.

I answer that, The good we receive from God is twofold, the good of nature, and the good of
grace. Now the fellowship of natural goods bestowed on us by God is the foundation of natural
love, in virtue of which not only man, so long as his nature remains unimpaired, loves God
above all things and more than himself, but also every single creature, each in its own way,
i.e. either by an intellectual, or by a rational, or by an animal, or at least by a natural
love, as stones do, for instance, and other things bereft of knowledge, because each part naturally
loves the common good of the whole more than its own particular good. This is evidenced by
its operation, since the principal inclination of each part is towards common action conducive
to the good of the whole. It may also be seen in civic virtues whereby sometimes the citizens
suffer damage even to their own property and persons for the sake of the common good. Wherefore
much more is this realized with regard to the friendship of charity which is based on the fellowship
of the gifts of grace.

Therefore man ought, out of charity, to love God, Who is the common good of all, more than
himself: since happiness is in God as in the universal and fountain principle of all who are
able to have a share of that happiness.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is speaking of friendly relations towards another person in whom
the good, which is the object of friendship, resides in some restricted way; and not of friendly
relations with another in whom the aforesaid good resides in totality.

Reply Obj. 2: The part does indeed love the good of the whole, as becomes a part, not however
so as to refer the good of the whole to itself, but rather itself to the good of the whole.

Reply Obj. 3: That a man wishes to enjoy God pertains to that love of God which is love of
concupiscence. Now we love God with the love of friendship more than with the love of concupiscence,
because the Divine good is greater in itself, than our share of good in enjoying Him. Hence,
out of charity, man simply loves God more than himself.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 4]

Whether Out of Charity, Man Ought to Love Himself More Than His Neighbor?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man ought not, out of charity, to love himself more than
his neighbor. For the principal object of charity is God, as stated above (A. 2; Q. 25, AA.
1, 12). Now sometimes our neighbor is more closely united to God than we are ourselves. Therefore
we ought to love such a one more than ourselves.

Obj. 2: Further, the more we love a person, the more we avoid injuring him. Now a man, out
of charity, submits to injury for his neighbor's sake, according to Prov. 12:26: "He that neglecteth
a loss for the sake of a friend, is just." Therefore a man ought, out of charity, to love his
neighbor more than himself.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (1 Cor. 13:5) "charity seeketh not its own." Now the thing we
love most is the one whose good we seek most. Therefore a man does not, out of charity, love
himself more than his neighbor.

On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 19:18, Matt. 22:39): "Thou shalt love thy neighbor (Lev.
19:18: 'friend') as thyself." Whence it seems to follow that man's love for himself is the
model of his love for another. But the model exceeds the copy. Therefore, out of charity, a
man ought to love himself more than his neighbor.

I answer that, There are two things in man, his spiritual nature and his corporeal nature.
And a man is said to love himself by reason of his loving himself with regard to his spiritual
nature, as stated above (Q. 25, A. 7): so that accordingly, a man ought, out of charity, to
love himself more than he loves any other person.

This is evident from the very reason for loving: since, as stated above (Q. 25, AA. 1, 12),
God is loved as the principle of good, on which the love of charity is founded; while man,
out of charity, loves himself by reason of his being a partaker of the aforesaid good, and
loves his neighbor by reason of his fellowship in that good. Now fellowship is a reason for
love according to a certain union in relation to God. Wherefore just as unity surpasses union,
the fact that man himself has a share of the Divine good, is a more potent reason for loving
than that another should be a partner with him in that share. Therefore man, out of charity,
ought to love himself more than his neighbor: in sign whereof, a man ought not to give way
to any evil of sin, which counteracts his share of happiness, not even that he may free his
neighbor from sin.

Reply Obj. 1: The love of charity takes its quantity not only from its object which is God,
but also from the lover, who is the man that has charity, even as the quantity of any action
depends in some way on the subject. Wherefore, though a better neighbor is nearer to God, yet
because he is not as near to the man who has charity, as this man is to himself, it does not
follow that a man is bound to love his neighbor more than himself.

Reply Obj. 2: A man ought to bear bodily injury for his friend's sake, and precisely in so
doing he loves himself more as regards his spiritual mind, because it pertains to the perfection
of virtue, which is a good of the mind. In spiritual matters, however, man ought not to suffer
injury by sinning, in order to free his neighbor from sin, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says in his Rule (Ep. ccxi), the saying, "'charity seeks not her
own,' means that it prefers the common to the private good." Now the common good is always
more lovable to the individual than his private good, even as the good of the whole is more
lovable to the part, than the latter's own partial good, as stated above (A. 3).

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 5]

Whether a Man Ought to Love His Neighbor More Than His Own Body?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is not bound to love his neighbor more than his own body.
For his neighbor includes his neighbor's body. If therefore a man ought to love his neighbor
more than his own body, it follows that he ought to love his neighbor's body more than his own.

Obj. 2: Further, a man ought to love his own soul more than his neighbor's, as stated above
(A. 4). Now a man's own body is nearer to his soul than his neighbor. Therefore we ought to
love our body more than our neighbor.

Obj. 3: Further, a man imperils that which he loves less for the sake of what he loves more.
Now every man is not bound to imperil his own body for his neighbor's safety: this belongs
to the perfect, according to John 15:13: "Greater love than this no man hath, that a man lay
down his life for his friends." Therefore a man is not bound, out of charity, to love his neighbor
more than his own body.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 27) that "we ought to love our neighbor
more than our own body."

I answer that, Out of charity we ought to love more that which has more fully the reason for
being loved out of charity, as stated above (A. 2; Q. 25, A. 12). Now fellowship in the full
participation of happiness which is the reason for loving one's neighbor, is a greater reason
for loving, than the participation of happiness by way of overflow, which is the reason for
loving one's own body. Therefore, as regards the welfare of the soul we ought to love our neighbor
more than our own body.

Reply Obj. 1: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. ix, 8) a thing seems to be that which is
predominant in it: so that when we say that we ought to love our neighbor more than our own
body, this refers to his soul, which is his predominant part.

Reply Obj. 2: Our body is nearer to our soul than our neighbor, as regards the constitution
of our own nature: but as regards the participation of happiness, our neighbor's soul is more
closely associated with our own soul, than even our own body is.

Reply Obj. 3: Every man is immediately concerned with the care of his own body, but not with
his neighbor's welfare, except perhaps in cases of urgency: wherefore charity does not necessarily
require a man to imperil his own body for his neighbor's welfare, except in a case where he
is under obligation to do so; and if a man of his own accord offer himself for that purpose,
this belongs to the perfection of charity.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 6]

Whether We Ought to Love One Neighbor More Than Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to love one neighbor more than another. For Augustine
says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 28): "One ought to love all men equally. Since, however, one cannot
do good to all, we ought to consider those chiefly who by reason of place, time or any other
circumstance, by a kind of chance, are more closely united to us." Therefore one neighbor ought
not to be loved more than another.

Obj. 2: Further, where there is one and the same reason for loving several, there should be
no inequality of love. Now there is one and the same reason for loving all one's neighbors,
which reason is God, as Augustine states (De Doctr. Christ. i, 27). Therefore we ought to love
all our neighbors equally.

Obj. 3: Further, to love a man is to wish him good things, as the Philosopher states (Rhet.
ii, 4). Now to all our neighbors we wish an equal good, viz. everlasting life. Therefore we
ought to love all our neighbors equally.

On the contrary, One's obligation to love a person is proportionate to the gravity of the sin
one commits in acting against that love. Now it is a more grievous sin to act against the love
of certain neighbors, than against the love of others. Hence the commandment (Lev. 10:9), "He
that curseth his father or mother, dying let him die," which does not apply to those who cursed
others than the above. Therefore we ought to love some neighbors more than others.

I answer that, There have been two opinions on this question: for some have said that we ought,
out of charity, to love all our neighbors equally, as regards our affection, but not as regards
the outward effect. They held that the order of love is to be understood as applying to outward
favors, which we ought to confer on those who are connected with us in preference to those
who are unconnected, and not to the inward affection, which ought to be given equally to all
including our enemies.

But this is unreasonable. For the affection of charity, which is the inclination of grace,
is not less orderly than the natural appetite, which is the inclination of nature, for both
inclinations flow from Divine wisdom. Now we observe in the physical order that the natural
inclination in each thing is proportionate to the act or movement that is becoming to the nature
of that thing: thus in earth the inclination of gravity is greater than in water, because it
is becoming to earth to be beneath water. Consequently the inclination also of grace which
is the effect of charity, must needs be proportionate to those actions which have to be performed
outwardly, so that, to wit, the affection of our charity be more intense towards those to whom
we ought to behave with greater kindness.

We must, therefore, say that, even as regards the affection we ought to love one neighbor more
than another. The reason is that, since the principle of love is God, and the person who loves,
it must needs be that the affection of love increases in proportion to the nearness to one
or the other of those principles. For as we stated above (A. 1), wherever we find a principle,
order depends on relation to that principle.

Reply Obj. 1: Love can be unequal in two ways: first on the part of the good we wish our friend.
In this respect we love all men equally out of charity: because we wish them all one same generic
good, namely everlasting happiness. Secondly love is said to be greater through its action
being more intense: and in this way we ought not to love all equally.

Or we may reply that we have unequal love for certain persons in two ways: first, through our
loving some and not loving others. As regards beneficence we are bound to observe this inequality,
because we cannot do good to all: but as regards benevolence, love ought not to be thus unequal.
The other inequality arises from our loving some more than others: and Augustine does not mean
to exclude the latter inequality, but the former, as is evident from what he says of beneficence.

Reply Obj. 2: Our neighbors are not all equally related to God; some are nearer to Him, by
reason of their greater goodness, and those we ought, out of charity, to love more than those
who are not so near to Him.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers the quantity of love on the part of the good which we
wish our friends.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 7]

Whether We Ought to Love Those Who Are Better More Than Those Who Are More Closely United Us?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to love those who are better more than those who are
more closely united to us. For that which is in no way hateful seems more lovable than that
which is hateful for some reason: just as a thing is all the whiter for having less black mixed
with it. Now those who are connected with us are hateful for some reason, according to Luke
14:26: "If any man come to Me, and hate not his father," etc. On the other hand good men are
not hateful for any reason. Therefore it seems that we ought to love those who are better more
than those who are more closely connected with us.

Obj. 2: Further, by charity above all, man is likened to God. But God loves more the better
man. Therefore man also, out of charity, ought to love the better man more than one who is
more closely united to him.

Obj. 3: Further, in every friendship, that ought to be loved most which has most to do with
the foundation of that friendship: for, by natural friendship we love most those who are connected
with us by nature, our parents for instance, or our children. Now the friendship of charity
is founded upon the fellowship of happiness, which has more to do with better men than with
those who are more closely united to us. Therefore, out of charity, we ought to love better
men more than those who are more closely connected with us.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Tim. Now the inward affection of charity ought to correspond
to the outward effect. Therefore charity regards those who are nearer to us before those who
are better.

I answer that, Every act should be proportionate both to its object and to the agent. But from
its object it takes its species, while, from the power of the agent it takes the mode of its
intensity: thus movement has its species from the term to which it tends, while the intensity
of its speed arises from the disposition of the thing moved and the power of the mover. Accordingly
love takes its species from its object, but its intensity is due to the lover.

Now the object of charity's love is God, and man is the lover. Therefore the specific diversity
of the love which is in accordance with charity, as regards the love of our neighbor, depends
on his relation to God, so that, out of charity, we should wish a greater good to one who is
nearer to God; for though the good which charity wishes to all, viz. everlasting happiness,
is one in itself, yet it has various degrees according to various shares of happiness, and
it belongs to charity to wish God's justice to be maintained, in accordance with which better
men have a fuller share of happiness. And this regards the species of love; for there are different
species of love according to the different goods that we wish for those whom we love.

On the other hand, the intensity of love is measured with regard to the man who loves, and
accordingly man loves those who are more closely united to him, with more intense affection
as to the good he wishes for them, than he loves those who are better as to the greater good
he wishes for them.

Again a further difference must be observed here: for some neighbors are connected with us
by their natural origin, a connection which cannot be severed, since that origin makes them
to be what they are. But the goodness of virtue, wherein some are close to God, can come and
go, increase and decrease, as was shown above (Q. 24, AA. 4, 10, 11). Hence it is possible
for one, out of charity, to wish this man who is more closely united to one, to be better than
another, and so reach a higher degree of happiness.

Moreover there is yet another reason for which, out of charity, we love more those who are
more nearly connected with us, since we love them in more ways. For, towards those who are
not connected with us we have no other friendship than charity, whereas for those who are connected
with us, we have certain other friendships, according to the way in which they are connected.
Now since the good on which every other friendship of the virtuous is based, is directed, as
to its end, to the good on which charity is based, it follows that charity commands each act
of another friendship, even as the art which is about the end commands the art which is about
the means. It was part of his scheme to permit a few nights to pass quietly so that disturbances
would not be associated with him, he being supposed far away. In the depths of the adjacent
forest he had found safe shelter for himself and horse, and here, like a beast in its lair, he
slept by day.

The darkness was as light to him about the familiar plantation, and he prowled around at night
unmolested.

During this second meeting he attempted little more than to argue his dusky associates out of their
innate fear of spooks and to urge upon them patience in submitting to Perkins's rule a little
longer. "I des tells you," he declared, "dey ain' no spooks fer us! Dere's spooks on'y fer dem
w'at kills folks on de sly-like.

If ole Perkins come rarin' en tarin' wid his gun en dawg, I des kill 'im ez I wud a rattler en he
kyant bodder me no mo'; but ef I steal on 'im now en kill 'im in he sleep he ghos pester me ter
daith.

Dat de conslomeration ob de hull business.

I doan ax you ter do any ting but he'p me skeer' im mos' ter daith.

He watchin' lak a ole fox ter ke'p you en Zany yere. Ef you puts out, he riz de kentry en put
de houn's arter you. We des got ter skeer 'im off fust. I'm studyin' how ter git dat dawg out'n
de way. Des go on quiet few mo' days en ef you year quar noises up on de hill whar de sogers bur'ed
you know hit me. Look skeered lak de oders but doan be fear'd en keep mum."

The next few days and nights passed in quiet and all began to breathe more freely. Even Aun'
Jinkey rallied under the soothing influence of her pipe and the privilege
of watching part of each day with Miss Lou.

Slowly the girl began to grow better. Hoping not even for tolerance of her feelings in regard
to Scoville, it was her instinct to conceal them from her relatives. She knew Mrs. Waldo would
not reveal what Aun' Jinkey had told her, and understood the peculiar tenderness with which
that lady often kissed her. She also guessed that while the stanch Southern friend had deep
sympathy for her there was not very strong regret that the affair
had ended in a way to preclude further complications.

"Remember, my dear," said Mrs. Waldo, in her affectionate parting,
"that God never utterly impoverishes our lives.

Only we ourselves can do that. You will get well and become happy in making others happy."

On the evening of that day, even Mr. Baron's routine was completely
restored.

His larder was meagre compared with the past, but with the exception that Mrs. Whately occupied the
place of his niece at the table, and viands were fewer, all was as it had been. Zany's fears
had subsided, leaving her inwardly chafing at the prospect of monotonous and indefinite years
of work under "ole miss," with little chance of Chunk's return. Aun' Suke's taste of freedom had
not been to her mind, so she was rather complacent than otherwise, and especially over the
fact that there was so little to cook. The garden and Mr. Baron's good credit would insure enough
plain food till the crops matured and the impoverishment caused by the raid was repaired.
It certainly seemed when the sun set that evening that the present aspect of affairs might
be maintained indefinitely in the little community.

Only one was not exactly at rest. Perkins felt as if something was in the air. There was a brooding,
sullen quiet among the negroes which led him to suspect that they were waiting and hoping for something
unknown to him. This was true of Uncle Lusthah and the majority. The crack of Union rifles was
the "soun' f'um far away" they were listening for. By secret channels of communication tidings
of distant battles were conveyed from plantation to plantation, and
the slaves were often better informed that their masters.

As for Perkins, he knew next to nothing of what was taking place,
nor did he dream that he was daily addressing harsh words to conspirators
against his peace.

The time had come when Chunk was ready to act. On the night in question a hot wind arose which
blew from the little burial-place on the hill toward the house. "Hi! now's de charnce ter
fix dat ar bizness!" and he made his preparations.

Shortly before midnight he crept like a cat under the overseer's window. The heavy snoring
rose and fell reassuringly, sweet as music to Chunk's ears. Not so the angry, restless growling
of the savage bloodhound chained within. "But you doan kotch me dis yere time fer all yer fuss,
Marse Grip," the negro muttered. "I done hab yer brekfus' ready fer yer! Dat'll settle yer hash,'
and with deft hand a piece of poisoned meat was tossed close to the
brute's feet as Chunk hastened away.

Jute was next wakened and put on the watch. An hour later there came from the soldiers' cemetery
the most doleful, unearthly sounds imaginable. No need for Jute and his confederates to arouse
the other negroes in the quarters. A huddled frightened gang soon collected, Aun' Jinkey among
them so scared she could not speak.

"Marse Perkins ought to know 'bout dis," cried Jute.

The suggestion was enough. The whole terror-stricken throng rushed in a body to the overseer's
cottage and began calling and shrieking, "Come out yere! come out yere!" Confused in his sudden
waking and thinking he was mobbed, he shouted through the window, "I'll shoot a dozen of yer
ef yer don't clar out."

"Marse Perkins, des you lis'n," rose in chorus from those far beyond the fear of mortal weapons.

In
the silence that followed the rushing wind bore down to them a weird, dismal howl that in Perkins's
ears met every ghostly requirement.

His teeth began to chatter like castanets, and snatching his jug of corn whiskey he swallowed
great draughts.

"We des tink you orter know 'bout dis," said Jute.

"Cert'ny," cried Perkins in his sudden flame of false courage. "I'll light a lantern and take
twenty o' you hands round that place. Ef thar's a cuss yonder makin' this 'sturbance we'll roast
'im alive."

In a moment or two he dressed and came out with a light and his gun. Two revolvers were also
stuck in his belt. As he appeared on the threshold there was a prolonged yell which curdled
even his inflamed blood and sent some of the negro women into hysterics.

"Come on," shouted the overseer hoarsely, "thirty of yer ef yer afraid."

The crowd fell back. "We ain' gwine ter dat ar spook place, no mattah w'at you do to us."

"Perkins, what IS the matter?" Mr. Baron was heard shouting from the house.

"Reckon you better come out yere, sir."

"Are the hands making trouble?"

"No sir, sump'n quar's gwine on, what we kyant mek out yit."

Mr. Baron, wrapped in his dressing-gown, soon appeared on the scene,
while Aun' Suke's domain contributed its quota also of agitated, half-dressed
forms.

Chunk could not resist the temptation to be a witness to the scene and in a copse near by was
grinning with silent laughter at his success.

After learning what had occurred, Mr. Baron scoffed at their superstitions, sternly bidding all
to go to their places and keep quiet.

"Perkins, you've been drinking beyond reason," he warned his overseer
in a low voice.

"Get back to your room quick or you will be the laughing-stock of
everybody!

See here, you people, you have simply got into a panic over the howling of the wind, which happens
to blow down from the graveyard to-night."

"Neber yeared de win' howl dataway befo'," the negroes answered, as in a mass they drifted back
to the quarters.

Perkins was not only aware of his condition but was only too glad to have so good an excuse for
not searching the cemetery. Scarcely had he been left alone, however, before he followed the negroes,
resolved upon companionship of even those in whom he denied a humanity
like his own.

In the darkness Chunk found an opportunity to summon Jute aside and say, "Free er fo' ob you offer
ter stay wid ole Perkins. Thet he'p me out."

Perkins accepted the offer gladly, and they agreed to watch at his door and in the little hallway.

"You
mus' des tie up dat ar dawg ob yourn," first stipulated Jute.

"Why, whar in--is the dog? Hain't yeared a sound from 'im sence the 'sturbance begun."

"Dwags kyant stan' spooks nohow," remarked Jute.

"I've yeared that," admitted Perkins, looking around for the animal.

"Thar he is, un'er yo' baid," said Jute, peeking through the doorway.

The miserable man's hair fairly stood up when the brute was discovered stark and dead without a scratch
upon him. Recourse was again had to the jug, and oblivion soon followed.

CHAPTER XXXV

A VISITATION

There was no more sleep at the quarters that night, and never was the dawn more welcome. It
only brought a respite, however, for the impression was fixed that the place was haunted. There
was a settled aspect of gloom and anxiety on every dusky face in
the morning.

Mr. Baron found his overseer incapacitated for duty, but the hands
were rather anxious to go to work and readily obeyed his orders to
do so.

They clung to all that was familiar and every-day-like, while their
fears and troubled consciences spurred them to tasks which they felt
might be a sort of propitiation to the mysterious powers abroad.

Zany was now sorry indeed that she had not gone with Chunk, and poor
Aun' Jinkey so shook and trembled all day that Mrs. Whately would
not let her watch by Miss Lou.

Knowing much of negro superstitions she believed, with her brother and Mrs. Baron, that the graves
on the place, together with some natural, yet unusual sounds, had started a panic which would
soon die out.

When at last Perkins, shaky and nervous, reported the mysterious death of his dog, Mr. Baron was
perplexed, but nothing more. "You were in no condition to give a sane account of anything
that happened last night," he said curtly.

"Be careful in the future. If you will only be sensible about it, this ridiculous scare will
be to our advantage, for the hands are subdued enough now and frightened into their duty."

Perkins
remained silent. In truth, he was more frightened than any one else, for the death of his dog
appeared to single him out as a special object of ghostly hostility. He got through the day
as well as he could, but dreaded the coming night all the more as
he saw eyes directed toward him, as if he, in some way, were the cause
of the supernatural visitation.

This belief was due to the fact that Aun' Jinkey in her terror had spoken of Scoville's death,
although she would not tell how she knew about it. "Perkins shoot at en try ter kill Marse
Scoville," she had whispered to her cronies, "en now he daid he spook comin' yere ter hant
de oberseer.

We neber hab no quiet nights till dat ar Perkins go way fer good."

This rational explanation passed from lip to lip and was generally accepted. The coming night was
looked forward to in deep apprehension, and by none more than by
Perkins.

Indeed, his fears so got the better of him that when the hands quit work he started for the nearest
tavern and there remained till morning. Chunk was made aware of this fact, and the night passed
in absolute quiet.

All the negroes not in the secret now hoped that the overseer was the sole prey of the spook,
and that if they remained quietly in their places they would be unmolested. Chunk and a few
of the boldest of his fellow conspirators had full scope therefore to perfect their final arrangements.
In a disused room of one of the outbuildings the most ragged and
blood-stained uniforms of the Union soldiers had been cast and forgotten.

These were carried to a point near the burying- ground, tried on and concealed. Chunk found it
was no easy task to keep even the reckless fellows he had picked up to the sticking point of
courage in the grewsome tasks he had in view, but his scoff, together
with their mutual aid and comfort, carried them through, while the
hope of speedy freedom inspired them to what was felt to be great
risks.

On this occasion he dismissed them some little time before midnight,
for he wished them to get rested and in good condition for what he
hoped would be the final effort the following night.

As he lingered in the still, starlit darkness he could not resist making an effort to see Zany,
and so began hooting like an owl down by the run, gradually approaching nearer till he reached
the garden. Zany, wakeful and shivering with nameless dread, was
startled by the sound.

Listening intently, she soon believed she detected a note that was
Chunk's and not a bird's. Her first impression was that her lover
had discovered that he could not go finally away without her and so
had returned.

Her fear of spooks was so great that her impulse was to run away
with Chunk as far from that haunted plantation as he would take her.

Trembling like a wind-shaken leaf, she stole into the garden shrubbery and whispered, "Chunk?"

"Hi! yere I is."

There was no tantalizing coquetry in Zany's manner now.

In a moment she was in Chunk's arms sobbing, "Tek me way off fum dis place. I go wid you now,
dis berry minute, en I neber breve easy till we way, way off enywhar, I doan keer whar. Oh, Chunk,
you doan know w'at been gwine on en I darsn't tell you twel we gits way off."

"I isn't feared," replied Chunk easily.

"Dat's kaze you doan know.

I des been tremblin' stiddy sence las' night en I'se feared hit begin eny minute now."

"Hit woan begin dis yere night," replied Chunk, soothingly and incautiously.

"How
you know?" she asked quickly, a sudden suspicion entering her mind.

"Wat's
ter begin?" answered Chunk, now on his guard. "De night am still,
nobody roun'. I hang roun' a few nights twel I study out de bes' plan
ter git away."

"Has you been hangin' roun' nights, Chunk?" Zany asked
solemnly.

"How you talks, Zany! Does you s'pects I dar stay roun'
whar Perkins am? He kill me. He done gone way to-night."

"How you
know dat?"

"One de fiel'-hans tole me."

"Chunk, ef you up ter shines
en doan tole me I done wid you. Hasn't I hep you out'n in eberyting
so fur? Ef I fin' out you been skeerin me so wid eny doin's I des
done wid you. I des feel hit in my bones you de spook. You kyant bamboozle
me. I kin hep you--hab done hit afo'--en I kin hinder you, so be keerful.
Dere's some dif'unce in bein' a spook yosef en bein' skeered ter death
by a rale spook. Ef you tryin' ter skeer en fool me I be wuss on you
ner eny Voodoo woman dat eber kunjurd folks."

The interview ended
in Chunk's making a clean breast of it and in securing Zany as an
ally with mental reservations. The thought that he had fooled her
rankled.

Mr. Baron's expostulation and his own pressing interests
induced Perkins to remain at home the following night. As Jute had
seemed forgiving and friendly, the overseer asked him to bring two
others and stay with him, offering some of the contents of the replenished
jug as a reward. They sat respectfully near the door while Perkins
threw himself on his bed with the intention of getting to sleep as
soon as possible. "Are you shore ther wuz no 'sturbances last night?"
he asked.

"Well, Marse Perkins," replied Jute, "you didn't s'pect
we out lookin'. We wuz po'ful sleepy en roll we haids en er blankets
en den 'fo' we knowed, hit sun-up. Folks say en de quarters dat ar
spook ain' arter us."

"Who the devil is hit arter then?" was the
angry response.

"How we know, mars'r? We neber try ter kill enybody."

"But
I tell you I didn't kill him," expostulated their nervous victim.

"Didn't
name no names, Marse Perkins. I on'y knows w'at I yeared folks tell
'bout spooks. Dey's mighty cur'us, spooks is. Dey des 'pear to git
a spite agin some folks en dey ain' bodderin oder folks long ez dey
ain' 'feered wid. I 'spect a spook dat wuz 'feered wid, get he dander
up en slam roun' permiscus. I des tek a ole bull by de horns 'fo'
I 'fere wid a spook," and Jute's companions grunted assent.

"W'at's
the good o' yer bein' yere then?" Perkins asked, taking a deep draught.

"Well,
now, Marse Perkins, you mus'n be onreasonbul. Wat cud we do? We des
riskin' de wool on we haids stayin' yere fer comp'ny. Ef de spook
come, 'spose he tink we no business yere en des lay we out lak he
kunjer yo' dawg? We des tank you, Marse Perkins, fer anoder lil drap
ter kep we sperets out'n we shoon," and Jute shuddered portentously.

"Well,"
said Perkins, with attempted bravado, "I rammed a piece o' silver
down on the bullat in my gun. 'Twix 'em both--"

"Dar now, Marse Perkins,
you des been 'posed on 'bout dat silber business. Ole Unc' Sampson
w'at libed on de Simcoe place nigh on er hun'erd yeahs, dey say, tole
me lots 'bout a spook dat boddered um w'en he a boy. Way back ole
Marse Simcoe shot at de man dat hanker fer he darter. 9, 11), a thing is loved more in two ways: first because
it has the character of a more excellent good, secondly by reason of a closer connection. In
the first way we ought to love our benefactor most, because, since he is a principle of good
to the man he has benefited, he has the character of a more excellent good, as stated above
with regard to one's father (A. 9).

In the second way, however, we love those more who have received benefactions from us, as the
Philosopher proves (Ethic. ix, 7) by four arguments. First because the recipient of benefactions
is the handiwork of the benefactor, so that we are wont to say of a man: "He was made by so
and so." Now it is natural to a man to love his own work (thus it is to be observed that poets
love their own poems): and the reason is that we love to be and to live, and these are made
manifest in our action. Secondly, because we all naturally love that in which we see our own
good. Now it is true that the benefactor has some good of his in the recipient of his benefaction,
and the recipient some good in the benefactor; but the benefactor sees his virtuous good in
the recipient, while the recipient sees his useful good in the benefactor. Now it gives more
pleasure to see one's virtuous good than one's useful good, both because it is more enduring,--for
usefulness quickly flits by, and the pleasure of calling a thing to mind is not like the pleasure
of having it present--and because it is more pleasant to recall virtuous goods than the profit
we have derived from others. Thirdly, because is it the lover's part to act, since he wills
and works the good of the beloved, while the beloved takes a passive part in receiving good,
so that to love surpasses being loved, for which reason the greater love is on the part of
the benefactor. Fourthly because it is more difficult to give than to receive favors: and we
are most fond of things which have cost us most trouble, while we almost despise what comes
easy to us.

Reply Obj. 1: It is some thing in the benefactor that incites the recipient to love him: whereas
the benefactor loves the recipient, not through being incited by him, but through being moved
thereto of his own accord: and what we do of our own accord surpasses what we do through another.

Reply Obj. 2: The love of the beneficiary for the benefactor is more of a duty, wherefore the
contrary is the greater sin. On the other hand, the love of the benefactor for the beneficiary
is more spontaneous, wherefore it is quicker to act.

Reply Obj. 3: God also loves us more than we love Him, and parents love their children more
than these love them. Yet it does not follow that we love all who have received good from us,
more than any of our benefactors. For we prefer such benefactors as God and our parents, from
whom we have received the greatest favors, to those on whom we have bestowed lesser benefits.

THIRTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 26, Art. 13]

Whether the Order of Charity Endures in Heaven?

Objection 1: It would seem that the order of charity does not endure in heaven. For Augustine
says (De Vera Relig. xlviii): "Perfect charity consists in loving greater goods more, and lesser
goods less." Now charity will be perfect in heaven. Therefore a man will love those who are
better more than either himself or those who are connected with him.

Obj. 2: Further, we love more him to whom we wish a greater good. Now each one in heaven wishes
a greater good for those who have more good, else his will would not be conformed in all things
to God's will: and there to be better is to have more good. Therefore in heaven each one loves
more those who are better, and consequently he loves others more than himself, and one who
is not connected with him, more than one who is.

Obj. 3: Further, in heaven love will be entirely for God's sake, for then will be fulfilled
the words of 1 Cor. 15:28: "That God may be all in all." Therefore he who is nearer God will
be loved more, so that a man will love a better man more than himself, and one who is not connected
with him, more than one who is.

On the contrary, Nature is not done away, but perfected, by glory. Now the order of charity
given above (AA. 2, 3, 4) is derived from nature: since all things naturally love themselves
more than others. Therefore this order of charity will endure in heaven.

I answer that, The order of charity must needs remain in heaven, as regards the love of God
above all things. For this will be realized simply when man shall enjoy God perfectly. But,
as regards the order between man himself and other men, a distinction would seem to be necessary,
because, as we stated above (AA. 7, 9), the degrees of love may be distinguished either in
respect of the good which a man desires for another, or according to the intensity of love
itself. In the first way a man will love better men more than himself, and those who are less
good, less than himself: because, by reason of the perfect conformity of the human to the Divine
will, each of the blessed will desire everyone to have what is due to him according to Divine
justice. Nor will that be a time for advancing by means of merit to a yet greater reward, as
happens now while it is possible for a man to desire both the virtue and the reward of a better
man, whereas then the will of each one will rest within the limits determined by God. But in
the second way a man will love himself more than even his better neighbors, because the intensity
of the act of love arises on the part of the person who loves, as stated above (AA. 7, 9).
Moreover it is for this that the gift of charity is bestowed by God on each one, namely, that
he may first of all direct his mind to God, and this pertains to a man's love for himself,
and that, in the second place, he may wish other things to be directed to God, and even work
for that end according to his capacity.

As to the order to be observed among our neighbors, a man will simply love those who are better,
according to the love of charity. Because the entire life of the blessed consists in directing
their minds to God, wherefore the entire ordering of their love will be ruled with respect
to God, so that each one will love more and reckon to be nearer to himself those who are nearer
to God. For then one man will no longer succor another, as he needs to in the present life,
wherein each man has to succor those who are closely connected with him rather than those who
are not, no matter what be the nature of their distress: hence it is that in this life, a man,
by the inclination of charity, loves more those who are more closely united to him, for he
is under a greater obligation to bestow on them the effect of charity. It will however be possible
in heaven for a man to love in several ways one who is connected with him, since the causes
of virtuous love will not be banished from the mind of the blessed. Yet all these reasons are
incomparably surpassed by that which is taken from nighness to God.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument should be granted as to those who are connected together; but as
regards man himself, he ought to love himself so much the more than others, as his charity
is more perfect, since perfect entire reason of his love, for God is man's charity directs
man to God perfectly, and this belongs to love of oneself, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers the order of charity in respect of the degree of good
one wills the person one loves.

Reply Obj. 3: God will be to each one the entire reason of his love, for God is man's entire
good. For if we make the impossible supposition that God were not man's good, He would not
be man's reason for loving. Hence it is that in the order of love man should love himself more
than all else after God.

QUESTION 27

OF THE PRINCIPAL ACT OF CHARITY, WHICH IS TO LOVE (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the act of charity, and (1) the principal act of charity, which is to
love, (2) the other acts or effects which follow from that act.

Under the first head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Which is the more proper to charity, to love or to be loved?

(2) Whether to love considered as an act of charity is the same as goodwill?

(3) Whether God should be loved for His own sake?

(4) Whether God can be loved immediately in this life?

(5) Whether God can be loved wholly?

(6) Whether the love of God is according to measure?

(7) Which is the better, to love one's friend, or one's enemy?

(8) Which is the better, to love God, or one's neighbor?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 1]

Whether to Be Loved Is More Proper to Charity Than to Love?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is more proper to charity to be loved than to love. For
the better charity is to be found in those who are themselves better. But those who are better
should be more loved. Therefore to be loved is more proper to charity.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is to be found in more subjects seems to be more in keeping with
nature, and, for that reason, better. Now, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 8), "many
would rather be loved than love, and lovers of flattery always abound." Therefore it is better
to be loved than to love, and consequently it is more in keeping with charity.

Obj. 3: Further, "the cause of anything being such is yet more so." Now men love because they
are loved, for Augustine says (De Catech. Rud. iv) that "nothing incites another more to love
you than that you love him first." Therefore charity consists in being loved rather than in loving.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 8) that friendship consists in loving rather
than in being loved. Now charity is a kind of friendship. Therefore it consists in loving rather
than in being loved.

I answer that, To love belongs to charity as charity. For, since charity is a virtue, by its
very essence it has an inclination to its proper act. Now to be loved is not the act of the
charity of the person loved; for this act is to love: and to be loved is competent to him as
coming under the common notion of good, in so far as another tends towards his good by an act
of charity. Hence it is clear that to love is more proper to charity than to be loved: for
that which befits a thing by reason of itself and its essence is more competent to it than
that which is befitting to it by reason of something else. This can be exemplified in two ways.
First, in the fact that friends are more commended for loving than for being loved, indeed,
if they be loved and yet love not, they are blamed. Secondly, because a mother, whose love
is the greatest, seeks rather to love than to be loved: for "some women," as the Philosopher
observes (Ethic. viii, 8) "entrust their children to a nurse; they do love them indeed, yet
seek not to be loved in return, if they happen not to be loved."

Reply Obj. 1: A better man, through being better, is more lovable; but through having more
perfect charity, loves more. He loves more, however, in proportion to the person he loves.
For a better man does not love that which is beneath him less than it ought to be loved: whereas
he who is less good fails to love one who is better, as much as he ought to be loved.

Reply Obj. 2: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 8), "men wish to be loved in as much as
they wish to be honored." For just as honor is bestowed on a man in order to bear witness to
the good which is in him, so by being loved a man is shown to have some good, since good alone
is lovable. Accordingly men seek to be loved and to be honored, for the sake of something else,
viz. to make known the good which is in the person loved. On the other hand, those who have
charity seek to love for the sake of loving, as though this were itself the good of charity,
even as the act of any virtue is that virtue's good. Hence it is more proper to charity to
wish to love than to wish to be loved.

Reply Obj. 3: Some love on account of being loved, not so that to be loved is the end of their
loving, but because it is a kind of way leading a man to love.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 2]

Whether to Love Considered As an Act of Charity Is the Same As Goodwill?

Objection 1: It would seem that to love, considered as an act of charity, is nothing else than
goodwill. For the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 4) that "to love is to wish a person well"; and
this is goodwill. Therefore the act of charity is nothing but goodwill.

Obj. 2: Further, the act belongs to the same subject as the habit. Now the habit of charity
is in the power of the will, as stated above (Q. 24, A. 1). Therefore the act of charity is
also an act of the will. But it tends to good only, and this is goodwill. Therefore the act
of charity is nothing else than goodwill.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher reckons five things pertaining to friendship (Ethic. ix, 4),
the first of which is that a man should wish his friend well; the second, that he should wish
him to be and to live; the third, that he should take pleasure in his company; the fourth,
that he should make choice of the same things; the fifth, that he should grieve and rejoice
with him. Now the first two pertain to goodwill. Therefore goodwill is the first act of charity.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 5) that "goodwill is neither friendship nor
love, but the beginning of friendship." Now charity is friendship, as stated above (Q. 23,
A. 1). Therefore goodwill is not the same as to love considered as an act of charity.

I answer that, Goodwill properly speaking is that act of the will whereby we wish well to another.
Now this act of the will differs from actual love, considered not only as being in the sensitive
appetite but also as being in the intellective appetite or will. For the love which is in the
sensitive appetite is a passion. Now every passion seeks its object with a certain eagerness.
And the passion of love is not aroused suddenly, but is born of an earnest consideration of
the object loved; wherefore the Philosopher, showing the difference between goodwill and the
love which is a passion, says (Ethic. ix, 5) that goodwill does not imply impetuosity or desire,
that is to say, has not an eager inclination, because it is by the sole judgment of his reason
that one man wishes another well. Again such like love arises from previous acquaintance, whereas
goodwill sometimes arises suddenly, as happens to us if we look on at a boxing-match, and we
wish one of the boxers to win. But the love, which is in the intellective appetite, also differs
from goodwill, because it denotes a certain union of affections between the lover and the beloved,
in as much as the lover deems the beloved as somewhat united to him, or belonging to him, and
so tends towards him. On the other hand, goodwill is a simple act of the will, whereby we wish
a person well, even without presupposing the aforesaid union of the affections with him. Accordingly,
to love, considered as an act of charity, includes goodwill, but such dilection or love adds
union of affections, wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 5) that "goodwill is a beginning
of friendship."

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher, by thus defining "to love," does not describe it fully, but
mentions only that part of its definition in which the act of love is chiefly manifested.

Reply Obj. 2: To love is indeed an act of the will tending to the good, but it adds a certain
union with the beloved, which union is not denoted by goodwill.

Reply Obj. 3: These things mentioned by the Philosopher belong to friendship because they arise
from a man's love for himself, as he says in the same passage, in so far as a man does all
these things in respect of his friend, even as he does them to himself: and this belongs to
the aforesaid union of the affections.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 3]

Whether Out of Charity God Ought to Be Loved for Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that God is loved out of charity, not for Himself but for the sake
of something else. For Gregory says in a homily (In Evang. xi): "The soul learns from the things
it knows, to love those it knows not," where by things unknown he means the intelligible and
the Divine, and by things known he indicates the objects of the senses. Therefore God is to
be loved for the sake of something else.

Obj. 2: Further, love follows knowledge. Therefore He is also loved on account of something
else and not for Himself.

Obj. 3: Further, "hope begets charity" as a gloss says on Matt. 1:1, and "fear leads to charity,"
according to Augustine in his commentary on the First Canonical Epistle of John (In prim. canon.
Joan. Tract. ix). Now hope looks forward to obtain something from God, while fear shuns something
which can be inflicted by God. Therefore it seems that God is to be loved on account of some
good we hope for, or some evil to be feared. Therefore He is not to be loved for Himself.

On the contrary, According to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i), to enjoy is to cleave to something
for its own sake. Now "God is to be enjoyed" as he says in the same book. Therefore God is
to be loved for Himself.

I answer that, The preposition "for" denotes a relation of causality. Now there are four kinds
of cause, viz., final, formal, efficient, and material, to which a material disposition also
is to be reduced, though it is not a cause simply but relatively. According to these four different
causes one thing is said to be loved for another. In respect of the final cause, we love medicine,
for instance, for health; in respect of the formal cause, we love a man for his virtue, because,
to wit, by his virtue he is formally good and therefore lovable; in respect of the efficient
cause, we love certain men because, for instance, they are the sons of such and such a father;
and in respect of the disposition which is reducible to the genus of a material cause, we speak
of loving something for that which disposed us to love it, e.g. we love a man for the favors
received from him, although after we have begun to love our friend, we no longer love him for
his favors, but for his virtue. Accordingly, as regards the first three ways, we love God,
not for anything else, but for Himself. For He is not directed to anything else as to an end,
but is Himself the last end of all things; nor does He require to receive any form in order
to be good, for His very substance is His goodness, which is itself the exemplar of all other
good things; nor again does goodness accrue to Him from aught else, but from Him to all other
things. In the fourth way, however, He can be loved for something else, because we are disposed
by certain things to advance in His love, for instance, by favors bestowed by Him, by the rewards
we hope to receive from Him, or even by the punishments which we are minded to avoid through Him.

Reply Obj. 1: From the things it knows the soul learns to love what it knows not, not as though
the things it knows were the reason for its loving things it knows not, through being the formal,
final, or efficient cause of this love, but because this knowledge disposes man to love the
unknown.

Reply Obj. 2: Knowledge of God is indeed acquired through other things, but after He is known,
He is no longer known through them, but through Himself, according to John 4:42: "We now believe,
not for thy saying: for we ourselves have heard Him, and know that this is indeed the Saviour
of the world."

Reply Obj. 3: Hope and fear lead to charity by way of a certain disposition, as was shown above
(Q. 17, A. 8; Q. 19, AA. 4, 7, 10).

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 4]

Whether God Can Be Loved Immediately in This Life?

Objection 1: It would seem that God cannot be loved immediately in this life. For the "unknown
cannot be loved" as Augustine says (De Trin. x, 1). Now we do not know God immediately in this
life, since "we see now through a glass, in a dark manner" (1 Cor. 13:12). Neither, therefore,
do we love Him immediately.

Obj. 2: Further, he who cannot do what is less, cannot do what is more. Now it is more to love
God than to know Him, since "he who is joined" to God by love, is "one spirit with Him" (1
Cor. 6:17). But man cannot know God immediately. Therefore much less can he love Him immediately.

Obj. 3: Further, man is severed from God by sin, according to Isa. 59:2: "Your iniquities have
divided between you and your God." Now sin is in the will rather than in the intellect. Therefore
man is less able to love God immediately than to know Him immediately.

On the contrary, Knowledge of God, through being mediate, is said to be "enigmatic," and "falls
away" in heaven, as stated in 1 Cor. 13:12. But charity "does not fall away" as stated in the
same passage (1 Cor. 13:12). Therefore the charity of the way adheres to God immediately.

I answer that, As stated above (I, Q. 82, A. 3; Q. 84, A. 7), the act of a cognitive power
is completed by the thing known being in the knower, whereas the act of an appetitive power
consists in the appetite being inclined towards the thing in itself. Hence it follows that
the movement of the appetitive power is towards things in respect of their own condition, whereas
the act of a cognitive power follows the mode of the knower.

Now in itself the very order of things is such, that God is knowable and lovable for Himself,
since He is essentially truth and goodness itself, whereby other things are known and loved:
but with regard to us, since our knowledge is derived through the senses, those things are
knowable first which are nearer to our senses, and the last term of knowledge is that which
is most remote from our senses.

Accordingly, we must assert that to love which is an act of the appetitive power, even in this
state of life, tends to God first, and flows on from Him to other things, and in this sense
charity loves God immediately, and other things through God. On the other hand, with regard
to knowledge, it is the reverse, since we know God through other things, either as a cause
through its effects, or by way of pre-eminence or negation as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. i;
cf. I, Q. 12, A. 12).

Reply Obj. 1: Although the unknown cannot be loved, it does not follow that the order of knowledge
is the same as the order of love, since love is the term of knowledge, and consequently, love
can begin at once where knowledge ends, namely in the thing itself which is known through another
thing.

Reply Obj. 2: Since to love God is something greater than to know Him, especially in this state
of life, it follows that love of God presupposes knowledge of God. And because this knowledge
does not rest in creatures, but, through them, tends to something else, love begins there,
and thence goes on to other things by a circular movement so to speak; for knowledge begins
from creatures, tends to God, and love begins with God as the last end, and passes on to creatures.

Reply Obj. 3: Aversion from God, which is brought about by sin, is removed by charity, but
not by knowledge alone: hence charity, by loving God, unites the soul immediately to Him with
a chain of spiritual union.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 5]

Whether God can be loved wholly? [*Cf. Q. 184, A. 2]

Objection 1: It would seem that God cannot be loved wholly. For love follows knowledge. Now
God cannot be wholly known by us, since this would imply comprehension of Him. Therefore He
cannot be wholly loved by us.

Obj. 2: Further, love is a kind of union, as Dionysius shows (Div. Nom. iv). But the heart
of man cannot be wholly united to God, because "God is greater than our heart" (1 John 3:20).
Therefore God cannot be loved wholly.

Obj. 3: Further, God loves Himself wholly. If therefore He be loved wholly by another, this
one will love Him as much as God loves Himself. But this is unreasonable. Therefore God cannot
be wholly loved by a creature.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut.

I answer that, Since love may be considered as something between lover and beloved, when we
ask whether God can be wholly loved, the question may be understood in three ways, first so
that the qualification "wholly" be referred to the thing loved, and thus God is to be loved
wholly, since man should love all that pertains to God.

Secondly, it may be understood as though "wholly" qualified the lover: and thus again God ought
to be loved wholly, since man ought to love God with all his might, and to refer all he has
to the love of God, according to Deut.

Thirdly, it may be understood by way of comparison of the lover to the thing loved, so that
the mode of the lover equal the mode of the thing loved. This is impossible: for, since a thing
is lovable in proportion to its goodness, God is infinitely lovable, since His goodness is
infinite. Now no creature can love God infinitely, because all power of creatures, whether
it be natural or infused, is finite.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections, because the first three objections consider
the question in this third sense, while the last takes it in the second sense.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 6]

Whether in Loving God We Ought to Observe Any Mode?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to observe some mode in loving God. For the notion
of good consists in mode, species and order, as Augustine states (De Nat. Boni iii, iv). Now
the love of God is the best thing in man, according to Col. 3:14: "Above all . . . things,
have charity." Therefore there ought to be a mode of the love of God.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. viii): "Prithee, tell me which is the mode
of love. For I fear lest I burn with the desire and love of my Lord, more or less than I ought."
But it would be useless to seek the mode of the Divine love, unless there were one. Therefore
there is a mode of the love of God.

Obj. 3: Further, as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iv, 3), "the measure which nature appoints
to a thing, is its mode." Now the measure of the human will, as also of external action, is
the reason. Therefore just as it is necessary for the reason to appoint a mode to the exterior
effect of charity, according to Rom. 12:1: "Your reasonable service," so also the interior
love of God requires a mode.

On the contrary, Bernard says (De Dilig. Deum 1) that "God is the cause of our loving God;
the measure is to love Him without measure."

I answer that, As appears from the words of Augustine quoted above (Obj. 3) mode signifies
a determination of measure; which determination is to be found both in the measure and in the
thing measured, but not in the same way. For it is found in the measure essentially, because
a measure is of itself the determining and modifying rule of other things; whereas in the things
measured, it is found relatively, that is in so far as they attain to the measure. Hence there
can be nothing unmodified in the measure whereas the thing measured is unmodified if it fails
to attain to the measure, whether by deficiency or by excess.

Now in all matters of appetite and action the measure is the end, because the proper reason
for all that we desire or do should be taken from the end, as the Philosopher proves (Phys.
ii, 9). Therefore the end has a mode by itself, while the means take their mode from being
proportionate to the end. Hence, according to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 3), "in every art,
the desire for the end is endless and unlimited," whereas there is a limit to the means: thus
the physician does not put limits to health, but makes it as perfect as he possibly can; but
he puts a limit to medicine, for he does not give as much medicine as he can, but according
as health demands so that if he give too much or too little, the medicine would be immoderate.

Again, the end of all human actions and affections is the love of God, whereby principally
we attain to our last end, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 6), wherefore the mode in the love of
God, must not be taken as in a thing measured where we find too much or too little, but as
in the measure itself, where there cannot be excess, and where the more the rule is attained
the better it is, so that the more we love God the better our love is.

Reply Obj. 1: That which is so by its essence takes precedence of that which is so through
another, wherefore the goodness of the measure which has the mode essentially, takes precedence
of the goodness of the thing measured, which has its mode through something else; and so too,
charity, which has a mode as a measure has, stands before the other virtues, which have a mode
through being measured.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine adds in the same passage, "the measure of our love for God is to
love Him with our whole heart," that is to love Him as much as He can be loved, and this belongs
to the mode which is proper to the measure.

Reply Obj. 3: An affection, whose object is subject to reason's judgment, should be measured
by reason. But the object of the Divine love which is God surpasses the judgment of reason,
wherefore it is not measured by reason but transcends it. Nor is there parity between the interior
act and external acts of charity. For the interior act of charity has the character of an end,
since man's ultimate good consists in his soul cleaving to God, according to Ps. 72:28: "It
is good for me to adhere to my God"; whereas the exterior acts are as means to the end, and
so have to be measured both according to charity and according to reason.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 7]

Whether It Is More Meritorious to Love an Enemy Than to Love a Friend?

Objection 1: It would seem more meritorious to love an enemy than to love a friend. For it
is written (Matt. 5:46): "If you love them that love you, what reward shall you have?" Therefore
it is not deserving of reward to love one's friend: whereas, as the same passage proves, to
love one's enemy is deserving of a reward. Therefore it is more meritorious to love one's enemy
than to love one's friend.

Obj. 2: Further, an act is the more meritorious through proceeding from a greater charity.
But it belongs to the perfect children of God to love their enemies, whereas those also who
have imperfect charity love their friends. Therefore it is more meritorious to love one's enemy
than to love one's friend.

Obj. 3: Further, where there is more effort for good, there seems to be more merit, since "every
man shall receive his own reward according to his own labor" (1 Cor. 3:8). Now a man has to
make a greater effort to love his enemy than to love his friend, because it is more difficult.
Therefore it seems more meritorious to love one's enemy than to love one's friend.

On the contrary, The better an action is, the more meritorious it is. Now it is better to love
one's friend, since it is better to love a better man, and the friend who loves you is better
than the enemy who hates you. Therefore it is more meritorious to love one's friend than to
love one's enemy.

I answer that, God is the reason for our loving our neighbor out of charity, as stated above
(Q. 25, A. 1). When therefore it is asked which is better or more meritorious, to love one's
friend or one's enemy, these two loves may be compared in two ways, first, on the part of our
neighbor whom we love, secondly, on the part of the reason for which we love him.

In the first way, love of one's friend surpasses love of one's enemy, because a friend is both
better and more closely united to us, so that he is a more suitable matter of love and consequently
the act of love that passes over this matter, is better, and therefore its opposite is worse,
for it is worse to hate a friend than an enemy.

In the second way, however, it is better to love one's enemy than one's friend, and this for
two reasons. First, because it is possible to love one's friend for another reason than God,
whereas God is the only reason for loving one's enemy. Secondly, because if we suppose that
both are loved for God, our love for God is proved to be all the stronger through carrying
a man's affections to things which are furthest from him, namely, to the love of his enemies,
even as the power of a furnace is proved to be the stronger, according as it throws its heat
to more distant objects. Hence our love for God is proved to be so much the stronger, as the
more difficult are the things we accomplish for its sake, just as the power of fire is so much
the stronger, as it is able to set fire to a less inflammable matter.

Yet just as the same fire acts with greater force on what is near than on what is distant,
so too, charity loves with greater fervor those who are united to us than those who are far
removed; and in this respect the love of friends, considered in itself, is more ardent and
better than the love of one's enemy.

Reply Obj. 1: The words of Our Lord must be taken in their strict sense: because the love of
one's friends is not meritorious in God's sight when we love them merely because they are our
friends: and this would seem to be the case when we love our friends in such a way that we
love not our enemies. On the other hand the love of our friends is meritorious, if we love
them for God's sake, and not merely because they are our friends.

The Reply to the other Objections is evident from what has been said in the article, because
the two arguments that follow consider the reason for loving, while the last considers the
question on the part of those who are loved.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 27, Art. 8]

Whether It Is More Meritorious to Love One's Neighbor Than to Love God?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is more meritorious to love one's neighbor than to love
God. For the more meritorious thing would seem to be what the Apostle preferred. Now the Apostle
preferred the love of our neighbor to the love of God, according to Rom. 9:3: "I wished myself
to be an anathema from Christ for my brethren." Therefore it is more meritorious to love one's
neighbor than to love God.

Obj. 2: Further, in a certain sense it seems to be less meritorious to love one's friend, as
stated above (A. 7). Now God is our chief friend, since "He hath first loved us" (1 John 4:10).
Therefore it seems less meritorious to love God.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is more difficult seems to be more virtuous and meritorious since
"virtue is about that which is difficult and good" (Ethic. ii, 3). Now it is easier to love
God than to love one's neighbor, both because all things love God naturally, and because there
is nothing unlovable in God, and this cannot be said of one's neighbor. Therefore it is more
meritorious to love one's neighbor than to love God.

On the contrary, That on account of which a thing is such, is yet more so. Now the love of
one's neighbor is not meritorious, except by reason of his being loved for God's sake. Therefore
the love of God is more meritorious than the love of our neighbor.

I answer that, This comparison may be taken in two ways. First, by considering both loves separately:
and then, without doubt, the love of God is the more meritorious, because a reward is due to
it for its own sake, since the ultimate reward is the enjoyment of God, to Whom the movement
of the Divine love tends: hence a reward is promised to him that loves God (John 14:21): "He
that loveth Me, shall be loved of My Father, and I will . . . manifest Myself to him." Secondly,
the comparison may be understood to be between the love of God alone on the one side, and the
love of one's neighbor for God's sake, on the other. In this way love of our neighbor includes
love of God, while love of God does not include love of our neighbor. Hence the comparison
will be between perfect love of God, extending also to our neighbor, and inadequate and imperfect
love of God, for "this commandment we have from God, that he, who loveth God, love also his
brother" (1 John 4:21).

Reply Obj. 1: According to one gloss, the Apostle did not desire this, viz. to be severed from
Christ for his brethren, when he was in a state of grace, but had formerly desired it when
he was in a state of unbelief, so that we should not imitate him in this respect.

We may also reply, with Chrysostom (De Compunct. i, 8) [*Hom. xvi in Ep. ad Rom.] that this
does not prove the Apostle to have loved his neighbor more than God, but that he loved God
more than himself. For he wished to be deprived for a time of the Divine fruition which pertains
to love of one self, in order that God might be honored in his neighbor, which pertains to
the love of God.

Reply Obj. 2: A man's love for his friends is sometimes less meritorious in so far as he loves
them for their sake, so as to fall short of the true reason for the friendship of charity,
which is God. Hence that God be loved for His own sake does not diminish the merit, but is
the entire reason for merit.

Reply Obj. 3: The good has, more than the difficult, to do with the reason of merit and virtue.
Therefore it does not follow that whatever is more difficult is more meritorious, but only
what is more difficult, and at the same time better.

QUESTION 28

OF JOY (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the effects which result from the principal act of charity which is love,
and (1) the interior effects, (2) the exterior effects. As to the first, three things have
to be considered: (1) Joy, (2) Peace, (3) Mercy.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether joy is an effect of charity?

(2) Whether this kind of joy is compatible with sorrow?

(3) Whether this joy can be full?

(4) Whether it is a virtue?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 28, Art. 1]

Whether Joy Is Effected in Us by Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that joy is not effected in us by charity. For the absence of what
we love causes sorrow rather than joy. But God, Whom we love by charity, is absent from us,
so long as we are in this state of life, since "while we are in the body, we are absent from
the Lord" (2 Cor. 5:6). Therefore charity causes sorrow in us rather than joy.

Obj. 2: Further, it is chiefly through charity that we merit happiness. Now mourning, which
pertains to sorrow, is reckoned among those things whereby we merit happiness, according to
Matt. 5:5: "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted." Therefore sorrow, rather
than joy, is an effect of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is a virtue distinct from hope, as shown above (Q. 17, A. 6). Now
joy is the effect of hope, according to Rom. 12:12: "Rejoicing in hope." Therefore it is not
the effect of charity. But joy is caused in us by the Holy Ghost according to Rom. 14:17: "The
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but justice and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." Therefore
charity is a cause of joy.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 25, AA. 1, 2, 3), when we were treating of the passions,
joy and sorrow proceed from love, but in contrary ways. For joy is caused by love, either through
the presence of the thing loved, or because the proper good of the thing loved exists and endures
in it; and the latter is the case chiefly in the love of benevolence, whereby a man rejoices
in the well-being of his friend, though he be absent. On the other hand sorrow arises from
love, either through the absence of the thing loved, or because the loved object to which we
wish well, is deprived of its good or afflicted with some evil. Now charity is love of God,
Whose good is unchangeable, since He is His goodness, and from the very fact that He is loved,
He is in those who love Him by His most excellent effect, according to 1 John 4:16: "He that
abideth in charity, abideth in God, and God in him." Therefore spiritual joy, which is about
God, is caused by charity.

Reply Obj. 1: So long as we are in the body, we are said to be "absent from the Lord," in comparison
with that presence whereby He is present to some by the vision of "sight"; wherefore the Apostle
goes on to say (2 Cor. 5:6): "For we walk by faith and not by sight." Nevertheless, even in
this life, He is present to those who love Him, by the indwelling of His grace.

Reply Obj. 2: The mourning that merits happiness, is about those things that are contrary to
happiness. Wherefore it amounts to the same that charity causes this mourning, and this spiritual
joy about God, since to rejoice in a certain good amounts to the same as to grieve for things
that are contrary to it.

Reply Obj. 3: There can be spiritual joy about God in two ways. First, when we rejoice in the
Divine good considered in itself; secondly, when we rejoice in the Divine good as participated
by us. The former joy is the better, and proceeds from charity chiefly: while the latter joy
proceeds from hope also, whereby we look forward to enjoy the Divine good, although this enjoyment
itself, whether perfect or imperfect, is obtained according to the measure of one's charity.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 28, Art. 2]

Whether the Spiritual Joy, Which Results from Charity, Is Compatible with an Admixture of Sorrow?

Objection 1: It would seem that the spiritual joy that results from charity is compatible with
an admixture of sorrow. For it belongs to charity to rejoice in our neighbor's good, according
to 1 Cor. 13:4, 6: "Charity . . . rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth with the truth."
But this joy is compatible with an admixture of sorrow, according to Rom. 12:15: "Rejoice with
them that rejoice, weep with them that weep." Therefore the spiritual joy of charity is compatible
with an admixture of sorrow.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Gregory (Hom. in Evang. xxxiv), "penance consists in deploring
past sins, and in not committing again those we have deplored." But there is no true penance
without charity. Therefore the joy of charity has an admixture of sorrow.

Obj. 3: Further, it is through charity that man desires to be with Christ according to Phil.
1:23: "Having a desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ." Now this desire gives rise,
in man, to a certain sadness, according to Ps. 119:5: "Woe is me that my sojourning is prolonged!"
Therefore the joy of charity admits of a seasoning of sorrow.

On the contrary, The joy of charity is joy about the Divine wisdom. Now such like joy has no
admixture of sorrow, according to Wis. 8:16: "Her conversation hath no bitterness." Therefore
the joy of charity is incompatible with an admixture of sorrow.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1, ad 3), a twofold joy in God arises from charity. One,
the more excellent, is proper to charity; and with this joy we rejoice in the Divine good considered
in itself. This joy of charity is incompatible with an admixture of sorrow, even as the good
which is its object is incompatible with any admixture of evil: hence the Apostle says (Phil.
4:4): "Rejoice in the Lord always."

The other is the joy of charity whereby we rejoice in the Divine good as participated by us.
This participation can be hindered by anything contrary to it, wherefore, in this respect,
the joy of charity is compatible with an admixture of sorrow, in so far as a man grieves for
that which hinders the participation of the Divine good, either in us or in our neighbor, whom
we love as ourselves.

Reply Obj. 1: Our neighbor does not weep save on account of some evil. Now every evil implies
lack of participation in the sovereign good: hence charity makes us weep with our neighbor
in so far as he is hindered from participating in the Divine good.

Reply Obj. 2: Our sins divide between us and God, according to Isa. 59:2; wherefore this is
the reason why we grieve for our past sins, or for those of others, in so far as they hinder
us from participating in the Divine good.

Reply Obj. 3: Although in this unhappy abode we participate, after a fashion, in the Divine
good, by knowledge and love, yet the unhappiness of this life is an obstacle to a perfect participation
in the Divine good: hence this very sorrow, whereby a man grieves for the delay of glory, is
connected with the hindrance to a participation of the Divine good.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 28, Art. 3]

Whether the Spiritual Joy Which Proceeds from Charity, Can Be Filled?

Objection 1: It would seem that the spiritual joy which proceeds from charity cannot be filled.
For the more we rejoice in God, the more is our joy in Him filled. But we can never rejoice
in Him as much as it is meet that we should rejoice in God, since His goodness which is infinite,
surpasses the creature's joy which is finite. Therefore joy in God can never be filled.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is filled cannot be increased. But the joy, even of the blessed,
can be increased, since one's joy is greater than another's. Therefore joy in God cannot be
filled in a creature.

Obj. 3: Further, comprehension seems to be nothing else than the fulness of knowledge. Now,
just as the cognitive power of a creature is finite, so is its appetitive power. Since therefore
God cannot be comprehended by any creature, it seems that no creature's joy in God can be filled.

On the contrary, Our Lord said to His disciples (John 15:11): "That My joy may be in you, and
your joy may be filled."

I answer that, Fulness of joy can be understood in two ways; first, on the part of the thing
rejoiced in, so that one rejoice in it as much as it is meet that one should rejoice in it,
and thus God's joy alone in Himself is filled, because it is infinite; and this is condignly
due to the infinite goodness of God: but the joy of any creature must needs be finite. Secondly,
fulness of joy may be understood on the part of the one who rejoices. Now joy is compared to
desire, as rest to movement, as stated above (I-II, Q. 25, AA. 1, 2), when we were treating
of the passions: and rest is full when there is no more movement. Hence joy is full, when there
remains nothing to be desired. But as long as we are in this world, the movement of desire
does not cease in us, because it still remains possible for us to approach nearer to God by
grace, as was shown above (Q. 24, AA. 4, 7). When once, however, perfect happiness has been
attained, nothing will remain to be desired, because then there will be full enjoyment of God,
wherein man will obtain whatever he had desired, even with regard to other goods, according
to Ps. 102:5: "Who satisfieth thy desire with good things." This is what is meant by the words
of Luke 6:38: "Good measure and pressed down, and shaken together, and running over shall they
give into your bosom." Yet, since no creature is capable of the joy condignly due to God, it
follows that this perfectly full joy is not taken into man, but, on the contrary, man enters
into it, according to Matt. 25:21: "Enter into the joy of thy Lord."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument takes the fulness of joy in reference to the thing in which we rejoice.

Reply Obj. 2: When each one attains to happiness he will reach the term appointed to him by
Divine predestination, and nothing further will remain to which he may tend, although by reaching
that term, some will approach nearer to God than others. Hence each one's joy will be full
with regard to himself, because his desire will be fully set at rest; yet one's joy will be
greater than another's, on account of a fuller participation of the Divine happiness.

Reply Obj. 3: Comprehension denotes fulness of knowledge in respect of the thing known, so
that it is known as much as it can be. There is however a fulness of knowledge in respect of
the knower, just as we have said of joy. Wherefore the Apostle says (Col. 1:9): "That you may
be filled with the knowledge of His will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 28, Art. 4]

Whether Joy Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that joy is a virtue. For vice is contrary to virtue. Now sorrow
is set down as a vice, as in the case of sloth and envy. Therefore joy also should be accounted
a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, as love and hope are passions, the object of which is good, so also is joy.
Now love and hope are reckoned to be virtues. Therefore joy also should be reckoned a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the precepts of the Law are about acts of virtue. But we are commanded to
rejoice in the Lord, according to Phil. 4:4: "Rejoice in the Lord always." Therefore joy is
a virtue.

On the contrary, It is not numbered among the theological virtues, nor among the moral, nor
among the intellectual virtues, as is evident from what has been said above (I-II, QQ. 57, 60, 62).

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 55, AA. 2, 4), virtue is an operative habit, wherefore
by its very nature it has an inclination to a certain act. Now it may happen that from the
same habit there proceed several ordinate and homogeneous acts, each of which follows from
another. And since the subsequent acts do not proceed from the virtuous habit except through
the preceding act, hence it is that the virtue is defined and named in reference to that preceding
act, although those other acts also proceed from the virtue. Now it is evident from what we
have said about the passions (I-II, Q. 25, AA. 2, 4) that love is the first affection of the
appetitive power, and that desire and joy follow from it. Hence the same virtuous habit inclines
us to love and desire the beloved good, and to rejoice in it. But in as much as love is the
first of these acts, that virtue takes its name, not from joy, nor from desire, but from love,
and is called charity. Hence joy is not a virtue distinct from charity, but an act, or effect,
of charity: for which reason it is numbered among the Fruits (Gal. 5:22).

Reply Obj. 1: The sorrow which is a vice is caused by inordinate self-love, and this is not
a special vice, but a general source of the vices, as stated above (I-II, Q. 77, A. 4); so
that it was necessary to account certain particular sorrows as special vices, because they
do not arise from a special, but from a general vice. On the other hand love of God is accounted
a special virtue, namely charity, to which joy must be referred, as its proper act, as stated
above (here and A. 2).

Reply Obj. 2: Hope proceeds from love even as joy does, but hope adds, on the part of the object,
a special character, viz. difficult, and possible to obtain; for which reason it is accounted
a special virtue. On the other hand joy does not add to love any special aspect, that might
cause a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: The Law prescribes joy, as being an act of charity, albeit not its first act.

QUESTION 29

OF PEACE (Four Articles)

We must now consider Peace, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether peace is the same as concord?

(2) Whether all things desire peace?

(3) Whether peace is an effect of charity?

(4) Whether peace is a virtue?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 29, Art. 1]

Whether Peace Is the Same As Concord?

Objection 1: It would seem that peace is the same as concord. For Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
xix, 13): "Peace among men is well ordered concord." Now we are speaking here of no other peace
than that of men. Therefore peace is the same as concord.

Obj. 2: Further, concord is union of wills. Now the nature of peace consists in such like union,
for Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xi) that peace unites all, and makes them of one mind. Therefore
peace is the same as concord.

Obj. 3: Further, things whose opposites are identical are themselves identical. Now the one
same thing is opposed to concord and peace, viz. dissension; hence it is written (1 Cor. 16:33):
"God is not the God of dissension but of peace." Therefore peace is the same as concord.

On the contrary, There can be concord in evil between wicked men. But "there is no peace to
the wicked" (Isa. 48:22). Therefore peace is not the same as concord.

I answer that, Peace includes concord and adds something thereto. Hence wherever peace is,
there is concord, but there is not peace, wherever there is concord, if we give peace its proper
meaning.

For concord, properly speaking, is between one man and another, in so far as the wills of various
hearts agree together in consenting to the same thing. Now the heart of one man may happen
to tend to diverse things, and this in two ways. First, in respect of the diverse appetitive
powers: thus the sensitive appetite tends sometimes to that which is opposed to the rational
appetite, according to Gal. 5:17: "The flesh lusteth against the spirit." Secondly, in so far
as one and the same appetitive power tends to diverse objects of appetite, which it cannot
obtain all at the same time: so that there must needs be a clashing of the movements of the
appetite. Now the union of such movements is essential to peace, because man's heart is not
at peace, so long as he has not what he wants, or if, having what he wants, there still remains
something for him to want, and which he cannot have at the same time. On the other hand this
union is not essential to concord: wherefore concord denotes union of appetites among various
persons, while peace denotes, in addition to this union, the union of the appetites even in
one man.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking there of that peace which is between one man and another,
and he says that this peace is concord, not indeed any kind of concord, but that which is well
ordered, through one man agreeing with another in respect of something befitting to both of
them. For if one man concord with another, not of his own accord, but through being forced,
as it were, by the fear of some evil that besets him, such concord is not really peace, because
the order of each concordant is not observed, but is disturbed by some fear-inspiring cause.
For this reason he premises that "peace is tranquillity of order," which tranquillity consists
in all the appetitive movements in one man being set at rest together.

Reply Obj. 2: If one man consent to the same thing together with another man, his consent is
nevertheless not perfectly united to himself, unless at the same time all his appetitive movements
be in agreement.

Reply Obj. 3: A twofold dissension is opposed to peace, namely dissension between a man and
himself, and dissension between one man and another. The latter alone is opposed to concord.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 29, Art. 2]

Whether All Things Desire Peace?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all things desire peace. For, according to Dionysius (Div.
Nom. xi), peace "unites consent." But there cannot be unity of consent in things which are
devoid of knowledge. Therefore such things cannot desire peace.

Obj. 2: Further, the appetite does not tend to opposite things at the same time. Now many desire
war and dissension. Therefore all men do not desire peace.

Obj. 3: Further, good alone is an object of appetite. But a certain peace is, seemingly, evil,
else Our Lord would not have said (Matt. 10:34): "I came not to send peace." Therefore all
things do not desire peace.

Obj. 4: Further, that which all desire is, seemingly, the sovereign good which is the last
end. But this is not true of peace, since it is attainable even by a wayfarer; else Our Lord
would vainly command (Mk. 9:49): "Have peace among you." Therefore all things do not desire peace.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 12, 14) that "all things desire peace": and
Dionysius says the same (Div. Nom. xi).

I answer that, From the very fact that a man desires a certain thing it follows that he desires
to obtain what he desires, and, in consequence, to remove whatever may be an obstacle to his
obtaining it. Now a man may be hindered from obtaining the good he desires, by a contrary desire
either of his own or of some other, and both are removed by peace, as stated above. Hence it
follows of necessity that whoever desires anything desires peace, in so far as he who desires
anything, desires to attain, with tranquillity and without hindrance, to that which he desires:
and this is what is meant by peace which Augustine defines (De Civ. Dei xix, 13) "the tranquillity
of order."

Reply Obj. 1: Peace denotes union not only of the intellective or rational appetite, or of
the animal appetite, in both of which consent may be found, but also of the natural appetite.
Hence Dionysius says that "peace is the cause of consent and of connaturalness," where "consent"
denotes the union of appetites proceeding from knowledge, and "connaturalness," the union of
natural appetites.

Reply Obj. 2: Even those who seek war and dissension, desire nothing but peace, which they
deem themselves not to have. For as we stated above, there is no peace when a man concords
with another man counter to what he would prefer. Consequently men seek by means of war to
break this concord, because it is a defective peace, in order that they may obtain peace, where
nothing is contrary to their will. Hence all wars are waged that men may find a more perfect
peace than that which they had heretofore.

Reply Obj. 3: Peace gives calm and unity to the appetite. Now just as the appetite may tend
to what is good simply, or to what is good apparently, so too, peace may be either true or
apparent. There can be no true peace except where the appetite is directed to what is truly
good, since every evil, though it may appear good in a way, so as to calm the appetite in some
respect, has, nevertheless many defects, which cause the appetite to remain restless and disturbed.
Hence true peace is only in good men and about good things. The peace of the wicked is not
a true peace but a semblance thereof, wherefore it is written (Wis. 14:22): "Whereas they lived
in a great war of ignorance, they call so many and so great evils peace."

Reply Obj. 4: Since true peace is only about good things, as the true good is possessed in
two ways, perfectly and imperfectly, so there is a twofold true peace. One is perfect peace.
It consists in the perfect enjoyment of the sovereign good, and unites all one's desires by
giving them rest in one object. This is the last end of the rational creature, according to
Ps. 147:3: "Who hath placed peace in thy borders." The other is imperfect peace, which may
be had in this world, for though the chief movement of the soul finds rest in God, yet there
are certain things within and without which disturb the peace.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 29, Art. 3]

Whether Peace Is the Proper Effect of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that peace is not the proper effect of charity. For one cannot have
charity without sanctifying grace. But some have peace who have not sanctifying grace, thus
heathens sometimes have peace. Therefore peace is not the effect of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, if a certain thing is caused by charity, its contrary is not compatible with
charity. But dissension, which is contrary to peace, is compatible with charity, for we find
that even holy doctors, such as Jerome and Augustine, dissented in some of their opinions.
We also read that Paul and Barnabas dissented from one another (Acts 15). Therefore it seems
that peace is not the effect of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, the same thing is not the proper effect of different things. Now peace is
the effect of justice, according to Isa. 32:17: "And the work of justice shall be peace." Therefore
it is not the effect of charity.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 118:165): "Much peace have they that love Thy Law."

I answer that, Peace implies a twofold union, as stated above (A. 1). The first is the result
of one's own appetites being directed to one object; while the other results from one's own
appetite being united with the appetite of another: and each of these unions is effected by
charity--the first, in so far as man loves God with his whole heart, by referring all things
to Him, so that all his desires tend to one object--the second, in so far as we love our neighbor
as ourselves, the result being that we wish to fulfil our neighbor's will as though it were
ours: hence it is reckoned a sign of friendship if people "make choice of the same things"
(Ethic. ix, 4), and Tully says (De Amicitia) that friends "like and dislike the same things"
(Sallust, Catilin.)

Reply Obj. 1: Without sin no one falls from a state of sanctifying grace, for it turns man
away from his due end by making him place his end in something undue: so that his appetite
does not cleave chiefly to the true final good, but to some apparent good. Hence, without sanctifying
grace, peace is not real but merely apparentapparent.

Reply Obj. 2: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 6) friends need not agree in opinion, but
only upon such goods as conduce to life, and especially upon such as are important; because
dissension in small matters is scarcely accounted dissension. Hence nothing hinders those who
have charity from holding different opinions. Nor is this an obstacle to peace, because opinions
concern the intellect, which precedes the appetite that is united by peace. In like manner
if there be concord as to goods of importance, dissension with regard to some that are of little
account is not contrary to charity: for such a dissension proceeds from a difference of opinion,
because one man thinks that the particular good, which is the object of dissension, belongs
to the good about which they agree, while the other thinks that it does not. Accordingly such
like dissension about very slight matters and about opinions is inconsistent with a state of
perfect peace, wherein the truth will be known fully, and every desire fulfilled; but it is
not inconsistent with the imperfect peace of the wayfarer.

Reply Obj. 3: Peace is the "work of justice" indirectly, in so far as justice removes the obstacles
to peace: but it is the work of charity directly, since charity, according to its very nature,
causes peace. For love is "a unitive force" as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv): and peace is
the union of the appetite's inclinations.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 29, Art. 4]

Whether Peace Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that peace is a virtue. For nothing is a matter of precept, unless
it be an act of virtue. But there are precepts about keeping peace, for example: "Have peace
among you" (Mk. 9:49). Therefore peace is a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, we do not merit except by acts of virtue. Now it is meritorious to keep peace,
according to Matt. 5:9: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God." Therefore peace is a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, vices are opposed to virtues. But dissensions, which are contrary to peace,
are numbered among the vices (Gal. 5:20). Therefore peace is a virtue.

On the contrary, Virtue is not the last end, but the way thereto. But peace is the last end,
in a sense, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xix, 11). Therefore peace is not a virtue.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 28, A. 4), when a number of acts all proceeding uniformly
from an agent, follow one from the other, they all arise from the same virtue, nor do they
each have a virtue from which they proceed, as may be seen in corporeal things. For, though
fire by heating, both liquefies and rarefies, there are not two powers in fire, one of liquefaction,
the other of rarefaction: and fire produces all such actions by its own power of calefaction.

Since then charity causes peace precisely because it is love of God and of our neighbor, as
shown above (A. 3), there is no other virtue except charity whose proper act is peace, as we
have also said in reference to joy (Q. 28, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 1: We are commanded to keep peace because it is an act of charity; and for this
reason too it is a meritorious act. Hence it is placed among the beatitudes, which are acts
of perfect virtue, as stated above (I-II, Q. 69, AA. 1, 3). It is also numbered among the fruits,
in so far as it is a final good, having spiritual sweetness.

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: Several vices are opposed to one virtue in respect of its various acts: so that
not only is hatred opposed to charity, in respect of its act which is love, but also sloth
and envy, in respect of joy, and dissension in respect of peace.

QUESTION 30

OF MERCY* [*The one Latin word "misericordia" signifies either pity or mercy. The distinction
between these two is that pity may stand either for the act or for the virtue, whereas mercy
stands only for the virtue.] (In Four Articles)

We must now go on to consider Mercy, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether evil is the cause of mercy on the part of the person pitied?

(2) To whom does it belong to pity?

(3) Whether mercy is a virtue?

(4) Whether it is the greatest of virtues?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 30, Art. 1]

Whether Evil Is Properly the Motive of Mercy?

Objection 1: It would seem that, properly speaking, evil is not the motive of mercy. For, as
shown above (Q. 19, A. 1; I-II, Q. 79, A. 1, ad 4; I, Q. 48, A. 6), fault is an evil rather
than punishment. Now fault provokes indignation rather than mercy. Therefore evil does not
excite mercy.

Obj. 2: Further, cruelty and harshness seem to excel other evils. Now the Philosopher says
(Rhet. ii, 8) that "harshness does not call for pity but drives it away." Therefore evil, as
such, is not the motive of mercy.

Obj. 3: Further, signs of evils are not true evils. But signs of evils excite one to mercy,
as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 8). Therefore evil, properly speaking, is not an incentive
to mercy.

On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 2) that mercy is a kind of sorrow. Now evil
is the motive of sorrow. Therefore it is the motive of mercy.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 5), mercy is heartfelt sympathy for another's
distress, impelling us to succor him if we can. For mercy takes its name misericordia from
denoting a man's compassionate heart (miserum cor) for another's unhappiness. Now unhappiness
is opposed to happiness: and it is essential to beatitude or happiness that one should obtain
what one wishes; for, according to Augustine (De Trin. xiii, 5), "happy is he who has whatever
he desires, and desires nothing amiss." Hence, on the other hand, it belongs to unhappiness
that a man should suffer what he wishes not.

Now a man wishes a thing in three ways: first, by his natural appetite; thus all men naturally
wish to be and to live: secondly, a man wishes a thing from deliberate choice: thirdly, a man
wishes a thing, not in itself, but in its cause, thus, if a man wishes to eat what is bad for
him, we say that, in a way, he wishes to be ill.

Accordingly the motive of mercy, being something pertaining to misery, is, in the first way,
anything contrary to the will's natural appetite, namely corruptive or distressing evils, the
contrary of which man desires naturally, wherefore the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that
"pity is sorrow for a visible evil, whether corruptive or distressing." Secondly, such like
evils are yet more provocative of pity if they are contrary to deliberate choice, wherefore
the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that evil excites our pity "when it is the result of an
accident, as when something turns out ill, whereas we hoped well of it." Thirdly, they cause
yet greater pity, if they are entirely contrary to the will, as when evil befalls a man who
has always striven to do well: wherefore the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that "we pity most
the distress of one who suffers undeservedly."

Reply Obj. 1: It is essential to fault that it be voluntary; and in this respect it deserves
punishment rather than mercy. Since, however, fault may be, in a way, a punishment, through
having something connected with it that is against the sinner's will, it may, in this respect,
call for mercy. It is in this sense that we pity and commiserate sinners. Thus Gregory says
in a homily (Hom. in Evang. xxxiv) that "true godliness is not disdainful but compassionate,"
and again it is written (Matt. 9:36) that Jesus "seeing the multitudes, had compassion on them:
because they were distressed, and lying like sheep that have no shepherd."

Reply Obj. 2: Since pity is sympathy for another's distress, it is directed, properly speaking,
towards another, and not to oneself, except figuratively, like justice, according as a man
is considered to have various parts (Ethic. v, 11). Thus it is written (Ecclus. 30:24): "Have
pity on thy own soul, pleasing God" [*Cf. Q. 106, A. 3, ad 1].

Accordingly just as, properly speaking, a man does not pity himself, but suffers in himself,
as when we suffer cruel treatment in ourselves, so too, in the case of those who are so closely
united to us, as to be part of ourselves, such as our children or our parents, we do not pity
their distress, but suffer as for our own sores; in which sense the Philosopher says that "harshness
drives pity away."

Reply Obj. 3: Just as pleasure results from hope and memory of good things, so does sorrow
arise from the prospect or the recollection of evil things; though not so keenly as when they
are present to the senses. Hence the signs of evil move us to pity, in so far as they represent
as present, the evil that excites our pity.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 30, Art. 2]

Whether the Reason for Taking Pity Is a Defect in the Person Who Pities?

Objection 1: It would seem that the reason for taking pity is not a defect in the person who
takes pity. For it is proper to God to be merciful, wherefore it is written (Ps. 144:9): "His
tender mercies are over all His works." But there is no defect in God. Therefore a defect cannot
be the reason for taking pity.

Obj. 2: Further, if a defect is the reason for taking pity, those in whom there is most defect,
must needs take most pity. But this is false: for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that "those
who are in a desperate state are pitiless." Therefore it seems that the reason for taking pity
is not a defect in the person who pities.

Obj. 3: Further, to be treated with contempt is to be defective. But the Philosopher says (Rhet.
ii, 8) that "those who are disposed to contumely are pitiless." Therefore the reason for taking
pity, is not a defect in the person who pities.

On the contrary, Pity is a kind of sorrow. But a defect is the reason of sorrow, wherefore
those who are in bad health give way to sorrow more easily, as we shall say further on (Q.
35, A. 1, ad 2). Therefore the reason why one takes pity is a defect in oneself.

I answer that, Since pity is grief for another's distress, as stated above (A. 1), from the
very fact that a person takes pity on anyone, it follows that another's distress grieves him.
And since sorrow or grief is about one's own ills, one grieves or sorrows for another's distress,
in so far as one looks upon another's distress as one's own.

Now this happens in two ways: first, through union of the affections, which is the effect of
love. For, since he who loves another looks upon his friend as another self, he counts his
friend's hurt as his own, so that he grieves for his friend's hurt as though he were hurt himself.
Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. ix, 4) reckons "grieving with one's friend" as being one of the
signs of friendship, and the Apostle says (Rom. 12:15): "Rejoice with them that rejoice, weep
with them that weep."

Secondly, it happens through real union, for instance when another's evil comes near to us,
so as to pass to us from him. Hence the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 8) that men pity such as
are akin to them, and the like, because it makes them realize that the same may happen to themselves.
This also explains why the old and the wise who consider that they may fall upon evil times,
as also feeble and timorous persons, are more inclined to pity: whereas those who deem themselves
happy, and so far powerful as to think themselves in no danger of suffering any hurt, are not
so inclined to pity.

Accordingly a defect is always the reason for taking pity, either because one looks upon another's
defect as one's own, through being united to him by love, or on account of the possibility
of suffering in the same way.

Reply Obj. 1: God takes pity on us through love alone, in as much as He loves us as belonging
to Him.

Reply Obj. 2: Those who are already in infinite distress, do not fear to suffer more, wherefore
they are without pity. In like manner this applies to those also who are in great fear, for
they are so intent on their own passion, that they pay no attention to the suffering of others.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who are disposed to contumely, whether through having been contemned, or
because they wish to contemn others, are incited to anger and daring, which are manly passions
and arouse the human spirit to attempt difficult things. Hence they make a man think that he
is going to suffer something in the future, so that while they are disposed in that way they
are pitiless, according to Prov. 27:4: "Anger hath no mercy, nor fury when it breaketh forth."
For the same reason the proud are without pity, because they despise others, and think them
wicked, so that they account them as suffering deservedly whatever they suffer. Hence Gregory
says (Hom. in Evang. xxxiv) that "false godliness," i.e. of the proud, "is not compassionate
but disdainful."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 30, Art. 3]

Whether Mercy Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that mercy is not a virtue. For the chief part of virtue is choice
as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 5). Now choice is "the desire of what has been already
counselled" (Ethic. iii, 2). Therefore whatever hinders counsel cannot be called a virtue.
But mercy hinders counsel, according to the saying of Sallust (Catilin.): "All those that take
counsel about matters of doubt, should be free from . . . anger . . . and mercy, because the
mind does not easily see aright, when these things stand in the way." Therefore mercy is not
a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing contrary to virtue is praiseworthy. But nemesis is contrary to mercy,
as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 9), and yet it is a praiseworthy passion (Rhet. ii, 9).
Therefore mercy is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, joy and peace are not special virtues, because they result from charity, as
stated above (Q. 28, A. 4; Q. 29, A. 4). Now mercy, also, results from charity; for it is out
of charity that we weep with them that weep, as we rejoice with them that rejoice. Therefore
mercy is not a special virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, since mercy belongs to the appetitive power, it is not an intellectual virtue,
and, since it has not God for its object, neither is it a theological virtue. Moreover it is
not a moral virtue, because neither is it about operations, for this belongs to justice; nor
is it about passions, since it is not reduced to one of the twelve means mentioned by the Philosopher
(Ethic. ii, 7). Therefore mercy is not a virtue.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 5): "Cicero in praising Caesar expresses himself
much better and in a fashion at once more humane and more in accordance with religious feeling,
when he says: 'Of all thy virtues none is more marvelous or more graceful than thy mercy.'"
Therefore mercy is a virtue.

I answer that, Mercy signifies grief for another's distress. Now this grief may denote, in
one way, a movement of the sensitive appetite, in which case mercy is not a virtue but a passion;
whereas, in another way, it may denote a movement of the intellective appetite, in as much
as one person's evil is displeasing to another. This movement may be ruled in accordance with
reason, and in accordance with this movement regulated by reason, the movement of the lower
appetite may be regulated. Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 5) that "this movement of
the mind" (viz. mercy) "obeys the reason, when mercy is vouchsafed in such a way that justice
is safeguarded, whether we give to the needy or forgive the repentant." And since it is essential
to human virtue that the movements of the soul should be regulated by reason, as was shown
above (I-II, Q. 59, AA. 4, 5), it follows that mercy is a virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: The words of Sallust are to be understood as applying to the mercy which is a
passion unregulated by reason: for thus it impedes the counselling of reason, by making it
wander from justice.

Reply Obj. 2: The Philosopher is speaking there of pity and nemesis, considered, both of them,
as passions. They are contrary to one another on the part of their respective estimation of
another's evils, for which pity grieves, in so far as it esteems someone to suffer undeservedly,
whereas nemesis rejoices, in so far as it esteems someone to suffer deservedly, and grieves,
if things go well with the undeserving: "both of these are praiseworthy and come from the same
disposition of character" (Rhet. ii, 9). Properly speaking, however, it is envy which is opposed
to pity, as we shall state further on (Q. 36, A. 3).

Reply Obj. 3: Joy and peace add nothing to the aspect of good which is the object of charity,
wherefore they do not require any other virtue besides charity. But mercy regards a certain
special aspect, namely the misery of the person pitied.

Reply Obj. 4: Mercy, considered as a virtue, is a moral virtue having relation to the passions,
and it is reduced to the mean called nemesis, because "they both proceed from the same character"
(Rhet. ii, 9). Now the Philosopher proposes these means not as virtues, but as passions, because,
even as passions, they are praiseworthy. Yet nothing prevents them from proceeding from some
elective habit, in which case they assume the character of a virtue.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 30, Art. 4]

Whether Mercy Is the Greatest of the Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that mercy is the greatest of the virtues. For the worship of God
seems a most virtuous act. But mercy is preferred before the worship of God, according to Osee
6:6 and Matt. 12:7: "I have desired mercy and not sacrifice." Therefore mercy is the greatest
virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, on the words of 1 Tim. 4:8: "Godliness is profitable to all things," a gloss
says: "The sum total of a Christian's rule of life consists in mercy and godliness." Now the
Christian rule of life embraces every virtue. Therefore the sum total of all virtues is contained
in mercy.

Obj. 3: Further, "Virtue is that which makes its subject good," according to the Philosopher.
Therefore the more a virtue makes a man like God, the better is that virtue: since man is the
better for being more like God. Now this is chiefly the result of mercy, since of God is it
said (Ps. 144:9) that "His tender mercies are over all His works," and (Luke 6:36) Our Lord
said: "Be ye . . . merciful, as your Father also is merciful." Therefore mercy is the greatest
of virtues.

On the contrary, The Apostle after saying (Col. 3:12): "Put ye on . . . as the elect of God
. . . the bowels of mercy," etc., adds (Col. 3:14): "Above all things have charity." Therefore
mercy is not the greatest of virtues.

I answer that, A virtue may take precedence of others in two ways: first, in itself; secondly,
in comparison with its subject. In itself, mercy takes precedence of other virtues, for it
belongs to mercy to be bountiful to others, and, what is more, to succor others in their wants,
which pertains chiefly to one who stands above. Hence mercy is accounted as being proper to
God: and therein His omnipotence is declared to be chiefly manifested [*Collect, Tenth Sunday
after Pentecost].

On the other hand, with regard to its subject, mercy is not the greatest virtue, unless that
subject be greater than all others, surpassed by none and excelling all: since for him that
has anyone above him it is better to be united to that which is above than to supply the defect
of that which is beneath. [*"The quality of mercy is not strained./'Tis mightiest in the mightiest:
it becomes/The throned monarch better than his crown." Merchant of Venice, Act IV, Scene i.].
Hence, as regards man, who has God above him, charity which unites him to God, is greater than
mercy, whereby he supplies the defects of his neighbor. But of all the virtues which relate
to our neighbor, mercy is the greatest, even as its act surpasses all others, since it belongs
to one who is higher and better to supply the defect of another, in so far as the latter is
deficient.

Reply Obj. 1: We worship God by external sacrifices and gifts, not for His own profit, but
for that of ourselves and our neighbor. For He needs not our sacrifices, but wishes them to
be offered to Him, in order to arouse our devotion and to profit our neighbor. Hence mercy,
whereby we supply others' defects is a sacrifice more acceptable to Him, as conducing more
directly to our neighbor's well-being, according to Heb. 13:16: "Do not forget to do good and
to impart, for by such sacrifices God's favor is obtained."

Reply Obj. 2: The sum total of the Christian religion consists in mercy, as regards external
works: but the inward love of charity, whereby we are united to God preponderates over both
love and mercy for our neighbor.

Reply Obj. 3: Charity likens us to God by uniting us to Him in the bond of love: wherefore
it surpasses mercy, which likens us to God as regards similarity of works.

QUESTION 31

OF BENEFICENCE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the outward acts or effects of charity, (1) Beneficence, (2) Almsdeeds,
which are a part of beneficence, (3) Fraternal correction, which is a kind of alms.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether beneficence is an act of charity?

(2) Whether we ought to be beneficent to all?

(3) Whether we ought to be more beneficent to those who are more closely united to us?

(4) Whether beneficence is a special virtue?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 31, Art. 1]

Whether Beneficence Is an Act of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that beneficence is not an act of charity. For charity is chiefly
directed to God. Now we cannot benefit God, according to Job 35:7: "What shalt thou give Him?
or what shall He receive of thy hand?" Therefore beneficence is not an act of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, beneficence consists chiefly in making gifts. But this belongs to liberality.
Therefore beneficence is an act of liberality and not of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, what a man gives, he gives either as being due, or as not due. But a benefit
conferred as being due belongs to justice while a benefit conferred as not due, is gratuitous,
and in this respect is an act of mercy. Therefore every benefit conferred is either an act
of justice, or an act of mercy. Therefore it is not an act of charity.

On the contrary, Charity is a kind of friendship, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1). Now the Philosopher
reckons among the acts of friendship (Ethic. ix, 1) "doing good," i.e. being beneficent, "to
one's friends." Therefore it is an act of charity to do good to others.

I answer that, Beneficence simply means doing good to someone. This good may be considered
in two ways, first under the general aspect of good, and this belongs to beneficence in general,
and is an act of friendship, and, consequently, of charity: because the act of love includes
goodwill whereby a man wishes his friend well, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 1; Q. 27, A. 2).
Now the will carries into effect if possible, the things it wills, so that, consequently, the
result of an act of love is that a man is beneficent to his friend. Therefore beneficence in
its general acceptation is an act of friendship or charity.

But if the good which one man does another, be considered under some special aspect of good,
then beneficence will assume a special character and will belong to some special virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: According to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv), "love moves those, whom it unites, to
a mutual relationship: it turns the inferior to the superior to be perfected thereby; it moves
the superior to watch over the inferior:" and in this respect beneficence is an effect of love.
Hence it is not for us to benefit God, but to honor Him by obeying Him, while it is for Him,
out of His love, to bestow good things on us.

Reply Obj. 2: Two things must be observed in the bestowal of gifts. One is the thing given
outwardly, while the other is the inward passion that a man has in the delight of riches. It
belongs to liberality to moderate this inward passion so as to avoid excessive desire and love
for riches; for this makes a man more ready to part with his wealth. Hence, if a man makes
some great gift, while yet desiring to keep it for himself, his is not a liberal giving. On
the other hand, as regards the outward gift, the act of beneficence belongs in general to friendship
or charity. Hence it does not detract from a man's friendship, if, through love, he give his
friend something he would like to keep for himself; rather does this prove the perfection of
his friendship.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as friendship or charity sees, in the benefit bestowed, the general aspect
of good, so does justice see therein the aspect of debt, while pity considers the relieving
of distress or defect.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 31, Art. 2]

Whether We Ought to Do Good to All?

Objection 1: It would seem that we are not bound to do good to all. For Augustine says (De
Doctr. Christ. i, 28) that we "are unable to do good to everyone." Now virtue does not incline
one to the impossible. Therefore it is not necessary to do good to all.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 12:5) "Give to the good, and receive not a sinner."
But many men are sinners. Therefore we need not do good to all.

Obj. 3: Further, "Charity dealeth not perversely" (1 Cor. 13:4). Now to do good to some is
to deal perversely: for instance if one were to do good to an enemy of the common weal, or
if one were to do good to an excommunicated person, since, by doing so, he would be holding
communion with him. Therefore, since beneficence is an act of charity, we ought not to do good
to all.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Gal. 6:10): "Whilst we have time, let us work good to all men."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1, ad 1), beneficence is an effect of love in so far as
love moves the superior to watch over the inferior. Now degrees among men are not unchangeable
as among angels, because men are subject to many failings, so that he who is superior in one
respect, is or may be inferior in another. Therefore, since the love of charity extends to
all, beneficence also should extend to all, but according as time and place require: because
all acts of virtue must be modified with a view to their due circumstances.

Reply Obj. 1: Absolutely speaking it is impossible to do good to every single one: yet it is
true of each individual that one may be bound to do good to him in some particular case. Hence
charity binds us, though not actually doing good to someone, to be prepared in mind to do good
to anyone if we have time to spare. There is however a good that we can do to all, if not to
each individual, at least to all in general, as when we pray for all, for unbelievers as well
as for the faithful.

Reply Obj. 2: In a sinner there are two things, his guilt and his nature. Accordingly we are
bound to succor the sinner as to the maintenance of his nature, but not so as to abet his sin,
for this would be to do evil rather than good.

Reply Obj. 3: The excommunicated and the enemies of the common weal are deprived of all beneficence,
in so far as this prevents them from doing evil deeds. Yet if their nature be in urgent need
of succor lest it fail, we are bound to help them: for instance, if they be in danger of death
through hunger or thirst, or suffer some like distress, unless this be according to the order
of justice.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 31, Art. 3]

Whether We Ought to Do Good to Those Rather Who Are More Closely United to Us?

Objection 1: It would seem that we are not bound to do good to those rather who are more closely
united to us. Now these are the most closely united to us. Therefore we are not bound to do
good to those rather who are more closely united to us, but preferably to strangers and to
those who are in want: hence the text goes on: "But, when thou makest a feast, call the poor,
the maimed," etc.

Obj. 2: Further, to help another in the battle is an act of very great goodness. But a soldier
on the battlefield is bound to help a fellow-soldier who is a stranger rather than a kinsman
who is a foe. Therefore in doing acts of kindness we are not bound to give the preference to
those who are most closely united to us.

Obj. 3: Further, we should pay what is due before conferring gratuitous favors. But it is a
man's duty to be good to those who have been good to him. Therefore we ought to do good to
our benefactors rather than to those who are closely united to us.

Obj. 4: Further, a man ought to love his parents more than his children, as stated above (Q.
26, A. 9). Yet a man ought to be more beneficent to his children, since "neither ought the
children to lay up for the parents," according to 2 Cor. 12:14. Therefore we are not bound
to be more beneficent to those who are more closely united to us.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr.

I answer that, Grace and virtue imitate the order of nature, which is established by Divine
wisdom. Now the order of nature is such that every natural agent pours forth its activity first
and most of all on the things which are nearest to it: thus fire heats most what is next to
it. In like manner God pours forth the gifts of His goodness first and most plentifully on
the substances which are nearest to Him, as Dionysius declares (Coel. Hier. vii). But the bestowal
of benefits is an act of charity towards others. Therefore we ought to be most beneficent towards
those who are most closely connected with us.

Now one man's connection with another may be measured in reference to the various matters in
which men are engaged together; (thus the intercourse of kinsmen is in natural matters, that
of fellow-citizens is in civic matters, that of the faithful is in spiritual matters, and so
forth): and various benefits should be conferred in various ways according to these various
connections, because we ought in preference to bestow on each one such benefits as pertain
to the matter in which, speaking simply, he is most closely connected with us. And yet this
may vary according to the various requirements of time, place, or matter in hand: because in
certain cases one ought, for instance, to succor a stranger, in extreme necessity, rather than
one's own father, if he is not in such urgent need.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord did not absolutely forbid us to invite our friends and kinsmen to eat
with us, but to invite them so that they may invite us in return, since that would be an act
not of charity but of cupidity. The case may occur, however, that one ought rather to invite
strangers, on account of their greater want. For it must be understood that, other things being
equal, one ought to succor those rather who are most closely connected with us. And if of two,
one be more closely connected, and the other in greater want, it is not possible to decide,
by any general rule, which of them we ought to help rather than the other, since there are
various degrees of want as well as of connection: and the matter requires the judgment of a
prudent man.

Reply Obj. 2: The common good of many is more Godlike than the good of an individual. Wherefore
it is a virtuous action for a man to endanger even his own life, either for the spiritual or
for the temporal common good of his country. Since therefore men engage together in warlike
acts in order to safeguard the common weal, the soldier who with this in view succors his comrade,
succors him not as a private individual, but with a view to the welfare of his country as a
whole: wherefore it is not a matter for wonder if a stranger be preferred to one who is a blood
relation.

Reply Obj. 3: A thing may be due in two ways. There is one which should be reckoned, not among
the goods of the debtor, but rather as belonging to the person to whom it is due: for instance,
a man may have another's goods, whether in money or in kind, either because he has stolen them,
or because he has received them on loan or in deposit or in some other way. In this case a
man ought to pay what he owes, rather than benefit his connections out of it, unless perchance
the case be so urgent that it would be lawful for him to take another's property in order to
relieve the one who is in need. Yet, again, this would not apply if the creditor were in equal
distress: in which case, however, the claims on either side would have to be weighed with regard
to such other conditions as a prudent man would take into consideration, because, on account
of the different particular cases, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ix, 2), it is impossible
to lay down a general rule.

The other kind of due is one which is reckoned among the goods of the debtor and not of the
creditor; for instance, a thing may be due, not because justice requires it, but on account
of a certain moral equity, as in the case of benefits received gratis. Now no benefactor confers
a benefit equal to that which a man receives from his parents: wherefore in paying back benefits
received, we should give the first place to our parents before all others, unless, on the other
side, there be such weightier motives, as need or some other circumstance, for instance the
common good of the Church or state. In other cases we must take to account the connection and
the benefit received; and here again no general rule can laid down.

Reply Obj. 4: Parents are like superiors, and so a parent's love tends to conferring benefits,
while the children's love tends to honor their parents. Nevertheless in a case of extreme urgency
it would be lawful to abandon one's children rather than one's parents, to abandon whom it
is by no means lawful, on account of the obligation we lie under towards them for the benefits
we have received from them, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. iii, 14).

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 31, Art. 4]

Whether Beneficence Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that beneficence is a special virtue. For precepts are directed
to virtue, since lawgivers purpose to make men virtuous (Ethic. i 9, 13; ii, 1). Now beneficence
and love are prescribed as distinct from one another, for it is written (Matt. 4:44): "Love
your enemies, do good to them that hate you." Therefore beneficence is a virtue distinct from
charity.

Obj. 2: Further, vices are opposed to virtues. Now there are opposed to beneficence certain
vices whereby a hurt is inflicted on our neighbor, for instance, rapine, theft and so forth.
Therefore beneficence is a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is not divided into several species: whereas there would seem to be
several kinds of beneficence, according to the various kinds of benefits. Therefore beneficence
is a distinct virtue from charity.

On the contrary, The internal and the external act do not require different virtues. Now beneficence
and goodwill differ only as external and internal act, since beneficence is the execution of
goodwill. Therefore as goodwill is not a distinct virtue from charity, so neither is beneficence.

I answer that, Virtues differ according to the different aspects of their objects. Now the
formal aspect of the object of charity and of beneficence is the same, since both virtues regard
the common aspect of good, as explained above (A. 1). Wherefore beneficence is not a distinct
virtue from charity, but denotes an act of charity.

Reply Obj. 1: Precepts are given, not about habits but about acts of virtue: wherefore distinction
of precept denotes distinction, not of habits, but of acts.

Reply Obj. 2: Even as all benefits conferred on our neighbor, if we consider them under the
common aspect of good, are to be traced to love, so all hurts considered under the common aspect
of evil, are to be traced to hatred. But if we consider these same things under certain special
aspects of good or of evil, they are to be traced to certain special virtues or vices, and
in this way also there are various kinds of benefits.

Hence the Reply to the Third Objection is evident.

QUESTION 32

OF ALMSDEEDS (In Ten Articles)

We must now consider almsdeeds, under which head there are ten points of inquiry:

(1) Whether almsgiving is an act of charity?

(2) Of the different kinds of alms;

(3) Which alms are of greater account, spiritual or corporal?

(4) Whether corporal alms have a spiritual effect?

(5) Whether the giving of alms is a matter of precept?

(6) Whether corporal alms should be given out of the things we need?

(7) Whether corporal alms should be given out of ill-gotten goods?

(8) Who can give alms?

(9) To whom should we give alms?

(10) How should alms be given?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 1]

Whether Almsgiving Is an Act of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that almsgiving is not an act of charity. For without charity one
cannot do acts of charity. Now it is possible to give alms without having charity, according
to 1 Cor. 13:3: "If I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor . . . and have not charity,
it profiteth me nothing." Therefore almsgiving is not an act of charity.

Obj. 2: Further, almsdeeds are reckoned among works of satisfaction, according to Dan. 4:24:
"Redeem thou thy sins with alms." Now satisfaction is an act of justice. Therefore almsgiving
is an act of justice and not of charity.

Obj. 3: Further, the offering of sacrifices to God is an act of religion. Therefore almsgiving
is not an act of charity, but of religion.

Obj. 4: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 1) that to give for a good purpose is an
act of liberality. Now this is especially true of almsgiving. Therefore almsgiving is not an
act of charity.

On the contrary, It is written 2 John 3:17: "He that hath the substance of this world, and
shall see his brother in need, and shall put up his bowels from him, how doth the charity of
God abide in him?"

I answer that, External acts belong to that virtue which regards the motive for doing those
acts. Now the motive for giving alms is to relieve one who is in need. Wherefore some have
defined alms as being "a deed whereby something is given to the needy, out of compassion and
for God's sake," which motive belongs to mercy, as stated above (Q. 30, AA. 1, 2). Hence it
is clear that almsgiving is, properly speaking, an act of mercy. This appears in its very name,
for in Greek (eleemosyne) it is derived from having mercy (eleein) even as the Latin miseratio
is. And since mercy is an effect of charity, as shown above (Q. 30, A. 2, A. 3, Obj. 3), it
follows that almsgiving is an act of charity through the medium of mercy.

Reply Obj. 1: An act of virtue may be taken in two ways: first materially, thus an act of justice
is to do what is just; and such an act of virtue can be without the virtue, since many, without
having the habit of justice, do what is just, led by the natural light of reason, or through
fear, or in the hope of gain. Secondly, we speak of a thing being an act of justice formally,
and thus an act of justice is to do what is just, in the same way as a just man, i.e. with
readiness and delight, and such an act of virtue cannot be without the virtue.

Accordingly almsgiving can be materially without charity, but to give alms formally, i.e. for
God's sake, with delight and readiness, and altogether as one ought, is not possible without
charity.

Reply Obj. 2: Nothing hinders the proper elicited act of one virtue being commanded by another
virtue as commanding it and directing it to this other virtue's end. It is in this way that
almsgiving is reckoned among works of satisfaction in so far as pity for the one in distress
is directed to the satisfaction for his sin; and in so far as it is directed to placate God,
it has the character of a sacrifice, and thus it is commanded by religion.

Wherefore the Reply to the Third Objection is evident.

Reply Obj. 4: Almsgiving belongs to liberality, in so far as liberality removes an obstacle
to that act, which might arise from excessive love of riches, the result of which is that one
clings to them more than one ought.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 2]

Whether the Different Kinds of Almsdeeds Are Suitably Enumerated?

Objection 1: It would seem that the different kinds of almsdeeds are unsuitably enumerated.
For we reckon seven corporal almsdeeds, namely, to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty,
to clothe the naked, to harbor the harborless, to visit the sick, to ransom the captive, to
bury the dead; all of which are expressed in the following verse: "To visit, to quench, to
feed, to ransom, clothe, harbor or bury."

Again we reckon seven spiritual alms, namely, to instruct the ignorant, to counsel the doubtful,
to comfort the sorrowful, to reprove the sinner, to forgive injuries, to bear with those who
trouble and annoy us, and to pray for all, which are all contained in the following verse:
"To counsel, reprove, console, to pardon, forbear, and to pray," yet so that counsel includes
both advice and instruction.

And it seems that these various almsdeeds are unsuitably enumerated. For the purpose of almsdeeds
is to succor our neighbor. But a dead man profits nothing by being buried, else Our Lord would
not have spoken truly when He said (Matt. 10:28): "Be not afraid of them who kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do." [*The quotation is from Luke 12:4.] This explains
why Our Lord, in enumerating the works of mercy, made no mention of the burial of the dead
(Matt. 25:35, 36). Therefore it seems that these almsdeeds are unsuitably enumerated.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (A. 1), the purpose of giving alms is to relieve our neighbor's
need. Now there are many needs of human life other than those mentioned above, for instance,
a blind man needs a leader, a lame man needs someone to lean on, a poor man needs riches. Therefore
these almsdeeds are unsuitably enumerated.

Obj. 3: Further, almsgiving is a work of mercy. But the reproof of the wrong-doer savors, apparently,
of severity rather than of mercy. Therefore it ought not to be reckoned among the spiritual
almsdeeds.

Obj. 4: Further, almsgiving is intended for the supply of a defect. But no man is without the
defect of ignorance in some matter or other. Therefore, apparently, each one ought to instruct
anyone who is ignorant of what he knows himself.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Nom. in Evang. ix): "Let him that hath understanding beware
lest he withhold his knowledge; let him that hath abundance of wealth, watch lest he slacken
his merciful bounty; let him who is a servant to art be most solicitous to share his skill
and profit with his neighbor; let him who has an opportunity of speaking with the wealthy,
fear lest he be condemned for retaining his talent, if when he has the chance he plead not
with him the cause of the poor." Therefore the aforesaid almsdeeds are suitably enumerated
in respect of those things whereof men have abundance or insufficiency.

I answer that, The aforesaid distinction of almsdeeds is suitably taken from the various needs
of our neighbor: some of which affect the soul, and are relieved by spiritual almsdeeds, while
others affect the body, and are relieved by corporal almsdeeds. For corporal need occurs either
during this life or afterwards. If it occurs during this life, it is either a common need in
respect of things needed by all, or it is a special need occurring through some accident supervening.
In the first case, the need is either internal or external. Internal need is twofold: one which
is relieved by solid food, viz. hunger, in respect of which we have to feed the hungry; while
the other is relieved by liquid food, viz. thirst, and in respect of this we have to give drink
to the thirsty. The common need with regard to external help is twofold; one in respect of
clothing, and as to this we have to clothe the naked: while the other is in respect of a dwelling
place, and as to this we have to harbor the harborless. Again if the need be special, it is
either the result of an internal cause, like sickness, and then we have to visit the sick,
or it results from an external cause, and then we have to ransom the captive. After this life
we give burial to the dead.

In like manner spiritual needs are relieved by spiritual acts in two ways, first by asking
for help from God, and in this respect we have prayer, whereby one man prays for others; secondly,
by giving human assistance, and this in three ways. First, in order to relieve a deficiency
on the part of the intellect, and if this deficiency be in the speculative intellect, the remedy
is applied by instructing, and if in the practical intellect, the remedy is applied by counselling.
Secondly, there may be a deficiency on the part of the appetitive power, especially by way
of sorrow, which is remedied by comforting. Thirdly, the deficiency may be due to an inordinate
act; and this may be the subject of a threefold consideration. First, in respect of the sinner,
inasmuch as the sin proceeds from his inordinate will, and thus the remedy takes the form of
reproof. Secondly, in respect of the person sinned against; and if the sin be committed against
ourselves, we apply the remedy by pardoning the injury, while, if it be committed against God
or our neighbor, it is not in our power to pardon, as Jerome observes (Super Matth. xviii,
15). Thirdly, in respect of the result of the inordinate act, on account of which the sinner
is an annoyance to those who live with him, even beside his intention; in which case the remedy
is applied by bearing with him,    especially with regard to those who sin out of weakness,
according to Rom. 15:1: "We that are stronger, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,"
and not only as regards their being infirm and consequently troublesome on account of their
unruly actions, but also by bearing any other burdens of theirs with them, according to Gal.
6:2: "Bear ye one another's burdens."

Reply Obj. 1: Burial does not profit a dead man as though his body could be capable of perception
after death. In this sense Our Lord said that those who kill the body "have no more that they
can do"; and for this reason He did not mention the burial of the dead with the other works
of mercy, but those only which are more clearly necessary. Nevertheless it does concern the
deceased what is done with his body: both that he may live in the memory of man whose respect
he forfeits if he remain without burial, and as regards a man's fondness for his own body while
he was yet living, a fondness which kindly persons should imitate after his death. It is thus
that some are praised for burying the dead, as Tobias, and those who buried Our Lord; as Augustine
says (De Cura pro Mort. iii).

Reply Obj. 2: All other needs are reduced to these, for blindness and lameness are kinds of
sickness, so that to lead the blind, and to support the lame, come to the same as visiting
the sick. In like manner to assist a man against any distress that is due to an extrinsic cause
comes to the same as the ransom of captives. And the wealth with which we relieve the poor
is sought merely for the purpose of relieving the aforesaid needs: hence there was no reason
for special mention of this particular need.

Reply Obj. 3: The reproof of the sinner, as to the exercise of the act of reproving, seems
to imply the severity of justice, but, as to the intention of the reprover, who wishes to free
a man from the evil of sin, it is an act of mercy and lovingkindness, according to Prov. 27:6:
"Better are the wounds of a friend, than the deceitful kisses of an enemy."

Reply Obj. 4: Nescience is not always a defect, but only when it is about what one ought to
know, and it is a part of almsgiving to supply this defect by instruction. In doing this however
we should observe the due circumstances of persons, place and time, even as in other virtuous acts.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 3]

Whether Corporal Alms Are of More Account Than Spiritual Alms?

Objection 1: It would seem that corporal alms are of more account than spiritual alms. For
it is more praiseworthy to give an alms to one who is in greater want, since an almsdeed is
to be praised because it relieves one who is in need. Now the body which is relieved by corporal
alms, is by nature more needy than the spirit which is relieved by spiritual alms. Therefore
corporal alms are of more account.

Obj. 2: Further, an alms is less praiseworthy and meritorious if the kindness is compensated,
wherefore Our Lord says (Luke 14:12): "When thou makest a dinner or a supper, call not thy
neighbors who are rich, lest perhaps they also invite thee again." Now there is always compensation
in spiritual almsdeeds, since he who prays for another, profits thereby, according to Ps. 34:13:
"My prayer shall be turned into my bosom": and he who teaches another, makes progress in knowledge,
which cannot be said of corporal almsdeeds. Therefore corporal almsdeeds are of more account
than spiritual almsdeeds.

Obj. 3: Further, an alms is to be commended if the needy one is comforted by it: wherefore
it is written (Job 31:20): "If his sides have not blessed me," and the Apostle says to Philemon
(verse 7): "The bowels of the saints have been refreshed by thee, brother." Now a corporal
alms is sometimes more welcome to a needy man than a spiritual alms. Therefore bodily almsdeeds
are of more account than spiritual almsdeeds.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 20) on the words, "Give to him that
asketh of thee" (Matt. 5:42): "You should give so as to injure neither yourself nor another,
and when you refuse what another asks you must not lose sight of the claims of justice, and
send him away empty; at times indeed you will give what is better than what is asked for, if
you reprove him that asks unjustly." Now reproof is a spiritual alms. Therefore spiritual almsdeeds
are preferable to corporal almsdeeds.

I answer that, There are two ways of comparing these almsdeeds. First, simply; and in this
respect, spiritual almsdeeds hold the first place, for three reasons. First, because the offering
is more excellent, since it is a spiritual gift, which surpasses a corporal gift, according
to Prov. 4:2: "I will give you a good gift, forsake not My Law." Secondly, on account of the
object succored, because the spirit is more excellent than the body, wherefore, even as a man
in looking after himself, ought to look to his soul more than to his body, so ought he in looking
after his neighbor, whom he ought to love as himself. Thirdly, as regards the acts themselves
by which our neighbor is succored, because spiritual acts are more excellent than corporal
acts, which are, in a fashion, servile.

Secondly, we may compare them with regard to some particular case, when some corporal alms
excels some spiritual alms: for instance, a man in hunger is to be fed rather than instructed,
and as the Philosopher observes (Topic. iii, 2), for a needy man "money is better than philosophy,"
although the latter is better simply.

Reply Obj. 1: It is better to give to one who is in greater want, other things being equal,
but if he who is less needy is better, and is in want of better things, it is better to give
to him: and it is thus in the case in point.

Reply Obj. 2: Compensation does not detract from merit and praise if it be not intended, even
as human glory, if not intended, does not detract from virtue. Thus Sallust says of Cato (Catilin.),
that "the less he sought fame, the more he became famous": and thus it is with spiritual almsdeeds.

Nevertheless the intention of gaining spiritual goods does not detract from merit, as the intention
of gaining corporal goods.

Reply Obj. 3: The merit of an almsgiver depends on that in which the will of the recipient
rests reasonably, and not on that in which it rests when it is inordinate.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 4]

Whether Corporal Almsdeeds Have a Spiritual Effect?

Objection 1: It would seem that corporal almsdeeds have not a spiritual effect. For no effect
exceeds its cause. But spiritual goods exceed corporal goods. Therefore corporal almsdeeds
have no spiritual effect.

Obj. 2: Further, the sin of simony consists in giving the corporal for the spiritual, and it
is to be utterly avoided. Therefore one ought not to give alms in order to receive a spiritual
effect.

Obj. 3: Further, to multiply the cause is to multiply the effect. If therefore corporal almsdeeds
cause a spiritual effect, the greater the alms, the greater the spiritual profit, which is
contrary to what we read (Luke 21:3) of the widow who cast two brass mites into the treasury,
and in Our Lord's own words "cast in more than . . . all." Therefore bodily almsdeeds have
no spiritual effect.

On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 17:18): "The alms of a man . . . shall preserve the
grace of a man as the apple of the eye."

I answer that, Corporal almsdeeds may be considered in three ways. First, with regard to their
substance, and in this way they have merely a corporal effect, inasmuch as they supply our
neighbor's corporal needs. Secondly, they may be considered with regard to their cause, in
so far as a man gives a corporal alms out of love for God and his neighbor, and in this respect
they bring forth a spiritual fruit, according to Ecclus. 29:13, 14: "Lose thy money for thy
brother . . . place thy treasure in the commandments of the Most High, and it shall bring thee
more profit than gold."

Thirdly, with regard to the effect, and in this way again, they have a spiritual fruit, inasmuch
as our neighbor, who is succored by a corporal alms, is moved to pray for his benefactor; wherefore
the above text goes on (Ecclus. 29:15): "Shut up alms in the heart of the poor, and it shall
obtain help for thee from all evil."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument considers corporal almsdeeds as to their substance.

Reply Obj. 2: He who gives an alms does not intend to buy a spiritual thing with a corporal
thing, for he knows that spiritual things infinitely surpass corporal things, but he intends
to merit a spiritual fruit through the love of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: The widow who gave less in quantity, gave more in proportion; and thus we gather
that the fervor of her charity, whence corporal almsdeeds derive their spiritual efficacy,
was greater.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 5]

Whether Almsgiving Is a Matter of Precept?

Objection 1: It would seem that almsgiving is not a matter of precept. For the counsels are
distinct from the precepts. Now almsgiving is a matter of counsel, according to Dan. 4:24:
"Let my counsel be acceptable to the King; [Vulg.: 'to thee, and'] redeem thou thy sins with
alms." Therefore almsgiving is not a matter of precept.

Obj. 2: Further, it is lawful for everyone to use and to keep what is his own. Yet by keeping
it he will not give alms. Therefore it is lawful not to give alms: and consequently almsgiving
is not a matter of precept.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is a matter of precept binds the transgressor at some time or other
under pain of mortal sin, because positive precepts are binding for some fixed time. Therefore,
if almsgiving were a matter of precept, it would be possible to point to some fixed time when
a man would commit a mortal sin unless he gave an alms. But it does not appear how this can
be so, because it can always be deemed probable that the person in need can be relieved in
some other way, and that what we would spend in almsgiving might be needful to ourselves either
now or in some future time. Therefore it seems that almsgiving is not a matter of precept.

Obj. 4: Further, every commandment is reducible to the precepts of the Decalogue. But these
precepts contain no reference to almsgiving. Therefore almsgiving is not a matter of precept.

On the contrary, No man is punished eternally for omitting to do what is not a matter of precept.
But some are punished eternally for omitting to give alms, as is clear from Matt. 25:41-43.
Therefore almsgiving is a matter of precept.

I answer that, As love of our neighbor is a matter of precept, whatever is a necessary condition
to the love of our neighbor is a matter of precept also. And in order to be a person's well-wisher
and well-doer, we ought to succor his needs: this is done by almsgiving. Therefore almsgiving
is a matter of precept.

Since, however, precepts are about acts of virtue, it follows that all almsgiving must be a
matter of precept, in so far as it is necessary to virtue, namely, in so far as it is demanded
by right reason. Now right reason demands that we should take into consideration something
on the part of the giver, and something on the part of the recipient. On the part of the giver,
it must be noted that he should give of his surplus, according to Luke 11:41: "That which remaineth,
give alms." This surplus is to be taken in reference not only to himself, so as to denote what
is unnecessary to the individual, but also in reference to those of whom he has charge (in
which case we have the expression "necessary to the person" [*The official necessities of a
person in position] taking the word "person" as expressive of dignity). Because each one must
first of all look after himself and then after those over whom he has charge, and afterwards
with what remains relieve the needs of others. Thus nature first, by its nutritive power, takes
what it requires for the upkeep of one's own body, and afterwards yields the residue for the
formation of another by the power of generation.

On the part of the recipient it is requisite that he should be in need, else there would be
no reason for giving him alms: yet since it is not possible for one individual to relieve the
needs of all, we are not bound to relieve all who are in need, but only those who could not
be succored if we not did succor them. For in such cases the words of Ambrose apply, "Feed
him that dies of hunger: if thou hast not fed him, thou hast slain him" [*Cf. Canon Pasce,
dist. lxxxvi, whence the words, as quoted, are taken]. Accordingly we are bound to give alms
of our surplus, as also to give alms to one whose need is extreme: otherwise almsgiving, like
any other greater good, is a matter of counsel.

Reply Obj. 1: Daniel spoke to a king who was not subject to God's Law, wherefore such things
as were prescribed by the Law which he did not profess, had to be counselled to him. Or he
may have been speaking in reference to a case in which almsgiving was not a matter of precept.

Reply Obj. 2: The temporal goods which God grants us, are ours as to the ownership, but as
to the use of them, they belong not to us alone but also to such others as we are able to succor
out of what we have over and above our needs. Hence Basil says [*Hom. super Luc. xii, 18]:
"If you acknowledge them," viz. your temporal goods, "as coming from God, is He unjust because
He apportions them unequally? Why are you rich while another is poor, unless it be that you
may have the merit of a good stewardship, and he the reward of patience? It is the hungry man's
bread that you withhold, the naked man's cloak that you have stored away, the shoe of the barefoot
that you have left to rot, the money of the needy that you have buried underground: and so
you injure as many as you might help." Ambrose expresses himself in the same way.

Reply Obj. 3: There is a time when we sin mortally if we omit to give alms; on the part of
the recipient when we see that his need is evident and urgent, and that he is not likely to
be succored otherwise--on the part of the giver, when he has superfluous goods, which he does
not need for the time being, as far as he can judge with probability. Nor need he consider
every case that may possibly occur in the future, for this would be to think about the morrow,
which Our Lord forbade us to do (Matt. 6:34), but he should judge what is superfluous and what
necessary, according as things probably and generally occur.

Reply Obj. 4: All succor given to our neighbor is reduced to the precept about honoring our
parents. For thus does the Apostle interpret it (1 Tim. 4:8) where he says: "Dutifulness* [Douay:
'Godliness'] is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come," and he says this because the precept about honoring our parents contains
the promise, "that thou mayest be longlived upon the land" (Ex. 20:12): and dutifulness comprises
all kinds of almsgiving. [*Pietas, whence our English word "Piety." Cf. also inf. Q. 101, A. 2.]

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 6]

Whether One Ought to Give Alms Out of What One Needs?

Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not to give alms out of what one needs. For the order
of charity should be observed not only as regards the effect of our benefactions but also as
regards our interior affections. Now it is a sin to contravene the order of charity, because
this order is a matter of precept. Since, then, the order of charity requires that a man should
love himself more than his neighbor, it seems that he would sin if he deprived himself of what
he needed, in order to succor his neighbor.

Obj. 2: Further, whoever gives away what he needs himself, squanders his own substance, and
that is to be a prodigal, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 1). But no sinful deed should
be done. Therefore we should not give alms out of what we need.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Tim. Now if a man gives of what he needs for himself or
for his charge, he seems to detract from the care he should have for himself or his charge.
Therefore it seems that whoever gives alms from what he needs, sins gravely.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. Now he that gives all he has to the poor, gives not only
what he needs not, but also what he needs. Therefore a man may give alms out of what he needs.

I answer that, A thing is necessary in two ways: first, because without it something is impossible,
and it is altogether wrong to give alms out of what is necessary to us in this sense; for instance,
if a man found himself in the presence of a case of urgency, and had merely sufficient to support
himself and his children, or others under his charge, he would be throwing away his life and
that of others if he were to give away in alms, what was then necessary to him. Yet I say this
without prejudice to such a case as might happen, supposing that by depriving himself of necessaries
a man might help a great personage, and a support of the Church or State, since it would be
a praiseworthy act to endanger one's life and the lives of those who are under our charge for
the delivery of such a person, since the common good is to be preferred to one's own.

Secondly, a thing is said to be necessary, if a man cannot without it live in keeping with
his social station, as regards either himself or those of whom he has charge. The "necessary"
considered thus is not an invariable quantity, for one might add much more to a man's property,
and yet not go beyond what he needs in this way, or one might take much from him, and he would
still have sufficient for the decencies of life in keeping with his own position. Accordingly
it is good to give alms of this kind of "necessary"; and it is a matter not of precept but
of counsel. Yet it would be inordinate to deprive oneself of one's own, in order to give to
others to such an extent that the residue would be insufficient for one to live in keeping
with one's station and the ordinary occurrences of life: for no man ought to live unbecomingly.
There are, however, three exceptions to the above rule. The first is when a man changes his
state of life, for instance, by entering religion, for then he gives away all his possessions
for Christ's sake, and does the deed of perfection by transferring himself to another state.
Secondly, when that which he deprives himself of, though it be required for the decencies of
life, can nevertheless easily be recovered, so that he does not suffer extreme inconvenience.
Thirdly, when he is in presence of extreme indigence in an individual, or great need on the
part of the common weal. For in such cases it would seem praiseworthy to forego the requirements
of one's station, in order to provide for a greater need.

The objections may be easily solved from what has been said.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 7]

Whether One May Give Alms Out of Ill-gotten Goods?

Objection 1: It would seem that one may give alms out of ill-gotten goods. For it is written
(Luke 16:9): "Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity." Now mammon signifies riches.
Therefore it is lawful to make unto oneself spiritual friends by giving alms out of ill-gotten
riches.

Obj. 2: Further, all filthy lucre seems to be ill-gotten. But the profits from whoredom are
filthy lucre; wherefore it was forbidden (Deut. 23:18) to offer therefrom sacrifices or oblations
to God: "Thou shalt not offer the hire of a strumpet . . . in the house of . . . thy God."
In like manner gains from games of chance are ill-gotten, for, as the Philosopher says (Ethic.
iv, 1), "we take such like gains from our friends to whom we ought rather to give." And most
of all are the profits from simony ill-gotten, since thereby the Holy Ghost is wronged. Nevertheless
out of such gains it is lawful to give alms. Therefore one may give alms out of ill-gotten goods.

Obj. 3: Further, greater evils should be avoided more than lesser evils. Now it is less sinful
to keep back another's property than to commit murder, of which a man is guilty if he fails
to succor one who is in extreme need, as appears from the words of Ambrose who says (Cf. Therefore,
in certain cases, it is lawful to give alms of ill-gotten goods.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xxxv, 2): "Give alms from your just labors.
For you will not bribe Christ your judge, not to hear you with the poor whom you rob . . .
Give not alms from interest and usury: I speak to the faithful to whom we dispense the Body
of Christ."

I answer that, A thing may be ill-gotten in three ways. In the first place a thing is ill-gotten
if it be due to the person from whom it is gotten, and may not be kept by the person who has
obtained possession of it; as in the case of rapine, theft and usury, and of such things a
man may not give alms since he is bound to restore them.

Secondly, a thing is ill-gotten, when he that has it may not keep it, and yet he may not return
it to the person from whom he received it, because he received it unjustly, while the latter
gave it unjustly. This happens in simony, wherein both giver and receiver contravene the justice
of the Divine Law, so that restitution is to be made not to the giver, but by giving alms.
The same applies to all similar cases of illegal giving and receiving.

Thirdly, a thing is ill-gotten, not because the taking was unlawful, but because it is the
outcome of something unlawful, as in the case of a woman's profits from whoredom. This is filthy
lucre properly so called, because the practice of whoredom is filthy and against the Law of
God, yet the woman does not act unjustly or unlawfully in taking the money. Consequently it
is lawful to keep and to give in alms what is thus acquired by an unlawful action.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. 2), "Some have misunderstood this saying of
Our Lord, so as to take another's property and give thereof to the poor, thinking that they
are fulfilling the commandment by so doing. This interpretation must be amended. Yet all riches
are called riches of iniquity, as stated in De Quaest. Ev. ii, 34, because "riches are not
unjust save for those who are themselves unjust, and put all their trust in them. Or, according
to Ambrose in his commentary on Luke 16:9, "Make unto yourselves friends," etc., "He calls
mammon unjust, because it draws our affections by the various allurements of wealth." Or, because
"among the many ancestors whose property you inherit, there is one who took the property of
others unjustly, although you know nothing about it," as Basil says in a homily (Hom. super
Luc. A, 5). Or, all riches are styled riches "of iniquity," i.e., of "inequality," because
they are not distributed equally among all, one being in need, and another in affluence.

Reply Obj. 2: We have already explained how alms may be given out of the profits of whoredom.
Yet sacrifices and oblations were not made therefrom at the altar, both on account of the scandal,
and through reverence for sacred things. It is also lawful to give alms out of the profits
of simony, because they are not due to him who paid, indeed he deserves to lose them. But as
to the profits from games of chance, there would seem to be something unlawful as being contrary
to the Divine Law, when a man wins from one who cannot alienate his property, such as minors,
lunatics and so forth, or when a man, with the desire of making money out of another man, entices
him to play, and wins from him by cheating. In these cases he is bound to restitution, and
consequently cannot give away his gains in alms. Then again there would seem to be something
unlawful as being against the positive civil law, which altogether forbids any such profits.
Since, however, a civil law does not bind all, but only those who are subject to that law,
and moreover may be abrogated through desuetude, it follows that all such as are bound by these
laws are bound to make restitution of such gains, unless perchance the contrary custom prevail,
or unless a man win from one who enticed him to play, in which case he is not bound to restitution,
because the loser does not deserve to be paid back: and yet he cannot lawfully keep what he
has won, so long as that positive law is in force, wherefore in this case he ought to give
it away in alms.

Reply Obj. 3: All things are common property in a case of extreme necessity. Hence one who
is in such dire straits may take another's goods in order to succor himself, if he can find
no one who is willing to give him something. For the same reason a man may retain what belongs
to another, and give alms thereof; or even take something if there be no other way of succoring
the one who is in need. If however this be possible without danger, he must ask the owner's
consent, and then succor the poor man who is in extreme necessity.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 8]

Whether One Who Is Under Another's Power Can Give Alms?

Objection 1: It would seem that one who is under another's power can give alms. For religious
are under the power of their prelates to whom they have vowed obedience. Now if it were unlawful
for them to give alms, they would lose by entering the state of religion, for as Ambrose [*The
quotation is from the works of Ambrosiaster. Cf. Therefore those who are in another's power
can give alms.

Obj. 2: Further, a wife is under her husband's power (Gen. 3:16). But a wife can give alms
since she is her husband's partner; hence it is related of the Blessed Lucy that she gave alms
without the knowledge of her betrothed [*Sponsus. The matrimonial institutions of the Romans
were so entirely different from ours that sponsus is no longer accurately rendered either "husband"
or "betrothed."] Therefore a person is not prevented from giving alms, by being under another's
power.

Obj. 3: Further, the subjection of children to their parents is founded on nature, wherefore
the Apostle says (Eph. 6:1): "Children, obey your parents in the Lord." But, apparently, children
may give alms out of their parents' property. For it is their own, since they are the heirs;
wherefore, since they can employ it for some bodily use, it seems that much more can they use
it in giving alms so as to profit their souls. Therefore those who are under another's power
can give alms.

Obj. 4: Further, servants are under their master's power, according to Titus 2:9: "Exhort servants
to be obedient to their masters." Now they may lawfully do anything that will profit their
masters: and this would be especially the case if they gave alms for them. Therefore those
who are under another's power can give alms.

On the contrary, Alms should not be given out of another's property; and each one should give
alms out of the just profit of his own labor as Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xxxv, 2). Now
if those who are subject to anyone were to give alms, this would be out of another's property.
Therefore those who are under another's power cannot give alms.

I answer that, Anyone who is under another's power must, as such, be ruled in accordance with
the power of his superior: for the natural order demands that the inferior should be ruled
according to its superior. Therefore in those matters in which the inferior is subject to his
superior, his ministrations must be subject to the superior's permission.

Accordingly he that is under another's power must not give alms of anything in respect of which
he is subject to that other, except in so far as he has been commissioned by his superior.
But if he has something in respect of which he is not under the power of his superior, he is
no longer subject to another in its regard, being independent in respect of that particular
thing, and he can give alms therefrom.

Reply Obj. 1: If a monk be dispensed through being commissioned by his superior, he can give
alms from the property of his monastery, in accordance with the terms of his commission; but
if he has no such dispensation, since he has nothing of his own, he cannot give alms without
his abbot's permission either express or presumed for some probable reason: except in a case
of extreme necessity, when it would be lawful for him to commit a theft in order to give an
alms. Nor does it follow that he is worse off than before, because, as stated in De Eccles.
Dogm. lxxi, "it is a good thing to give one's property to the poor little by little, but it
is better still to give all at once in order to follow Christ, and being freed from care, to
be needy with Christ."

Reply Obj. 2: A wife, who has other property besides her dowry which is for the support of
the burdens of marriage, whether that property be gained by her own industry or by any other
lawful means, can give alms, out of that property, without asking her husband's permission:
yet such alms should be moderate, lest through giving too much she impoverish her husband.
Otherwise she ought not to give alms without the express or presumed consent of her husband,
except in cases of necessity as stated, in the case of a monk, in the preceding Reply. For
though the wife be her husband's equal in the marriage act, yet in matters of housekeeping,
the head of the woman is the man, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:3). As regards Blessed Lucy,
she had a betrothed, not a husband, wherefore she could give alms with her mother's consent.

Reply Obj. 3: What belongs to the children belongs also to the father: wherefore the child
cannot give alms, except in such small quantity that one may presume the father to be willing:
unless, perchance, the father authorize his child to dispose of any particular property. The
same applies to servants. Hence the Reply to the Fourth Objection is clear.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 9]

Whether One Ought to Give Alms to Those Rather Who Are More Closely United to Us?

Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not to give alms to those rather who are more closely
united to us. For it is written (Ecclus. 12:4, 6): "Give to the merciful and uphold not the
sinner . . . Do good to the humble and give not to the ungodly." Now it happens sometimes that
those who are closely united to us are sinful and ungodly. Therefore we ought not to give alms
to them in preference to others.

Obj. 2: Further, alms should be given that we may receive an eternal reward in return, according
to Matt. 6:18: "And thy Father Who seeth in secret, will repay thee." Now the eternal reward
is gained chiefly by the alms which are given to the saints, according to Luke 16:9: "Make
unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you shall fail, they may receive you
into everlasting dwellings," which passage Augustine expounds (De Verb. Dom. xxxv, 1): "Who
shall have everlasting dwellings unless the saints of God? And who are they that shall be received
by them into their dwellings, if not those who succor them in their needs?" Therefore alms
should be given to the more holy persons rather than to those who are more closely united to us.

Obj. 3: Further, man is more closely united to himself. But a man cannot give himself an alms.
Therefore it seems that we are not bound to give alms to those who are most closely united to us.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (1 Tim.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 28), "it falls to us by lot, as it were,
to have to look to the welfare of those who are more closely united to us." Nevertheless in
this matter we must employ discretion, according to the various degrees of connection, holiness
and utility. For we ought to give alms to one who is much holier and in greater want, and to
one who is more useful to the common weal, rather than to one who is more closely united to
us, especially if the latter be not very closely united, and has no special claim on our care
then and there, and who is not in very urgent need.

Reply Obj. 1: We ought not to help a sinner as such, that is by encouraging him to sin, but
as man, that is by supporting his nature.

Reply Obj. 2: Almsdeeds deserve on two counts to receive an eternal reward. First because they
are rooted in charity, and in this respect an almsdeed is meritorious in so far as it observes
the order of charity, which requires that, other things being equal, we should, in preference,
help those who are more closely connected with us. Wherefore Ambrose says (De Officiis i, 30):
"It is with commendable liberality that you forget not your kindred, if you know them to be
in need, for it is better that you should yourself help your own family, who would be ashamed
to beg help from others." Secondly, almsdeeds deserve to be rewarded eternally, through the
merit of the recipient, who prays for the giver, and it is in this sense that Augustine is
speaking.

Reply Obj. 3: Since almsdeeds are works of mercy, just as a man does not, properly speaking,
pity himself, but only by a kind of comparison, as stated above (Q. 30, AA. 1, 2), so too,
properly speaking, no man gives himself an alms, unless he act in another's person; thus when
a man is appointed to distribute alms, he can take something for himself, if he be in want,
on the same ground as when he gives to others.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 32, Art. 10]

Whether Alms Should Be Given in Abundance?

Objection 1: It would seem that alms should not be given in abundance. For we ought to give
alms to those chiefly who are most closely connected with us. But we ought not to give to them
in such a way that they are likely to become richer thereby, as Ambrose says (De Officiis i,
30). Therefore neither should we give abundantly to others.

Obj. 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Officiis i, 30): "We should not lavish our wealth on others
all at once, we should dole it out by degrees." But to give abundantly is to give lavishly.
Therefore alms should not be given in abundance.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (2 Cor. 8:13): "Not that others should be eased," i.e. should
live on you without working themselves, "and you burthened," i.e. impoverished. But this would
be the result if alms were given in abundance. Therefore we ought not to give alms abundantly.

On the contrary, It is written (Tob. 4:93): "If thou have much, give abundantly."

I answer that, Alms may be considered abundant in relation either to the giver, or to the recipient:
in relation to the giver, when that which a man gives is great as compared with his means.
To give thus is praiseworthy, wherefore Our Lord (Luke 21:3, 4) commended the widow because
"of her want, she cast in all the living that she had." Nevertheless those conditions must
be observed which were laid down when we spoke of giving alms out of one's necessary goods (A. 9).

On the part of the recipient, an alms may be abundant in two ways; first, by relieving his
need sufficiently, and in this sense it is praiseworthy to give alms: secondly, by relieving
his need more than sufficiently; this is not praiseworthy, and it would be better to give to
several that are in need, wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:3): "If I should distribute
. . . to feed the poor," on which words a gloss comments: "Thus we are warned to be careful
in giving alms, and to give, not to one only, but to many, that we may profit many."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument considers abundance of alms as exceeding the needs of the recipient.

Reply Obj. 2: The passage quoted considers abundance of alms on the part of the giver; but
the sense is that God does not wish a man to lavish all his wealth at once, except when he
changes his state of life, wherefore he goes on to say: "Except we imitate Eliseus who slew
his oxen and fed the poor with what he had, so that no household cares might keep him back"
(3 Kings 19:21).

Reply Obj. 3: In the passage quoted the words, "not that others should be eased or refreshed,"
refer to that abundance of alms which surpasses the need of the recipient, to whom one should
give alms not that he may have an easy life, but that he may have relief. Nevertheless we must
bring discretion to bear on the matter, on account of the various conditions of men, some of
whom are more daintily nurtured, and need finer food and clothing. Hence Ambrose says (De Officiis
i, 30): "When you give an alms to a man, you should take into consideration his age and his
weakness; and sometimes the shame which proclaims his good birth; and again that perhaps he
has fallen from riches to indigence through no fault of his own."

With regard to the words that follow, "and you burdened," they refer to abundance on the part
of the giver. Yet, as a gloss says on the same passage, "he says this, not because it would
be better to give in abundance, but because he fears for the weak, and he admonishes them so
to give that they lack not for themselves."

QUESTION 33

OF FRATERNAL CORRECTION (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider Fraternal Correction, under which head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether fraternal correction is an act of charity?

(2) Whether it is a matter of precept?

(3) Whether this precept binds all, or only superiors?

(4) Whether this precept binds the subject to correct his superior?

(5) Whether a sinner may correct anyone?

(6) Whether one ought to correct a person who becomes worse through being corrected?

(7) Whether secret correction should precede denouncement?

(8) Whether witnesses should be called before denouncement?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 1]

Whether Fraternal Correction Is an Act of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that fraternal correction is not an act of charity. For a gloss
on Matt. 18:15, "If thy brother shall offend against thee," says that "a man should reprove
his brother out of zeal for justice." But justice is a distinct virtue from charity. Therefore
fraternal correction is an act, not of charity, but of justice.

Obj. 2: Further, fraternal correction is given by secret admonition. Now admonition is a kind
of counsel, which is an act of prudence, for a prudent man is one who is of good counsel (Ethic.
vi, 5). Therefore fraternal correction is an act, not of charity, but of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, contrary acts do not belong to the same virtue. Now it is an act of charity
to bear with a sinner, according to Gal. 6:2: "Bear ye one another's burdens, and so you shall
fulfil the law of Christ," which is the law of charity. Therefore it seems that the correction
of a sinning brother, which is contrary to bearing with him, is not an act of charity.

On the contrary, To correct the wrongdoer is a spiritual almsdeed. But almsdeeds are works
of charity, as stated above (Q. 32, A. 1). Therefore fraternal correction is an act of charity.

I answer that, The correction of the wrongdoer is a remedy which should be employed against
a man's sin. Now a man's sin may be considered in two ways, first as being harmful to the sinner,
secondly as conducing to the harm of others, by hurting or scandalizing them, or by being detrimental
to the common good, the justice of which is disturbed by that man's sin.

Consequently the correction of a wrongdoer is twofold, one which applies a remedy to the sin
considered as an evil of the sinner himself. This is fraternal correction properly so called,
which is directed to the amendment of the sinner. Now to do away with anyone's evil is the
same as to procure his good: and to procure a person's good is an act of charity, whereby we
wish and do our friend well. Consequently fraternal correction also is an act of charity, because
thereby we drive out our brother's evil, viz. sin, the removal of which pertains to charity
rather than the removal of an external loss, or of a bodily injury, in so much as the contrary
good of virtue is more akin to charity than the good of the body or of external things. Therefore
fraternal correction is an act of charity rather than the healing of a bodily infirmity, or
the relieving of an external bodily need. There is another correction which applies a remedy
to the sin of the wrongdoer, considered as hurtful to others, and especially to the common
good. This correction is an act of justice, whose concern it is to safeguard the rectitude
of justice between one man and another.

Reply Obj. 1: This gloss speaks of the second correction which is an act of justice. Or if
it speaks of the first correction, then it takes justice as denoting a general virtue, as we
shall state further on (Q. 58, A. 5), in which sense again all "sin is iniquity" (1 John 3:4),
through being contrary to justice.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 12), prudence regulates whatever is
directed to the end, about which things counsel and choice are concerned. Nevertheless when,
guided by prudence, we perform some action aright which is directed to the end of some virtue,
such as temperance or fortitude, that action belongs chiefly to the virtue to whose end it
is directed. Since, then, the admonition which is given in fraternal correction is directed
to the removal of a brother's sin, which removal pertains to charity, it is evident that this
admonition is chiefly an act of charity, which virtue commands it, so to speak, but secondarily
an act of prudence, which executes and directs the action.

Reply Obj. 3: Fraternal correction is not opposed to forbearance with the weak, on the contrary
it results from it. For a man bears with a sinner, in so far as he is not disturbed against
him, and retains his goodwill towards him: the result being that he strives to make him do better.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 2]

Whether Fraternal Correction Is a Matter of Precept?

Objection 1: It would seem that fraternal correction is not a matter of precept. For nothing
impossible is a matter of precept, according to the saying of Jerome [*Pelagius, Expos. Symb.
ad Damas]: "Accursed be he who says that God has commanded anything impossible." Now it is
written (Eccles. 7:14): "Consider the works of God, that no man can correct whom He hath despised."
Therefore fraternal correction is not a matter of precept.

Obj. 2: Further, all the precepts of the Divine Law are reduced to the precepts of the Decalogue.
But fraternal correction does not come under any precept of the Decalogue. Therefore it is
not a matter of precept.

Obj. 3: Further, the omission of a Divine precept is a mortal sin, which has no place in a
holy man. Yet holy and spiritual men are found to omit fraternal correction: since Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei i, 9): "Not only those of low degree, but also those of high position, refrain
from reproving others, moved by a guilty cupidity, not by the claims of charity." Therefore
fraternal correction is not a matter of precept.

Obj. 4: Further, whatever is a matter of precept is something due. If, therefore, fraternal
correction is a matter of precept, it is due to our brethren that we correct them when they
sin. Now when a man owes anyone a material due, such as the payment of a sum of money, he must
not be content that his creditor come to him, but he should seek him out, that he may pay him
his due. Hence we should have to go seeking for those who need correction, in order that we
might correct them; which appears to be inconvenient, both on account of the great number of
sinners, for whose correction one man could not suffice, and because religious would have to
leave the cloister in order to reprove men, which would be unbecoming. Therefore fraternal
correction is not a matter of precept.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xvi, 4): "You become worse than the sinner if
you fail to correct him." But this would not be so unless, by this neglect, one omitted to
observe some precept. Therefore fraternal correction is a matter of precept.

I answer that, Fraternal correction is a matter of precept. We must observe, however, that
while the negative precepts of the Law forbid sinful acts, the positive precepts inculcate
acts of virtue. Now sinful acts are evil in themselves, and cannot become good, no matter how,
or when, or where, they are done, because of their very nature they are connected with an evil
end, as stated in Ethic. ii, 6: wherefore negative precepts bind always and for all times.
On the other hand, acts of virtue must not be done anyhow, but by observing the due circumstances,
which are requisite in order that an act be virtuous; namely, that it be done where, when,
and how it ought to be done. And since the disposition of whatever is directed to the end depends
on the formal aspect of the end, the chief of these circumstances of a virtuous act is this
aspect of the end, which in this case is the good of virtue. If therefore such a circumstance
be omitted from a virtuous act, as entirely takes away the good of virtue, such an act is contrary
to a precept. If, however, the circumstance omitted from a virtuous act be such as not to destroy
the virtue altogether, though it does not perfectly attain the good of virtue, it is not against
a precept. Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 9) says that if we depart but little from the
mean, it is not contrary to the virtue, whereas if we depart much from the mean virtue is destroyed
in its act. Now fraternal correction is directed to a brother's amendment: so that it is a
matter of precept, in so far as it is necessary for that end, but not so as we have to correct
our erring brother at all places and times.

Reply Obj. 1: In all good deeds man's action is not efficacious without the Divine assistance:
and yet man must do what is in his power. Hence Augustine says (De Correp. et Gratia xv): "Since
we ignore who is predestined and who is not, charity should so guide our feelings, that we
wish all to be saved." Consequently we ought to do our brethren the kindness of correcting
them, with the hope of God's help.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 32, A. 5, ad 4), all the precepts about rendering service
to our neighbor are reduced to the precept about the honor due to parents.

Reply Obj. 3: Fraternal correction may be omitted in three ways.

First, meritoriously, when out of charity one omits to correct someone. For Augustine says
(De Civ. Dei i, 9): "If a man refrains from chiding and reproving wrongdoers, because he awaits
a suitable time for so doing, or because he fears lest, if he does so, they may become worse,
or hinder, oppress, or turn away from the faith, others who are weak and need to be instructed
in a life of goodness and virtue, this does not seem to result from covetousness, but to be
counselled by charity."

Secondly, fraternal correction may be omitted in such a way that one commits a mortal sin,
namely, "when" (as he says in the same passage) "one fears what people may think, or lest one
may suffer grievous pain or death; provided, however, that the mind is so dominated by such
things, that it gives them the preference to fraternal charity." This would seem to be the
case when a man reckons that he might probably withdraw some wrongdoer from sin, and yet omits
to do so, through fear or covetousness.

Thirdly, such an omission is a venial sin, when through fear or covetousness, a man is loth
to correct his brother's faults, and yet not to such a degree, that if he saw clearly that
he could withdraw him from sin, he would still forbear from so doing, through fear or covetousness,
because in his own mind he prefers fraternal charity to these things. It is in this way that
holy men sometimes omit to correct wrongdoers.

Reply Obj. 4: We are bound to pay that which is due to some fixed and certain person, whether
it be a material or a spiritual good, without waiting for him to come to us, but by taking
proper steps to find him. Wherefore just as he that owes money to a creditor should seek him,
when the time comes, so as to pay him what he owes, so he that has spiritual charge of some
person is bound to seek him out, in order to reprove him for a sin. On the other hand, we are
not bound to seek someone on whom to bestow such favors as are due, not to any certain person,
but to all our neighbors in general, whether those favors be material or spiritual goods, but
it suffices that we bestow them when the opportunity occurs; because, as Augustine says (De
Doctr. Christ. i, 28), we must look upon this as a matter of chance. For this reason he says
(De Verb. Dom. xvi, 1) that "Our Lord warns us not to be listless in regard of one another's
sins: not indeed by being on the lookout for something to denounce, but by correcting what
we see": else we should become spies on the lives of others, which is against the saying of
Prov. 24:19: "Lie not in wait, nor seek after wickedness in the house of the just, nor spoil
his rest." It is evident from this that there is no need for religious to leave their cloister
in order to rebuke evil-doers.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 3]

Whether Fraternal Correction Belongs Only to Prelates?

Objection 1: It would seem that fraternal correction belongs to prelates alone. For Jerome
[*Origen, Hom. vii in Joan.] says: "Let priests endeavor to fulfil this saying of the Gospel:
'If thy brother sin against thee,'" etc. Now prelates having charge of others were usually
designated under the name of priests. Therefore it seems that fraternal correction belongs
to prelates alone.

Obj. 2: Further, fraternal correction is a spiritual alms. Now corporal almsgiving belongs
to those who are placed above others in temporal matters, i.e. to the rich. Therefore fraternal
correction belongs to those who are placed above others in spiritual matters, i.e. to prelates.

Obj. 3: Further, when one man reproves another he moves him by his rebuke to something better.
Now in the physical order the inferior is moved by the superior. Therefore in the order of
virtue also, which follows the order of nature, it belongs to prelates alone to correct inferiors.

On the contrary, It is written (Dist. xxiv, qu. 3, Can. Tam Sacerdotes): "Both priests and
all the rest of the faithful should be most solicitous for those who perish, so that their
reproof may either correct their sinful ways, or, if they be incorrigible, cut them off from
the Church."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), correction is twofold. One is an act of charity, which
seeks in a special way the recovery of an erring brother by means of a simple warning: such
like correction belongs to anyone who has charity, be he subject or prelate.

But there is another correction which is an act of justice purposing the common good, which
is procured not only by warning one's brother, but also, sometimes, by punishing him, that
others may, through fear, desist from sin. Such a correction belongs only to prelates, whose
business it is not only to admonish, but also to correct by means of punishments.

Reply Obj. 1: Even as regards that fraternal correction which is common to all, prelates have
a grave responsibility, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 9): "for just as a man ought to bestow
temporal favors on those especially of whom he has temporal care, so too ought he to confer
spiritual favors, such as correction, teaching and the like, on those who are entrusted to
his spiritual care." Therefore Jerome does not mean that the precept of fraternal correction
concerns priests only, but that it concerns them chiefly.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as he who has the means wherewith to give corporal assistance is rich in
this respect, so he whose reason is gifted with a sane judgment, so as to be able to correct
another's wrong-doing, is, in this respect, to be looked on as a superior.

Reply Obj. 3: Even in the physical order certain things act mutually on one another, through
being in some respect higher than one another, in so far as each is somewhat in act, and somewhat
in potentiality with regard to another. In like manner one man can correct another in so far
as he has a sane judgment in a matter wherein the other sins, though he is not his superior simply.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Correct His Prelate?

Objection 1: It would seem that no man is bound to correct his prelate. For it is written (Ex.
19:12): "The beast that shall touch the mount shall be stoned," [*Vulg.: 'Everyone that shall
touch the mount, dying he shall die.'] and (2 Kings 6:7) it is related that the Lord struck
Oza for touching the ark. Now the mount and the ark signify our prelates. Therefore prelates
should not be corrected by their subjects.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss on Gal. 2:11, "I withstood him to the face," adds: "as an equal."
Therefore, since a subject is not equal to his prelate, he ought not to correct him.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxiii, 8) that "one ought not to presume to reprove the
conduct of holy men, unless one thinks better of oneself." But one ought not to think better
of oneself than of one's prelate. Therefore one ought not to correct one's prelate.

On the contrary, Augustine says in his Rule: "Show mercy not only to yourselves, but also to
him who, being in the higher position among you, is therefore in greater danger." But fraternal
correction is a work of mercy. Therefore even prelates ought to be corrected.

I answer that, A subject is not competent to administer to his prelate the correction which
is an act of justice through the coercive nature of punishment: but the fraternal correction
which is an act of charity is within the competency of everyone in respect of any person towards
whom he is bound by charity, provided there be something in that person which requires correction.

Now an act which proceeds from a habit or power extends to whatever is contained under the
object of that power or habit: thus vision extends to all things comprised in the object of
sight. Since, however, a virtuous act needs to be moderated by due circumstances, it follows
that when a subject corrects his prelate, he ought to do so in a becoming manner, not with
impudence and harshness, but with gentleness and respect. Hence the Apostle says (1 Tim. 5:1):
"An ancient man rebuke not, but entreat him as a father." Wherefore Dionysius finds fault with
the monk Demophilus (Ep. viii), for rebuking a priest with insolence, by striking and turning
him out of the church.

Reply Obj. 1: It would seem that a subject touches his prelate inordinately when he upbraids
him with insolence, as also when he speaks ill of him: and this is signified by God's condemnation
of those who touched the mount and the ark.

Reply Obj. 2: To withstand anyone in public exceeds the mode of fraternal correction, and so
Paul would not have withstood Peter then, unless he were in some way his equal as regards the
defense of the faith. But one who is not an equal can reprove privately and respectfully. 2
Tim. 4:5]." It must be observed, however, that if the faith were endangered, a subject ought
to rebuke his prelate even publicly. Hence Paul, who was Peter's subject, rebuked him in public,
on account of the imminent danger of scandal concerning faith, and, as the gloss of Augustine
says on Gal. 2:11, "Peter gave an example to superiors, that if at any time they should happen
to stray from the straight path, they should not disdain to be reproved by their subjects."

Reply Obj. 3: To presume oneself to be simply better than one's prelate, would seem to savor
of presumptuous pride; but there is no presumption in thinking oneself better in some respect,
because, in this life, no man is without some fault. We must also remember that when a man
reproves his prelate charitably, it does not follow that he thinks himself any better, but
merely that he offers his help to one who, "being in the higher position among you, is therefore
in greater danger," as Augustine observes in his Rule quoted above.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 5]

Whether a Sinner Ought to Reprove a Wrongdoer?

Objection 1: It would seem that a sinner ought to reprove a wrongdoer. For no man is excused
from obeying a precept by having committed a sin. But fraternal correction is a matter of precept,
as stated above (A. 2). Therefore it seems that a man ought not to forbear from such like correction
for the reason that he has committed a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, spiritual almsdeeds are of more account than corporal almsdeeds. Now one who
is in sin ought not to abstain from administering corporal alms. Much less therefore ought
he, on account of a previous sin, to refrain from correcting wrongdoers.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (1 John 1:8): "If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves."
Therefore if, on account of a sin, a man is hindered from reproving his brother, there will
be none to reprove the wrongdoer. But the latter proposition is unreasonable: therefore the
former is also.

On the contrary, Isidore says (De Summo Bono iii, 32): "He that is subject to vice should not
correct the vices of others." Again it is written (Rom. 2:1): "Wherein thou judgest another,
thou condemnest thyself. For thou dost the same things which thou judgest."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3, ad 2), to correct a wrongdoer belongs to a man, in so
far as his reason is gifted with right judgment. Now sin, as stated above (I-II, Q. 85, AA.
1, 2), does not destroy the good of nature so as to deprive the sinner's reason of all right
judgment, and in this respect he may be competent to find fault with others for committing
sin. Nevertheless a previous sin proves somewhat of a hindrance to this correction, for three
reasons. First because this previous sin renders a man unworthy to rebuke another; and especially
is he unworthy to correct another for a lesser sin, if he himself has committed a greater.
Hence Jerome says on the words, "Why seest thou the mote?" etc. (Matt. 7:3): "He is speaking
of those who, while they are themselves guilty of mortal sin, have no patience with the lesser
sins of their brethren."

Secondly, such like correction becomes unseemly, on account of the scandal which ensues therefrom,
if the corrector's sin be well known, because it would seem that he corrects, not out of charity,
but more for the sake of ostentation. Hence the words of Matt. 7:4, "How sayest thou to thy
brother?" etc. are expounded by Chrysostom [*Hom. xvii in the Opus Imperfectum falsely ascribed
to St. John Chrysostom] thus: "That is--'With what object?' Out of charity, think you, that
you may save your neighbor?" No, "because you would look after your own salvation first. What
you want is, not to save others, but to hide your evil deeds with good teaching, and to seek
to be praised by men for your knowledge."

Thirdly, on account of the rebuker's pride; when, for instance, a man thinks lightly of his
own sins, and, in his own heart, sets himself above his neighbor, judging the latter's sins
with harsh severity, as though he himself were a just man. Hence Augustine says (De Serm. Dom.
in Monte ii, 19): "To reprove the faults of others is the duty of good and kindly men: when
a wicked man rebukes anyone, his rebuke is the latter's acquittal." And so, as Augustine says
(De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 19): "When we have to find fault with anyone, we should think whether
we were never guilty of his sin; and then we must remember that we are men, and might have
been guilty of it; or that we once had it on our conscience, but have it no longer: and then
we should bethink ourselves that we are all weak, in order that our reproof may be the outcome,
not of hatred, but of pity. But if we find that we are guilty of the same sin, we must not
rebuke him, but groan with him, and invite him to repent with us." It follows from this that,
if a sinner reprove a wrongdoer with humility, he does not sin, nor does he bring a further
condemnation on himself, although thereby he proves himself deserving of condemnation, either
in his brother's or in his own conscience, on account of his previous sin.

Hence the Replies to the Objections are clear.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 6]

Whether One Ought to Forbear from Correcting Someone, Through Fear Lest He Become Worse?

Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not to forbear from correcting someone through fear
lest he become worse. For sin is weakness of the soul, according to Ps. 6:3: "Have mercy on
me, O Lord, for I am weak." Now he that has charge of a sick person, must not cease to take
care of him, even if he be fractious or contemptuous, because then the danger is greater, as
in the case of madmen. Much more, therefore should one correct a sinner, no matter how badly
he takes it.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Jerome vital truths are not to be foregone on account of scandal.
Now God's commandments are vital truths. Since, therefore, fraternal correction is a matter
of precept, as stated above (A. 2), it seems that it should not be foregone for fear of scandalizing
the person to be corrected.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Apostle (Rom. 3:8) we should not do evil that good may come
of it. Therefore, in like manner, good should not be omitted lest evil befall. Now fraternal
correction is a good thing. Therefore it should not be omitted for fear lest the person corrected
become worse.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 9:8): "Rebuke not a scorner lest he hate thee," where
a gloss remarks: "You must not fear lest the scorner insult you when you rebuke him: rather
should you bear in mind that by making him hate you, you may make him worse." Therefore one
ought to forego fraternal correction, when we fear lest we may make a man worse.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3) the correction of the wrongdoer is twofold. One, which
belongs to prelates, and is directed to the common good, has coercive force. Such correction
should not be omitted lest the person corrected be disturbed, both because if he is unwilling
to amend his ways of his own accord, he should be made to cease sinning by being punished,
and because, if he be incorrigible, the common good is safeguarded in this way, since the order
of justice is observed, and others are deterred by one being made an example of. Hence a judge
does not desist from pronouncing sentence of condemnation against a sinner, for fear of disturbing
him or his friends.

The other fraternal correction is directed to the amendment of the wrongdoer, whom it does
not coerce, but merely admonishes. Consequently when it is deemed probable that the sinner
will not take the warning, and will become worse, such fraternal correction should be foregone,
because the means should be regulated according to the requirements of the end.

Reply Obj. 1: The doctor uses force towards a madman, who is unwilling to submit to his treatment;
and this may be compared with the correction administered by prelates, which has coercive power,
but not with simple fraternal correction.

Reply Obj. 2: Fraternal correction is a matter of precept, in so far as it is an act of virtue,
and it will be a virtuous act in so far as it is proportionate to the end. Consequently whenever
it is a hindrance to the end, for instance when a man becomes worse through it, it is longer
a vital truth, nor is it a matter of precept.

Reply Obj. 3: Whatever is directed to an end, becomes good through being directed to the end.
Hence whenever fraternal correction hinders the end, namely the amendment of our brother, it
is no longer good, so that when such a correction is omitted, good is not omitted lest evil
should befall.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 7]

Whether the Precept of Fraternal Correction Demands That a Private Admonition Should Precede
Denunciation?

Objection 1: It would seem that the precept of fraternal correction does not demand that a
private admonition should precede denunciation. For, in works of charity, we should above all
follow the example of God, according to Eph. 5:1, 2: "Be ye followers of God, as most dear
children, and walk in love." Now God sometimes punishes a man for a sin, without previously
warning him in secret. Therefore it seems that there is no need for a private admonition to
precede denunciation.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Augustine (De Mendacio xv), we learn from the deeds of holy men
how we ought to understand the commandments of Holy Writ. Now among the deeds of holy men we
find that a hidden sin is publicly denounced, without any previous admonition in private. Thus
we read (Gen. 37:2) that "Joseph accused his brethren to his father of a most wicked crime":
and (Acts 5:4, 9) that Peter publicly denounced Ananias and Saphira who had secretly "by fraud
kept back the price of the land," without beforehand admonishing them in private: nor do we
read that Our Lord admonished Judas in secret before denouncing him. Therefore the precept
does not require that secret admonition should precede public denunciation.

Obj. 3: Further, it is a graver matter to accuse than to denounce. Now one may go to the length
of accusing a person publicly, without previously admonishing him in secret: for it is decided
in the Decretal (Cap. Qualiter, xiv, De Accusationibus) that "nothing else need precede accusation
except inscription." [*The accuser was bound by Roman Law to endorse (se inscribere) the writ
of accusation. 4: Further, it does not seem probable that the customs observed by religious
in general are contrary to the precepts of Christ. Now it is customary among religious orders
to proclaim this or that one for a fault, without any previous secret admonition. Therefore
it seems that this admonition is not required by the precept.

Obj. 5: Further, religious are bound to obey their prelates. Now a prelate sometimes commands
either all in general, or someone in particular, to tell him if they know of anything that
requires correction. Therefore it would seem that they are bound to tell them this, even before
any secret admonition. Therefore the precept does not require secret admonition before public
denunciation.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xvi, 4) on the words, "Rebuke him between thee
and him alone" (Matt. 18:15): "Aiming at his amendment, while avoiding his disgrace: since
perhaps from shame he might begin to defend his sin; and him whom you thought to make a better
man, you make worse." Now we are bound by the precept of charity to beware lest our brother
become worse. Therefore the order of fraternal correction comes under the precept.

I answer that, With regard to the public denunciation of sins it is necessary to make a distinction:
because sins may be either public or secret. In the case of public sins, a remedy is required
not only for the sinner, that he may become better, but also for others, who know of his sin,
lest they be scandalized. Wherefore such like sins should be denounced in public, according
to the saying of the Apostle (1 Tim. 5:20): "Them that sin reprove before all, that the rest
also may have fear," which is to be understood as referring to public sins, as Augustine states
(De Verb. Dom. xvi, 7).

On the other hand, in the case of secret sins, the words of Our Lord seem to apply (Matt. 18:15):
"If thy brother shall offend against thee," etc. For if he offend thee publicly in the presence
of others, he no longer sins against thee alone, but also against others whom he disturbs.
Since, however, a man's neighbor may take offense even at his secret sins, it seems that we
must make yet a further distinction. For certain secret sins are hurtful to our neighbor either
in his body or in his soul, as, for instance, when a man plots secretly to betray his country
to its enemies, or when a heretic secretly turns other men away from the faith. And since he
that sins thus in secret, sins not only against you in particular, but also against others,
it is necessary to take steps to denounce him at once, in order to prevent him doing such harm,
unless by chance you were firmly persuaded that this evil result would be prevented by admonishing
him secretly. On the other hand there are other sins which injure none but the sinner, and
the person sinned against, either because he alone is hurt by the sinner, or at least because
he alone knows about his sin, and then our one purpose should be to succor our sinning brother:
and just as the physician of the body restores the sick man to health, if possible, without
cutting off a limb, but, if this be unavoidable, cuts off a limb which is least indispensable,
in order to preserve the life of the whole body, so too he who desires his brother's amendment
should, if possible, so amend him as regards his conscience, that he keep his good name.

For a good name is useful, first of all to the sinner himself, not only in temporal matters
wherein a man suffers many losses, if he lose his good name, but also in spiritual matters,
because many are restrained from sinning, through fear of dishonor, so that when a man finds
his honor lost, he puts no curb on his sinning. Hence Jerome says on Matt. 18:15: "If he sin
against thee, thou shouldst rebuke him in private, lest he persist in his sin if he should
once become shameless or unabashed." Secondly, we ought to safeguard our sinning brother's
good name, both because the dishonor of one leads to the dishonor of others, according to the
saying of Augustine (Ep. ad pleb. Hipponens. lxxviii): "When a few of those who bear a name
for holiness are reported falsely or proved in truth to have done anything wrong, people will
seek by busily repeating it to make it believed of all": and also because when one man's sin
is made public others are incited to sin likewise.

Since, however, one's conscience should be preferred to a good name, Our Lord wished that we
should publicly denounce our brother and so deliver his conscience from sin, even though he
should forfeit his good name. Therefore it is evident that the precept requires a secret admonition
to precede public denunciation.

Reply Obj. 1: Whatever is hidden, is known to God, wherefore hidden sins are to the judgment
of God, just what public sins are to the judgment of man. Nevertheless God does rebuke sinners
sometimes by secretly admonishing them, so to speak, with an inward inspiration, either while
they wake or while they sleep, according to Job 33:15-17: "By a dream in a vision by night,
when deep sleep falleth upon men . . . then He openeth the ears of men, and teaching instructeth
them in what they are to learn, that He may withdraw a man from the things he is doing."

Reply Obj. 2: Our Lord as God knew the sin of Judas as though it were public, wherefore He
could have made it known at once. Yet He did not, but warned Judas of his sin in words that
were obscure. The sin of Ananias and Saphira was denounced by Peter acting as God's executor,
by Whose revelation he knew of their sin. With regard to Joseph it is probable that he warned
his brethren, though Scripture does not say so. Or we may say that the sin was public with
regard to his brethren, wherefore it is stated in the plural that he accused "his brethren."

Reply Obj. 3: When there is danger to a great number of people, those words of Our Lord do
not apply, because then thy brother does not sin against thee alone.

Reply Obj. 4: Proclamations made in the chapter of religious are about little faults which
do not affect a man's good name, wherefore they are reminders of forgotten faults rather than
accusations or denunciations. If, however, they should be of such a nature as to injure our
brother's good name, it would be contrary to Our Lord's precept, to denounce a brother's fault
in this manner.

Reply Obj. 5: A prelate is not to be obeyed contrary to a Divine precept, according to Acts
5:29: "We ought to obey God rather then men." Therefore when a prelate commands anyone to tell
him anything that he knows to need correction, the command rightly understood supports the
safeguarding of the order of fraternal correction, whether the command be addressed to all
in general, or to some particular individual. If, on the other hand, a prelate were to issue
a command in express opposition to this order instituted by Our Lord, both would sin, the one
commanding, and the one obeying him, as disobeying Our Lord's command. Consequently he ought
not to be obeyed, because a prelate is not the judge of secret things, but God alone is, wherefore
he has no power to command anything in respect of hidden matters, except in so far as they
are made known through certain signs, as by ill-repute or suspicion; in which cases a prelate
can command just as a judge, whether secular or ecclesiastical, can bind a man under oath to
tell the truth.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 33, Art. 8]

Whether Before the Public Denunciation Witnesses Ought to Be Brought Forward?

Objection 1: It would seem that before the public denunciation witnesses ought not to be brought
forward. For secret sins ought not to be made known to others, because by so doing "a man would
betray his brother's sins instead of correcting them," as Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. xvi,
7). Now by bringing forward witnesses one makes known a brother's sin to others. Therefore
in the case of secret sins one ought not to bring witnesses forward before the public denunciation.

Obj. 2: Further, man should love his neighbor as himself. Now no man brings in witnesses to
prove his own secret sin. Neither therefore ought one to bring forward witnesses to prove the
secret sin of our brother.

Obj. 3: Further, witnesses are brought forward to prove something. But witnesses afford no
proof in secret matters. Therefore it is useless to bring witnesses forward in such cases.

Obj. 4: Further, Augustine says in his Rule that "before bringing it to the notice of witnesses
. . . it should be put before the superior." Now to bring a matter before a superior or a prelate
is to tell the Church. Therefore witnesses should not be brought forward before the public
denunciation.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. 18:16): "Take with thee one or two more, that in the
mouth of two," etc.

I answer that, The right way to go from one extreme to another is to pass through the middle
space. Now Our Lord wished the beginning of fraternal correction to be hidden, when one brother
corrects another between this one and himself alone, while He wished the end to be public,
when such a one would be denounced to the Church. Consequently it is befitting that a citation
of witnesses should be placed between the two extremes, so that at first the brother's sin
be indicated to a few, who will be of use without being a hindrance, and thus his sin be amended
without dishonoring him before the public.

Reply Obj. 1: Some have understood the order of fraternal correction to demand that we should
first of all rebuke our brother secretly, and that if he listens, it is well; but if he listen
not, and his sin be altogether hidden, they say that we should go no further in the matter,
whereas if it has already begun to reach the ears of several by various signs, we ought to
prosecute the matter, according to Our Lord's command. But this is contrary to what Augustine
says in his Rule that "we are bound to reveal" a brother's sin, if it "will cause a worse corruption
in the heart." Wherefore we must say otherwise that when the secret admonition has been given
once or several times, as long as there is probable hope of his amendment, we must continue
to admonish him in private, but as soon as we are able to judge with any probability that the
secret admonition is of no avail, we must take further steps, however secret the sin may be,
and call witnesses, unless perhaps it were thought probable that this would not conduce to
our brother's amendment, and that he would become worse: because on that account one ought
to abstain altogether from correcting him, as stated above (A. 6).

Reply Obj. 2: A man needs no witnesses that he may amend his own sin: yet they may be necessary
that we may amend a brother's sin. Hence the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 3: There may be three reasons for citing witnesses. First, to show that the deed
in question is a sin, as Jerome says: secondly, to prove that the deed was done, if repeated,
as Augustine says (loc. cit.): thirdly, "to prove that the man who rebuked his brother, has
done what he could," as Chrysostom says (Hom. in Matth. lx).

Reply Obj. 4: Augustine means that the matter ought to be made known to the prelate before
it is stated to the witnesses, in so far as the prelate is a private individual who is able
to be of more use than others, but not that it is to be told him as to the Church, i.e. as
holding the position of judge.

QUESTION 34

OF HATRED (In Six Articles)

We must now consider the vices opposed to charity: (1) hatred, which is opposed to love; (2)
sloth and envy, which are opposed to the joy of charity; (3) discord and schism, which are
contrary to peace; (4) offense and scandal, which are contrary to beneficence and fraternal
correction.

Under the first head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is possible to hate God?

(2) Whether hatred of God is the greatest of sins?

(3) Whether hatred of one's neighbor is always a sin?

(4) Whether it is the greatest of all sins against our neighbor?

(5) Whether it is a capital sin?

(6) From what capital sin does it arise?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 34, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Possible for Anyone to Hate God?

Objection 1: It would seem that no man can hate God. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv) that
"the first good and beautiful is an object of love and dilection to all." But God is goodness
and beauty itself. Therefore He is hated by none.

Obj. 2: Further, in the Apocryphal books of 3 Esdras 4:36, 39 it is written that "all things
call upon truth . . . and (all men) do well like of her works." Now God is the very truth according
to John 14:6. Therefore all love God, and none can hate Him.

Obj. 3: Further, hatred is a kind of aversion. But according to Dionysius (Div. Nom. i) God
draws all things to Himself. Therefore none can hate Him.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 73:23): "The pride of them that hate Thee ascendeth continually,"
and (John 15:24): "But now they have both seen and hated both Me and My Father."

I answer that, As shown above (I-II, Q. 29, A. 1), hatred is a movement of the appetitive power,
which power is not set in motion save by something apprehended. Now God can be apprehended
by man in two ways; first, in Himself, as when He is seen in His Essence; secondly, in His
effects, when, to wit, "the invisible things" of God . . . "are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made" (Rom. 1:20). Now God in His Essence is goodness itself, which
no man can hate--for it is natural to good to be loved. Hence it is impossible for one who
sees God in His Essence, to hate Him.

Moreover some of His effects are such that they can nowise be contrary to the human will, since
to be, to live, to understand, which are effects of God, are desirable and lovable to all.
Wherefore again God cannot be an object of hatred if we consider Him as the Author of such
like effects. Some of God's effects, however, are contrary to an inordinate will, such as the
infliction of punishment, and the prohibition of sin by the Divine Law. Such like effects are
repugnant to a will debased by sin, and as regards the consideration of them, God may be an
object of hatred to some, in so far as they look upon Him as forbidding sin, and inflicting
punishment.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument is true of those who see God's Essence, which is the very essence
of goodness.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument is true in so far as God is apprehended as the cause of such effects
as are naturally beloved of all, among which are the works of Truth who reveals herself to men.

Reply Obj. 3: God draws all things to Himself, in so far as He is the source of being, since
all things, in as much as they are, tend to be like God, Who is Being itself.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 34, Art. 2]

Whether Hatred of God Is the Greatest of Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that hatred of God is not the greatest of sins. For the most grievous
sin is the sin against the Holy Ghost, since it cannot be forgiven, according to Matt. 12:32.
Now hatred of God is not reckoned among the various kinds of sin against the Holy Ghost, as
may be seen from what has been said above (Q. 14, A. 2). Therefore hatred of God is not the
most grievous sin.

Obj. 2: Further, sin consists in withdrawing oneself from God. Now an unbeliever who has not
even knowledge of God seems to be further away from Him than a believer, who though he hate
God, nevertheless knows Him. Therefore it seems that the sin of unbelief is graver than the
sin of hatred against God.

Obj. 3: Further, God is an object of hatred, only by reason of those of His effects that are
contrary to the will: the chief of which is punishment. But hatred of punishment is not the
most grievous sin. Therefore hatred of God is not the most grievous sin.

On the contrary, The best is opposite to the worst, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii,
10). But hatred of God is contrary to the love of God, wherein man's best consists. Therefore
hatred of God is man's worst sin.

I answer that, The defect in sin consists in its aversion from God, as stated above (Q. 10,
A. 3): and this aversion would not have the character of guilt, were it not voluntary. Hence
the nature of guilt consists in a voluntary aversion from God.

Now this voluntary aversion from God is directly implied in the hatred of God, but in other
sins, by participation and indirectly. For just as the will cleaves directly to what it loves,
so does it directly shun what it hates. Hence when a man hates God, his will is directly averted
from God, whereas in other sins, fornication for instance, a man turns away from God, not directly,
but indirectly, in so far, namely, as he desires an inordinate pleasure, to which aversion
from God is connected. Now that which is so by itself, always takes precedence of that which
is so by another. Wherefore hatred of God is more grievous than other sins.

Reply Obj. 1: According to Gregory (Moral. xxv, 11), "it is one thing not to do good things,
and another to hate the giver of good things, even as it is one thing to sin indeliberately,
and another to sin deliberately." This implies that to hate God, the giver of all good things,
is to sin deliberately, and this is a sin against the Holy Ghost. Hence it is evident that
hatred of God is chiefly a sin against the Holy Ghost, in so far as the sin against the Holy
Ghost denotes a special kind of sin: and yet it is not reckoned among the kinds of sin against
the Holy Ghost, because it is universally found in every kind of that sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Even unbelief is not sinful unless it be voluntary: wherefore the more voluntary
it is, the more it is sinful. Now it becomes voluntary by the fact that a man hates the truth
that is proposed to him. Wherefore it is evident that unbelief derives its sinfulness from
hatred of God, Whose truth is the object of faith; and hence just as a cause is greater than
its effect, so hatred of God is a greater sin than unbelief.

Reply Obj. 3: Not everyone who hates his punishment, hates God the author of punishments. For
many hate the punishments inflicted on them, and yet they bear them patiently out of reverence
for the Divine justice. Wherefore Augustine says (Confess. x) that God commands us to bear
with penal evils, not to love them. On the other hand, to break out into hatred of God when
He inflicts those punishments, is to hate God's very justice, and that is a most grievous sin.
Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxv, 11): "Even as sometimes it is more grievous to love sin than
to do it, so is it more wicked to hate justice than not to have done it."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 34, Art. 3]

Whether hatred of one's neighbor is always a sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that hatred of one's neighbor is not always a sin. For no sin is
commanded or counselled by God, according to Prov. 8:8: "All My words are just, there is nothing
wicked nor perverse in them." Now, it is written (Luke 14:26): "If any man come to Me, and
hate not his father and mother . . . he cannot be My disciple." Therefore hatred of one's neighbor
is not always a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing wherein we imitate God can be a sin. But it is in imitation of God
that we hate certain people: for it is written (Rom. 1:30): "Detractors, hateful to God." Therefore
it is possible to hate certain people without committing a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing that is natural is a sin, for sin is a "wandering away from what is
according to nature," according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 4, 30; iv, 20). Now it is natural
to a thing to hate whatever is contrary to it, and to aim at its undoing. Therefore it seems
that it is not a sin to hate one's I enemy.

On the contrary, It is written (1 John 2:9): "He that . . . hateth his brother, is in darkness."
Now spiritual darkness is sin. Therefore there cannot be hatred of one's neighbor without sin.

I answer that, Hatred is opposed to love, as stated above (I-II, Q. 29, A. 2); so that hatred
of a thing is evil according as the love of that thing is good. Now love is due to our neighbor
in respect of what he holds from God, i.e. in respect of nature and grace, but not in respect
of what he has of himself and from the devil, i.e. in respect of sin and lack of justice.

Consequently it is lawful to hate the sin in one's brother, and whatever pertains to the defect
of Divine justice, but we cannot hate our brother's nature and grace without sin. Now it is
part of our love for our brother that we hate the fault and the lack of good in him, since
desire for another's good is equivalent to hatred of his evil. Consequently the hatred of one's
brother, if we consider it simply, is always sinful.

Reply Obj. 1: By the commandment of God (Ex. 20:12) we must honor our parents--as united to
us in nature and kinship. But we must hate them in so far as they prove an obstacle to our
attaining the perfection of Divine justice.

Reply Obj. 2: God hates the sin which is in the detractor, not his nature: so that we can hate
detractors without committing a sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Men are not opposed to us in respect of the goods which they have received from
God: wherefore, in this respect, we should love them. But they are opposed to us, in so far
as they show hostility towards us, and this is sinful in them. In this respect we should hate
them, for we should hate in them the fact that they are hostile to us.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 34, Art. 4]

Whether Hatred of Our Neighbor Is the Most Grievous Sin Against Our Neighbor?

Objection 1: It would seem that hatred of our neighbor is the most grievous sin against our
neighbor. For it is written (1 John 3:15): "Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer." Now
murder is the most grievous of sins against our neighbor. Therefore hatred is also.

Obj. 2: Further, worst is opposed to best. Now the best thing we give our neighbor is love,
since all other things are referable to love. Therefore hatred is the worst.

On the contrary, A thing is said to be evil, because it hurts, as Augustine observes (Enchiridion
xii). Now there are sins by which a man hurts his neighbor more than by hatred, e.g. theft,
murder and adultery. Therefore hatred is not the most grievous sin.

Moreover, Chrysostom [*Hom. x in the Opus Imperfectum, falsely ascribed to St. John Chrysostom]
commenting on Matt. 5:19, "He that shall break one of these least commandments," says: "The
commandments of Moses, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not commit adultery, count for little
in their reward, but they count for much if they be disobeyed. On the other hand the commandments
of Christ such as, Thou shalt not be angry, Thou shalt not desire, are reckoned great in their
reward, but little in the transgression." Now hatred is an internal movement like anger and
desire. Therefore hatred of one's brother is a less grievous sin than murder.

I answer that, Sins committed against our neighbor are evil on two counts; first by reason
of the disorder in the person who sins, secondly by reason of the hurt inflicted on the person
sinned against. On the first count, hatred is a more grievous sin than external actions that
hurt our neighbor, because hatred is a disorder of man's will, which is the chief part of man,
and wherein is the root of sin, so that if a man's outward actions were to be inordinate, without
any disorder in his will, they would not be sinful, for instance, if he were to kill a man,
through ignorance or out of zeal for justice: and if there be anything sinful in a man's outward
sins against his neighbor, it is all to be traced to his inward hatred.

On the other hand, as regards the hurt inflicted on his neighbor, a man's outward sins are
worse than his inward hatred. This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 34, Art. 5]

Whether Hatred Is a Capital Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that hatred is a capital sin. For hatred is directly opposed to
charity. Now charity is the foremost among the virtues, and the mother of all others. Therefore
hatred is the chief of the capital sins, and the origin of all others.

Obj. 2: Further, sins arise in us on account of the inclinations of our passions, according
to Rom. 7:5: "The passions of sins . . . did work in our members to bring forth fruit unto
death." Now all other passions of the soul seem to arise from love and hatred, as was shown
above (I-II, Q. 25, AA. 1, 2). Therefore hatred should be reckoned one of the capital sins.

Obj. 3: Further, vice is a moral evil. Now hatred regards evil more than any other passion
does. Therefore it seems that hatred should be reckoned a capital sin.

On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi) does not reckon hatred among the seven capital sins.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 84, AA. 3, 4), a capital vice is one from which other
vices arise most frequently. Now vice is contrary to man's nature, in as much as he is a rational
animal: and when a thing acts contrary to its nature, that which is natural to it is corrupted
little by little. Consequently it must first of all fail in that which is less in accordance
with its nature, and last of all in that which is most in accordance with its nature, since
what is first in construction is last in destruction. Now that which, first and foremost, is
most natural to man, is the love of what is good, and especially love of the Divine good, and
of his neighbor's good. Wherefore hatred, which is opposed to this love, is not the first but
the last thing in the downfall of virtue resulting from vice: and therefore it is not a capital
vice.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated in Phys. vii, text. 18, "the virtue of a thing consists in its being
well disposed in accordance with its nature." Hence what is first and foremost in the virtues
must be first and foremost in the natural order. Hence charity is reckoned the foremost of
the virtues, and for the same reason hatred cannot be first among the vices, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Hatred of the evil that is contrary to one's natural good, is the first of the
soul's passions, even as love of one's natural good is. But hatred of one's connatural good
cannot be first, but is something last, because such like hatred is a proof of an already corrupted
nature, even as love of an extraneous good.

Reply Obj. 3: Evil is twofold. One is a true evil, for the reason that it is incompatible with
one's natural good, and the hatred of such an evil may have priority over the other passions.
There is, however, another which is not a true, but an apparent evil, which, namely, is a true
and connatural good, and yet is reckoned evil on account of the corruption of nature: and the
hatred of such an evil must needs come last. This hatred is vicious, but the former is not.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 34, Art. 6]

Whether Hatred Arises from Envy?

Objection 1: It seems that hatred does not arise from envy. For envy is sorrow for another's
good. Now hatred does not arise from sorrow, for, on the contrary, we grieve for the presence
of the evil we hate. Therefore hatred does not arise from envy.

Obj. 2: Further, hatred is opposed to love. Now love of our neighbor is referred to our love
of God, as stated above (Q. 25, A. 1; Q. 26, A. 2). Therefore hatred of our neighbor is referred
to our hatred of God. But hatred of God does not arise from envy, for we do not envy those
who are very far removed from us, but rather those who seem to be near us, as the Philosopher
states (Rhet. ii). Therefore hatred does not arise from envy.

Obj. 3: Further, to one effect there is one cause. Now hatred is caused by anger, for Augustine
says in his Rule that "anger grows into hatred." Therefore hatred does not arise from envy.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "out of envy cometh hatred."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5), hatred of his neighbor is a man's last step in the path
of sin, because it is opposed to the love which he naturally has for his neighbor. Now if a
man declines from that which is natural, it is because he intends to avoid that which is naturally
an object to be shunned. Now every animal naturally avoids sorrow, just as it desires pleasure,
as the Philosopher states (Ethic. vii, x). Accordingly just as love arises from pleasure, so
does hatred arise from sorrow. For just as we are moved to love whatever gives us pleasure,
in as much as for that very reason it assumes the aspect of good; so we are moved to hate whatever
displeases us, in so far as for this very reason it assumes the aspect of evil. Wherefore,
since envy is sorrow for our neighbor's good, it follows that our neighbor's good becomes hateful
to us, so that "out of envy cometh hatred."

Reply Obj. 1: Since the appetitive power, like the apprehensive power, reflects on its own
acts, it follows that there is a kind of circular movement in the actions of the appetitive
power. And so according to the first forward course of the appetitive movement, love gives
rise to desire, whence follows pleasure when one has obtained what one desired. And since the
very fact of taking pleasure in the good one loves is a kind of good, it follows that pleasure
causes love. And in the same way sorrow causes hatred.

Reply Obj. 2: Love and hatred are essentially different, for the object of love is good, which
flows from God to creatures, wherefore love is due to God in the first place, and to our neighbor
afterwards. On the other hand, hatred is of evil, which has no place in God Himself, but only
in His effects, for which reason it has been stated above (A. 1), that God is not an object
of hatred, except in so far as He is considered in relation to His effects, and consequently
hatred is directed to our neighbor before being directed to God. Therefore, since envy of our
neighbor is the mother of hatred of our neighbor, it becomes, in consequence, the cause of
hatred towards God.

Reply Obj. 3: Nothing prevents a thing arising from various causes in various respects, and
accordingly hatred may arise both from anger and from envy. However it arises more directly
from envy, which looks upon the very good of our neighbor as displeasing and therefore hateful,
whereas hatred arises from anger by way of increase. For at first, through anger, we desire
our neighbor's evil according to a certain measure, that is in so far as that evil has the
aspect of vengeance: but afterwards, through the continuance of anger, man goes so far as absolutely
to desire his neighbor's evil, which desire is part of hatred. Wherefore it is evident that
hatred is caused by envy formally as regards the aspect of the object, but dispositively by anger.

QUESTION 35

OF SLOTH (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the vices opposed to the joy of charity. This joy is either about the
Divine good, and then its contrary is sloth, or about our neighbor's good, and then its contrary
is envy. Wherefore we must consider (1) Sloth and (2) Envy.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether sloth is a sin?

(2) Whether it is a special vice?

(3) Whether it is a mortal sin?

(4) Whether it is a capital sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 35, Art. 1]

Whether Sloth Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sloth is not a sin. For we are neither praised nor blamed for
our passions, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 5). Now sloth is a passion, since it
is a kind of sorrow, according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 14), and as we stated above
(I-II, Q. 35, A. 8). Therefore sloth is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no bodily failing that occurs at fixed times is a sin. But sloth is like this,
for Cassian says (De Instit. Monast. x, [*De Institutione Caenobiorum]): "The monk is troubled
with sloth chiefly about the sixth hour: it is like an intermittent fever, and inflicts the
soul of the one it lays low with burning fires at regular and fixed intervals." Therefore sloth
is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, that which proceeds from a good root is, seemingly, no sin. Now sloth proceeds
from a good root, for Cassian says (De Instit. Monast. x) that "sloth arises from the fact
that we sigh at being deprived of spiritual fruit, and think that other monasteries and those
which are a long way off are much better than the one we dwell in": all of which seems to point
to humility. Therefore sloth is not a sin.

Obj. 4: Further, all sin is to be avoided, according to Ecclus. 21:2: "Flee from sins as from
the face of a serpent." Now Cassian says (De Instit. Monast. x): "Experience shows that the
onslaught of sloth is not to be evaded by flight but to be conquered by resistance." Therefore
sloth is not a sin.

On the contrary, Whatever is forbidden in Holy Writ is a sin. Now such is sloth (acedia): for
it is written (Ecclus. 6:26): "Bow down thy shoulder, and bear her," namely spiritual wisdom,
"and be not grieved (acedieris) with her bands." Therefore sloth is a sin.

I answer that, Sloth, according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 14) is an oppressive sorrow,
which, to wit, so weighs upon man's mind, that he wants to do nothing; thus acid things are
also cold. Hence sloth implies a certain weariness of work, as appears from a gloss on Ps.
106:18, "Their soul abhorred all manner of meat," and from the definition of some who say that
sloth is a "sluggishness of the mind which neglects to begin good."

Now this sorrow is always evil, sometimes in itself, sometimes in its effect. For sorrow is
evil in itself when it is about that which is apparently evil but good in reality, even as,
on the other hand, pleasure is evil if it is about that which seems to be good but is, in truth,
evil. Since, then, spiritual good is a good in very truth, sorrow about spiritual good is evil
in itself. And yet that sorrow also which is about a real evil, is evil in its effect, if it
so oppresses man as to draw him away entirely from good deeds. Hence the Apostle (2 Cor. 2:7)
did not wish those who repented to be "swallowed up with overmuch sorrow."

Accordingly, since sloth, as we understand it here, denotes sorrow for spiritual good, it is
evil on two counts, both in itself and in point of its effect. Consequently it is a sin, for
by sin we mean an evil movement of the appetite, as appears from what has been said above (Q.
10, A. 2; I-II, Q. 74, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 1: Passions are not sinful in themselves; but they are blameworthy in so far as
they are applied to something evil, just as they deserve praise in so far as they are applied
to something good. Wherefore sorrow, in itself, calls neither for praise nor for blame: whereas
moderate sorrow for evil calls for praise, while sorrow for good, and again immoderate sorrow
for evil, call for blame. It is in this sense that sloth is said to be a sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The passions of the sensitive appetite may either be venial sins in themselves,
or incline the soul to mortal sin. And since the sensitive appetite has a bodily organ, it
follows that on account of some bodily transmutation a man becomes apt to commit some particular
sin. Hence it may happen that certain sins may become more insistent, through certain bodily
transmutations occurring at certain fixed times. Now all bodily effects, of themselves, dispose
one to sorrow; and thus it is that those who fast are harassed by sloth towards mid-day, when
they begin to feel the want of food, and to be parched by the sun's heat.

Reply Obj. 3: It is a sign of humility if a man does not think too much of himself, through
observing his own faults; but if a man contemns the good things he has received from God, this,
far from being a proof of humility, shows him to be ungrateful: and from such like contempt
results sloth, because we sorrow for things that we reckon evil and worthless. Accordingly
we ought to think much of the goods of others, in such a way as not to disparage those we have
received ourselves, because if we did they would give us sorrow.

Reply Obj. 4: Sin is ever to be shunned, but the assaults of sin should be overcome, sometimes
by flight, sometimes by resistance; by flight when a continued thought increases the incentive
to sin, as in lust; for which reason it is written (1 Cor. 6:18): "Fly fornication"; by resistance,
when perseverance in the thought diminishes the incentive to sin, which incentive arises from
some trivial consideration. This is the case with sloth, because the more we think about spiritual
goods, the more pleasing they become to us, and forthwith sloth dies away.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 35, Art. 2]

Whether Sloth Is a Special Vice?

Objection 1: It would seem that sloth is not a special vice. For that which is common to all
vices does not constitute a special kind of vice. But every vice makes a man sorrowful about
the opposite spiritual good: for the lustful man is sorrowful about the good of continence,
and the glutton about the good of abstinence. Since then sloth is sorrow for spiritual good,
as stated above (A. 1), it seems that sloth is not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, sloth, through being a kind of sorrow, is opposed to joy. Now joy is not accounted
one special virtue. Therefore sloth should not be reckoned a special vice.

Obj. 3: Further, since spiritual good is a general kind of object, which virtue seeks, and
vice shuns, it does not constitute a special virtue or vice, unless it be determined by some
addition. Now nothing, seemingly, except toil, can determine it to sloth, if this be a special
vice; because the reason why a man shuns spiritual goods, is that they are toilsome, wherefore
sloth is a kind of weariness: while dislike of toil, and love of bodily repose seem to be due
to the same cause, viz. idleness. Hence sloth would be nothing but laziness, which seems untrue,
for idleness is opposed to carefulness, whereas sloth is opposed to joy. Therefore sloth is
not a special vice.

On the contrary, Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) distinguishes sloth from the other vices. Therefore
it is a special vice.

I answer that, Since sloth is sorrow for spiritual good, if we take spiritual good in a general
way, sloth will not be a special vice, because, as stated above (I-II, Q. 71, A. 1), every
vice shuns the spiritual good of its opposite virtue. Again it cannot be said that sloth is
a special vice, in so far as it shuns spiritual good, as toilsome, or troublesome to the body,
or as a hindrance to the body's pleasure, for this again would not sever sloth from carnal
vices, whereby a man seeks bodily comfort and pleasure.

Wherefore we must say that a certain order exists among spiritual goods, since all the spiritual
goods that are in the acts of each virtue are directed to one spiritual good, which is the
Divine good, about which there is a special virtue, viz. charity. Hence it is proper to each
virtue to rejoice in its own spiritual good, which consists in its own act, while it belongs
specially to charity to have that spiritual joy whereby one rejoices in the Divine good. In
like manner the sorrow whereby one is displeased at the spiritual good which is in each act
of virtue, belongs, not to any special vice, but to every vice, but sorrow in the Divine good
about which charity rejoices, belongs to a special vice, which is called sloth. This suffices
for the Replies to the Objections.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 35, Art. 3]

Whether Sloth Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sloth is not a mortal sin. For every mortal sin is contrary
to a precept of the Divine Law. But sloth seems contrary to no precept, as one may see by going
through the precepts of the Decalogue. Therefore sloth is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, in the same genus, a sin of deed is no less grievous than a sin of thought.
Now it is not a mortal sin to refrain in deed from some spiritual good which leads to God,
else it would be a mortal sin not to observe the counsels. Therefore it is not a mortal sin
to refrain in thought from such like spiritual works. Therefore sloth is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, no mortal sin is to be found in a perfect man. But sloth is to be found in
a perfect man: for Cassian says (De Instit. Caenob. x, l) that "sloth is well known to the
solitary, and is a most vexatious and persistent foe to the hermit." Therefore sloth is not
always a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (2 Cor. 7:20): "The sorrow of the world worketh death." But
such is sloth; for it is not sorrow "according to God," which is contrasted with sorrow of
the world. Therefore it is a mortal sin.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 88, AA. 1, 2), mortal sin is so called because it
destroys the spiritual life which is the effect of charity, whereby God dwells in us. Wherefore
any sin which by its very nature is contrary to charity is a mortal sin by reason of its genus.
And such is sloth, because the proper effect of charity is joy in God, as stated above (Q.
28, A. 1), while sloth is sorrow about spiritual good in as much as it is a Divine good. Therefore
sloth is a mortal sin in respect of its genus. But it must be observed with regard to all sins
that are mortal in respect of their genus, that they are not mortal, save when they attain
to their perfection. Because the consummation of sin is in the consent of reason: for we are
speaking now of human sins consisting in human acts, the principle of which is the reason.
Wherefore if the sin be a mere beginning of sin in the sensuality alone, without attaining
to the consent of reason, it is a venial sin on account of the imperfection of the act. Thus
in the genus of adultery, the concupiscence that goes no further than the sensuality is a venial
sin, whereas if it reach to the consent of reason, it is a mortal sin. So too, the movement
of sloth is sometimes in the sensuality alone, by reason of the opposition of the flesh to
the spirit, and then it is a venial sin; whereas sometimes it reaches to the reason, which
consents in the dislike, horror and detestation of the Divine good, on account of the flesh
utterly prevailing over the spirit. In this case it is evident that sloth is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Sloth is opposed to the precept about hallowing the Sabbath day. For this precept,
in so far as it is a moral precept, implicitly commands the mind to rest in God: and sorrow
of the mind about the Divine good is contrary thereto.

Reply Obj. 2: Sloth is not an aversion of the mind from any spiritual good, but from the Divine
good, to which the mind is obliged to adhere. Wherefore if a man is sorry because someone forces
him to do acts of virtue that he is not bound to do, this is not a sin of sloth; but when he
is sorry to have to do something for God's sake.

Reply Obj. 3: Imperfect movements of sloth are to be found in holy men, but they do not reach
to the consent of reason.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 35, Art. 4]

Whether Sloth Should Be Accounted a Capital Vice?

Objection 1: It would seem that sloth ought not to be accounted a capital vice. For a capital
vice is one that moves a man to sinful acts, as stated above (Q. 34, A. 5). Now sloth does
not move one to action, but on the contrary withdraws one from it. Therefore it should not
be accounted a capital sin.

Obj. 2: Further, a capital sin is one to which daughters are assigned. Now Gregory (Moral.
xxxi, 45) assigns six daughters to sloth, viz. "malice, spite, faint-heartedness, despair,
sluggishness in regard to the commandments, wandering of the mind after unlawful things." Now
these do not seem in reality to arise from sloth. For "spite" is, seemingly the same as hatred,
which arises from envy, as stated above (Q. 34, A. 6); "malice" is a genus which contains all
vices, and, in like manner, a "wandering" of the mind after unlawful things is to be found
in every vice; "sluggishness" about the commandments seems to be the same as sloth, while "faint-heartedness"
and "despair" may arise from any sin. Therefore sloth is not rightly accounted a capital sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Isidore distinguishes the vice of sloth from the vice of sorrow, saying (De
Summo Bono ii, 37) that in so far as a man shirks his duty because it is distasteful and burdensome,
it is sorrow, and in so far as he is inclined to undue repose, it is sloth: and of sorrow he
says that it gives rise to "spite, faint-heartedness, bitterness, despair," whereas he states
that from sloth seven things arise, viz. "idleness, drowsiness, uneasiness of the mind, restlessness
of the body, instability, loquacity, curiosity." Therefore it seems that either Gregory or
Isidore has wrongly assigned sloth as a capital sin together with its daughters.

On the contrary, The same Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) states that sloth is a capital sin, and
has the daughters aforesaid. Now just as we do many things on account of pleasure, both in
order to obtain it, and through being moved to do something under the impulse of pleasure,
so again we do many things on account of sorrow, either that we may avoid it, or through being
exasperated into doing something under pressure thereof. Wherefore, since sloth is a kind of
sorrow, as stated above (A. 2; I-II, Q. 85, A. 8), it is fittingly reckoned a capital sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Sloth by weighing on the mind, hinders us from doing things that cause sorrow:
nevertheless it induces the mind to do certain things, either because they are in harmony with
sorrow, such as weeping, or because they are a means of avoiding sorrow.

Reply Obj. 2: Gregory fittingly assigns the daughters of sloth. For since, according to the
Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 5, 6) "no man can be a long time in company with what is painful
and unpleasant," it follows that something arises from sorrow in two ways: first, that man
shuns whatever causes sorrow; secondly, that he passes to other things that give him pleasure:
thus those who find no joy in spiritual pleasures, have recourse to pleasures of the body,
according to the Philosopher (Ethic. x, 6). Now in the avoidance of sorrow the order observed
is that man at first flies from unpleasant objects, and secondly he even struggles against
such things as cause sorrow. Now spiritual goods which are the object of the sorrow of sloth,
are both end and means. Avoidance of the end is the result of "despair," while avoidance of
those goods which are the means to the end, in matters of difficulty which come under the counsels,
is the effect of "faint-heartedness," and in matters of common righteousness, is the effect
of "sluggishness about the commandments." The struggle against spiritual goods that cause sorrow
is sometimes with men who lead others to spiritual goods, and this is called "spite"; and sometimes
it extends to the spiritual goods themselves, when a man goes so far as to detest them, and
this is properly called "malice." In so far as a man has recourse to eternal objects of pleasure,
the daughter of sloth is called "wandering after unlawful things." From this it is clear how
to reply to the objections against each of the daughters: for "malice" does not denote here
that which is generic to all vices, but must be understood as explained. Nor is "spite" taken
as synonymous with hatred, but for a kind of indignation, as stated above: and the same applies
to the others.

Reply Obj. 3: This distinction between sorrow and sloth is also given by Cassian (De Instit.
Caenob. x, 1). But Gregory more fittingly (Moral. xxxi, 45) calls sloth a kind of sorrow, because,
as stated above (A. 2), sorrow is not a distinct vice, in so far as a man shirks a distasteful
and burdensome work, or sorrows on account of any other cause whatever, but only in so far
as he is sorry on account of the Divine good, which sorrow belongs essentially to sloth; since
sloth seeks undue rest in so far as it spurns the Divine good. Moreover the things which Isidore
reckons to arise from sloth and sorrow, are reduced to those mentioned by Gregory: for "bitterness"
which Isidore states to be the result of sorrow, is an effect of "spite." "Idleness" and "drowsiness"
are reduced to "sluggishness about the precepts": for some are idle and omit them altogether,
while others are drowsy and fulfil them with negligence. All the other five which he reckons
as effects of sloth, belong to the "wandering of the mind after unlawful things." This tendency
to wander, if it reside in the mind itself that is desirous of rushing after various things
without rhyme or reason, is called "uneasiness of the mind," but if it pertains to the imaginative
power, it is called "curiosity"; if it affect the speech it is called "loquacity"; and in so
far as it affects a body that changes place, it is called "restlessness of the body," when,
to wit, a man shows the unsteadiness of his mind, by the inordinate movements of members of
his body; while if it causes the body to move from one place to another, it is called "instability";
or "instability" may denote changeableness of purpose.

QUESTION 36

OF ENVY (FOUR ARTICLES)

We must now consider envy, and under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) What is envy?

(2) Whether it is a sin?

(3) Whether it is a mortal sin?

(4) Whether it is a capital sin, and which are its daughters?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 36, Art. 1]

Whether Envy Is a Kind of Sorrow?

Objection 1: It would seem that envy is not a kind of sorrow. For the object of envy is a good,
for Gregory says (Moral. v, 46) of the envious man that "self-inflicted pain wounds the pining
spirit, which is racked by the prosperity of another." Therefore envy is not a kind of sorrow.

Obj. 2: Further, likeness is a cause, not of sorrow but rather of pleasure. But likeness is
a cause of envy: for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 10): "Men are envious of such as are like
them in genus, in knowledge, in stature, in habit, or in reputation." Therefore envy is not
a kind of sorrow.

Obj. 3: Further, sorrow is caused by a defect, wherefore those who are in great defect are
inclined to sorrow, as stated above (I-II, Q. 47, A. 3) when we were treating of the passions.
Now those who lack little, and who love honors, and who are considered wise, are envious, according
to the Philosopher (Rhet. ii, 10). Therefore envy is not a kind of sorrow.

Obj. 4: Further, sorrow is opposed to pleasure. Now opposite effects have not one and the same
cause. Therefore, since the recollection of goods once possessed is a cause of pleasure, as
stated above (I-II, Q. 32, A. 3) it will not be a cause of sorrow. But it is a cause of envy;
for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 10) that "we envy those who have or have had things that
befitted ourselves, or which we possessed at some time." Therefore sloth is not a kind of sorrow.

On the contrary, Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii, 14) calls envy a species of sorrow, and says
that "envy is sorrow for another's good."

I answer that, The object of a man's sorrow is his own evil. Now it may happen that another's
good is apprehended as one's own evil, and in this way sorrow can be about another's good.
But this happens in two ways: first, when a man is sorry about another's good, in so far as
it threatens to be an occasion of harm to himself, as when a man grieves for his enemy's prosperity,
for fear lest he may do him some harm: such like sorrow is not envy, but rather an effect of
fear, as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 9).

Secondly, another's good may be reckoned as being one's own evil, in so far as it conduces
to the lessening of one's own good name or excellence. It is in this way that envy grieves
for another's good: and consequently men are envious of those goods in which a good name consists,
and about which men like to be honored and esteemed, as the Philosopher remarks (Rhet. ii, 10).

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing hinders what is good for one from being reckoned as evil for another:
and in this way it is possible for sorrow to be about good, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Since envy is about another's good name in so far as it diminishes the good name
a man desires to have, it follows that a man is envious of those only whom he wishes to rival
or surpass in reputation. But this does not apply to people who are far removed from one another:
for no man, unless he be out of his mind, endeavors to rival or surpass in reputation those
who are far above him. Thus a commoner does not envy the king, nor does the king envy a commoner
whom he is far above. Wherefore a man envies not those who are far removed from him, whether
in place, time, or station, but those who are near him, and whom he strives to rival or surpass.
For it is against our will that these should be in better repute than we are, and that gives
rise to sorrow. On the other hand, likeness causes pleasure in so far as it is in agreement
with the will.

Reply Obj. 3: A man does not strive for mastery in matters where he is very deficient; so that
he does not envy one who surpasses him in such matters, unless he surpass him by little, for
then it seems to him that this is not beyond him, and so he makes an effort; wherefore, if
his effort fails through the other's reputation surpassing his, he grieves. Hence it is that
those who love to be honored are more envious; and in like manner the faint-hearted are envious,
because all things are great to them, and whatever good may befall another, they reckon that
they themselves have been bested in something great. Hence it is written (Job 5:2): "Envy slayeth
the little one," and Gregory says (Moral. v, 46) that "we can envy those only whom we think
better in some respect than ourselves."

Reply Obj. 4: Recollection of past goods in so far as we have had them, causes pleasure; in
so far as we have lost them, causes sorrow; and in so far as others have them, causes envy,
because that, above all, seems to belittle our reputation. Hence the Philosopher says (Rhet.
ii) that the old envy the young, and those who have spent much in order to get something, envy
those who have got it by spending little, because they grieve that they have lost their goods,
and that others have acquired goods.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 36, Art. 2]

Whether Envy Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that envy is not a sin. For Jerome says to Laeta about the education
of her daughter (Ep. cvii): "Let her have companions, so that she may learn together with them,
envy them, and be nettled when they are praised." But no one should be advised to commit a
sin. Therefore envy is not a sin.

Objection 2: Further, "Envy is sorrow for another's good," as Damascene says (De Fide Orth.
ii, 14). But this is sometimes praiseworthy: for it is written (Prov. 29:2): "When the wicked
shall bear rule, the people shall mourn." Therefore envy is not always a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, envy denotes a kind of zeal. But there is a good zeal, according to Ps. 68:10:
"The zeal of Thy house hath eaten me up." Therefore envy is not always a sin.

Obj. 4: Further, punishment is condivided with fault. But envy is a kind of punishment: for
Gregory says (Moral. v, 46): "When the foul sore of envy corrupts the vanquished heart, the
very exterior itself shows how forcibly the mind is urged by madness. For paleness seizes the
complexion, the eyes are weighed down, the spirit is inflamed, while the limbs are chilled,
there is frenzy in the heart, there is gnashing with the teeth." Therefore envy is not a sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Gal. 5:26): "Let us not be made desirous of vainglory, provoking
one another, envying one another."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), envy is sorrow for another's good. Now this sorrow may
come about in four ways. First, when a man grieves for another's good, through fear that it
may cause harm either to himself, or to some other goods. This sorrow is not envy, as stated
above (A. 1), and may be void of sin. Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxii, 11): "It very often
happens that without charity being lost, both the destruction of an enemy rejoices us, and
again his glory, without any sin of envy, saddens us, since, when he falls, we believe that
some are deservedly set up, and when he prospers, we dread lest many suffer unjustly."

Secondly, we may grieve over another's good, not because he has it, but because the good which
he has, we have not: and this, properly speaking, is zeal, as the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii,
9). And if this zeal be about virtuous goods, it is praiseworthy, according to 1 Cor. 14:1:
"Be zealous for spiritual gifts": while, if it be about temporal goods, it may be either sinful
or sinless. Thirdly, one may grieve over another's good, because he who happens to have that
good is unworthy of it. Such sorrow as this cannot be occasioned by virtuous goods, which make
a man righteous, but, as the Philosopher states, is about riches, and those things which can
accrue to the worthy and the unworthy; and he calls this sorrow nemesis [*The nearest equivalent
is "indignation." The use of the word "nemesis" to signify "revenge" does not represent the
original Greek.], saying that it belongs to good morals. But he says this because he considered
temporal goods in themselves, in so far as they may seem great to those who look not to eternal
goods: whereas, according to the teaching of faith, temporal goods that accrue to those who
are unworthy, are so disposed according to God's just ordinance, either for the correction
of those men, or for their condemnation, and such goods are as nothing in comparison with the
goods to come, which are prepared for good men. Wherefore sorrow of this kind is forbidden
in Holy Writ, according to Ps. 36:1: "Be not emulous of evil doers, nor envy them that work
iniquity," and elsewhere (Ps. 72:2, 3): "My steps had well nigh slipped, for I was envious
of the wicked, when I saw the prosperity of sinners [*Douay: 'because I had a zeal on occasion
of the wicked, seeing the prosperity of sinners']." Fourthly, we grieve over a man's good,
in so far as his good surpasses ours; this is envy properly speaking, and is always sinful,
as also the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 10), because to do so is to grieve over what should
make us rejoice, viz. over our neighbor's good.

Reply Obj. 1: Envy there denotes the zeal with which we ought to strive to progress with those
who are better than we are.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers sorrow for another's good in the first sense given above.

Reply Obj. 3: Envy differs from zeal, as stated above. Hence a certain zeal may be good, whereas
envy is always evil.

Reply Obj. 4: Nothing hinders a sin from being penal accidentally, as stated above (I-II, Q.
87, A. 2) when we were treating of sins.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 36, Art. 3]

Whether Envy Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that envy is not a mortal sin. For since envy is a kind of sorrow,
it is a passion of the sensitive appetite. Now there is no mortal sin in the sensuality, but
only in the reason, as Augustine declares (De Trin. xii, 12) [*Cf. I-II, Q. 74, A. 4]. Therefore
envy is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, there cannot be mortal sin in infants. But envy can be in them, for Augustine
says (Confess. i): "I myself have seen and known even a baby envious, it could not speak, yet
it turned pale and looked bitterly on its foster-brother." Therefore envy is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every mortal sin is contrary to some virtue. But envy is contrary, not to
a virtue but to nemesis, which is a passion, according to the Philosopher (Rhet. ii, 9). Therefore
envy is not a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Job 5:2): "Envy slayeth the little one." Now nothing slays
spiritually, except mortal sin. Therefore envy is a mortal sin.

I answer that, Envy is a mortal sin, in respect of its genus. Now the object both of charity
and of envy is our neighbor's good, but by contrary movements, since charity rejoices in our
neighbor's good, while envy grieves over it, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore it is evident
that envy is a mortal sin in respect of its genus.

Nevertheless, as stated above (Q. 35, A. 4; I-II, Q. 72, A. 5, ad 1), in every kind of mortal
sin we find certain imperfect movements in the sensuality, which are venial sins: such are
the first movement of concupiscence, in the genus of adultery, and the first movement of anger,
in the genus of murder, and so in the genus of envy we find sometimes even in perfect men certain
first movements, which are venial sins.

Reply Obj. 1: The movement of envy in so far as it is a passion of the sensuality, is an imperfect
thing in the genus of human acts, the principle of which is the reason, so that envy of that
kind is not a mortal sin. The same applies to the envy of little children who have not the
use of reason: wherefore the Reply to the Second Objection is manifest.

Reply Obj. 3: According to the Philosopher (Rhet. ii, 9), envy is contrary both to nemesis
and to pity, but for different reasons. For it is directly contrary to pity, their principal
objects being contrary to one another, since the envious man grieves over his neighbor's good,
whereas the pitiful man grieves over his neighbor's evil, so that the envious have no pity,
as he states in the same passage, nor is the pitiful man envious. On the other hand, envy is
contrary to nemesis on the part of the man whose good grieves the envious man, for nemesis
is sorrow for the good of the undeserving according to Ps. Hence it is clear that the former
contrariety is more direct than the latter. Now pity is a virtue, and an effect proper to charity:
so that envy is contrary to pity and charity.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 36, Art. 4]

Whether Envy Is a Capital Vice?

Objection 1: It would seem that envy is not a capital vice. For the capital vices are distinct
from their daughters. Now envy is the daughter of vainglory; for the Philosopher says (Rhet.
ii, 10) that "those who love honor and glory are more envious." Therefore envy is not a capital
vice.

Obj. 2: Further, the capital vices seem to be less grave than the other vices which arise from
them. For Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45): "The leading vices seem to worm their way into the
deceived mind under some kind of pretext, but those which follow them provoke the soul to all
kinds of outrage, and confuse the mind with their wild outcry." Now envy is seemingly a most
grave sin, for Gregory says (Moral. v, 46): "Though in every evil thing that is done, the venom
of our old enemy is infused into the heart of man, yet in this wickedness the serpent stirs
his whole bowels and discharges the bane of spite fitted to enter deep into the mind." Therefore
envy is not a capital sin.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems that its daughters are unfittingly assigned by Gregory (Moral. xxxi,
45), who says that from envy arise "hatred, tale-bearing, detraction, joy at our neighbor's
misfortunes, and grief for his prosperity." For joy at our neighbor's misfortunes and grief
for his prosperity seem to be the same as envy, as appears from what has been said above (A.
3). Therefore these should not be assigned as daughters of envy.

On the contrary stands the authority of Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45) who states that envy is a
capital sin and assigns the aforesaid daughters thereto.

I answer that, Just as sloth is grief for a Divine spiritual good, so envy is grief for our
neighbor's good. Now it has been stated above (Q. 35, A. 4) that sloth is a capital vice for
the reason that it incites man to do certain things, with the purpose either of avoiding sorrow
or of satisfying its demands. Wherefore envy is accounted a capital vice for the same reason.

Reply Obj. 1: As Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45), "the capital vices are so closely akin to
one another that one springs from the other. For the first offspring of pride is vainglory,
which by corrupting the mind it occupies begets envy, since while it craves for the power of
an empty name, it repines for fear lest another should acquire that power." Consequently the
notion of a capital vice does not exclude its originating from another vice, but it demands
that it should have some principal reason for being itself the origin of several kinds of sin.
However it is perhaps because envy manifestly arises from vainglory, that it is not reckoned
a capital sin, either by Isidore (De Summo Bono) or by Cassian (De Instit. Caenob. v, 1).

Reply Obj. 2: It does not follow from the passage quoted that envy is the greatest of sins,
but that when the devil tempts us to envy, he is enticing us to that which has its chief place
in his heart, for as quoted further on in the same passage, "by the envy of the devil, death
came into the world" (Wis. 2:24).

There is, however, a kind of envy which is accounted among the most grievous sins, viz. envy
of another's spiritual good, which envy is a sorrow for the increase of God's grace, and not
merely for our neighbor's good. Hence it is accounted a sin against the Holy Ghost, because
thereby a man envies, as it were, the Holy Ghost Himself, Who is glorified in His works.

Reply Obj. 3: The number of envy's daughters may be understood for the reason that in the struggle
aroused by envy there is something by way of beginning, something by way of middle, and something
by way of term. The beginning is that a man strives to lower another's reputation, and this
either secretly, and then we have tale-bearing, or openly, and then we have detraction. The
middle consists in the fact that when a man aims at defaming another, he is either able to
do so, and then we have joy at another's misfortune, or he is unable, and then we have grief
at another's prosperity. The term is hatred itself, because just as good which delights causes
love, so does sorrow cause hatred, as stated above (Q. 34, A. 6). Grief at another's prosperity
is in one way the very same as envy, when, to Wit, a man grieves over another's prosperity,
in so far as it gives the latter a good name, but in another way it is a daughter of envy,
in so far as the envious man sees his neighbor prosper notwithstanding his efforts to prevent
it. On the other hand, joy at another's misfortune is not directly the same as envy, but is
a result thereof, because grief over our neighbor's good which is envy, gives rise to joy in
his evil.

QUESTION 37

OF DISCORD, WHICH IS CONTRARY TO PEACE (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the sins contrary to peace, and first we shall consider discord which
is in the heart, secondly contention, which is on the lips, thirdly, those things which consist
in deeds, viz. schism, quarrelling, war, and sedition. Under the first head there are two points
of inquiry:

(1) Whether discord is a sin?

(2) Whether it is a daughter of vainglory?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 37, Art. 1]

Whether Discord Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that discord is not a sin. For to disaccord with man is to sever
oneself from another's will. But this does not seem to be a sin, because God's will alone,
and not our neighbor's, is the rule of our own will. Therefore discord is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, whoever induces another to sin, sins also himself. And when he had so said,
there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees." Therefore discord is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, sin, especially mortal sin, is not to be found in a holy man. But discord
is to be found even among holy men, for it is written (Acts 15:39): "There arose a dissension"
between Paul and Barnabas, "so that they departed one from another." Therefore discord is not
a sin, and least of all a mortal sin.

On the contrary, "Dissensions," that is, discords, are reckoned among the works of the flesh
(Gal. 5:20), of which it is said afterwards (Gal. 5:21) that "they who do such things shall
not obtain the kingdom of God." Now nothing, save mortal sin, excludes man from the kingdom
of God. Therefore discord is a mortal sin.

I answer that, Discord is opposed to concord. Now, as stated above (Q. 29, AA. 1, 3) concord
results from charity, in as much as charity directs many hearts together to one thing, which
is chiefly the Divine good, secondarily, the good of our neighbor. Wherefore discord is a sin,
in so far as it is opposed to this concord.

But it must be observed that this concord is destroyed by discord in two ways: first, directly;
secondly, accidentally. Now, human acts and movements are said to be direct when they are according
to one's intention. Wherefore a man directly disaccords with his neighbor, when he knowingly
and intentionally dissents from the Divine good and his neighbor's good, to which he ought
to consent. This is a mortal sin in respect of its genus, because it is contrary to charity,
although the first movements of such discord are venial sins by reason of their being imperfect
acts.

The accidental in human acts is that which occurs beside the intention. Hence when several
intend a good pertaining to God's honor, or our neighbor's profit, while one deems a certain
thing good, and another thinks contrariwise, the discord is in this case accidentally contrary
to the Divine good or that of our neighbor. Such like discord is neither sinful nor against
charity, unless it be accompanied by an error about things necessary to salvation, or by undue
obstinacy, since it has also been stated above (Q. 29, AA. 1, 3, ad 2) that the concord which
is an effect of charity, is union of wills not of opinions. It follows from this that discord
is sometimes the sin of one party only, for instance, when one wills a good which the other
knowingly resists; while sometimes it implies sin in both parties, as when each dissents from
the other's good, and loves his own.

Reply Obj. 1: One man's will considered in itself is not the rule of another man's will; but
in so far as our neighbor's will adheres to God's will, it becomes in consequence, a rule regulated
according to its proper measure. Wherefore it is a sin to disaccord with such a will, because
by that very fact one disaccords with the Divine rule.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as a man's will that adheres to God is a right rule, to disaccord with which
is a sin, so too a man's will that is opposed to God is a perverse rule, to disaccord with
which is good. Hence to cause a discord, whereby a good concord resulting from charity is destroyed,
is a grave sin: wherefore it is written (Prov. 6:16): "Six things there are, which the Lord
hateth, and the seventh His soul detesteth," which seventh is stated (Prov. 6:19) to be "him
that soweth discord among brethren." On the other hand, to arouse a discord whereby an evil
concord (i.e. concord in an evil will) is destroyed, is praiseworthy. In this way Paul was
to be commended for sowing discord among those who concorded together in evil, because Our
Lord also said of Himself (Matt. 10:34): "I came not to send peace, but the sword."

Reply Obj. 3: The discord between Paul and Barnabas was accidental and not direct: because
each intended some good, yet the one thought one thing good, while the other thought something
else, which was owing to human deficiency: for that controversy was not about things necessary
to salvation. Moreover all this was ordained by Divine providence, on account of the good which
would ensue.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 37, Art. 2]

Whether Discord Is a Daughter of Vainglory?

Objection 1: It would seem that discord is not a daughter of vainglory. For anger is a vice
distinct from vainglory. Now discord is apparently the daughter of anger, according to Prov.
15:18: "A passionate man stirreth up strifes." Therefore it is not a daughter of vainglory.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine expounding the words of John 7:39, "As yet the Spirit was not given,"
says (Tract. xxxii) "Malice severs, charity unites." Now discord is merely a separation of
wills. Therefore discord arises from malice, i.e. envy, rather than from vainglory.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever gives rise to many evils, would seem to be a capital vice. Now such
is discord, because Jerome in commenting on Matt. 12:25, "Every kingdom divided against itself
shall be made desolate," says: "Just as concord makes small things thrive, so discord brings
the greatest things to ruin." Therefore discord should itself be reckoned a capital vice, rather
than a daughter of vainglory.

On the contrary stands the authority of Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45).

I answer that, Discord denotes a certain disunion of wills, in so far, to wit, as one man's
will holds fast to one thing, while the other man's will holds fast to something else. Now
if a man's will holds fast to its own ground, this is due to the act that he prefers what is
his own to that which belongs to others, and if he do this inordinately, it is due to pride
and vainglory. Therefore discord, whereby a man holds to his own way of thinking, and departs
from that of others, is reckoned to be a daughter of vainglory.

Reply Obj. 1: Strife is not the same as discord, for strife consists in external deeds, wherefore
it is becoming that it should arise from anger, which incites the mind to hurt one's neighbor;
whereas discord consists in a divergence in the movements of wills, which arises from pride
or vainglory, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 2: In discord we may consider that which is the term wherefrom, i.e. another's will
from which we recede, and in this respect it arises from envy; and again we may consider that
which is the term whither, i.e. something of our own to which we cling, and in this respect
it is caused by vainglory. And since in every moment the term whither is more important than
the term wherefrom (because the end is of more account than the beginning), discord is accounted
a daughter of vainglory rather than of envy, though it may arise from both for different reasons,
as stated.

Reply Obj. (De Causis xvii). Hence it is evident that this is part of the proper effect of
discord which is a disunion of wills, and in no way indicates that other vices arise from discord,
as though it were a capital vice.

QUESTION 38

OF CONTENTION (In Two Articles)

We must now consider contention, in respect of which there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether contention is a mortal sin?

(2) Whether it is a daughter of vainglory?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 38, Art. 1]

Whether Contention Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that contention is not a mortal sin. For there is no mortal sin
in spiritual men: and yet contention is to be found in them, according to Luke 22:24: "And
there was also a strife amongst" the disciples of Jesus, "which of them should . . . be the
greatest." Therefore contention is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no well disposed man should be pleased that his neighbor commit a mortal sin.
But the Apostle says (Phil. 1:17): "Some out of contention preach Christ," and afterwards he
says (Phil. 1:18): "In this also I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." Therefore contention is
not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, it happens that people contend either in the courts or in disputations, without
any spiteful purpose, and with a good intention, as, for example, those who contend by disputing
with heretics. Hence a gloss on 1 Kings 14:1, "It came to pass one day," etc. says: "Catholics
do not raise contentions with heretics, unless they are first challenged to dispute." Therefore
contention is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 4: Further, Job seems to have contended with God, according to Job 39:32: "Shall he that
contendeth with God be so easily silenced?" And yet Job was not guilty of mortal sin, since
the Lord said of him (Job 42:7): "You have not spoken the thing that is right before me, as
my servant Job hath." Therefore contention is not always a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is against the precept of the Apostle who says (2 Tim. 2:14): "Contend
not in words." Moreover (Gal. 5:20) contention is included among the works of the flesh, and
as stated there (Gal. 5:21) "they who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God."
Now whatever excludes a man from the kingdom of God and is against a precept, is a mortal sin.
Therefore contention is a mortal sin.

I answer that, To contend is to tend against some one. Wherefore just as discord denotes a
contrariety of wills, so contention signifies contrariety of speech. For this reason when a
man contrasts various contrary things in a speech, this is called contentio, which Tully calls
one of the rhetorical colors (De Rhet. ad Heren. iv), where he says that "it consists in developing
a speech from contrary things," for instance: "Adulation has a pleasant beginning, and a most
bitter end."

Now contrariety of speech may be looked at in two ways: first with regard to the intention
of the contentious party, secondly, with regard to the manner of contending. As to the intention,
we must consider whether he contends against the truth, and then he is to be blamed, or against
falsehood, and then he should be praised. As to the manner, we must consider whether his manner
of contending is in keeping with the persons and the matter in dispute, for then it would be
praiseworthy, hence Tully says (De Rhet. ad Heren. iii) that "contention is a sharp speech
suitable for proof and refutation"--or whether it exceeds the demands of the persons and matter
in dispute, in which case it is blameworthy.

Accordingly if we take contention as denoting a disclaimer of the truth and an inordinate manner,
it is a mortal sin. Thus Ambrose [*Cf. Gloss. Ord. in Rom. i, 29] defines contention: "Contention
is a disclaimer of the truth with clamorous confidence." If, however, contention denote a disavowal
of what is false, with the proper measure of acrimony, it is praiseworthy: whereas, if it denote
a disavowal of falsehood, together with an inordinate manner, it can be a venial sin, unless
the contention be conducted so inordinately, as to give scandal to others. Hence the Apostle
after saying (2 Tim. 2:14): "Contend not in words," adds, "for it is to no profit, but to the
subverting of the hearers."

Reply Obj. 1: The disciples of Christ contended together, not with the intention of disclaiming
the truth, since each one stood up for what he thought was true. Yet there was inordinateness
in their contention, because they contended about a matter which they ought not to have contended
about, viz. the primacy of honor; for they were not spiritual men as yet, as a gloss says on
the same passage; and for this reason Our Lord checked them.

Reply Obj. 2: Those who preached Christ "out of contention," were to be blamed, because, although
they did not gainsay the truth of faith, but preached it, yet they did gainsay the truth, by
the fact that they thought they would "raise affliction" to the Apostle who was preaching the
truth of faith. Hence the Apostle rejoiced not in their contention, but in the fruit that would
result therefrom, namely that Christ would be made known--since evil is sometimes the occasion
of good results.

Reply Obj. 3: Contention is complete and is a mortal sin when, in contending before a judge,
a man gainsays the truth of justice, or in a disputation, intends to impugn the true doctrine.
In this sense Catholics do not contend against heretics, but the reverse. But when, whether
in court or in a disputation, it is incomplete, i.e. in respect of the acrimony of speech,
it is not always a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 4: Contention here denotes an ordinary dispute. For Job had said (13:3): "I will
speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God": yet he intended not to impugn the
truth, but to defend it, and in seeking the truth thus, he had no wish to be inordinate in
mind or in speech.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 38, Art. 2]

Whether Contention Is a Daughter of Vainglory?

Objection 1: It would seem that contention is not a daughter of vainglory. For contention is
akin to zeal, wherefore it is written (1 Cor. 3:3): "Whereas there is among you zeal [Douay:
'envying'] and contention, are you not carnal, and walk according to men?" Now zeal pertains
to envy. Therefore contention arises rather from envy.

Obj. 2: Further, contention is accompanied by raising of the voice. But the voice is raised
on account of anger, as Gregory declares (Moral. xxxi, 14). Therefore contention too arises
from anger.

Obj. 3: Further, among other things knowledge seems to be the matter of pride and vainglory,
according to 1 Cor. 8:1: "Knowledge puffeth up." Now contention is often due to lack of knowledge,
and by knowledge we do not impugn the truth, we know it.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 37, A. 2), discord is a daughter of vainglory, because each
of the disaccording parties clings to his own opinion, rather than acquiesce with the other.
Now it is proper to pride and vainglory to seek one's own glory. And just as people are discordant
when they hold to their own opinion in their hearts, so are they contentious when each defends
his own opinion by words. Consequently contention is reckoned a daughter of vainglory for the
same reason as discord.

Reply Obj. 1: Contention, like discord, is akin to envy in so far as a man severs himself from
the one with whom he is discordant, or with whom he contends, but in so far as a contentious
man holds to something, it is akin to pride and vainglory, because, to wit, he clings to his
own opinion, as stated above (Q. 37, A. 2, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 2: The contention of which we are speaking puts on a loud voice, for the purpose
of impugning the truth, so that it is not the chief part of contention. Hence it does not follow
that contention arises from the same source as the raising of the voice.

Reply Obj. 3: Pride and vainglory are occasioned chiefly by goods even those that are contrary
to them, for instance, when a man is proud of his humility: for when a thing arises in this
way, it does so not directly but accidentally, in which way nothing hinders one contrary from
arising out of another. Hence there is no reason why the per se and direct effects of pride
or vainglory, should not result from the contraries of those things which are the occasion
of pride.

QUESTION 39

OF SCHISM (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the vices contrary to peace, which belong to deeds: such are schism, strife,
sedition, and war. In the first place, then, about schism, there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether schism is a special sin?

(2) Whether it is graver than unbelief?

(3) Of the power exercised by schismatics;

(4) Of the punishment inflicted on them.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 39, Art. 1]

Whether Schism Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that schism is not a special sin. For "schism," as Pope Pelagius
I says (Epist. ad Victor. et Pancrat.), "denotes a division." But every sin causes a division,
according to Isa. 59: "Your sins have divided between you and your God." Therefore schism is
not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, a man is apparently a schismatic if he disobeys the Church. But every sin
makes a man disobey the commandments of the Church, because sin, according to Ambrose (De Parad.
viii) "is disobedience against the heavenly commandments." Therefore every sin is a schism.

Obj. 3: Further, heresy also divides a man from the unity of faith. If, therefore, the word
schism denotes a division, it would seem not to differ, as a special sin, from the sin of unbelief.

On the contrary, Augustine (Contra Faust. xx, 3; Contra Crescon. ii, 4) distinguishes between
schism and heresy, for he says that a "schismatic is one who holds the same faith, and practises
the same worship, as others, and takes pleasure in the mere disunion of the community, whereas
a heretic is one who holds another faith from that of the Catholic Church." Therefore schism
is not a generic sin.

I answer that, As Isidore says (Etym. viii, 3), schism takes its name "from being a scission
of minds," and scission is opposed to unity. Wherefore the sin of schism is one that is directly
and essentially opposed to unity. For in the moral, as in the physical order, the species is
not constituted by that which is accidental. Now, in the moral order, the essential is that
which is intended, and that which results beside the intention, is, as it were, accidental.
Hence the sin of schism is, properly speaking, a special sin, for the reason that the schismatic
intends to sever himself from that unity which is the effect of charity: because charity unites
not only one person to another with the bond of spiritual love, but also the whole Church in
unity of spirit.

Accordingly schismatics properly so called are those who, wilfully and intentionally separate
themselves from the unity of the Church; for this is the chief unity, and the particular unity
of several individuals among themselves is subordinate to the unity of the Church, even as
the mutual adaptation of each member of a natural body is subordinate to the unity of the whole
body. Now the unity of the Church consists in two things; namely, in the mutual connection
or communion of the members of the Church, and again in the subordination of all the members
of the Church to the one head, according to Col. 2:18, 19: "Puffed up by the sense of his flesh,
and not holding the Head, from which the whole body, by joints and bands, being supplied with
nourishment and compacted, groweth unto the increase of God." Now this Head is Christ Himself,
Whose viceregent in the Church is the Sovereign Pontiff. Wherefore schismatics are those who
refuse to submit to the Sovereign Pontiff, and to hold communion with those members of the
Church who acknowledge his supremacy.

Reply Obj. 1: The division between man and God that results from sin is not intended by the
sinner: it happens beside his intention as a result of his turning inordinately to a mutable
good, and so it is not schism properly so called.

Reply Obj. 2: The essence of schism consists in rebelliously disobeying the commandments: and
I say "rebelliously," since a schismatic both obstinately scorns the commandments of the Church,
and refuses to submit to her judgment. But every sinner does not do this, wherefore not every
sin is a schism.

Reply Obj. 3: Heresy and schism are distinguished in respect of those things to which each
is opposed essentially and directly. For heresy is essentially opposed to faith, while schism
is essentially opposed to the unity of ecclesiastical charity. Wherefore just as faith and
charity are different virtues, although whoever lacks faith lacks charity, so too schism and
heresy are different vices, although whoever is a heretic is also a schismatic, but not conversely.
This is what Jerome says in his commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians [*In Ep. ad Tit.
iii, 10]: "I consider the difference between schism and heresy to be that heresy holds false
doctrine while schism severs a man from the Church." Nevertheless, just as the loss of charity
is the road to the loss of faith, according to 1 Tim. 1:6: "From which things," i.e. charity
and the like, "some going astray, are turned aside into vain babbling," so too, schism is the
road to heresy. Wherefore Jerome adds (In Ep. ad Tit. iii, 10) that "at the outset it is possible,
in a certain respect, to find a difference between schism and heresy: yet there is no schism
that does not devise some heresy for itself, that it may appear to have had a reason for separating
from the Church."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 39, Art. 2]

Whether Schism Is a Graver Sin Than Unbelief?

Objection 1: It would seem that schism is a graver sin than unbelief. Now we find the sin of
schism punished more severely than even the sin of unbelief or idolatry: for we read (Ex. 32:28)
that some were slain by the swords of their fellow men on account of idolatry: whereas of the
sin of schism we read (Num. 16:30): "If the Lord do a new thing, and the earth opening her
mouth swallow them down, and all things that belong to them, and they go down alive into hell,
you shall know that they have blasphemed the Lord God." Moreover the ten tribes who were guilty
of schism in revolting from the rule of David were most severely punished (4 Kings 17). Therefore
the sin of schism is graver than the sin of unbelief.

Obj. 2: Further, "The good of the multitude is greater and more godlike than the good of the
individual," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i, 2). Now schism is opposed to the good of
the multitude, namely, ecclesiastical unity, whereas unbelief is contrary to the particular
good of one man, namely the faith of an individual. Therefore it seems that schism is a graver
sin than unbelief.

Obj. 3: Further, a greater good is opposed to a greater evil, according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. viii, 10). Now schism is opposed to charity, which is a greater virtue than faith to
which unbelief is opposed, as shown above (Q. 10, A. 2; Q. 23, A. 6). Therefore schism is a
graver sin than unbelief.

On the contrary, That which results from an addition to something else surpasses that thing
either in good or in evil. Now heresy results from something being added to schism, for it
adds corrupt doctrine, as Jerome declares in the passage quoted above (A. 1, ad 3). Therefore
schism is a less grievous sin than unbelief.

I answer that, The gravity of a sin can be considered in two ways: first, according to the
species of that sin, secondly, according to its circumstances. And since particular circumstances
are infinite in number, so too they can be varied in an infinite number of ways: wherefore
if one were to ask in general which of two sins is the graver, the question must be understood
to refer to the gravity derived from the sin's genus. Now the genus or species of a sin is
taken from its object, as shown above (I-II, Q. 72, A. 1; I-II, Q. 73, A. 3). Wherefore the
sin which is opposed to the greater good is, in respect of its genus, more grievous, for instance
a sin committed against God is graver than a sin committed against one's neighbor.

Now it is evident that unbelief is a sin committed against God Himself, according as He is
Himself the First Truth, on which faith is founded; whereas schism is opposed to ecclesiastical
unity, which is a participated good, and a lesser good than God Himself. Wherefore it is manifest
that the sin of unbelief is generically more grievous than the sin of schism, although it may
happen that a particular schismatic sins more grievously than a particular unbeliever, either
because his contempt is greater, or because his sin is a source of greater danger, or for some
similar reason.

Reply Obj. 1: It had already been declared to that people by the law which they had received
that there was one God, and that no other God was to be worshipped by them; and the same had
been confirmed among them by many kinds of signs. Consequently there was no need for those
who sinned against this faith by falling into idolatry, to be punished in an unwonted manner:
it was enough that they should be punished in the usual way. On the other hand, it was not
so well known among them that Moses was always to be their ruler, and so it behooved those
who rebelled against his authority to be punished in a miraculous and unwonted manner.

We may also reply by saying that the sin of schism was sometimes more severely punished in
that people, because they were inclined to seditions and schisms. Now sometimes a more severe
punishment is inflicted for an habitual sin (as stated above, I-II, Q. 105, A. 2, ad 9), because
punishments are medicines intended to keep man away from sin: so that where there is greater
proneness to sin, a more severe punishment ought to be inflicted. As regards the ten tribes,
they were punished not only for the sin of schism, but also for that of idolatry as stated
in the passage quoted.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as the good of the multitude is greater than the good of a unit in that
multitude, so is it less than the extrinsic good to which that multitude is directed, even
as the good of a rank in the army is less than the good of the commander-in-chief. In like
manner the good of ecclesiastical unity, to which schism is opposed, is less than the good
of Divine truth, to which unbelief is opposed.

Reply Obj. 3: Charity has two objects; one is its principal object and is the Divine goodness,
the other is its secondary object and is our neighbor's good. Now schism and other sins against
our neighbor, are opposed to charity in respect of its secondary good, which is less than the
object of faith, for this is God Himself; and so these sins are less grievous than unbelief.
On the other hand, hatred of God, which is opposed to charity in respect of its principal object,
is not less grievous than unbelief. Nevertheless of all sins committed by man against his neighbor,
the sin of schism would seem to be the greatest, because it is opposed to the spiritual good
of the multitude.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 39, Art. 3]

Whether Schismatics Have Any Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that schismatics have some power. For Augustine says (Contra Donat.
i, 1): "Just as those who come back to the Church after being baptized, are not baptized again,
so those who return after being ordained, are not ordained again." Now Order is a kind of power.
Therefore schismatics have some power since they retain their Orders.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Unico Bapt. [*De Bap. contra Donat. vi, 5]): "One who is
separated can confer a sacrament even as he can have it." But the power of conferring a sacrament
is a very great power. Therefore schismatics who are separated from the Church, have a spiritual
power.

Obj. 3: Further, Pope Urban II [*Council of Piacenza, cap. x; cf. Can. Ordinationes, ix, qu.
1] says: "We command that persons consecrated by bishops who were themselves consecrated according
to the Catholic rite, but have separated themselves by schism from the Roman Church, should
be received mercifully and that their Orders should be acknowledged, when they return to the
unity of the Church, provided they be of commendable life and knowledge." But this would not
be so, unless spiritual power were retained by schismatics. Therefore schismatics have spiritual
power.

On the contrary, Cyprian says in a letter (Ep. lii, quoted vii, qu. 1, can. Novatianus): "He
who observes neither unity of spirit nor the concord of peace, and severs himself from the
bonds of the Church, and from the fellowship of her priests, cannot have episcopal power or honor."

I answer that, Spiritual power is twofold, the one sacramental, the other a power of jurisdiction.
The sacramental power is one that is conferred by some kind of consecration. Now all the consecrations
of the Church are immovable so long as the consecrated thing remains: as appears even in inanimate
things, since an altar, once consecrated, is not consecrated again unless it has been broken
up. Consequently such a power as this remains, as to its essence, in the man who has received
it by consecration, as long as he lives, even if he fall into schism or heresy: and this is
proved from the fact that if he come back to the Church, he is not consecrated anew. Since,
however, the lower power ought not to exercise its act, except in so far as it is moved by
the higher power, as may be seen also in the physical order, it follows that such persons lose
the use of their power, so that it is not lawful for them to use it. Yet if they use it, this
power has its effect in sacramental acts, because therein man acts only as God's instrument,
so that sacramental effects are not precluded on account of any fault whatever in the person
who confers the sacrament.

On the other hand, the power of jurisdiction is that which is conferred by a mere human appointment.
Such a power as this does not adhere to the recipient immovably: so that it does not remain
in heretics and schismatics; and consequently they neither absolve nor excommunicate, nor grant
indulgence, nor do anything of the kind, and if they do, it is invalid.

Accordingly when it is said that such like persons have no spiritual power, it is to be understood
as referring either to the second power, or if it be referred to the first power, not as referring
to the essence of the power, but to its lawful use.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 39, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Right That Schismatics Should Be Punished with Excommunication?

Objection 1: It would seem that schismatics are not rightly punished with excommunication.
For excommunication deprives a man chiefly of a share in the sacraments. But Augustine says
(Contra Donat. vi, 5) that "Baptism can be received from a schismatic." Therefore it seems
that excommunication is not a fitting punishment for schismatics.

Obj. 2: Further, it is the duty of Christ's faithful to lead back those who have gone astray,
wherefore it is written against certain persons (Ezech. 34:4): "That which was driven away
you have not brought again, neither have you sought that which was lost." Now schismatics are
more easily brought back by such as may hold communion with them. Therefore it seems that they
ought not to be excommunicated.

Obj. 3: Further, a double punishment is not inflicted for one and the same sin, according to
Nahum 1:9: "God will not judge the same twice" [*Septuagint version]. Now some receive a temporal
punishment for the sin of schism, according to 23, qu. 5 [*Gratianus, Decretum, P. II, causa
XXIII, qu. 5, can. 44, Quali nos (RP I, 943)], where it is stated: "Both divine and earthly
laws have laid down that those who are severed from the unity of the Church, and disturb her
peace, must be punished by the secular power." Therefore they ought not to be punished with
excommunication.

On the contrary, It is written (Num. 16:26): "Depart from the tents of these wicked men," those,
to wit, who had caused the schism, "and touch nothing of theirs, lest you be involved in their
sins."

I answer that, According to Wis. 11:11, "By what things a man sinneth, by the same also he
should be punished" [Vulg.: 'he is tormented']. Now a schismatic, as shown above (A. 1), commits
a twofold sin: first by separating himself from communion with the members of the Church, and
in this respect the fitting punishment for schismatics is that they be excommunicated. Secondly,
they refuse submission to the head of the Church, wherefore, since they are unwilling to be
controlled by the Church's spiritual power, it is just that they should be compelled by the
secular power.

Reply Obj. 1: It is not lawful to receive Baptism from a schismatic, save in a case of necessity,
since it is better for a man to quit this life, marked with the sign of Christ, no matter from
whom he may receive it, whether from a Jew or a pagan, than deprived of that mark, which is
bestowed in Baptism.

Reply Obj. 2: Excommunication does not forbid the intercourse whereby a person by salutary
admonitions leads back to the unity of the Church those who are separated from her. Indeed
this very separation brings them back somewhat, because through confusion at their separation,
they are sometimes led to do penance.

Reply Obj. 3: The punishments of the present life are medicinal, and therefore when one punishment
does not suffice to compel a man, another is added: just as physicians employ several bod[il]y
medicines when one has no effect. In like manner the Church, when excommunication does not
sufficiently restrain certain men, employs the compulsion of the secular arm. If, however,
one punishment suffices, another should not be employed.

QUESTION 40

OF WAR (In Four Articles)

We must now consider war, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether some kind of war is lawful?

(2) Whether it is lawful for clerics to fight?

(3) Whether it is lawful for belligerents to lay ambushes?

(4) Whether it is lawful to fight on holy days?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 40, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Always Sinful to Wage War?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is always sinful to wage war. Because punishment is not
inflicted except for sin. Now those who wage war are threatened by Our Lord with punishment,
according to Matt. 26:52: "All that take the sword shall perish with the sword." Therefore
all wars are unlawful.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is contrary to a Divine precept is a sin. But war is contrary to
a Divine precept, for it is written (Matt. 5:39): "But I say to you not to resist evil"; and
(Rom. 12:19): "Not revenging yourselves, my dearly beloved, but give place unto wrath." Therefore
war is always sinful.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing, except sin, is contrary to an act of virtue. But war is contrary
to peace. Therefore war is always a sin.

Obj. 4: Further, the exercise of a lawful thing is itself lawful, as is evident in scientific
exercises. But warlike exercises which take place in tournaments are forbidden by the Church,
since those who are slain in these trials are deprived of ecclesiastical burial. Therefore
it seems that war is a sin in itself.

On the contrary, Augustine says in a sermon on the son of the centurion [*Ep. ad Marcel. cxxxviii]:
"If the Christian Religion forbade war altogether, those who sought salutary advice in the
Gospel would rather have been counselled to cast aside their arms, and to give up soldiering
altogether. On the contrary, they were told: 'Do violence to no man . . . and be content with
your pay' [*Luke 3:14]. If he commanded them to be content with their pay, he did not forbid
soldiering."

I answer that, In order for a war to be just, three things are necessary. First, the authority
of the sovereign by whose command the war is to be waged. For it is not the business of a private
individual to declare war, because he can seek for redress of his rights from the tribunal
of his superior. Moreover it is not the business of a private individual to summon together
the people, which has to be done in wartime. And as the care of the common weal is committed
to those who are in authority, it is their business to watch over the common weal of the city,
kingdom or province subject to them. And just as it is lawful for them to have recourse to
the sword in defending that common weal against internal disturbances, when they punish evil-doers,
according to the words of the Apostle (Rom. 13:4): "He beareth not the sword in vain: for he
is God's minister, an avenger to execute wrath upon him that doth evil"; so too, it is their
business to have recourse to the sword of war in defending the common weal against external
enemies. Hence it is said to those who are in authority (Ps. 81:4): "Rescue the poor: and deliver
the needy out of the hand of the sinner"; and for this reason Augustine says (Contra Faust.
xxii, 75): "The natural order conducive to peace among mortals demands that the power to declare
and counsel war should be in the hands of those who hold the supreme authority."

Secondly, a just cause is required, namely that those who are attacked, should be attacked
because they deserve it on account of some fault. Wherefore Augustine says (QQ. in Hept., qu.
x, super Jos.): "A just war is wont to be described as one that avenges wrongs, when a nation
or state has to be punished, for refusing to make amends for the wrongs inflicted by its subjects,
or to restore what it has seized unjustly."

Thirdly, it is necessary that the belligerents should have a rightful intention, so that they
intend the advancement of good, or the avoidance of evil. Hence Augustine says (De Verb. Dom.
[*The words quoted are to be found not in St. Augustine's works, but Can. Apud. Caus. xxiii,
qu. 1]): "True religion looks upon as peaceful those wars that are waged not for motives of
aggrandizement, or cruelty, but with the object of securing peace, of punishing evil-doers,
and of uplifting the good." For it may happen that the war is declared by the legitimate authority,
and for a just cause, and yet be rendered unlawful through a wicked intention. Hence Augustine
says (Contra Faust. xxii, 74): "The passion for inflicting harm, the cruel thirst for vengeance,
an unpacific and relentless spirit, the fever of revolt, the lust of power, and such like things,
all these are rightly condemned in war."

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxii, 70): "To take the sword is to arm oneself
in order to take the life of anyone, without the command or permission of superior or lawful
authority." On the other hand, to have recourse to the sword (as a private person) by the authority
of the sovereign or judge, or (as a public person) through zeal for justice, and by the authority,
so to speak, of God, is not to "take the sword," but to use it as commissioned by another,
wherefore it does not deserve punishment. And yet even those who make sinful use of the sword
are not always slain with the sword, yet they always perish with their own sword, because,
unless they repent, they are punished eternally for their sinful use of the sword.

Reply Obj. 2: Such like precepts, as Augustine observes (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 19), should
always be borne in readiness of mind, so that we be ready to obey them, and, if necessary,
to refrain from resistance or self-defense. Nevertheless it is necessary sometimes for a man
to act otherwise for the common good, or for the good of those with whom he is fighting. Hence
Augustine says (Ep. ad Marcellin. cxxxviii): "Those whom we have to punish with a kindly severity,
it is necessary to handle in many ways against their will. For when we are stripping a man
of the lawlessness of sin, it is good for him to be vanquished, since nothing is more hopeless
than the happiness of sinners, whence arises a guilty impunity, and an evil will, like an internal
enemy."

Reply Obj. 3: Those who wage war justly aim at peace, and so they are not opposed to peace,
except to the evil peace, which Our Lord "came not to send upon earth" (Matt. 10:34). Hence
Augustine says (Ep. ad Bonif. clxxxix): "We do not seek peace in order to be at war, but we
go to war that we may have peace. Be peaceful, therefore, in warring, so that you may vanquish
those whom you war against, and bring them to the prosperity of peace."

Reply Obj. 4: Manly exercises in warlike feats of arms are not all forbidden, but those which
are inordinate and perilous, and end in slaying or plundering. In olden times warlike exercises
presented no such danger, and hence they were called "exercises of arms" or "bloodless wars,"
as Jerome states in an epistle [*Reference incorrect: cf. Veget., De Re Milit. i].

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 40, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful for Clerics and Bishops to Fight?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for clerics and bishops to fight. For, as stated above (A.
1), wars are lawful and just in so far as they protect the poor and the entire common weal
from suffering at the hands of the foe. Now this seems to be above all the duty of prelates,
for Gregory says (Hom. in Ev. xiv): "The wolf comes upon the sheep, when any unjust and rapacious
man oppresses those who are faithful and humble. But he who was thought to be the shepherd,
and was not, leaveth the sheep, and flieth, for he fears lest the wolf hurt him, and dares
not stand up against his injustice." Therefore it is lawful for prelates and clerics to fight.

Obj. 2: Further, Pope Leo IV writes (xxiii, qu. 8, can. Igitur): "As untoward tidings had frequently
come from the Saracen side, some said that the Saracens would come to the port of Rome secretly
and covertly; for which reason we commanded our people to gather together, and ordered them
to go down to the seashore." Therefore it is lawful for bishops to fight.

Obj. 3: Further, apparently, it comes to the same whether a man does a thing himself, or consents
to its being done by another, according to Rom. 1:32: "They who do such things, are worthy
of death, and not only they that do them, but they also that consent to them that do them."
Now those, above all, seem to consent to a thing, who induce others to do it. But it is lawful
for bishops and clerics to induce others to fight: for it is written (xxiii, qu. 8, can. Hortatu)
that Charles went to war with the Lombards at the instance and entreaty of Adrian, bishop of
Rome. Therefore they also are allowed to fight.

Obj. 4: Further, whatever is right and meritorious in itself, is lawful for prelates and clerics.
Now it is sometimes right and meritorious to make war, for it is written (xxiii, qu. 8, can.
Omni timore) that if "a man die for the true faith, or to save his country, or in defense of
Christians, God will give him a heavenly reward." Therefore it is lawful for bishops and clerics
to fight.

On the contrary, It was said to Peter as representing bishops and clerics (Matt. 16:52): "Put
up again thy sword into the scabbard [Vulg.: 'its place'] [*"Scabbard" is the reading in John
18:11]." Therefore it is not lawful for them to fight.

I answer that, Several things are requisite for the good of a human society: and a number of
things are done better and quicker by a number of persons than by one, as the Philosopher observes
(Polit. i, 1), while certain occupations are so inconsistent with one another, that they cannot
be fittingly exercised at the same time; wherefore those who are deputed to important duties
are forbidden to occupy themselves with things of small importance. Thus according to human
laws, soldiers who are deputed to warlike pursuits are forbidden to engage in commerce [*Cod.
xii, 35, De Re Milit.].

Now warlike pursuits are altogether incompatible with the duties of a bishop and a cleric,
for two reasons. The first reason is a general one, because, to wit, warlike pursuits are full
of unrest, so that they hinder the mind very much from the contemplation of Divine things,
the praise of God, and prayers for the people, which belong to the duties of a cleric. Wherefore
just as commercial enterprises are forbidden to clerics, because they unsettle the mind too
much, so too are warlike pursuits, according to 2 Tim. 2:4: "No man being a soldier to God,
entangleth himself with secular business." The second reason is a special one, because, to
wit, all the clerical Orders are directed to the ministry of the altar, on which the Passion
of Christ is represented sacramentally, according to 1 Cor. 11:26: "As often as you shall eat
this bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show the death of the Lord, until He come." Wherefore
it is unbecoming for them to slay or shed blood, and it is more fitting that they should be
ready to shed their own blood for Christ, so as to imitate in deed what they portray in their
ministry. For this reason it has been decreed that those who shed blood, even without sin,
become irregular. Now no man who has a certain duty to perform, can lawfully do that which
renders him unfit for that duty. Wherefore it is altogether unlawful for clerics to fight,
because war is directed to the shedding of blood.

Reply Obj. 1: Prelates ought to withstand not only the wolf who brings spiritual death upon
the flock, but also the pillager and the oppressor who work bodily harm; not, however, by having
recourse themselves to material arms, but by means of spiritual weapons, according to the saying
of the Apostle (2 Cor. 10:4): "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God." Such are salutary warnings, devout prayers, and, for those who are obstinate, the sentence
of excommunication.

Reply Obj. 2: Prelates and clerics may, by the authority of their superiors, take part in wars,
not indeed by taking up arms themselves, but by affording spiritual help to those who fight
justly, by exhorting and absolving them, and by other like spiritual helps. Thus in the Old
Testament (Joshua 6:4) the priests were commanded to sound the sacred trumpets in the battle.
It was for this purpose that bishops or clerics were first allowed to go to the front: and
it is an abuse of this permission, if any of them take up arms themselves.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 23, A. 4, ad 2) every power, art or virtue that regards the
end, has to dispose that which is directed to the end. Now, among the faithful, carnal wars
should be considered as having for their end the Divine spiritual good to which clerics are
deputed. Wherefore it is the duty of clerics to dispose and counsel other men to engage in
just wars. For they are forbidden to take up arms, not as though it were a sin, but because
such an occupation is unbecoming their personality.

Reply Obj. 4: Although it is meritorious to wage a just war, nevertheless it is rendered unlawful
for clerics, by reason of their being deputed to works more meritorious still. Thus the marriage
act may be meritorious; and yet it becomes reprehensible in those who have vowed virginity,
because they are bound to a yet greater good.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q., 40, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Lawful to Lay Ambushes in War?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is unlawful to lay ambushes in war. For it is written (Deut.
16:20): "Thou shalt follow justly after that which is just." But ambushes, since they are a
kind of deception, seem to pertain to injustice. Therefore it is unlawful to lay ambushes even
in a just war.

Obj. 2: Further, ambushes and deception seem to be opposed to faithfulness even as lies are.
But since we are bound to keep faith with all men, it is wrong to lie to anyone, as Augustine
states (Contra Mend. xv). Therefore, as one is bound to keep faith with one's enemy, as Augustine
states (Ep. ad Bonif. clxxxix), it seems that it is unlawful to lay ambushes for one's enemies.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Matt. 7:12): "Whatsoever you would that men should do to you,
do you also to them": and we ought to observe this in all our dealings with our neighbor. Now
our enemy is our neighbor. Therefore, since no man wishes ambushes or deceptions to be prepared
for himself, it seems that no one ought to carry on war by laying ambushes.

On the contrary, Augustine says (QQ. in Hept. qu. x super Jos): "Provided the war be just,
it is no concern of justice whether it be carried on openly or by ambushes": and he proves
this by the authority of the Lord, Who commanded Joshua to lay ambushes for the city of Hai
(Joshua 8:2).

I answer that, The object of laying ambushes is in order to deceive the enemy. Now a man may
be deceived by another's word or deed in two ways. First, through being told something false,
or through the breaking of a promise, and this is always unlawful. No one ought to deceive
the enemy in this way, for there are certain "rights of war and covenants, which ought to be
observed even among enemies," as Ambrose states (De Officiis i).

Secondly, a man may be deceived by what we say or do, because we do not declare our purpose
or meaning to him. Now we are not always bound to do this, since even in the Sacred Doctrine
many things have to be concealed, especially from unbelievers, lest they deride it, according
to Matt. 7:6: "Give not that which is holy, to dogs." Wherefore much more ought the plan of
campaign to be hidden from the enemy. For this reason among other things that a soldier has
to learn is the art of concealing his purpose lest it come to the enemy's knowledge, as stated
in the Book on Strategy [*Stratagematum i, 1] by Frontinus. Such like concealment is what is
meant by an ambush which may be lawfully employed in a just war.

Nor can these ambushes be properly called deceptions, nor are they contrary to justice or to
a well-ordered will. For a man would have an inordinate will if he were unwilling that others
should hide anything from him.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 40, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Lawful to Fight on Holy Days?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to fight on holy days. For holy days are instituted that
we may give our time to the things of God. Hence they are included in the keeping of the Sabbath
prescribed Ex. 20:8: for "sabbath" is interpreted "rest." But wars are full of unrest. Therefore
by no means is it lawful to fight on holy days.

Obj. 2: Further, certain persons are reproached (Isa. 58:3) because on fast-days they exacted
what was owing to them, were guilty of strife, and of smiting with the fist. Much more, therefore,
is it unlawful to fight on holy days.

Obj. 3: Further, no ill deed should be done to avoid temporal harm. But fighting on a holy
day seems in itself to be an ill deed. Therefore no one should fight on a holy day even through
the need of avoiding temporal harm.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Mac. 2:41): The Jews rightly determined . . . saying: "Whosoever
shall come up against us to fight on the Sabbath-day, we will fight against him."

I answer that, The observance of holy days is no hindrance to those things which are ordained
to man's safety, even that of his body. Hence Our Lord argued with the Jews, saying (John 7:23):
"Are you angry at Me because I have healed the whole man on the Sabbath-day?" Hence physicians
may lawfully attend to their patients on holy days. Now there is much more reason for safeguarding
the common weal (whereby many are saved from being slain, and innumerable evils both temporal
and spiritual prevented), than the bodily safety of an individual. Therefore, for the purpose
of safeguarding the common weal of the faithful, it is lawful to carry on a war on holy days,
provided there be need for doing so: because it would be to tempt God, if notwithstanding such
a need, one were to choose to refrain from fighting.

However, as soon as the need ceases, it is no longer lawful to fight on a holy day, for the
reasons given: wherefore this suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

QUESTION 41

OF STRIFE (In Two Articles) [*Strife here denotes fighting between individuals]

We must now consider strife, under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether strife is a sin?

(2) Whether it is a daughter of anger?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 41, Art. 1]

Whether Strife Is Always a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that strife is not always a sin. For strife seems a kind of contention:
hence Isidore says (Etym. x) that the word "rixosus [quarrelsome] is derived from the snarling
[rictu] of a dog, because the quarrelsome man is ever ready to contradict; he delights in brawling,
and provokes contention." Now contention is not always a sin. Neither, therefore, is strife.

Obj. 2: Further, it is related (Gen. 26:21) that the servants of Isaac "digged" another well,
"and for that they quarrelled likewise." Now it is not credible that the household of Isaac
quarrelled publicly, without being reproved by him, supposing it were a sin. Therefore strife
is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, strife seems to be a war between individuals. But war is not always sinful.
Therefore strife is not always a sin.

On the contrary, Strifes [*The Douay version has 'quarrels'] are reckoned among the works of
the flesh (Gal. 5:20), and "they who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God." Therefore
strifes are not only sinful, but they are even mortal sins.

I answer that, While contention implies a contradiction of words, strife denotes a certain
contradiction of deeds. Wherefore a gloss on Gal. 5:20 says that "strifes are when persons
strike one another through anger." Hence strife is a kind of private war, because it takes
place between private persons, being declared not by public authority, but rather by an inordinate
will. Therefore strife is always sinful. In fact it is a mortal sin in the man who attacks
another unjustly, for it is not without mortal sin that one inflicts harm on another even if
the deed be done by the hands. But in him who defends himself, it may be without sin, or it
may sometimes involve a venial sin, or sometimes a mortal sin; and this depends on his intention
and on his manner of defending himself. For if his sole intention be to withstand the injury
done to him, and he defend himself with due moderation, it is no sin, and one cannot say properly
that there is strife on his part. But if, on the other hand, his self-defense be inspired by
vengeance and hatred, it is always a sin. It is a venial sin, if a slight movement of hatred
or vengeance obtrude itself, or if he does not much exceed moderation in defending himself:
but it is a mortal sin if he makes for his assailant with the fixed intention of killing him,
or inflicting grievous harm on him.

Reply Obj. 1: Strife is not just the same as contention: and there are three things in the
passage quoted from Isidore, which express the inordinate nature of strife. First, the quarrelsome
man is always ready to fight, and this is conveyed by the words, "ever ready to contradict,"
that is to say, whether the other man says or does well or ill. Secondly, he delights in quarrelling
itself, and so the passage proceeds, "and delights in brawling." Thirdly, "he" provokes others
to quarrel, wherefore it goes on, "and provokes contention."

Reply Obj. 1: The sense of the text is not that the servants of Isaac quarrelled, but that
the inhabitants of that country quarrelled with them: wherefore these sinned, and not the servants
of Isaac, who bore the calumny [*Cf. Gen. 26:20].

Reply Obj. 3: In order for a war to be just it must be declared by authority of the governing
power, as stated above (Q. 40, A. 1); whereas strife proceeds from a private feeling of anger
or hatred. For if the servants of a sovereign or judge, in virtue of their public authority,
attack certain men and these defend themselves, it is not the former who are said to be guilty
of strife, but those who resist the public authority. Hence it is not the assailants in this
case who are guilty of strife and commit sin, but those who defend themselves inordinately.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 41, Art. 2]

Whether Strife Is a Daughter of Anger?

Objection 1: It would seem that strife is not a daughter of anger. For it is written (James
4:1): "Whence are wars and contentions? Are they not . . . from your concupiscences, which
war in your members?" But anger is not in the concupiscible faculty. Therefore strife is a
daughter, not of anger, but of concupiscence.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 28:25): "He that boasteth and puffeth up himself, stirreth
up quarrels." Now strife is apparently the same as quarrel. Therefore it seems that strife
is a daughter of pride or vainglory which makes a man boast and puff himself up.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 18:6): "The lips of a fool intermeddle with strife."
Now folly differs from anger, for it is opposed, not to meekness, but to wisdom or prudence.
Therefore strife is not a daughter of anger.

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (Prov. 10:12): "Hatred stirreth up strifes." But hatred arises
from envy, according to Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 17). Therefore strife is not a daughter of anger,
but of envy.

Obj. 5: Further, it is written (Prov. 17:19): "He that studieth discords, soweth [Vulg.: 'loveth']
quarrels." But discord is a daughter of vainglory, as stated above (Q. 37, A. 2). Therefore
strife is also.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 17) that "anger gives rise to strife"; and it is
written (Prov. 15:18; 29:22): "A passionate man stirreth up strifes."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), strife denotes an antagonism extending to deeds, when
one man designs to harm another. Now there are two ways in which one man may intend to harm
another. In one way it is as though he intended absolutely the other's hurt, which in this
case is the outcome of hatred, for the intention of hatred is directed to the hurt of one's
enemy either openly or secretly. In another way a man intends to hurt another who knows and
withstands his intention. This is what we mean by strife, and belongs properly to anger which
is the desire of vengeance: for the angry man is not content to hurt secretly the object of
his anger, he even wishes him to feel the hurt and know that what he suffers is in revenge
for what he has done, as may be seen from what has been said above about the passion of anger
(I-II, Q. 46, A. 6, ad 2). Therefore, properly speaking, strife arises from anger.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (I-II, Q. 25, AA. 1, 2), all the irascible passions arise from
those of the concupiscible faculty, so that whatever is the immediate outcome of anger, arises
also from concupiscence as from its first root.

Reply Obj. 2: Boasting and puffing up of self which are the result of anger or vainglory, are
not the direct but the occasional cause of quarrels or strife, because, when a man resents
another being preferred to him, his anger is aroused, and then his anger results in quarrel
and strife.

Reply Obj. 3: Anger, as stated above (I-II, Q. 48, A. 3) hinders the judgment of the reason,
so that it bears a likeness to folly. Hence they have a common effect, since it is due to a
defect in the reason that a man designs to hurt another inordinately.

Reply Obj. 4: Although strife sometimes arises from hatred, it is not the proper effect thereof,
because when one man hates another it is beside his intention to hurt him in a quarrelsome
and open manner, since sometimes he seeks to hurt him secretly. When, however, he sees himself
prevailing, he endeavors to harm him with strife and quarrel. But to hurt a man in a quarrel
is the proper effect of anger, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 5: Strifes give rise to hatred and discord in the hearts of those who are guilty
of strife, and so he that "studies," i.e., intends to sow discord among others, causes them
to quarrel among themselves. Even so any sin may command the act of another sin, by directing
it to its own end. This does not, however, prove that strife is the daughter of vainglory properly
and directly.

QUESTION 42

OF SEDITION (In Two Articles)

We must now consider sedition, under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is a special sin?

(2) Whether it is a mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 42, Art. 1]

Whether Sedition Is a Special Sin Distinct from Other Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that sedition is not a special sin distinct from other sins. For,
according to Isidore (Etym. x), "a seditious man is one who sows dissent among minds, and begets
discord." Now, by provoking the commission of a sin, a man sins by no other kind of sin than
that which he provoked. Therefore it seems that sedition is not a special sin distinct from
discord.

Obj. 2: Further, sedition denotes a kind of division. Now schism takes its name from scission,
as stated above (Q. 39, A. 1). Therefore, seemingly, the sin of sedition is not distinct from
that of schism.

Obj. 3: Further, every special sin that is distinct from other sins, is either a capital vice,
or arises from some capital vice. Now sedition is reckoned neither among the capital vices,
nor among those vices which arise from them, as appears from Moral. xxxi, 45, where both kinds
of vice are enumerated. Therefore sedition is not a special sin, distinct from other sins.

On the contrary, Seditions are mentioned as distinct from other sins (2 Cor. 12:20).

I answer that, Sedition is a special sin, having something in common with war and strife, and
differing somewhat from them. It has something in common with them, in so far as it implies
a certain antagonism, and it differs from them in two points. First, because war and strife
denote actual aggression on either side, whereas sedition may be said to denote either actual
aggression, or the preparation for such aggression. Hence a gloss on 2 Cor. 12:20 says that
"seditions are tumults tending to fight," when, to wit, a number of people make preparations
with the intention of fighting. Secondly, they differ in that war is, properly speaking, carried
on against external foes, being as it were between one people and another, whereas strife is
between one individual and another, or between few people on one side and few on the other
side, while sedition, in its proper sense, is between mutually dissentient parts of one people,
as when one part of the state rises in tumult against another part. Wherefore, since sedition
is opposed to a special kind of good, namely the unity and peace of a people, it is a special
kind of sin.

Reply Obj. 1: A seditious man is one who incites others to sedition, and since sedition denotes
a kind of discord, it follows that a seditious man is one who creates discord, not of any kind,
but between the parts of a multitude. And the sin of sedition is not only in him who sows discord,
but also in those who dissent from one another inordinately.

Reply Obj. 2: Sedition differs from schism in two respects. First, because schism is opposed
to the spiritual unity of the multitude, viz. ecclesiastical unity, whereas sedition is contrary
to the temporal or secular unity of the multitude, for instance of a city or kingdom. Secondly,
schism does not imply any preparation for a material fight as sedition does, but only for a
spiritual dissent.

Reply Obj. 3: Sedition, like schism, is contained under discord, since each is a kind of discord,
not between individuals, but between the parts of a multitude.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 42, Art. 2]

Whether Sedition Is Always a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sedition is not always a mortal sin. For sedition denotes "a
tumult tending to fight," according to the gloss quoted above (A. 1). But fighting is not always
a mortal sin, indeed it is sometimes just and lawful, as stated above (Q. 40, A. 1). Much more,
therefore, can sedition be without a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, sedition is a kind of discord, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3). Now discord can
be without mortal sin, and sometimes without any sin at all. Therefore sedition can be also.

Obj. 3: Further, it is praiseworthy to deliver a multitude from a tyrannical rule. Yet this
cannot easily be done without some dissension in the multitude, if one part of the multitude
seeks to retain the tyrant, while the rest strive to dethrone him. Therefore there can be sedition
without mortal sin.

On the contrary, The Apostle forbids seditions together with other things that are mortal sins
(2 Cor. 12:20).

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1, ad 2), sedition is contrary to the unity of the multitude,
viz. the people of a city or kingdom. Now Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ii, 21) that "wise men
understand the word people to designate not any crowd of persons, but the assembly of those
who are united together in fellowship recognized by law and for the common good." Wherefore
it is evident that the unity to which sedition is opposed is the unity of law and common good:
whence it follows manifestly that sedition is opposed to justice and the common good. Therefore
by reason of its genus it is a mortal sin, and its gravity will be all the greater according
as the common good which it assails surpasses the private good which is assailed by strife.

Accordingly the sin of sedition is first and chiefly in its authors, who sin most grievously;
and secondly it is in those who are led by them to disturb the common good. Those, however,
who defend the common good, and withstand the seditious party, are not themselves seditious,
even as neither is a man to be called quarrelsome because he defends himself, as stated above
(Q. 41, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: It is lawful to fight, provided it be for the common good, as stated above (Q.
40, A. 1). But sedition runs counter to the common good of the multitude, so that it is always
a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Discord from what is not evidently good, may be without sin, but discord from
what is evidently good, cannot be without sin: and sedition is discord of this kind, for it
is contrary to the unity of the multitude, which is a manifest good.

Reply Obj. 3: A tyrannical government is not just, because it is directed, not to the common
good, but to the private good of the ruler, as the Philosopher states (Polit. iii, 5; Ethic.
viii, 10). Consequently there is no sedition in disturbing a government of this kind, unless
indeed the tyrant's rule be disturbed so inordinately, that his subjects suffer greater harm
from the consequent disturbance than from the tyrant's government. Indeed it is the tyrant
rather that is guilty of sedition, since he encourages discord and sedition among his subjects,
that he may lord over them more securely; for this is tyranny, being conducive to the private
good of the ruler, and to the injury of the multitude.

QUESTION 43

OF SCANDAL (In Eight Articles)

It remains for us to consider the vices which are opposed to beneficence, among which some
come under the head of injustice, those, to wit, whereby one harms one's neighbor unjustly.
But scandal seems to be specially opposed to charity. Accordingly we must here consider scandal,
under which head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) What is scandal?

(2) Whether scandal is a sin?

(3) Whether it is a special sin?

(4) Whether it is a mortal sin?

(5) Whether the perfect can be scandalized?

(6) Whether they can give scandal?

(7) Whether spiritual goods are to be foregone on account of scandal?

(8) Whether temporal things are to be foregone on account of scandal?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 1]

Whether Scandal Is Fittingly Defined As Being Something Less Rightly Said or Done That Occasions
Spiritual Downfall?

Objection 1: It would seem that scandal is unfittingly defined as "something less rightly said
or done that occasions spiritual downfall." For scandal is a sin as we shall state further
on (A. 2). Now, according to Augustine (Contra Faust. xxii, 27), a sin is a "word, deed, or
desire contrary to the law of God." Therefore the definition given above is insufficient, since
it omits "thought" or "desire."

Obj. 2: Further, since among virtuous or right acts one is more virtuous or more right than
another, that one alone which has perfect rectitude would not seem to be a "less" right one.
If, therefore, scandal is something "less" rightly said or done, it follows that every virtuous
act except the best of all, is a scandal.

Obj. 3: Further, an occasion is an accidental cause. But nothing accidental should enter a
definition, because it does not specify the thing defined. Therefore it is unfitting, in defining
scandal, to say that it is an "occasion."

Obj. 4: Further, whatever a man does may be the occasion of another's spiritual downfall, because
accidental causes are indeterminate. Consequently, if scandal is something that occasions another's
spiritual downfall, any deed or word can be a scandal: and this seems unreasonable.

Obj. 5: Further, a man occasions his neighbor's spiritual downfall when he offends or weakens
him. Now scandal is condivided with offense and weakness, for the Apostle says (Rom. 14:21):
"It is good not to eat flesh, and not to drink wine, nor anything whereby thy brother is offended
or scandalized, or weakened." Therefore the aforesaid definition of scandal is unfitting.

On the contrary, Jerome in expounding Matt. 15:12, "Dost thou know that the Pharisees, when
they heard this word," etc. says: "When we read 'Whosoever shall scandalize,' the sense is
'Whosoever shall, by deed or word, occasion another's spiritual downfall.'"

I answer that, As Jerome observes the Greek skandalon may be rendered offense, downfall, or
a stumbling against something. For when a body, while moving along a path, meets with an obstacle,
it may happen to stumble against it, and be disposed to fall down: such an obstacle is a skandalon.

In like manner, while going along the spiritual way, a man may be disposed to a spiritual downfall
by another's word or deed, in so far, to wit, as one man by his injunction, inducement or example,
moves another to sin; and this is scandal properly so called.

Now nothing by its very nature disposes a man to spiritual downfall, except that which has
some lack of rectitude, since what is perfectly right, secures man against a fall, instead
of conducing to his downfall. Scandal is, therefore, fittingly defined as "something less rightly
done or said, that occasions another's spiritual downfall."

Reply Obj. 1: The thought or desire of evil lies hidden in the heart, wherefore it does not
suggest itself to another man as an obstacle conducing to his spiritual downfall: hence it
cannot come under the head of scandal.

Reply Obj. 2: A thing is said to be less right, not because something else surpasses it in
rectitude, but because it has some lack of rectitude, either through being evil in itself,
such as sin, or through having an appearance of evil. Thus, for instance, if a man were to
"sit at meat in the idol's temple" (1 Cor. 8:10), though this is not sinful in itself, provided
it be done with no evil intention, yet, since it has a certain appearance of evil, and a semblance
of worshipping the idol, it might occasion another man's spiritual downfall. Hence the Apostle
says (1 Thess. 5:22): "From all appearance of evil refrain yourselves." Scandal is therefore
fittingly described as something done "less rightly," so as to comprise both whatever is sinful
in itself, and all that has an appearance of evil.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (I-II, Q. 75, AA. 2, 3; I-II, Q. 80, A. 1), nothing can be a
sufficient cause of a man's spiritual downfall, which is sin, save his own will. Wherefore
another man's words or deeds can only be an imperfect cause, conducing somewhat to that downfall.
For this reason scandal is said to afford not a cause, but an occasion, which is an imperfect,
and not always an accidental cause. Nor is there any reason why certain definitions should
not make mention of things that are accidental, since what is accidental to one, may be proper
to something else: thus the accidental cause is mentioned in the definition of chance (Phys.
ii, 5).

Reply Obj. 4: Another's words or deed may be the cause of another's sin in two ways, directly
and accidentally. Directly, when a man either intends, by his evil word or deed, to lead another
man into sin, or, if he does not so intend, when his deed is of such a nature as to lead another
into sin: for instance, when a man publicly commits a sin or does something that has an appearance
of sin. In this case he that does such an act does, properly speaking, afford an occasion of
another's spiritual downfall, wherefore his act is called "active scandal." One man's word
or deed is the accidental cause of another's sin, when he neither intends to lead him into
sin, nor does what is of a nature to lead him into sin, and yet this other one, through being
ill-disposed, is led into sin, for instance, into envy of another's good, and then he who does
this righteous act, does not, so far as he is concerned, afford an occasion of the other's
downfall, but it is this other one who takes the occasion according to Rom. 7:8: "Sin taking
occasion by the commandment wrought in me all manner of concupiscence." Wherefore this is "passive,"
without "active scandal," since he that acts rightly does not, for his own part, afford the
occasion of the other's downfall. Sometimes therefore it happens that there is active scandal
in the one together with passive scandal in the other, as when one commits a sin being induced
thereto by another; sometimes there is active without passive scandal, for instance when one,
by word or deed, provokes another to sin, and the latter does not consent; and sometimes there
is passive without active scandal, as we have already said.

Reply Obj. 5: "Weakness" denotes proneness to scandal; while "offense" signifies resentment
against the person who commits a sin, which resentment may be sometimes without spiritual downfall;
and "scandal" is the stumbling that results in downfall.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 2]

Whether Scandal Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that scandal is not a sin. For sins do not occur from necessity,
since all sin is voluntary, as stated above (I-II, Q. 74, AA. 1, 2). Now it is written (Matt.
18:7): "It must needs be that scandals come." Therefore scandal is not a sin.

Obj. But scandal may come from a sense of dutifulness, for Our Lord said to Peter (Matt. 16:23):
"Thou art a scandal unto Me," in reference to which words Jerome says that "the Apostle's error
was due to his sense of dutifulness, and such is never inspired by the devil." Therefore scandal
is not always a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, scandal denotes a stumbling. But he that stumbles does not always fall. Therefore
scandal, which is a spiritual fall, can be without sin.

On the contrary, Scandal is "something less rightly said or done." Now anything that lacks
rectitude is a sin. Therefore scandal is always with sin.

I answer that, As already said (A. 1, ad 4), scandal is of two kinds, passive scandal in the
person scandalized, and active scandal in the person who gives scandal, and so occasions a
spiritual downfall. Accordingly passive scandal is always a sin in the person scandalized;
for he is not scandalized except in so far as he succumbs to a spiritual downfall, and that
is a sin.

Yet there can be passive scandal, without sin on the part of the person whose action has occasioned
the scandal, as for instance, when a person is scandalized at another's good deed. In like
manner active scandal is always a sin in the person who gives scandal, since either what he
does is a sin, or if it only have the appearance of sin, it should always be left undone out
of that love for our neighbor which binds each one to be solicitous for his neighbor's spiritual
welfare; so that if he persist in doing it he acts against charity.

Yet there can be active scandal without sin on the part of the person scandalized, as stated
above (A. 1, ad 4).

Reply Obj. 1: These words, "It must needs be that scandals come," are to be understood to convey,
not the absolute, but the conditional necessity of scandal; in which sense it is necessary
that whatever God foresees or foretells must happen, provided it be taken conjointly with such
foreknowledge, as explained in the First Part (Q. 14, A. 13, ad 3; Q. 23, A. 6, ad 2).

Or we may say that the necessity of scandals occurring is a necessity of end, because they
are useful in order that "they . . . who are reproved may be made manifest" (1 Cor. 11:19).

Or scandals must needs occur, seeing the condition of man who fails to shield himself from
sin. Thus a physician on seeing a man partaking of unsuitable food might say that such a man
must needs injure his health, which is to be understood on the condition that he does not change
his diet. In like manner it must needs be that scandals come, so long as men fail to change
their evil mode of living.

Reply Obj. 2: In that passage scandal denotes any kind of hindrance: for Peter wished to hinder
Our Lord's Passion out of a sense of dutifulness towards Christ.

Reply Obj. 3: No man stumbles spiritually, without being kept back somewhat from advancing
in God's way, and that is at least a venial sin.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 3]

Whether Scandal Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that scandal is not a special sin. For scandal is "something said
or done less rightly." But this applies to every kind of sin. Therefore every sin is a scandal,
and consequently, scandal is not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, every special kind of sin, or every special kind of injustice, may be found
separately from other kinds, as stated in Ethic. v, 3, 5. But scandal is not to be found separately
from other sins. Therefore it is not a special kind of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every special sin is constituted by something which specifies the moral act.
But the notion of scandal consists in its being something done in the presence of others: and
the fact of a sin being committed openly, though it is an aggravating circumstance, does not
seem to constitute the species of a sin. Therefore scandal is not a special sin.

On the contrary, A special virtue has a special sin opposed to it. But scandal is opposed to
a special virtue, viz. charity. For it is written (Rom. 14:15): "If, because of thy meat, thy
brother be grieved, thou walkest not now according to charity." Therefore scandal is a special sin.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), scandal is twofold, active and passive. Passive scandal
cannot be a special sin, because through another's word or deed a man may fall into any kind
of sin: and the fact that a man takes occasion to sin from another's word or deed, does not
constitute a special kind of sin, because it does not imply a special deformity in opposition
to a special virtue.

On the other hand, active scandal may be understood in two ways, directly and accidentally.
The scandal is accidental when it is beside the agent's intention, as when a man does not intend,
by his inordinate deed or word, to occasion another's spiritual downfall, but merely to satisfy
his own will. In such a case even active scandal is not a special sin, because a species is
not constituted by that which is accidental.

Active scandal is direct when a man intends, by his inordinate word or deed, to draw another
into sin, and then it becomes a special kind of sin on account of the intention of a special
kind of end, because moral actions take their species from their end, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 1, A. 3; Q. 18, AA. 4, 6). Hence, just as theft and murder are special kinds of sin, on
account of their denoting the intention of doing a special injury to one's neighbor: so too,
scandal is a special kind of sin, because thereby a man intends a special harm to his neighbor,
and it is directly opposed to fraternal correction, whereby a man intends the removal of a
special kind of harm.

Reply Obj. 1: Any sin may be the matter of active scandal, but it may derive the formal aspect
of a special sin from the end intended, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Active scandal can be found separate from other sins, as when a man scandalizes
his neighbor by a deed which is not a sin in itself, but has an appearance of evil.

Reply Obj. 3: Scandal does not derive the species of a special sin from the circumstance in
question, but from the intention of the end, as stated above.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 4]

Whether Scandal Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that scandal is a mortal sin. For every sin that is contrary to
charity is a mortal sin, as stated above (Q. 24, A. 12; Q. 35, A. 3). But scandal is contrary
to charity, as stated above (AA. 2, 3). Therefore scandal is a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no sin, save mortal sin, deserves the punishment of eternal damnation. But
scandal deserves the punishment of eternal damnation, according to Matt. 18:6: "He that shall
scandalize one of these little ones, that believe in Me, it were better for him that a mill-stone
should be hanged about his neck, and that he should be drowned in the depth of the sea." For,
as Jerome says on this passage, "it is much better to receive a brief punishment for a fault,
than to await everlasting torments." Therefore scandal is a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every sin committed against God is a mortal sin, because mortal sin alone
turns man away from God. Now scandal is a sin against God, for the Apostle says (1 Cor. 8:12):
"When you wound the weak conscience of the brethren [*Vulg.: 'When you sin thus against the
brethren and wound their weak conscience'], you sin against Christ." Therefore scandal is always
a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It may be a venial sin to lead a person into venial sin: and yet this would
be to give scandal. Therefore scandal may be a venial sin.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), scandal denotes a stumbling whereby a person is disposed
to a spiritual downfall. Consequently passive scandal may sometimes be a venial sin, when it
consists in a stumbling and nothing more; for instance, when a person is disturbed by a movement
of venial sin occasioned by another's inordinate word or deed: while sometimes it is a mortal
sin, when the stumbling results in a downfall, for instance, when a person goes so far as to
commit a mortal sin through another's inordinate word or deed.

Active scandal, if it be accidental, may sometimes be a venial sin; for instance, when, through
a slight indiscretion, a person either commits a venial sin, or does something that is not
a sin in itself, but has some appearance of evil. On the other hand, it is sometimes a mortal
sin, either because a person commits a mortal sin, or because he has such contempt for his
neighbor's spiritual welfare that he declines, for the sake of procuring it, to forego doing
what he wishes to do. But in the case of active direct scandal, as when a person intends to
lead another into sin, if he intends to lead him into mortal sin, his own sin will be mortal;
and in like manner if he intends by committing a mortal sin himself, to lead another into venial
sin; whereas if he intends, by committing a venial sin, to lead another into venial sin, there
will be a venial sin of scandal.

And this suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 5]

Whether Passive Scandal May Happen Even to the Perfect?

Objection 1: It would seem that passive scandal may happen even to the perfect. For Christ
was supremely perfect: and yet He said to Peter (Matt. 16:23): "Thou art a scandal to Me."
Much more therefore can other perfect men suffer scandal.

Obj. 2: Further, scandal denotes an obstacle which is put in a person's spiritual way. Now
even perfect men can be hindered in their progress along the spiritual way, according to 1
Thess. 2:18: "We would have come to you, I Paul indeed, once and again; but Satan hath hindered
us." Therefore even perfect men can suffer scandal.

Obj. 3: Further, even perfect men are liable to venial sins, according to 1 John 1:8: "If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves." Now passive scandal is not always a mortal
sin, but is sometimes venial, as stated above (A. 4). Therefore passive scandal may be found
in perfect men.

On the contrary, Jerome, in commenting on Matt. 18:6, "He that shall scandalize one of these
little ones," says: "Observe that it is the little one that is scandalized, for the elders
do not take scandal."

I answer that, Passive scandal implies that the mind of the person who takes scandal is unsettled
in its adherence to good. Now no man can be unsettled, who adheres firmly to something immovable.
The elders, i.e. the perfect, adhere to God alone, Whose goodness is unchangeable, for though
they adhere to their superiors, they do so only in so far as these adhere to Christ, according
to 1 Cor. 4:16: "Be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ." Wherefore, however much others
may appear to them to conduct themselves ill in word or deed, they themselves do not stray
from their righteousness, according to Ps. 124:1: "They that trust in the Lord shall be as
Mount Sion: he shall not be moved for ever that dwelleth in Jerusalem." Therefore scandal is
not found in those who adhere to God perfectly by love, according to Ps. 118:165: "Much peace
have they that love Thy law, and to them there is no stumbling-block (scandalum)."

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (A. 2, ad 2), in this passage, scandal is used in a broad sense,
to denote any kind of hindrance. Hence Our Lord said to Peter: "Thou art a scandal to Me,"
because he was endeavoring to weaken Our Lord's purpose of undergoing His Passion.

Reply Obj. 2: Perfect men may be hindered in the performance of external actions. But they
are not hindered by the words or deeds of others, from tending to God in the internal acts
of the will, according to Rom. 8:38, 39: "Neither death, nor life . . . shall be able to separate
us from the love of God."

Reply Obj. 3: Perfect men sometimes fall into venial sins through the weakness of the flesh;
but they are not scandalized (taking scandal in its true sense), by the words or deeds of others,
although there can be an approach to scandal in them, according to Ps. 72:2: "My feet were
almost moved."

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 6]

Whether Active Scandal Can Be Found in the Perfect?

Objection 1: It would seem that active scandal can be found in the perfect. For passion is
the effect of action. Therefore active scandal can be found in the perfect.

Obj. 2: Further, Peter, after receiving the Holy Ghost, was in the state of the perfect. Yet
afterwards he scandalized the gentiles: for it is written (Gal. 2:14): "When I saw that they
walked not uprightly unto the truth of the Gospel, I said to Cephas," i.e. Peter, "before them
all: If thou being a Jew, livest after the manner of the gentiles, and not as the Jews do,
how dost thou compel the gentiles to live as do the Jews?" Therefore active scandal can be
in the perfect.

Obj. 3: Further, active scandal is sometimes a venial sin. But venial sins may be in perfect
men. Therefore active scandal may be in perfect men.

On the contrary, Active scandal is more opposed to perfection, than passive scandal. But passive
scandal cannot be in the perfect. Much less, therefore, can active scandal be in them.

I answer that, Active scandal, properly so called, occurs when a man says or does a thing which
in itself is of a nature to occasion another's spiritual downfall, and that is only when what
he says or does is inordinate. Now it belongs to the perfect to direct all their actions according
to the rule of reason, as stated in 1 Cor. 14:40: "Let all things be done decently and according
to order"; and they are careful to do this in those matters chiefly wherein not only would
they do wrong, but would also be to others an occasion of wrongdoing. And if indeed they fail
in this moderation in such words or deeds as come to the knowledge of others, this has its
origin in human weakness wherein they fall short of perfection. Yet they do not fall short
so far as to stray far from the order of reason, but only a little and in some slight matter:
and this is not so grave that anyone can reasonably take therefrom an occasion for committing sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Passive scandal is always due to some active scandal; yet this active scandal
is not always in another, but in the very person who is scandalized, because, to wit, he scandalizes
himself.

Reply Obj. 2: In the opinion of Augustine (Ep. xxviii, xl, lxxxii) and of Paul also, Peter
sinned and was to be blamed, in withdrawing from the gentiles in order to avoid the scandal
of the Jews, because he did this somewhat imprudently, so that the gentiles who had been converted
to the faith were scandalized. Nevertheless Peter's action was not so grave a sin as to give
others sufficient ground for scandal. Hence they were guilty of passive scandal, while there
was no active scandal in Peter.

Reply Obj. 3: The venial sins of the perfect consist chiefly in sudden movements, which being
hidden cannot give scandal. If, however, they commit any venial sins even in their external
words or deeds, these are so slight as to be insufficient in themselves to give scandal.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 7]

Whether Spiritual Goods Should Be Foregone on Account of Scandal?

Objection 1: It would seem that spiritual goods ought to be foregone on account of scandal.
For Augustine (Contra Ep. Parmen. iii, 2) teaches that "punishment for sin should cease, when
the peril of schism is feared." But punishment of sins is a spiritual good, since it is an
act of justice. Therefore a spiritual good is to be foregone on account of scandal.

Obj. 2: Further, the Sacred Doctrine is a most spiritual thing. Therefore a spiritual good
should be foregone on account of scandal.

Obj. 3: Further, since fraternal correction is an act of charity, it is a spiritual good. Yet
sometimes it is omitted out of charity, in order to avoid giving scandal to others, as Augustine
observes (De Civ. Dei i, 9). Therefore a spiritual good should be foregone on account of scandal.

Obj. 4: Further, Jerome [*Hugh de S. Cher., In Matth. xviii; in Luc. xvii, 2] says that in
order to avoid scandal we should forego whatever it is possible to omit without prejudice to
the threefold truth, i.e. "the truth of life, of justice and of doctrine." Now the observance
of the counsels, and the bestowal of alms may often be omitted without prejudice to the aforesaid
threefold truth, else whoever omitted them would always be guilty of sin, and yet such things
are the greatest of spiritual works. Therefore spiritual works should be omitted on account
of scandal.

Obj. 5: Further, the avoidance of any sin is a spiritual good, since any sin brings spiritual
harm to the sinner. Now it seems that one ought sometimes to commit a venial sin in order to
avoid scandalizing one's neighbor, for instance, when by sinning venially, one would prevent
someone else from committing a mortal sin: because one is bound to hinder the damnation of
one's neighbor as much as one can without prejudice to one's own salvation, which is not precluded
by a venial sin. Therefore one ought to forego a spiritual good in order to avoid scandal.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Hom. Super Ezech. vii): "If people are scandalized at the truth,
it is better to allow the birth of scandal, than to abandon the truth." Now spiritual goods
belong, above all others, to the truth. Therefore spiritual goods are not to be foregone on
account of scandal.

I answer that, Whereas scandal is twofold, active and passive, the present question does not
apply to active scandal, for since active scandal is "something said or done less rightly,"
nothing ought to be done that implies active scandal. The question does, however, apply to
passive scandal, and accordingly we have to see what ought to be foregone in order to avoid
scandal. Now a distinction must be made in spiritual goods. For some of them are necessary
for salvation, and cannot be foregone without mortal sin: and it is evident that no man ought
to commit a mortal sin, in order to prevent another from sinning, because according to the
order of charity, a man ought to love his own spiritual welfare more than another's. Therefore
one ought not to forego that which is necessary for salvation, in order to avoid giving scandal.

Again a distinction seems necessary among spiritual things which are not necessary for salvation:
because the scandal which arises from such things sometimes proceeds from malice, for instance
when a man wishes to hinder those spiritual goods by stirring up scandal. This is the "scandal
of the Pharisees," who were scandalized at Our Lord's teaching: and Our Lord teaches (Matt.
15:14) that we ought to treat such like scandal with contempt. Sometimes scandal proceeds from
weakness or ignorance, and such is the "scandal of little ones." In order to avoid this kind
of scandal, spiritual goods ought to be either concealed, or sometimes even deferred (if this
can be done without incurring immediate danger), until the matter being explained the scandal
cease. If, however, the scandal continue after the matter has been explained, it would seem
to be due to malice, and then it would no longer be right to forego that spiritual good in
order to avoid such like scandal.

Reply Obj. 1: In the infliction of punishment it is not the punishment itself that is the end
in view, but its medicinal properties in checking sin; wherefore punishment partakes of the
nature of justice, in so far as it checks sin. But if it is evident that the infliction of
punishment will result in more numerous and more grievous sins being committed, the infliction
of punishment will no longer be a part of justice. It is in this sense that Augustine is speaking,
when, to wit, the excommunication of a few threatens to bring about the danger of a schism,
for in that case it would be contrary to the truth of justice to pronounce excommunication.

Reply Obj. 2: With regard to a man's doctrine two points must be considered, namely, the truth
which is taught, and the act of teaching. The first of these is necessary for salvation, to
wit, that he whose duty it is to teach should not teach what is contrary to the truth, and
that he should teach the truth according to the requirements of times and persons: wherefore
on no account ought he to suppress the truth and teach error in order to avoid any scandal
that might ensue. But the act itself of teaching is one of the spiritual almsdeeds, as stated
above (Q. 32, A. 2), and so the same is to be said of it as of the other works of mercy, of
which we shall speak further on (ad 4).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 33, A. 1), fraternal correction aims at the correction of
a brother, wherefore it is to be reckoned among spiritual goods in so far as this end can be
obtained, which is not the case if the brother be scandalized through being corrected. And
so, if the correction be omitted in order to avoid scandal, no spiritual good is foregone.

Reply Obj. 4: The truth of life, of doctrine, and of justice comprises not only whatever is
necessary for salvation, but also whatever is a means of obtaining salvation more perfectly,
according to 1 Cor. 12:31: "Be zealous for the better gifts." Wherefore neither the counsels
nor even the works of mercy are to be altogether omitted in order to avoid scandal; but sometimes
they should be concealed or deferred, on account of the scandal of the little ones, as stated
above. Sometimes, however, the observance of the counsels and the fulfilment of the works of
mercy are necessary for salvation. This may be seen in the case of those who have vowed to
keep the counsels, and of those whose duty it is to relieve the wants of others, either in
temporal matters (as by feeding the hungry), or in spiritual matters (as by instructing the
ignorant), whether such duties arise from their being enjoined as in the case of prelates,
or from the need on the part of the person in want; and then the same applies to these things
as to others that are necessary for salvation.

Reply Obj. 5: Some have said that one ought to commit a venial sin in order to avoid scandal.
But this implies a contradiction, since if it ought to be done, it is no longer evil or sinful,
for a sin cannot be a matter of choice. It may happen however that, on account of some circumstance,
something is not a venial sin, though it would be were it not for that circumstance: thus an
idle word is a venial sin, when it is uttered uselessly; yet if it be uttered for a reasonable
cause, it is neither idle nor sinful. And though venial sin does not deprive a man of grace
which is his means of salvation, yet, in so far as it disposes him to mortal sin, it tends
to the loss of salvation.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 43, Art. 8]

Whether Temporal Goods Should Be Foregone on Account of Scandal?

Objection 1: It would seem that temporal goods should be foregone on account of scandal. For
we ought to love our neighbor's spiritual welfare which is hindered by scandal, more than any
temporal goods whatever. But we forego what we love less for the sake of what we love more.
Therefore we should forego temporal goods in order to avoid scandalizing our neighbor.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Jerome's rule [*Cf. A. 7, Obj. 4], whatever can be foregone without
prejudice to the threefold truth, should be omitted in order to avoid scandal. Now temporal
goods can be foregone without prejudice to the threefold truth. Therefore they should be foregone
in order to avoid scandal.

Obj. 3: Further, no temporal good is more necessary than food. But we ought to forego taking
food on account of scandal, according to Rom. 14:15: "Destroy not him with thy meat for whom
Christ died." Much more therefore should all other temporal goods be foregone on account of
scandal.

Obj. 4: Further, the most fitting way of safeguarding and recovering temporal goods is the
court of justice. But it is unlawful to have recourse to justice, especially if scandal ensues:
for it is written (Matt. 5:40): "If a man will contend with thee in judgment, and take away
thy coat, let go thy cloak also unto him"; and (1 Cor. 6:7): "Already indeed there is plainly
a fault among you, that you have lawsuits one with another. Why do you not rather take wrong?
why do you not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?" Therefore it seems that we ought
to forego temporal goods on account of scandal.

Obj. 5: Further, we ought, seemingly, to forego least of all those temporal goods which are
connected with spiritual goods: and yet we ought to forego them on account of scandal. For
the Apostle while sowing spiritual things did not accept a temporal stipend lest he "should
give any hindrance to the Gospel of Christ" as we read 1 Cor. 9:12. For a like reason the Church
does not demand tithes in certain countries, in order to avoid scandal. Much more, therefore,
ought we to forego other temporal goods in order to avoid scandal.

On the contrary, Blessed Thomas of Canterbury demanded the restitution of Church property,
notwithstanding that the king took scandal from his doing so.

I answer that, A distinction must be made in temporal goods: for either they are ours, or they
are consigned to us to take care of them for someone else; thus the goods of the Church are
consigned to prelates, and the goods of the community are entrusted to all such persons as
have authority over the common weal. In this latter case the care of such things (as of things
held in deposit) devolves of necessity on those persons to whom they are entrusted, wherefore,
even as other things that are necessary for salvation, they are not to be foregone on account
of scandal. On the other hand, as regards those temporalities of which we have the dominion,
sometimes, on account of scandal, we are bound to forego them, and sometimes we are not so
bound, whether we forego them by giving them up, if we have them in our possession, or by omitting
to claim them, if they are in the possession of others. For if the scandal arise therefrom
through the ignorance or weakness of others (in which case, as stated above, A. 7, it is scandal
of the little ones) we must either forego such temporalities altogether, or the scandal must
be abated by some other means, namely, by some kind of admonition. Hence Augustine says (De
Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 20): "Thou shouldst give so as to injure neither thyself nor another,
as much as thou canst lend, and if thou refusest what is asked, thou must yet be just to him,
indeed thou wilt give him something better than he asks, if thou reprove him that asks unjustly."
Sometimes, however, scandal arises from malice. This is scandal of the Pharisees: and we ought
not to forego temporal goods for the sake of those who stir up scandals of this kind, for this
would both be harmful to the common good, since it would give wicked men an opportunity of
plunder, and would be injurious to the plunderers themselves, who would remain in sin as long
as they were in possession of another's property. Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 13): "Sometimes
we ought to suffer those who rob us of our temporalities, while sometimes we should resist
them, as far as equity allows, in the hope not only that we may safeguard our property, but
also lest those who take what is not theirs may lose themselves."

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: If it were permissible for wicked men to rob other people of their property,
this would tend to the detriment of the truth of life and justice. Therefore we are not always
bound to forego our temporal goods in order to avoid scandal.

Reply Obj. 3: The Apostle had no intention of counselling total abstinence from food on account
of scandal, because our welfare requires that we should take food: but he intended to counsel
abstinence from a particular kind of food, in order to avoid scandal, according to 1 Cor. 8:13:
"I will never eat flesh, lest I should scandalize my brother."

Reply Obj. 4: According to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 19) this precept of Our Lord
is to be understood of the preparedness of the mind, namely, that man should be prepared, if
it be expedient, to suffer being harmed or defrauded, rather than go to law. But sometimes
it is not expedient, as stated above (ad 2). The same applies to the saying of the Apostle.

Reply Obj. 5: The scandal which the Apostle avoided, arose from an error of the gentiles who
were not used to this payment. Hence it behooved him to forego it for the time being, so that
they might be taught first of all that such a payment was a duty. For a like reason the Church
refrains from demanding tithes in those countries where it is not customary to pay them.

QUESTION 44

OF THE PRECEPTS OF CHARITY (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the Precepts of Charity, under which there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether precepts should be given about charity?

(2) Whether there should be one or two?

(3) Whether two suffice?

(4) Whether it is fittingly prescribed that we should love God, "with thy whole heart"?

(5) Whether it is fittingly added: "With thy whole mind," etc.?

(6) Whether it is possible to fulfil this precept in this life?

(7) Of the precept: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself";

(8) Whether the order of charity is included in the precept?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 44, Art. 1]

Whether Any Precept Should Be Given About Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that no precept should be given about charity. For charity imposes
the mode on all acts of virtue, since it is the form of the virtues as stated above (Q. 23,
A. 8), while the precepts are about the virtues themselves. Now, according to the common saying,
the mode is not included in the precept. Therefore no precepts should be given about charity.

Obj. 2: Further, charity, which "is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost" (Rom. 5:5),
makes us free, since "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" (2 Cor. 3:17). Now
the obligation that arises from a precept is opposed to liberty, since it imposes a necessity.
Therefore no precept should be given about charity.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is the foremost among all the virtues, to which the precepts are directed,
as shown above (I-II, Q. 90, A. 2; Q. 100, A. 9). If, therefore, any precepts were given about
charity, they should have a place among the chief precepts which are those of the decalogue.
But they have no place there. Therefore no precepts should be given about charity.

On the contrary, Whatever God requires of us is included in a precept. Now God requires that
man should love Him, according to Deut. 10:12. Therefore it behooved precepts to be given about
the love of charity, which is the love of God.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 16, A. 1; I-II, Q. 99, A. 1), a precept implies the notion
of something due. Hence a thing is a matter of precept, in so far as it is something due. Now
a thing is due in two ways, for its own sake, and for the sake of something else. In every
affair, it is the end that is due for its own sake, because it has the character of a good
for its own sake: while that which is directed to the end is due for the sake of something
else: thus for a physician, it is due for its own sake, that he should heal, while it is due
for the sake of something else that he should give a medicine in order to heal. Now the end
of the spiritual life is that man be united to God, and this union is effected by charity,
while all things pertaining to the spiritual life are ordained to this union, as to their end.
Hence the Apostle says (1 Tim. For all the virtues, about whose acts the precepts are given,
are directed either to the freeing of the heart from the whirl of the passions--such are the
virtues that regulate the passions--or at least to the possession of a good conscience--such
are the virtues that regulate operations--or to the having of a right faith--such are those
which pertain to the worship of God: and these three things are required of man that he may
love God. For an impure heart is withdrawn from loving God, on account of the passion that
inclines it to earthly things; an evil conscience gives man a horror for God's justice, through
fear of His punishments; and an untrue faith draws man's affections to an untrue representation
of God, and separates him from the truth of God. Now in every genus that which is for its own
sake takes precedence of that which is for the sake of another, wherefore the greatest precept
is that of charity, as stated in Matt. 22:39.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (I-II, Q. 100, A. 10) when we were treating of the commandments,
the mode of love does not come under those precepts which are about the other acts of virtue:
for instance, this precept, "Honor thy father and thy mother," does not prescribe that this
should be done out of charity. The act of love does, however, fall under special precepts.

Reply Obj. 2: The obligation of a precept is not opposed to liberty, except in one whose mind
is averted from that which is prescribed, as may be seen in those who keep the precepts through
fear alone. But the precept of love cannot be fulfilled save of one's own will, wherefore it
is not opposed to charity.

Reply Obj. 3: All the precepts of the decalogue are directed to the love of God and of our
neighbor: and therefore the precepts of charity had not to be enumerated among the precepts
of the decalogue, since they are included in all of them.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 44, Art. 2]

Whether There Should Have Been Given Two Precepts of Charity?

Objection 1: It would seem that there should not have been given two precepts of charity. For
the precepts of the Law are directed to virtue, as stated above (A. 1, Obj. 3). Now charity
is one virtue, as shown above (Q. 33, A. 5). Therefore only one precept of charity should have
been given.

Obj. 2: Further, as Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 22, 27), charity loves none but God
in our neighbor. Now we are sufficiently directed to love God by the precept, "Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God." Therefore there was no need to add the precept about loving our neighbor.

Obj. 3: Further, different sins are opposed to different precepts. But it is not a sin to put
aside the love of our neighbor, provided we put not aside the love of God; indeed, it is written
(Luke 15:26): "If any man come to Me, and hate not his father, and mother . . . he cannot be
My disciple." Therefore the precept of the love of God is not distinct from the precept of
the love of our neighbor.

Obj. 4: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 13:8): "He that loveth his neighbor hath fulfilled
the Law." But a law is not fulfilled unless all its precepts be observed. Therefore all the
precepts are included in the love of our neighbor: and consequently the one precept of the
love of our neighbor suffices. Therefore there should not be two precepts of charity. Hence
whoever knows the principles as to their entire virtual extent has no need to have the conclusions
put separately before him. Since, however, some who know the principles are unable to consider
all that is virtually contained therein, it is necessary, for their sake, that scientific conclusions
should be traced to their principles. Now in practical matters wherein the precepts of the
Law direct us, the end has the character of principle, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 7, ad 2;
Q. 26, A. 1, ad 1): and the love of God is the end to which the love of our neighbor is directed.
Therefore it behooved us to receive precepts not only of the love of God but also of the love
of our neighbor, on account of those who are less intelligent, who do not easily understand
that one of these precepts is included in the other.

Reply Obj. 1: Although charity is one virtue, yet it has two acts, one of which is directed
to the other as to its end. Now precepts are given about acts of virtue, and so there had to
be several precepts of charity.

Reply Obj. 2: God is loved in our neighbor, as the end is loved in that which is directed to
the end; and yet there was need for an explicit precept about both, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 3: The means derive their goodness from their relation to the end, and accordingly
aversion from the means derives its malice from the same source and from no other.

Reply Obj. 4: Love of our neighbor includes love of God, as the end is included in the means,
and vice versa: and yet it behooved each precept to be given explicitly, for the reason given
above. 

Threshold, house, railing, and plot, each as like to the other as
are those small commodities called "nest-tables," which, "even as
a broken mirror multiplies," summon to the bewildered eye countless
iterations of one four-legged individual.

Paradise Place was a set of nest houses.

A cow had passed through the streets with a milkwoman behind; two young and gay shopmen "looking
after the gals," had reconnoitred the street, and vanished in despair. The twilight advanced--but
gently; and though a star or two were up, the air was still clear.

At the open window of one of the tenements in this street sat Alice Darvil. She had been working
(that pretty excuse to women for thinking), and as the thoughts grew upon her, and the evening
waned, the work had fallen upon her knee, and her hands dropped mechanically
on her lap.

Her profile was turned towards the street; but without moving her head or changing her attitude,
her eyes glanced from time to time to her little girl, who nestled on the ground beside her, tired
with play; and wondering, perhaps, why she was not already in bed, seemed as tranquil as the
young mother herself.

And sometimes Alice's eyes filled with tears--and then she sighed, as if to sigh the tears away.
But poor Alice, if she grieved, hers was now a silent and a patient
grief.

The street was deserted of all other passengers, when a man passed along the pavement on the
side opposite to Alice's house. His garb was rude and homely, between that of a labourer and
a farmer; but still there was an affectation of tawdry show about the bright scarlet handkerchief,
tied, in a sailor or smuggler fashion, round the sinewy throat; the hat was set jauntily on
one side, and, dangling many an inch from the gaily-striped waistcoat,
glittered a watch-chain and seals, which appeared suspiciously out
of character with the rest of his attire.

The passenger was covered with dust; and as the street was in a suburb communicating with the
high-road, and formed one of the entrances into the town, he had probably, after long day's
journey, reached his evening's destination. The looks of this stranger wore anxious, restless,
and perturbed. In his gait and swagger there was the recklessness of the professional blackguard;
but in his vigilant, prying, suspicious eyes there was a hang-dog expression of apprehension and
fear.

He seemed a man upon whom Crime had set its significant mark--and who saw a purse with one
eye and a gibbet with the other. Alice did not note the stranger, until she herself had attracted
and centred all his attention. He halted abruptly as he caught a view of her face--shaded his
eyes with his hands as if to gaze more intently--and at length burst into an exclamation of surprise
and pleasure.

At that instant Alice turned, and her gaze met that of the stranger. The fascination of the basilisk
can scarcely more stun and paralyse its victim than the look of this stranger charmed, with the
appalling glamoury of horror, the eye and soul of Alice Darvil. Her face became suddenly locked
and rigid, her lips as white as marble, her eyes almost started from their sockets--she pressed
her hands convulsively together, and shuddered--but still she did
not move.

The man nodded, and grinned, and then, deliberately crossing the
street, gained the door, and knocked loudly.

Still Alice did not stir--her senses seemed to have forsaken her.

Presently the stranger's loud, rough voice was heard below, in answer to the accents of the solitary
woman-servant whom Alice kept in her employ; and his strong, heavy tread made the slight staircase
creak and tremble. Then Alice rose as by an instinct, caught her child in her arms, and stood
erect and motionless facing the door. It opened--and the FATHER and
DAUGHTER were once more face to face within the same walls.

"Well, Alley, how are you, my blowen?--glad to see your old dad again, I'll be sworn. No ceremony,
sit down. Ha, ha! snug here--very snug--we shall live together charmingly. Trade on your own
account--eh? sly!--well, can't desert your poor old father.

Let's have something to eat and drink."

So saying, Darvil threw himself at length upon the neat, prim little chintz sofa, with the air
of a man resolved to make himself perfectly at home.

Alice gazed, and trembled violently, but still said nothing--the power of voice had indeed left
her.

"Come, why don't you stir your stumps? I suppose I must wait on myself--fine manners!--But, ho,
ho--a bell, by gosh--mighty grand--never mind--I am used to call
for my own wants."

A hearty tug at the frail bell-rope sent a shrill alarum half-way
through the long lath-and-plaster row of Paradise Place, and left
the instrument of the sound in the hand of its creator.

Up came the maid-servant, a formal old woman, most respectable.

"Hark ye, old girl!" said Darvil; "bring up the best you have to eat--not particular--let there
be plenty. And I say--a bottle of brandy. Come, don't stand there
staring like a stuck pig.

Budge! Hell and furies! don't you hear me?"

The servant retreated, as if a pistol had been put to her head, and Darvil, laughing loud, threw
himself again upon the sofa.

Alice looked at him, and, still without saying a word, glided from the room--her child in her arms.
She hurried down-stairs, and in the hall met her servant. The latter, who was much attached to her
mistress, was alarmed to see her about to leave the house.

"Why, marm, where be you going? Dear heart, you have no bonnet on!
What is the matter?

Who is this?"

"Oh!" cried Alice, in agony; "what shall I do?--where shall I fly?"

The door above opened. Alice heard, started, and the next moment was in the street. She ran
on breathlessly, and like one insane. Her mind was, indeed, for the time, gone; and had a river
flowed before her way, she would have plunged into an escape from a world that seemed too narrow
to hold a father and his child.

But just as she turned the corner of a street that led into the more public thoroughfares, she
felt her arm grasped, and a voice called out her name in surprised and startled accents.

"Heavens, Mrs. Butler! Alice! What do I see? What is the matter?"

"Oh, sir, save me!--you are a good man--a great man--save me--he is
returned!"

"He! who? Mr. Butler?" said the banker (for that gentleman it was) in a changed and trembling
voice.

"No, no--ah, not he!--I did not say /he/--I said my father--my, my--ah--look behind--look behind--is
he coming?"

"Calm yourself, my dear young friend--no one is near. I will go and reason with your father.
No one shall harm you--I will protect you. Go back--go back, I will follow--we must not be
seen together." And the tall banker seemed trying to shrink into a nutshell.

"No, no," said Alice, growing yet paler, "I cannot go back."

"Well, then, just follow me to the door--your servant shall get you your bonnet, and accompany
you to my house, where you can wait till I return. Meanwhile I will see your father, and rid
you, I trust, of his presence."

The banker, who spoke in a very hurried and even impatient voice, waited for no reply, but took his way
to Alice's house.

Alice herself did not follow, but remained in the very place where
she was left, till joined by her servant, who then conducted her to
the rich man's residence. . .

But Alice's mind had not recovered its shock, and her thoughts wandered
alarmingly.

CHAPTER VII.

"/Miramont./--Do they chafe roundly?

/Andrew./--As they were rubbed with soap, sir, And now they swear aloud, now calm again Like
a ring of bells, whose sound the wind still utters, And then they sit in council what to do, And
then they jar again what shall be done?" BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.

OH! what a picture of human nature it was when the banker and the vagabond sat together in
that little drawing-room, facing each other,--one in the armchair,
one on the sofa!

Darvil was still employed on some cold meat, and was making wry faces at the very indifferent
brandy which he had frightened the formal old servant into buying at the nearest public-house; and
opposite sat the respectable--highly respectable man of forms and ceremonies, of decencies and
quackeries, gazing gravely upon this low, daredevil ruffian:--the
well-to-do hypocrite--the penniless villain;--the man who had everything
to lose--the man who had nothing in the wide world but his own mischievous,
rascally life, a gold watch, chain and seals, which he had stolen
the day before, and thirteen shillings and threepence halfpenny in
his left breeches pocket!

The man of wealth was by no means well acquainted with the nature of the beast before him. He
had heard from Mrs. Leslie (as we remember) the outline of Alice's
history, and ascertained that their joint /protegee's/ father was
a great blackguard; but he expected to find Mr. Darvil a mere dull,
brutish villain--a peasant-ruffian--a blunt serf, without brains,
or their substitute, effrontery.

But Luke Darvil was a clever, half-educated fellow: he did not sin from ignorance, but had wit
enough to have bad principles, and he was as impudent as if he had lived all his life in the
best society. He was not frightened at the banker's drab breeches and imposing air--not he! The Duke
of Wellington would not have frightened Luke Darvil, unless his grace had had the constables for
his /aides-de-camp/.

The banker, to use a homely phrase, was "taken aback."

"Look you here, Mr. What's-your-name!" said Darvil, swallowing a glass of the raw alcohol as if it
had been water--"look you now--you can't humbug me. What the devil do you care about my daughter's
respectability or comfort, or anything else, grave old dog as you are! It is my daughter herself
you are licking your brown old chaps at!--and, 'faith, my Alley is
a very pretty girl--very--but queer as moonshine.

You'll drive a much better bargain with me than with her."

The banker coloured scarlet--he bit his lips and measured his companion from head to foot (while
the latter lolled on the sofa), as if he were meditating the possibility of kicking him down-stairs.
But Luke Darvil would have thrashed the banker and all his clerks
into the bargain.

His frame was like a trunk of thews and muscles, packed up by that careful dame, Nature, as
tightly as possible; and a prizefighter would have thought twice before he had entered the
ring against so awkward a customer. The banker was a man prudent
to a fault, and he pushed his chair six inches back, as he concluded
his survey.

"Sir," then said he, very quietly, "do not let us misunderstand each other. Your daughter is safe
from your control--if you molest her, the law will protect--"

"She is not of age," said Darvil. "Your health, old boy."

"Whether she is of age or not," returned the banker, unheeding the courtesy conveyed in the
last sentence, "I do not care three straws--I know enough of the law to know that if she have
rich friends in this town, and you have none, she will be protected
and you will go to the treadmill."

"That is spoken like a sensible man," said Darvil, for the first time with a show of respect in
his manner; "you now take a practical view of matters, as we used
to say at the spouting-club."

"If I were in your situation, Mr. Darvil, I tell you what I would do. I would leave my daughter
and this town to-morrow morning, and I would promise never to return, and never to molest her,
on condition she allowed me a certain sum from her earnings, paid quarterly."

"And if I preferred living with her?"

"In that case, I, as a magistrate of this town, would have you sent away as a vagrant, or apprehended--"

"Ha!"

"Apprehended
on suspicion of stealing that gold chain and seals which you wear so ostentatiously."

"By goles, but you're a clever fellow," said Darvil, involuntarily; "you know human natur."

The
banker smiled: strange to say, he was pleased with the compliment.

"But," resumed Darvil, helping himself to another slice of beef, "you are in the wrong box--planted
in Queer Street, as /we/ say in London; for if you care a d--n about my daughter's respectability,
you will never muzzle her father on suspicion of theft--and so there's
tit for tat, my old gentleman!"

"I shall deny that you are her father, Mr. Darvil; and I think you
will find it hard to prove the fact in any town where I am a magistrate."

"By

goles, what a good prig you would have made! You are as sharp as a gimlet. Surely you were brought
up at the Old Bailey!"

"Mr. Darvil, be ruled.

You seem a man not deaf to reason, and I ask you whether, in any town in this country, a poor
man in suspicious circumstances can do anything against a rich man whose character is established?
Perhaps you are right in the main: I have nothing to do with that.

But I tell you that you shall quit this house in half an hour--that you shall never enter it again
but at your peril; and if you do--within ten minutes from that time you shall be in the town
gaol.

It is no longer a contest between you and your defenceless daughter; it is a contest between--"

"A
tramper in fustian, and a gemman as drives a coach," interrupted Darvil, laughing bitterly,
yet heartily. "Good--good!"

The banker rose.

"I think you have made a very clever definition," said he. "Half an hour--you recollect--good
evening."

"Stay," said Darvil; "you are the first man I have seen for many a year that I can take a fancy
to.

Sit down--sit down, I say, and talk a bit, and we shall come to terms soon, I dare say;--that's
right. Lord! how I should like to have you on the roadside instead of within these four gimcrack
walls. Ha! ha! the argufying would be all in my favour then."

The banker was not a brave man, and his colour changed slightly at the intimation of this obliging
wish. Darvil eyed him grimly and chucklingly.

The rich man resumed: "That may or may not be, Mr. Darvil, according as I might happen or not to
have pistols about me. But to the point. Quit this house without further debate, without noise, without
mentioning to any one else your claim upon its owner--"

"Well, and the return?"

"Ten guineas now, and the same sum quarterly, as long as the young
lady lives in this town, and you never persecute her by word or letter."

"That

is forty guineas a year.

I can't live upon it."

"You will cost less in the House of Correction, Mr. Darvil."

"Come, make it a hundred: Alley is cheap at that."

"Not a farthing more," said the banker, buttoning up his breeches
pockets with a determined air.

"Well, out with the shiners."

"Do you promise or not?"

"I promise."

"There are your ten guineas. If in half an hour you are not gone--why,
then--"

"Then?"

"Why, then you have robbed me of ten guineas, and
must take the usual consequences of robbery."

Darvil started to his
feet--his eyes glared--he grasped the carving-knife before him.

"You
are a bold fellow," said the banker, quietly; "but it won't do. It
is not worth your while to murder me; and I am a man sure to be missed."

Darvil
sank down, sullen and foiled. The respectable man was more than a
match for the villain.

"Had you been as poor as I,--Gad! what a rogue
you would have been!"

"I think not," said the banker; "I believe
roguery to be a very bad policy. Perhaps once I /was/ almost as poor
as you are, but I never turned rogue."

"You never were in my circumstances,"
returned Darvil, gloomily. "I was a gentleman's son. Come, you shall
hear my story. My father was well-born, but married a maid-servant
when he was at college; his family disowned him, and left him to starve.
He died in the struggle against a poverty he was not brought up to,
and my dam went into service again; became housekeeper to an old bachelor--sent
me to school--but mother had a family by the old bachelor, and I was
taken from school and put to trade. All hated me--for I was ugly;
damn them! Mother cut me--I wanted money--robbed the old bachelor--was
sent to gaol, and learned there a lesson or two how to rob better
in future. Mother died,--I was adrift on the world. The world was
my foe--could not make it up with the world, so we went to war;--you
understand, old boy? Married a poor woman and pretty;--wife made me
jealous--had learned to suspect every one. Alice born--did not believe
her mine: not like me--perhaps a gentleman's child. I hate--I loathe
gentlemen. Got drunk one night--kicked my wife in the stomach three
weeks after her confinement. Wife died--tried for my life--got off.
Went to another county--having had a sort of education, and being
sharp eno', got work as a mechanic. Hated work just as I hated gentlemen--for
was I not by blood a gentleman? There was the curse. Alice grew up;
never looked on her as my flesh and blood. Her mother was a w----!
Why should not /she/ be one? There, that's enough. Plenty of excuse,
I think, for all I have ever done. Curse the world--curse the rich--curse
the handsome--curse --curse all!"

"You have been a very foolish man,"
said the banker; "and seem to me to have had very good cards, if you
had known how to play them. However, that is your lookout. It is not
yet too late to repent; age is creeping on you.--Man, there is another
world."

The banker said the last words with a tone of solemn and
even dignified adjuration.

"You think so--do you?" said Darvil, staring
at him.

"From my soul I do."

"Then you are not the sensible man
I took you for," replied Darvil, drily; "and I should like to talk
to you on that subject."

But our Dives, however sincere a believer,
was by no means one

"At whose control Despair and anguish fled the
struggling soul."

He had words of comfort for the pious, but he had
none for the sceptic--he could soothe, but he could not convert. It
was not in his way; besides, he saw no credit in making a convert
of Luke Darvil. Accordingly, he again rose with some quickness, and
said:

"No, sir; that is useless, I fear, and I have no time to spare;
and so once more good night to you."

"But you have not arranged where
my allowance is to be sent."

"Ah! true; I will guarantee it. You
will find my name sufficient security."

"At least, it is the best
I can get," returned Darvil, carelessly; "and after all, it is not
a bad chance day's work. But I'm sure I can't say where the money
shall be sent. I don't know a man who would not grab it."

"Very well,
then--the best thing (I speak as a man of business) will be to draw
on me for ten guineas quarterly. Wherever you are staying, any banker
can effect this for you. But mind, if ever you overdraw the account
stops."

"I understand," said Darvil; "and when I have finished the
bottle I shall be off."

"You had better," replied the banker, as
he opened the door.

The rich man returned home hurriedly. "So Alice,
after all, has some gentle blood in her veins," thought he. "But that
father--no, it will never do. I wish he were hanged and nobody the
wiser. I should very much like to arrange the matter without marrying;
but then --scandal--scandal--scandal. After all, I had better give
up all thoughts of her. She is monstrous handsome, and so--humph:--I
shall never grow an old man."

CHAPTER VIII.

"Began to bend down
his admiring eyes On all her touching looks and qualities, Turning
their shapely sweetness every way Till 'twas his food and habit day
by day." LEIGH HUNT.

THERE must have been a secret something about
Alice Darvil singularly captivating, that (associated as she was with
images of the most sordid and the vilest crimes) left her still pure
and lovely alike in the eyes of a man as fastidious as Ernest Maltravers,
and of a man as influenced by all the thoughts and theories of the
world as the shrewd banker of C------. Therefore wisdom should not be reckoned
among the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Augustine (De Trin. xii, 14) "wisdom is the knowledge of Divine
things." Now that knowledge of Divine things which man can acquire by his natural endowments,
belongs to the wisdom which is an intellectual virtue, while the supernatural knowledge of
Divine things belongs to faith which is a theological virtue, as explained above (Q. 4, A.
5; I-II, Q. 62, A. 3). Therefore wisdom should be called a virtue rather than a gift.

Obj. And in this passage according to the rendering of the Septuagint which Augustine follows
(De Trin. xii, 14; xiv, 1) we read: "Behold piety, that is wisdom." Now both fear and piety
are gifts of the Holy Ghost. Therefore wisdom should not be reckoned among the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, as though it were distinct from the others. By means of that cause we are able
to form a most certain judgment about other causes, and according thereto all things should
be set in order. Now the highest cause may be understood in two ways, either simply or in some
particular genus. Accordingly he that knows the highest cause in any particular genus, and
by its means is able to judge and set in order all the things that belong to that genus, is
said to be wise in that genus, for instance in medicine or architecture, according to 1 Cor.
3:10: "As a wise architect, I have laid a foundation." On the other hand, he who knows the
cause that is simply the highest, which is God, is said to be wise simply, because he is able
to judge and set in order all things according to Divine rules.

Now man obtains this judgment through the Holy Ghost, according to 1 Cor. 2:15: "The spiritual
man judgeth all things," because as stated in the same chapter (1 Cor. 2:10), "the Spirit searcheth
all things, yea the deep things of God." Wherefore it is evident that wisdom is a gift of the
Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 1: A thing is said to be good in two senses: first in the sense that it is truly
good and simply perfect, secondly, by a kind of likeness, being perfect in wickedness; thus
we speak of a good or a perfect thief, as the Philosopher observes (Metaph. v, text. 21). And
just as with regard to those things which are truly good, we find a highest cause, namely the
sovereign good which is the last end, by knowing which, man is said to be truly wise, so too
in evil things something is to be found to which all others are to be referred as to a last
end, by knowing which, man is said to be wise unto evil doing, according to Jer. 4:22: "They
are wise to do evils, but to do good they have no knowledge." Now whoever turns away from his
due end, must needs fix on some undue end, since every agent acts for an end. Wherefore, if
he fixes his end in external earthly things, his "wisdom" is called "earthly," if in the goods
of the body, it is called "sensual wisdom," if in some excellence, it is called "devilish wisdom"
because it imitates the devil's pride, of which it is written (Job 41:25): "He is king over
all the children of pride."

Reply Obj. 2: The wisdom which is called a gift of the Holy Ghost, differs from that which
is an acquired intellectual virtue, for the latter is attained by human effort, whereas the
latter is "descending from above" (James 3:15). In like manner it differs from faith, since
faith assents to the Divine truth in itself, whereas it belongs to the gift of wisdom to judge
according to the Divine truth. Hence the gift of wisdom presupposes faith, because "a man judges
well what he knows" (Ethic. i, 3).

Reply Obj. 3: Just as piety which pertains to the worship of God is a manifestation of faith,
in so far as we make profession of faith by worshipping God, so too, piety manifests wisdom.
For this reason piety is stated to be wisdom, and so is fear, for the same reason, because
if a man fear and worship God, this shows that he has a right judgment about Divine things.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 45, Art. 2]

Whether Wisdom Is in the Intellect As Its Subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that wisdom is not in the intellect as its subject. For Augustine
says (Ep. cxx) that "wisdom is the charity of God." Now charity is in the will as its subject,
and not in the intellect, as stated above (Q. 24, A. 1). Therefore wisdom is not in the intellect
as its subject.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 6:23): "The wisdom of doctrine is according to her
name," for wisdom (sapientia) may be described as "sweet-tasting science (sapida scientia),"
and this would seem to regard the appetite, to which it belongs to taste spiritual pleasure
or sweetness. Therefore wisdom is in the appetite rather than in the intellect.

Obj. 3: Further, the intellective power is sufficiently perfected by the gift of understanding.
Now it is superfluous to require two things where one suffices for the purpose. Therefore wisdom
is not in the intellect.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49) that "wisdom is contrary to folly." But folly
is in the intellect. Therefore wisdom is also.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), wisdom denotes a certain rectitude of judgment according
to the Eternal Law. Now rectitude of judgment is twofold: first, on account of perfect use
of reason, secondly, on account of a certain connaturality with the matter about which one
has to judge. Thus, about matters of chastity, a man after inquiring with his reason forms
a right judgment, if he has learnt the science of morals, while he who has the habit of chastity
judges of such matters by a kind of connaturality.

Accordingly it belongs to the wisdom that is an intellectual virtue to pronounce right judgment
about Divine things after reason has made its inquiry, but it belongs to wisdom as a gift of
the Holy Ghost to judge aright about them on account of connaturality with them: thus Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. ii) that "Hierotheus is perfect in Divine things, for he not only learns, but
is patient of, Divine things."

Now this sympathy or connaturality for Divine things is the result of charity, which unites
us to God, according to 1 Cor. 6:17: "He who is joined to the Lord, is one spirit." Consequently
wisdom which is a gift, has its cause in the will, which cause is charity, but it has its essence
in the intellect, whose act is to judge aright, as stated above (I-II, Q. 14, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking of wisdom as to its cause, whence also wisdom (sapientia)
takes its name, in so far as it denotes a certain sweetness (saporem). Hence the Reply to the
Second Objection is evident, that is if this be the true meaning of the text quoted. For, apparently
this is not the case, because such an exposition of the text would only fit the Latin word
for wisdom, whereas it does not apply to the Greek and perhaps not in other languages. Hence
it would seem that in the text quoted wisdom stands for the renown of doctrine, for which it
is praised by all.

Reply Obj. 3: The intellect exercises a twofold act, perception and judgment. The gift of understanding
regards the former; the gift of wisdom regards the latter according to the Divine ideas, the
gift of knowledge, according to human ideas.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 45, Art. 3]

Whether Wisdom Is Merely Speculative, or Practical Also?

Objection 1: It would seem that wisdom is not practical but merely speculative. For the gift
of wisdom is more excellent than the wisdom which is an intellectual virtue. But wisdom, as
an intellectual virtue, is merely speculative. Much more therefore is wisdom, as a gift, speculative
and not practical.

Obj. 2: Further, the practical intellect is about matters of operation which are contingent.
But wisdom is about Divine things which are eternal and necessary. Therefore wisdom cannot
be practical.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. vi, 37) that "in contemplation we seek the Beginning
which is God, but in action we labor under a mighty bundle of wants." Therefore wisdom is merely
contemplative, and not practical or active.

On the contrary, It is written (Col. 4:5): "Walk with wisdom towards them that are without."
Now this pertains to action. Therefore wisdom is not merely speculative, but also practical.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Trin. xii, 14), the higher part of the reason is the province
of wisdom, while the lower part is the domain of knowledge. Now the higher reason according
to the same authority (De Trin. xii, 7) "is intent on the consideration and consultation of
the heavenly," i.e. Divine, "types" [*Cf. I, Q. 79, A. 9; I-II, Q. 74, A. 7]; it considers
them, in so far as it contemplates Divine things in themselves, and it consults them, in so
far as it judges of human acts by Divine things, and directs human acts according to Divine rules.

Accordingly wisdom as a gift, is not merely speculative but also practical.

Reply Obj. 1: The higher a virtue is, the greater the number of things to which it extends,
as stated in De Causis, prop. x, xvii. Wherefore from the very fact that wisdom as a gift is
more excellent than wisdom as an intellectual virtue, since it attains to God more intimately
by a kind of union of the soul with Him, it is able to direct us not only in contemplation
but also in action.

Reply Obj. 2: Divine things are indeed necessary and eternal in themselves, yet they are the
rules of the contingent things which are the subject-matter of human actions.

Reply Obj. 3: A thing is considered in itself before being compared with something else. Wherefore
to wisdom belongs first of all contemplation which is the vision of the Beginning, and afterwards
the direction of human acts according to the Divine rules. Nor from the direction of wisdom
does there result any bitterness or toil in human acts; on the contrary the result of wisdom
is to make the bitter sweet, and labor a rest.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 45, Art. 4]

Whether Wisdom Can Be Without Grace, and with Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that wisdom can be without grace and with mortal sin. For saints
glory chiefly in such things as are incompatible with mortal sin, according to 2 Cor. 1:12:
"Our glory is this, the testimony of our conscience." Now one ought not to glory in one's wisdom,
according to Jer. 9:23: "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom." Therefore wisdom can be
without grace and with mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, wisdom denotes knowledge of Divine things, as stated above (A. 1). Now one
in mortal sin may have knowledge of the Divine truth, according to Rom. 1:18: "(Those men that)
detain the truth of God in injustice." Therefore wisdom is compatible with mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 18) while speaking of charity: "Nothing surpasses
this gift of God, it is this alone that divides the children of the eternal kingdom from the
children of eternal perdition." But wisdom is distinct from charity. Therefore it does not
divide the children of the kingdom from the children of perdition. Therefore it is compatible
with mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Wis. 1:4): "Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor
dwell in a body subject to sins."

I answer that, The wisdom which is a gift of the Holy Ghost, as stated above (A. 1), enables
us to judge aright of Divine things, or of other things according to Divine rules, by reason
of a certain connaturalness or union with Divine things, which is the effect of charity, as
stated above (A. 2; Q. 23, A. 5). Hence the wisdom of which we are speaking presupposes charity.
Now charity is incompatible with mortal sin, as shown above (Q. 24, A. 12). Therefore it follows
that the wisdom of which we are speaking cannot be together with mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: These words are to be understood as referring to worldly wisdom, or to wisdom
in Divine things acquired through human reasons. In such wisdom the saints do not glory, according
to Prov. 30:2: "The wisdom of men is not with Me": But they do glory in Divine wisdom according
to 1 Cor. 1:30: "(Who) of God is made unto us wisdom."

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers, not the wisdom of which we speak but that which is acquired
by the study and research of reason, and is compatible with mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Although wisdom is distinct from charity, it presupposes it, and for that very
reason divides the children of perdition from the children of the kingdom.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 45, Art. 5]

Whether Wisdom Is in All Who Have Grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that wisdom is not in all who have grace. For it is more to have
wisdom than to hear wisdom. Now it is only for the perfect to hear wisdom, according to 1 Cor.
2:6: "We speak wisdom among the perfect." Since then not all who have grace are perfect, it
seems that much less all who have grace have wisdom.

Obj. 2: Further, "The wise man sets things in order," as the Philosopher states (Metaph. i,
2): and it is written (James 3:17) that the wise man "judges without dissimulation [*Vulg.:
'The wisdom that is from above . . . is . . . without judging, without dissimulation']". Now
it is not for all that have grace, to judge, or put others in order, but only for those in
authority. Therefore wisdom is not in all that have grace.

Obj. 3: Further, "Wisdom is a remedy against folly," as Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49). Now many
that have grace are naturally foolish, for instance madmen who are baptized or those who without
being guilty of mortal sin have become insane. Therefore wisdom is not in all that have grace.

On the contrary, Whoever is without mortal sin, is beloved of God; since he has charity, whereby
he loves God, and God loves them that love Him (Prov. 8:17). Now it is written (Wis. 7:28)
that "God loveth none but him that dwelleth with wisdom." Therefore wisdom is in all those
who have charity and are without mortal sin.

I answer that, The wisdom of which we are speaking, as stated above (A. 4), denotes a certain
rectitude of judgment in the contemplation and consultation of Divine things, and as to both
of these men obtain various degrees of wisdom through union with Divine things. For the measure
of right judgment attained by some, whether in the contemplation of Divine things or in directing
human affairs according to Divine rules, is no more than suffices for their salvation. This
measure is wanting to none who is without mortal sin through having sanctifying grace, since
if nature does not fail in necessaries, much less does grace fail: wherefore it is written
(1 John 2:27): "(His) unction teacheth you of all things."

Some, however, receive a higher degree of the gift of wisdom, both as to the contemplation
of Divine things (by both knowing more exalted mysteries and being able to impart this knowledge
to others) and as to the direction of human affairs according to Divine rules (by being able
to direct not only themselves but also others according to those rules). This degree of wisdom
is not common to all that have sanctifying grace, but belongs rather to the gratuitous graces,
which the Holy Ghost dispenses as He will, according to 1 Cor. 12:8: "To one indeed by the
Spirit is given the word of wisdom," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle speaks there of wisdom, as extending to the hidden mysteries of Divine
things, as indeed he says himself (2 Cor. 1:7): "We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, a
wisdom which is hidden."

Reply Obj. 2: Although it belongs to those alone who are in authority to direct and judge other
men, yet every man is competent to direct and judge his own actions, as Dionysius declares
(Ep. ad Demophil.).

Reply Obj. 3: Baptized idiots, like little children, have the habit of wisdom, which is a gift
of the Holy Ghost, but they have not the act, on account of the bodily impediment which hinders
the use of reason in them.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 45, Art. 6]

Whether the Seventh Beatitude Corresponds to the Gift of Wisdom?

Objection 1: It seems that the seventh beatitude does not correspond to the gift of wisdom.
For the seventh beatitude is: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God." (Rom. 8:15). Therefore the seventh beatitude ought to be ascribed to charity rather
than to wisdom.

Obj. 2: Further, a thing is declared by its proximate effect rather than by its remote effect.
Now the proximate effect of wisdom seems to be charity, according to Wis. 7:27: "Through nations
she conveyeth herself into holy souls; she maketh the friends of God and prophets": whereas
peace and the adoption of sons seem to be remote effects, since they result from charity, as
stated above (Q. 29, A. 3). Therefore the beatitude corresponding to wisdom should be determined
in respect of the love of charity rather than in respect of peace.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (James 3:17): "The wisdom, that is from above, first indeed
is chaste, then peaceable, modest, easy to be persuaded, consenting to the good, full of mercy
and good fruits, judging without dissimulation [*Vulg.: 'without judging, without dissimulation']."
Therefore the beatitude corresponding to wisdom should not refer to peace rather than to the
other effects of heavenly wisdom.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 4) that "wisdom is becoming to peacemakers,
in whom there is no movement of rebellion, but only obedience to reason."

I answer that, The seventh beatitude is fittingly ascribed to the gift of wisdom, both as to
the merit and as to the reward. The merit is denoted in the words, "Blessed are the peacemakers."
Now a peacemaker is one who makes peace, either in himself, or in others: and in both cases
this is the result of setting in due order those things in which peace is established, for
"peace is the tranquillity of order," according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei xix, 13). Now it
belongs to wisdom to set things in order, as the Philosopher declares (Metaph. i, 2), wherefore
peaceableness is fittingly ascribed to wisdom. The reward is expressed in the words, "they
shall be called the children of God." Now men are called the children of God in so far as they
participate in the likeness of the only-begotten and natural Son of God, according to Rom.
8:29, "Whom He foreknew . . . to be made conformable to the image of His Son," Who is Wisdom
Begotten. Hence by participating in the gift of wisdom, man attains to the sonship of God.

Reply Obj. 1: It belongs to charity to be at peace, but it belongs to wisdom to make peace
by setting things in order. Likewise the Holy Ghost is called the "Spirit of adoption" in so
far as we receive from Him the likeness of the natural Son, Who is the Begotten Wisdom.

Reply Obj. 2: These words refer to the Uncreated Wisdom, which in the first place unites itself
to us by the gift of charity, and consequently reveals to us the mysteries the knowledge of
which is infused wisdom. Hence, the infused wisdom which is a gift, is not the cause but the
effect of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (A. 3) it belongs to wisdom, as a gift, not only to contemplate
Divine things, but also to regulate human acts. Now the first thing to be effected in this
direction of human acts is the removal of evils opposed to wisdom: wherefore fear is said to
be "the beginning of wisdom," because it makes us shun evil, while the last thing is like an
end, whereby all things are reduced to their right order; and it is this that constitutes peace.
Hence James said with reason that "the wisdom that is from above" (and this is the gift of
the Holy Ghost) "first indeed is chaste," because it avoids the corruption of sin, and "then
peaceable," wherein lies the ultimate effect of wisdom, for which reason peace is numbered
among the beatitudes. As to the things that follow, they declare in becoming order the means
whereby wisdom leads to peace. For when a man, by chastity, avoids the corruption of sin, the
first thing he has to do is, as far as he can, to be moderate in all things, and in this respect
wisdom is said to be modest. Secondly, in those matters in which he is not sufficient by himself,
he should be guided by the advice of others, and as to this we are told further that wisdom
is "easy to be persuaded." These two are conditions required that man may be at peace with
himself. But in order that man may be at peace with others it is furthermore required, first
that he should not be opposed to their good; this is what is meant by "consenting to the good."
Secondly, that he should bring to his neighbor's deficiencies, sympathy in his heart, and succor
in his actions, and this is denoted by the words "full of mercy and good fruits." Thirdly,
he should strive in all charity to correct the sins of others, and this is indicated by the
words "judging without dissimulation [*Vulg.: 'The wisdom that is from above . . . is . . .
without judging, without dissimulation'," lest he should purpose to sate his hatred under cover
of correction.

QUESTION 46

OF FOLLY WHICH IS OPPOSED TO WISDOM (In Three Articles)

We must now consider folly which is opposed to wisdom; and under this head there are three
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether folly is contrary to wisdom?

(2) Whether folly is a sin?

(3) To which capital sin is it reducible?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 46, Art. 1]

Whether Folly Is Contrary to Wisdom?

Objection 1: It would seem that folly is not contrary to wisdom. For seemingly unwisdom is
directly opposed to wisdom. But folly does not seem to be the same as unwisdom, for the latter
is apparently about Divine things alone, whereas folly is about both Divine and human things.
Therefore folly is not contrary to wisdom.

Obj. 2: Further, one contrary is not the way to arrive at the other. But folly is the way to
arrive at wisdom, for it is written (1 Cor. 3:18): "If any man among you seem to be wise in
this world, let him become a fool, that he may be wise." Therefore folly is not opposed to wisdom.

Obj. 3: Further, one contrary is not the cause of the other. But wisdom is the cause of folly;
for it is written (Jer. 10:14): "Every man is become a fool for knowledge," and wisdom is a
kind of knowledge. Moreover, it is written (Isa. 47:10): "Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, this
hath deceived thee." Now it belongs to folly to be deceived. Therefore folly is not contrary
to wisdom.

Obj. 4: Further, Isidore says (Etym. x, under the letter S) that "a fool is one whom shame
does not incite to sorrow, and who is unconcerned when he is injured." But this pertains to
spiritual wisdom, according to Gregory (Moral. x, 49). Therefore folly is not opposed to wisdom.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. ii, 26) that "the gift of wisdom is given as a remedy
against folly."

I answer that, Stultitia (Folly) seems to take its name from stupor; wherefore Isidore says
(loc. cit.): "A fool is one who through dullness (stuporem) remains unmoved." And folly differs
from fatuity, according to the same authority (Etym. x), in that folly implies apathy in the
heart and dullness in the senses, while fatuity denotes entire privation of the spiritual sense.
Therefore folly is fittingly opposed to wisdom.

For "sapiens" (wise) as Isidore says (Etym. x) "is so named from sapor (savor), because just
as the taste is quick to distinguish between savors of meats, so is a wise man in discerning
things and causes." Wherefore it is manifest that folly is opposed to wisdom as its contrary,
while fatuity is opposed to it as a pure negation: since the fatuous man lacks the sense of
judgment, while the fool has the sense, though dulled, whereas the wise man has the sense acute
and penetrating.

Reply Obj. 1: According to Isidore (Etym. x), "unwisdom is contrary to wisdom because it lacks
the savor of discretion and sense"; so that unwisdom is seemingly the same as folly. Yet a
man would appear to be a fool chiefly through some deficiency in the verdict of that judgment,
which is according to the highest cause, for if a man fails in judgment about some trivial
matter, he is not for that reason called a fool.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as there is an evil wisdom, as stated above (Q. 45, A. 1, ad 1), called
"worldly wisdom," because it takes for the highest cause and last end some worldly good, so
too there is a good folly opposed to this evil wisdom, whereby man despises worldly things:
and it is of this folly that the Apostle speaks.

Reply Obj. 3: It is the wisdom of the world that deceives and makes us foolish in God's sight,
as is evident from the Apostle's words (1 Cor. 3:19).

Reply Obj. 4: To be unconcerned when one is injured is sometimes due to the fact that one has
no taste for worldly things, but only for heavenly things. Hence this belongs not to worldly
but to Divine wisdom, as Gregory declares (Moral. x, 49). Sometimes however it is the result
of a man's being simply stupid about everything, as may be seen in idiots, who do not discern
what is injurious to them, and this belongs to folly simply.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 45, Art. 2]

Whether Folly Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that folly is not a sin. For no sin arises in us from nature. But
some are fools naturally. Therefore folly is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, "Every sin is voluntary," according to Augustine (De Vera Relig. xiv). But
folly is not voluntary. Therefore it is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every sin is contrary to a Divine precept. But folly is not contrary to any
precept. Therefore folly is not a sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 1:32): "The prosperity of fools shall destroy them."
But no man is destroyed save for sin. Therefore folly is a sin.

I answer that, Folly, as stated above (A. 1), denotes dullness of sense in judging, and chiefly
as regards the highest cause, which is the last end and the sovereign good. Now a man may in
this respect contract dullness in judgment in two ways. First, from a natural indisposition,
as in the case of idiots, and such like folly is no sin. Secondly, by plunging his sense into
earthly things, whereby his sense is rendered incapable of perceiving Divine things, according
to 1 Cor. 2:14, "The sensual man perceiveth not these things that are of the Spirit of God,"
even as sweet things have no savor for a man whose taste is infected with an evil humor: and
such like folly is a sin.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Though no man wishes to be a fool, yet he wishes those things of which folly
is a consequence, viz. to withdraw his sense from spiritual things and to plunge it into earthly
things. The same thing happens in regard to other sins; for the lustful man desires pleasure,
without which there is no sin, although he does not desire sin simply, for he would wish to
enjoy the pleasure without sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Folly is opposed to the precepts about the contemplation of truth, of which we
have spoken above (Q. 16) when we were treating of knowledge and understanding.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 46, Art. 3]

Whether Folly Is a Daughter of Lust?

Objection 1: It would seem that folly is not a daughter of lust. For Gregory (Moral. xxxi,
45) enumerates the daughters of lust, among which however he makes no mention of folly. Therefore
folly does not proceed from lust.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 3:19): "The wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God." Now, according to Gregory (Moral. x, 29) "the wisdom of this world consists in covering
the heart with crafty devices;" and this savors of duplicity. Therefore folly is a daughter
of duplicity rather than of lust.

Obj. 3: Further, anger especially is the cause of fury and madness in some persons; and this
pertains to folly. Therefore folly arises from anger rather than from lust.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 7:22): "Immediately he followeth her," i.e. the harlot
. . . "not knowing that he is drawn like a fool to bonds."

I answer that, As already stated (A. 2), folly, in so far as it is a sin, is caused by the
spiritual sense being dulled, so as to be incapable of judging spiritual things. Now man's
sense is plunged into earthly things chiefly by lust, which is about the greatest of pleasures;
and these absorb the mind more than any others. Therefore the folly which is a sin, arises
chiefly from lust.

Reply Obj. 1: It is part of folly that a man should have a distaste for God and His gifts.
Hence Gregory mentions two daughters of lust, pertaining to folly, namely, "hatred of God"
and "despair of the life to come"; thus he divides folly into two parts as it were.

Reply Obj. 2: These words of the Apostle are to be understood, not causally but essentially,
because, to wit, worldly wisdom itself is folly with God. Hence it does not follow that whatever
belongs to worldly wisdom, is a cause of this folly.

Reply Obj. 3: Anger by reason of its keenness, as stated above (I-II, Q. 48, AA. 2, 3, 4),
produces a great change in the nature of the body, wherefore it conduces very much to the folly
which results from a bodily impediment. On the other hand the folly which is caused by a spiritual
impediment, viz. by the mind being plunged into earthly things, arises chiefly from lust, as
stated above.

TREATISE ON THE CARDINAL VIRTUES (QQ. 47-170)

QUESTION 47

OF PRUDENCE, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF (In Sixteen Articles)

After treating of the theological virtues, we must in due sequence consider the cardinal virtues.
In the first place we shall consider prudence in itself; secondly, its parts; thirdly, the
corresponding gift; fourthly, the contrary vices; fifthly, the precepts concerning prudence.

Under the first head there are sixteen points of inquiry:

(1) Whether prudence is in the will or in the reason?

(2) If in the reason, whether it is only in the practical, or also in the speculative reason?

(3) Whether it takes cognizance of singulars?

(4) Whether it is virtue?

(5) Whether it is a special virtue?

(6) Whether it appoints the end to the moral virtues?

(7) Whether it fixes the mean in the moral virtues?

(8) Whether its proper act is command?

(9) Whether solicitude or watchfulness belongs to prudence?

(10) Whether prudence extends to the governing of many?

(11) Whether the prudence which regards private good is the same in species as that which regards
the common good?

(12) Whether prudence is in subjects, or only in their rulers?

(13) Whether prudence is in the wicked?

(14) Whether prudence is in all good men?

(15) Whether prudence is in us naturally?

(16) Whether prudence is lost by forgetfulness?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 1]

Whether Prudence Is in the Cognitive or in the Appetitive Faculty?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not in the cognitive but in the appetitive faculty.
For Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. xv): "Prudence is love choosing wisely between the things
that help and those that hinder." Now love is not in the cognitive, but in the appetitive faculty.
Therefore prudence is in the appetitive faculty.

Obj. 2: Further, as appears from the foregoing definition it belongs to prudence "to choose
wisely." But choice is an act of the appetitive faculty, as stated above (I-II, Q. 13, A. 1).
Therefore prudence is not in the cognitive but in the appetitive faculty.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "in art it is better to err voluntarily
than involuntarily, whereas in the case of prudence, as of the virtues, it is worse." Now the
moral virtues, of which he is treating there, are in the appetitive faculty, whereas art is
in the reason. Therefore prudence is in the appetitive rather than in the rational faculty.

On the contrary, Augustine says (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 61): "Prudence is the knowledge of what to
seek and what to avoid."

I answer that, As Isidore says (Etym. x): "A prudent man is one who sees as it were from afar,
for his sight is keen, and he foresees the event of uncertainties." Now sight belongs not to
the appetitive but to the cognitive faculty. Wherefore it is manifest that prudence belongs
directly to the cognitive, and not to the sensitive faculty, because by the latter we know
nothing but what is within reach and offers itself to the senses: while to obtain knowledge
of the future from knowledge of the present or past, which pertains to prudence, belongs properly
to the reason, because this is done by a process of comparison. It follows therefore that prudence,
properly speaking, is in the reason.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (I, Q. 82, A. 4) the will moves all the faculties to their acts.
Now the first act of the appetitive faculty is love, as stated above (I-II, Q. 25, AA. 1, 2).
Accordingly prudence is said to be love, not indeed essentially, but in so far as love moves
to the act of prudence. Wherefore Augustine goes on to say that "prudence is love discerning
aright that which helps from that which hinders us in tending to God." Now love is said to
discern because it moves the reason to discern.

Reply Obj. 2: The prudent man considers things afar off, in so far as they tend to be a help
or a hindrance to that which has to be done at the present time. Hence it is clear that those
things which prudence considers stand in relation to this other, as in relation to the end.
Now of those things that are directed to the end there is counsel in the reason, and choice
in the appetite, of which two, counsel belongs more properly to prudence, since the Philosopher
states (Ethic. vi, 5, 7, 9) that a prudent man "takes good counsel." But as choice presupposes
counsel, since it is "the desire for what has been already counselled" (Ethic. iii, 2), it
follows that choice can also be ascribed to prudence indirectly, in so far, to wit, as prudence
directs the choice by means of counsel.

Reply Obj. 3: The worth of prudence consists not in thought merely, but in its application
to action, which is the end of the practical reason. Wherefore if any defect occur in this,
it is most contrary to prudence, since, the end being of most import in everything, it follows
that a defect which touches the end is the worst of all. Hence the Philosopher goes on to say
(Ethic. vi, 5) that prudence is "something more than a merely rational habit," such as art
is, since, as stated above (I-II, Q. 57, A. 4) it includes application to action, which application
is an act of the will.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 2]

Whether Prudence Belongs to the Practical Reason Alone or Also to the Speculative Reason?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence belongs not only to the practical, but also to the
speculative reason. For it is written (Prov. 10:23): "Wisdom is prudence to a man." Now wisdom
consists chiefly in contemplation. Therefore prudence does also.

Obj. 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 24): "Prudence is concerned with the quest of truth,
and fills us with the desire of fuller knowledge." Now this belongs to the speculative reason.
Therefore prudence resides also in the speculative reason.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher assigns art and prudence to the same part of the soul (Ethic.
vi, 1). Now art may be not only practical but also speculative, as in the case of the liberal
arts. Therefore prudence also is both practical and speculative.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that prudence is right reason applied
to action. Now this belongs to none but the practical reason. Therefore prudence is in the
practical reason only.

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5) "a prudent man is one who is capable
of taking good counsel." Now counsel is about things that we have to do in relation to some
end: and the reason that deals with things to be done for an end is the practical reason. Hence
it is evident that prudence resides only in the practical reason.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 45, AA. 1, 3), wisdom considers the absolutely highest cause:
so that the consideration of the highest cause in any particular genus belongs to wisdom in
that genus. Now in the genus of human acts the highest cause is the common end of all human
life, and it is this end that prudence intends. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that
just as he who reasons well for the realization of a particular end, such as victory, is said
to be prudent, not absolutely, but in a particular genus, namely warfare, so he that reasons
well with regard to right conduct as a whole, is said to be prudent absolutely. Wherefore it
is clear that prudence is wisdom about human affairs: but not wisdom absolutely, because it
is not about the absolutely highest cause, for it is about human good, and this is not the
best thing of all. And so it is stated significantly that "prudence is wisdom for man," but
not wisdom absolutely.

Reply Obj. 2: Ambrose, and Tully also (De Invent. ii, 53) take the word prudence in a broad
sense for any human knowledge, whether speculative or practical. And yet it may also be replied
that the act itself of the speculative reason, in so far as it is voluntary, is a matter of
choice and counsel as to its exercise; and consequently comes under the direction of prudence.
On the other hand, as regards its specification in relation to its object which is the "necessary
true," it comes under neither counsel nor prudence.

Reply Obj. 3: Every application of right reason in the work of production belongs to art: but
to prudence belongs only the application of right reason in matters of counsel, which are those
wherein there is no fixed way of obtaining the end, as stated in Ethic. iii, 3. Since then,
the speculative reason makes things such as syllogisms, propositions and the like, wherein
the process follows certain and fixed rules, consequently in respect of such things it is possible
to have the essentials of art, but not of prudence; and so we find such a thing as a speculative
art, but not a speculative prudence.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 3]

Whether Prudence Takes Cognizance of Singulars?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence does not take cognizance of singulars. For prudence
is in the reason, as stated above (AA. 1, 2). But "reason deals with universals," according
to Phys. i, 5. Therefore prudence does not take cognizance except of universals.

Obj. 2: Further, singulars are infinite in number. But the reason cannot comprehend an infinite
number of things. Therefore prudence which is right reason, is not about singulars.

Obj. 3: Further, particulars are known by the senses. But prudence is not in a sense, for many
persons who have keen outward senses are devoid of prudence. Therefore prudence does not take
cognizance of singulars.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 7) that "prudence does not deal with universals
only, but needs to take cognizance of singulars also."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1, ad 3), to prudence belongs not only the consideration
of the reason, but also the application to action, which is the end of the practical reason.
But no man can conveniently apply one thing to another, unless he knows both the thing to be
applied, and the thing to which it has to be applied. Now actions are in singular matters:
and so it is necessary for the prudent man to know both the universal principles of reason,
and the singulars about which actions are concerned.

Reply Obj. 1: Reason first and chiefly is concerned with universals, and yet it is able to
apply universal rules to particular cases: hence the conclusions of syllogisms are not only
universal, but also particular, because the intellect by a kind of reflection extends to matter,
as stated in De Anima iii.

Reply Obj. 2: It is because the infinite number of singulars cannot be comprehended by human
reason, that "our counsels are uncertain" (Wis. 9:14). Nevertheless experience reduces the
infinity of singulars to a certain finite number which occur as a general rule, and the knowledge
of these suffices for human prudence.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 8), prudence does not reside in the external
senses whereby we know sensible objects, but in the interior sense, which is perfected by memory
and experience so as to judge promptly of particular cases. This does not mean however that
prudence is in the interior sense as in its princip[al] subject, for it is chiefly in the reason,
yet by a kind of application it extends to this sense.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 4]

Whether Prudence Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not a virtue. For Augustine says (De Lib. Arb.
i, 13) that "prudence is the science of what to desire and what to avoid." Now science is condivided
with virtue, as appears in the Predicaments (vi). Therefore prudence is not a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, there is no virtue of a virtue: but "there is a virtue of art," as the Philosopher
states (Ethic. vi, 5): wherefore art is not a virtue. Now there is prudence in art, for it
is written (2 Paralip. ii, 14) concerning Hiram, that he knew "to grave all sort of graving,
and to devise ingeniously (prudenter) all that there may be need of in the work." Therefore
prudence is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, no virtue can be immoderate. But prudence is immoderate, else it would be
useless to say (Prov. 23:4): "Set bounds to thy prudence." Therefore prudence is not a virtue.

On the contrary, Gregory states (Moral. ii, 49) that prudence, temperance, fortitude and justice
are four virtues.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 55, A. 3; Q. 56, A. 1) when we were treating of virtues
in general, "virtue is that which makes its possessor good, and his work good likewise." Now
good may be understood in a twofold sense: first, materially, for the thing that is good, secondly,
formally, under the aspect of good. Good, under the aspect of good, is the object of the appetitive
power. Hence if any habits rectify the consideration of reason, without regarding the rectitude
of the appetite, they have less of the nature of a virtue since they direct man to good materially,
that is to say, to the thing which is good, but without considering it under the aspect of
good. On the other hand those virtues which regard the rectitude of the appetite, have more
of the nature of virtue, because they consider the good not only materially, but also formally,
in other words, they consider that which is good under the aspect of good.

Now it belongs to prudence, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3; A. 3) to apply right reason to action,
and this is not done without a right appetite. Hence prudence has the nature of virtue not
only as the other intellectual virtues have it, but also as the moral virtues have it, among
which virtues it is enumerated.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine there takes science in the broad sense for any kind of right reason.

Reply Obj. 2: The Philosopher says that there is a virtue of art, because art does not require
rectitude of the appetite; wherefore in order that a man may make right use of his art, he
needs to have a virtue which will rectify his appetite. Prudence however has nothing to do
with the matter of art, because art is both directed to a particular end, and has fixed means
of obtaining that end. And yet, by a kind of comparison, a man may be said to act prudently
in matters of art. Moreover in certain arts, on account of the uncertainty of the means for
obtaining the end, there is need for counsel, as for instance in the arts of medicine and navigation,
as stated in Ethic. iii, 3.

Reply Obj. 3: This saying of the wise man does not mean that prudence itself should be moderate,
but that moderation must be imposed on other things according to prudence.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 5]

Whether Prudence Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not a special virtue. For no special virtue is
included in the definition of virtue in general, since virtue is defined (Ethic. ii, 6) "an
elective habit that follows a mean appointed by reason in relation to ourselves, even as a
wise man decides." Now right reason is reason in accordance with prudence, as stated in Ethic.
vi, 13. Therefore prudence is not a special virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 13) that "the effect of moral virtue is right
action as regards the end, and that of prudence, right action as regards the means." Now in
every virtue certain things have to be done as means to the end. Therefore prudence is in every
virtue, and consequently is not a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, a special virtue has a special object. But prudence has not a special object,
for it is right reason "applied to action" (Ethic. vi, 5); and all works of virtue are actions.
Therefore prudence is not a special virtue.

I answer that, Since acts and habits take their species from their objects, as shown above
(I-II, Q. 1, A. 3; Q. 18, A. 2; Q. 54, A. 2), any habit that has a corresponding special object,
distinct from other objects, must needs be a special habit, and if it be a good habit, it must
be a special virtue. Now an object is called special, not merely according to the consideration
of its matter, but rather according to its formal aspect, as explained above (I-II, Q. 54,
A. 2, ad 1). Because one and the same thing is the subject matter of the acts of different
habits, and also of different powers, according to its different formal aspects. Now a yet
greater difference of object is requisite for a difference of powers than for a difference
of habits, since several habits are found in the same power, as stated above (I-II, Q. 54,
A. 1). Consequently any difference in the aspect of an object, that requires a difference of
powers, will a fortiori require a difference of habits.

Accordingly we must say that since prudence is in the reason, as stated above (A. 2), it is
differentiated from the other intellectual virtues by a material difference of objects. Wisdom,
knowledge and understanding are about necessary things, whereas art and prudence are about
contingent things, art being concerned with things made, that is, with things produced in external
matter, such as a house, a knife and so forth; and prudence, being concerned with things done,
that is, with things that have their being in the doer himself, as stated above (I-II, Q. 57,
A. 4). On the other hand prudence is differentiated from the moral virtues according to a formal
aspect distinctive of powers, i.e. the intellective power, wherein is prudence, and the appetitive
power, wherein is moral virtue. Hence it is evident that prudence is a special virtue, distinct
from all other virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: This is not a definition of virtue in general, but of moral virtue, the definition
of which fittingly includes an intellectual virtue, viz., prudence, which has the same matter
in common with moral virtue; because, just as the subject of moral virtue is something that
partakes of reason, so moral virtue has the aspect of virtue, in so far as it partakes of intellectual
virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument proves that prudence helps all the virtues, and works in all of
them; but this does not suffice to prove that it is not a special virtue; for nothing prevents
a certain genus from containing a species which is operative in every other species of that
same genus, even as the sun has an influence over all bodies.

Reply Obj. 3: Things done are indeed the matter of prudence, in so far as they are the object
of reason, that is, considered as true: but they are the matter of the moral virtues, in so
far as they are the object of the appetitive power, that is, considered as good.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 6]

Whether Prudence Appoints the End to Moral Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence appoints the end to moral virtues. Since prudence
is in the reason, while moral virtue is in the appetite, it seems that prudence stands in relation
to moral virtue, as reason to the appetite. Now reason appoints the end to the appetitive power.
Therefore prudence appoints the end to the moral virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, man surpasses irrational beings by his reason, but he has other things in
common with them. Accordingly the other parts of man are in relation to his reason, what man
is in relation to irrational creatures. Now man is the end of irrational creatures, according
to Polit. i, 3. Therefore all the other parts of man are directed to reason as to their end.
But prudence is "right reason applied to action," as stated above (A. 2). Therefore all actions
are directed to prudence as their end. Therefore prudence appoints the end to all moral virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to the virtue, art, or power that is concerned about the end, to
command the virtues or arts that are concerned about the means. Now prudence disposes of the
other moral virtues, and commands them. Therefore it appoints their end to them.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 12) that "moral virtue ensures the rectitude
of the intention of the end, while prudence ensures the rectitude of the means." Therefore
it does not belong to prudence to appoint the end to moral virtues, but only to regulate the means.

I answer that, The end of moral virtues is human good. Now the good of the human soul is to
be in accord with reason, as Dionysius declares (Div. Nom. iv). Wherefore the ends of moral
virtue must of necessity pre-exist in the reason.

Now, just as, in the speculative reason, there are certain things naturally known, about which
is understanding, and certain things of which we obtain knowledge through them, viz. conclusions,
about which is science, so in the practical reason, certain things pre-exist, as naturally
known principles, and such are the ends of the moral virtues, since the end is in practical
matters what principles are in speculative matters, as stated above (Q. 23, A. 7, ad 2; I-II,
Q. 13, A. 3); while certain things are in the practical reason by way of conclusions, and such
are the means which we gather from the ends themselves. About these is prudence, which applies
universal principles to the particular conclusions of practical matters.

Reply Obj. 1: Natural reason known by the name of synderesis appoints the end to moral virtues,
as stated above (I, Q. 79, A. 12): but prudence does not do this for the reason given above.

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: The end concerns the moral virtues, not as though they appointed the end, but
because they tend to the end which is appointed by natural reason. In this they are helped
by prudence, which prepares the way for them, by disposing the means. Hence it follows that
prudence is more excellent than the moral virtues, and moves them: yet synderesis moves prudence,
just as the understanding of principles moves science.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 7]

Whether It Belongs to Prudence to Find the Mean in Moral Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that it does not belong to prudence to find the mean in moral virtues.
For the achievement of the mean is the end of moral virtues. But prudence does not appoint
the end to moral virtues, as shown above (A. 6). Therefore it does not find the mean in them.

Obj. 2: Further, that which of itself has being, would seem to have no cause, but its very
being is its cause, since a thing is said to have being by reason of its cause. Now "to follow
the mean" belongs to moral virtue by reason of itself, as part of its definition, as shown
above (A. 5, Obj. 1). Therefore prudence does not cause the mean in moral virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence works after the manner of reason. But moral virtue tends to the mean
after the manner of nature, because, as Tully states (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 53), "virtue is
a habit like a second nature in accord with reason." Therefore prudence does not appoint the
mean to moral virtues.

On the contrary, In the foregoing definition of moral virtue (A. 5, Obj. 1) it is stated that
it "follows a mean appointed by reason . . . even as a wise man decides."

I answer that, The proper end of each moral virtue consists precisely in conformity with right
reason. For temperance intends that man should not stray from reason for the sake of his concupiscences;
fortitude, that he should not stray from the right judgment of reason through fear or daring.
Moreover this end is appointed to man according to natural reason, since natural reason dictates
to each one that he should act according to reason.

But it belongs to the ruling of prudence to decide in what manner and by what means man shall
obtain the mean of reason in his deeds. For though the attainment of the mean is the end of
a moral virtue, yet this mean is found by the right disposition of these things that are directed
to the end.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as a natural agent makes form to be in matter, yet does not make that which
is essential to the form to belong to it, so too, prudence appoints the mean in passions and
operations, and yet does not make the searching of the mean to belong to virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Moral virtue after the manner of nature intends to attain the mean. Since, however,
the mean as such is not found in all matters after the same manner, it follows that the inclination
of nature which ever works in the same manner, does not suffice for this purpose, and so the
ruling of prudence is required.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 8]

Whether Command Is the Chief Act of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that command is not the chief act of prudence. For command regards
the good to be ensued. Now Augustine (De Trin. xiv, 9) states that it is an act of prudence
"to avoid ambushes." Therefore command is not the chief act of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "the prudent man takes good counsel."
Now "to take counsel" and "to command" seem to be different acts, as appears from what has
been said above (I-II, Q. 57, A. 6). Therefore command is not the chief act of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems to belong to the will to command and to rule, since the will has
the end for its object, and moves the other powers of the soul. Now prudence is not in the
will, but in the reason. Therefore command is not an act of prudence.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 10) that "prudence commands."

I answer that, Prudence is "right reason applied to action," as stated above (A. 2). Hence
that which is the chief act of reason in regard to action must needs be the chief act of prudence.
Now there are three such acts. The first is to take counsel, which belongs to discovery, for
counsel is an act of inquiry, as stated above (I-II, Q. 14, A. 1). The second act is to judge
of what one has discovered, and this is an act of the speculative reason. But the practical
reason, which is directed to action, goes further, and its third act is to command, which act
consists in applying to action the things counselled and judged. And since this act approaches
nearer to the end of the practical reason, it follows that it is the chief act of the practical
reason, and consequently of prudence.

In confirmation of this we find that the perfection of art consists in judging and not in commanding:
wherefore he who sins voluntarily against his craft is reputed a better craftsman than he who
does so involuntarily, because the former seems to do so from right judgment, and the latter
from a defective judgment. On the other hand it is the reverse in prudence, as stated in Ethic.
vi, 5, for it is more imprudent to sin voluntarily, since this is to be lacking in the chief
act of prudence, viz. command, than to sin involuntarily.

Reply Obj. 1: The act of command extends both to the ensuing of good and to the avoidance of
evil. Nevertheless Augustine ascribes "the avoidance of ambushes" to prudence, not as its chief
act, but as an act of prudence that does not continue in heaven.

Reply Obj. 2: Good counsel is required in order that the good things discovered may be applied
to action: wherefore command belongs to prudence which takes good counsel.

Reply Obj. 3: Simply to move belongs to the will: but command denotes motion together with
a kind of ordering, wherefore it is an act of the reason, as stated above (I-II, Q. 17, A. 1).

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 9]

Whether Solicitude Belongs to Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that solicitude does not belong to prudence. For solicitude implies
disquiet, wherefore Isidore says (Etym. x) that "a solicitous man is a restless man." Now motion
belongs chiefly to the appetitive power: wherefore solicitude does also. But prudence is not
in the appetitive power, but in the reason, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore solicitude does
not belong to prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, the certainty of truth seems opposed to solicitude, wherefore it is related
(1 Kings 9:20) that Samuel said to Saul: "As for the asses which were lost three days ago,
be not solicitous, because they are found." Now the certainty of truth belongs to prudence,
since it is an intellectual virtue. Therefore solicitude is in opposition to prudence rather
than belonging to it.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3) the "magnanimous man is slow and leisurely."
Now slowness is contrary to solicitude. Since then prudence is not opposed to magnanimity,
for "good is not opposed to good," as stated in the Predicaments (viii) it would seem that
solicitude does not belong to prudence.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Pet. 4:7): "Be prudent . . . and watch in prayers." But watchfulness
is the same as solicitude. Therefore solicitude belongs to prudence.

I answer that, According to Isidore (Etym. x), a man is said to be solicitous through being
shrewd (solers) and alert (citus), in so far as a man through a certain shrewdness of mind
is on the alert to do whatever has to be done. Now this belongs to prudence, whose chief act
is a command about what has been already counselled and judged in matters of action. Hence
the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 9) that "one should be quick in carrying out the counsel taken,
but slow in taking counsel." Hence it is that solicitude belongs properly to prudence, and
for this reason Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. xxiv) that "prudence keeps most careful watch
and ward, lest by degrees we be deceived unawares by evil counsel."

Reply Obj. 1: Movement belongs to the appetitive power as to the principle of movement, in
accordance however, with the direction and command of reason, wherein solicitude consists.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 3), "equal certainty should not be sought
in all things, but in each matter according to its proper mode." And since the matter of prudence
is the contingent singulars about which are human actions, the certainty of prudence cannot
be so great as to be devoid of all solicitude.

Reply Obj. 3: The magnanimous man is said to be "slow and leisurely" not because he is solicitous
about nothing, but because he is not over-solicitous about many things, and is trustful in
matters where he ought to have trust, and is not over-solicitous about them: for over-much
fear and distrust are the cause of over-solicitude, since fear makes us take counsel, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 44, A. 2) when we were treating of the passion of fear.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 10]

Whether Solicitude Belongs to Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence does not extend to the governing of many, but only
to the government of oneself. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that virtue directed to
the common good is justice. But prudence differs from justice. Therefore prudence is not directed
to the common good.

Obj. 2: Further, he seems to be prudent, who seeks and does good for himself. Now those who
seek the common good often neglect their own. Therefore they are not prudent.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence is specifically distinct from temperance and fortitude. But temperance
and fortitude seem to be related only to a man's own good. Therefore the same applies to prudence.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. 24:45): "Who, thinkest thou, is a faithful and prudent
[Douay: 'wise'] servant whom his lord hath appointed over his family?"

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 8) some have held that prudence does
not extend to the common good, but only to the good of the individual, and this because they
thought that man is not bound to seek other than his own good. But this opinion is opposed
to charity, which "seeketh not her own" (1 Cor. 13:5): wherefore the Apostle says of himself
(1 Cor. 10:33): "Not seeking that which is profitable to myself, but to many, that they may
be saved." Moreover it is contrary to right reason, which judges the common good to be better
than the good of the individual.

Accordingly, since it belongs to prudence rightly to counsel, judge, and command concerning
the means of obtaining a due end, it is evident that prudence regards not only the private
good of the individual, but also the common good of the multitude.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is speaking there of moral virtue. Now just as every moral virtue
that is directed to the common good is called "legal" justice, so the prudence that is directed
to the common good is called "political" prudence, for the latter stands in the same relation
to legal justice, as prudence simply so called to moral virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: He that seeks the good of the many, seeks in consequence his own good, for two
reasons. First, because the individual good is impossible without the common good of the family,
state, or kingdom. Hence Valerius Maximus says [*Fact. et Dict. Memor. iv, 6] of the ancient
Romans that "they would rather be poor in a rich empire than rich in a poor empire." Secondly,
because, since man is a part of the home and state, he must needs consider what is good for
him by being prudent about the good of the many. For the good disposition of parts depends
on their relation to the whole; thus Augustine says (Confess. iii, 8) that "any part which
does not harmonize with its whole, is offensive."

Reply Obj. 3: Even temperance and fortitude can be directed to the common good, hence there
are precepts of law concerning them as stated in Ethic. v, 1: more so, however, prudence and
justice, since these belong to the rational faculty which directly regards the universal, just
as the sensitive part regards singulars.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 11]

Whether Prudence About One's Own Good Is Specifically the Same As That Which Extends to the
Common Good?

Objection 1: It seems that prudence about one's own good is the same specifically as that which
extends to the common good. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 8) that "political prudence,
and prudence are the same habit, yet their essence is not the same."

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 2) that "virtue is the same in a good man
and in a good ruler." Now political prudence is chiefly in the ruler, in whom it is architectonic,
as it were. Since then prudence is a virtue of a good man, it seems that prudence and political
prudence are the same habit.

Obj. 3: Further, a habit is not diversified in species or essence by things which are subordinate
to one another. But the particular good, which belongs to prudence simply so called, is subordinate
to the common good, which belongs to political prudence. Therefore prudence and political prudence
differ neither specifically nor essentially.

On the contrary, "Political prudence," which is directed to the common good of the state, "domestic
economy" which is of such things as relate to the common good of the household or family, and
"monastic economy" which is concerned with things affecting the good of one person, are all
distinct sciences. Therefore in like manner there are different kinds of prudence, corresponding
to the above differences of matter.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5; Q. 54, A. 2, ad 1), the species of habits differ according
to the difference of object considered in its formal aspect. Now the formal aspect of all things
directed to the end, is taken from the end itself, as shown above (I-II, Prolog.; Q. 102, A.
1), wherefore the species of habits differ by their relation to different ends. Again the individual
good, the good of the family, and the good of the city and kingdom are different ends. Wherefore
there must needs be different species of prudence corresponding to these different ends, so
that one is "prudence" simply so called, which is directed to one's own good; another, "domestic
prudence" which is directed to the common good of the home; and a third, "political prudence,"
which is directed to the common good of the state or kingdom.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher means, not that political prudence is substantially the same
habit as any kind of prudence, but that it is the same as the prudence which is directed to
the common good. This is called "prudence" in respect of the common notion of prudence, i.e.
as being right reason applied to action, while it is called "political," as being directed
to the common good.

Reply Obj. 2: As the Philosopher declares (Polit. iii, 2), "it belongs to a good man to be
able to rule well and to obey well," wherefore the virtue of a good man includes also that
of a good ruler. Yet the virtue of the ruler and of the subject differs specifically, even
as the virtue of a man and of a woman, as stated by the same authority (Polit. iii, 2).

Reply Obj. 3: Even different ends, one of which is subordinate to the other, diversify the
species of a habit, thus for instance, habits directed to riding, soldiering, and civic life,
differ specifically although their ends are subordinate to one another. In like manner, though
the good of the individual is subordinate to the good of the many, that does not prevent this
difference from making the habits differ specifically; but it follows that the habit which
is directed to the last end is above the other habits and commands them.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 12]

Whether Prudence Is in Subjects, or Only in Their Rulers?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not in subjects but only in their rulers. For the
Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 2) that "prudence alone is the virtue proper to a ruler, while
other virtues are common to subjects and rulers, and the prudence of the subject is not a virtue
but a true opinion."

Obj. 2: Further, it is stated in Polit. i, 5 that "a slave is not competent to take counsel."
But prudence makes a man take good counsel (Ethic. vi, 5). Therefore prudence is not befitting
slaves or subjects.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence exercises command, as stated above (A. 8). But command is not in
the competency of slaves or subjects but only of rulers. Therefore prudence is not in subjects
but only in rulers.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 8) that there are two kinds of political
prudence, one of which is "legislative" and belongs to rulers, while the other "retains the
common name political," and is about "individual actions." Now it belongs also to subjects
to perform these individual actions. Therefore prudence is not only in rulers but also in subjects.

I answer that, Prudence is in the reason. Now ruling and governing belong properly to the reason;
and therefore it is proper to a man to reason and be prudent in so far as he has a share in
ruling and governing. But it is evident that the subject as subject, and the slave as slave,
are not competent to rule and govern, but rather to be ruled and governed. Therefore prudence
is not the virtue of a slave as slave, nor of a subject as subject.

Since, however, every man, for as much as he is rational, has a share in ruling according to
the judgment of reason, he is proportionately competent to have prudence. Wherefore it is manifest
that prudence is in the ruler "after the manner of a mastercraft" (Ethic. vi, 8), but in the
subjects, "after the manner of a handicraft."

Reply Obj. 1: The saying of the Philosopher is to be understood strictly, namely, that prudence
is not the virtue of a subject as such.

Reply Obj. 2: A slave is not capable of taking counsel, in so far as he is a slave (for thus
he is the instrument of his master), but he does take counsel in so far as he is a rational animal.

Reply Obj. 3: By prudence a man commands not only others, but also himself, in so far as the
reason is said to command the lower powers.

THIRTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 13]

Whether Prudence Can Be in Sinners?

Objection 1: It would seem that there can be prudence in sinners. For our Lord said (Luke 16:8):
"The children of this world are more prudent [Douay: 'wiser'] in their generation than the
children of light." Now the children of this world are sinners. Therefore there be prudence
in sinners.

Obj. 2: Further, faith is a more excellent virtue than prudence. But there can be faith in
sinners. Therefore there can be prudence also.

Obj. 3: Further, according to Ethic. vi, 7, "we say that to be of good counsel is the work
of prudent man especially." Now many sinners can take good counsel. Therefore sinners can have
prudence.

On the contrary, The Philosopher declares (Ethic. vi, 12) that "it is impossible for a man
be prudent unless he be good." Now no sinner is a good man. Therefore no sinner is prudent.

I answer that, Prudence is threefold. There is a false prudence, which takes its name from
its likeness to true prudence. For since a prudent man is one who disposes well of the things
that have to be done for a good end, whoever disposes well of such things as are fitting for
an evil end, has false prudence, in far as that which he takes for an end, is good, not in
truth but in appearance. Thus man is called "a good robber," and in this way may speak of "a
prudent robber," by way of similarity, because he devises fitting ways of committing robbery.
This is the prudence of which the Apostle says (Rom. 8:6): "The prudence [Douay: 'wisdom']
of the flesh is death," because, to wit, it places its ultimate end in the pleasures of the flesh.

The second prudence is indeed true prudence, because it devises fitting ways of obtaining a
good end; and yet it is imperfect, from a twofold source. First, because the good which it
takes for an end, is not the common end of all human life, but of some particular affair; thus
when a man devises fitting ways of conducting business or of sailing a ship, he is called a
prudent businessman, or a prudent sailor; secondly, because he fails in the chief act of prudence,
as when a man takes counsel aright, and forms a good judgment, even about things concerning
life as a whole, but fails to make an effective command.

The third prudence is both true and perfect, for it takes counsel, judges and commands aright
in respect of the good end of man's whole life: and this alone is prudence simply so-called,
and cannot be in sinners, whereas the first prudence is in sinners alone, while imperfect prudence
is common to good and wicked men, especially that which is imperfect through being directed
to a particular end, since that which is imperfect on account of a failing in the chief act,
is only in the wicked.

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of our Lord is to be understood of the first prudence, wherefore
it is not said that they are prudent absolutely, but that they are prudent in "their generation."

Reply Obj. 2: The nature of faith consists not in conformity with the appetite for certain
right actions, but in knowledge alone. On the other hand prudence implies a relation to a right
appetite. First because its principles are the ends in matters of action; and of such ends
one forms a right estimate through the habits of moral virtue, which rectify the appetite:
wherefore without the moral virtues there is no prudence, as shown above (I-II, Q. 58, A. 5);
secondly because prudence commands right actions, which does not happen unless the appetite
be right. Wherefore though faith on account of its object is more excellent than prudence,
yet prudence, by its very nature, is more opposed to sin, which arises from a disorder of the
appetite.

Reply Obj. 3: Sinners can take good counsel for an evil end, or for some particular good, but
they do not perfectly take good counsel for the end of their whole life, since they do not
carry that counsel into effect. Hence they lack prudence which is directed to the good only;
and yet in them, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 12) there is "cleverness," [*deinotike]
i.e. natural diligence which may be directed to both good and evil; or "cunning," [*panourgia]
which is directed only to evil, and which we have stated above, to be "false prudence" or "prudence
of the flesh."

FOURTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 14]

Whether Prudence Is in All Who Have Grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is not in all who have grace. Prudence requires diligence,
that one may foresee aright what has to be done. But many who have grace have not this diligence.
Therefore not all who have grace have prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, a prudent man is one who takes good counsel, as stated above (A. 8, Obj. 2;
A. 13, Obj. 3). Yet many have grace who do not take good counsel, and need to be guided by
the counsel of others. Therefore not all who have grace, have prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says (Topic. iii, 2) that "young people are not obviously
prudent." Yet many young people have grace. Therefore prudence is not to be found in all who
have grace.

On the contrary, No man has grace unless he be virtuous. Now no man can be virtuous without
prudence, for Gregory says (Moral. ii, 46) that "the other virtues cannot be virtues at all
unless they effect prudently what they desire to accomplish." Therefore all who have grace
have prudence.

I answer that, The virtues must needs be connected together, so that
whoever has one has all, as stated above (I-II, Q. 65, A. 1). Now
 whoever has grace has charity, so that he must needs have all the
other virtues, and hence, since prudence is a virtue, as shown above
(A. 4), he must, of necessity, have prudence also.

Reply Obj. 1: Diligence is twofold: one is merely sufficient with regard to things necessary
for salvation; and such diligence is given to all who have grace, whom "His unction teacheth
of all things" (1 John 2:27). There is also another diligence which is more than sufficient,
whereby a man is able to make provision both for himself and for others, not only in matters
necessary for salvation, but also in all things relating to human life; and such diligence
as this is not in all who have grace.

Reply Obj. 2: Those who require to be guided by the counsel of others, are able, if they have
grace, to take counsel for themselves in this point at least, that they require the counsel
of others and can discern good from evil counsel.

Reply Obj. 3: Acquired prudence is caused by the exercise of acts, wherefore "its acquisition
demands experience and time" (Ethic. ii, 1), hence it cannot be in the young, neither in habit
nor in act. On the other hand gratuitous prudence is caused by divine infusion. Wherefore,
in children who have been baptized but have not come to the use of reason, there is prudence
as to habit but not as to act, even as in idiots; whereas in those who have come to the use
of reason, it is also as to act, with regard to things necessary for salvation. This by practice
merits increase, until it becomes perfect, even as the other virtues. Hence the Apostle says
(Heb. 5:14) that "strong meat is for the perfect, for them who by custom have their senses
exercised to the discerning of good and evil."

FIFTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 15]

Whether Prudence Is in Us by Nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence is in us by nature. The Philosopher says that things
connected with prudence "seem to be natural," namely "synesis, gnome" [*synesis and gnome,
Cf. I-II, Q. 57, A. 6] and the like, but not those which are connected with speculative wisdom.
Now things belonging to the same genus have the same kind of origin. Therefore prudence also
is in us from nature.

Obj. 2: Further, the changes of age are according to nature. Now prudence results from age,
according to Job 12:12: "In the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days prudence." Therefore
prudence is natural.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence is more consistent with human nature than with that of dumb animals.
Now there are instances of a certain natural prudence in dumb animals, according to the Philosopher
(De Hist. Anim. viii, 1). Therefore prudence is natural.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 1) that "intellectual virtue is both originated
and fostered by teaching; it therefore demands experience and time." Now prudence is an intellectual
virtue, as stated above (A. 4). Therefore prudence is in us, not by nature, but by teaching
and experience.

I answer that, As shown above (A. 3), prudence includes knowledge both of universals, and of
the singular matters of action to which prudence applies the universal principles. Accordingly,
as regards the knowledge of universals, the same is to be said of prudence as of speculative
science, because the primary universal principles of either are known naturally, as shown above
(A. 6): except that the common principles of prudence are more connatural to man; for as the
Philosopher remarks (Ethic. x, 7) "the life which is according to the speculative reason is
better than that which is according to man": whereas the secondary universal principles, whether
of the speculative or of the practical reason, are not inherited from nature, but are acquired
by discovery through experience, or through teaching.

On the other hand, as regards the knowledge of particulars which are the matter of action,
we must make a further distinction, because this matter of action is either an end or the means
to an end. Now the right ends of human life are fixed; wherefore there can be a natural inclination
in respect of these ends; thus it has been stated above (I-II, Q. 51, A. 1; Q. 63, A. 1) that
some, from a natural inclination, have certain virtues whereby they are inclined to right ends;
and consequently they also have naturally a right judgment about such like ends.

But the means to the end, in human concerns, far from being fixed, are of manifold variety
according to the variety of persons and affairs. Wherefore since the inclination of nature
is ever to something fixed, the knowledge of those means cannot be in man naturally, although,
by reason of his natural disposition, one man has a greater aptitude than another in discerning
them, just as it happens with regard to the conclusions of speculative sciences. Since then
prudence is not about the ends, but about the means, as stated above (A. 6; I-II, Q. 57, A.
5), it follows that prudence is not from nature.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is speaking there of things relating to prudence, in so far as
they are directed to ends. Wherefore he had said before (Ethic. vi, 5, 11) that "they are the
principles of the ou heneka" [*Literally, 'for the sake of which' (are the means)], namely,
the end; and so he does not mention euboulia among them, because it takes counsel about the means.

Reply Obj. 2: Prudence is rather in the old, not only because their natural disposition calms
the movement of the sensitive passions, but also because of their long experience.

Reply Obj. 3: Even in dumb animals there are fixed ways of obtaining an end, wherefore we observe
that all the animals of a same species act in like manner. But this is impossible in man, on
account of his reason, which takes cognizance of universals, and consequently extends to an
infinity of singulars.

SIXTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 47, Art. 16]

Whether Prudence Can Be Lost Through Forgetfulness?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence can be lost through forgetfulness. For since science
is about necessary things, it is more certain than prudence which is about contingent matters
of action. But science is lost by forgetfulness. Much more therefore is prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 3) "the same things, but by a contrary
process, engender and corrupt virtue." Now the engendering of prudence requires experience
which is made up "of many memories," as he states at the beginning of his Metaphysics (i, 1).
Therefore since forgetfulness is contrary to memory, it seems that prudence can be lost through
forgetfulness.

Obj. 3: Further, there is no prudence without knowledge of universals. But knowledge of universals
can be lost through forgetfulness. Therefore prudence can also.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "forgetfulness is possible to art
but not to prudence."

I answer that, Forgetfulness regards knowledge only, wherefore one can forget art and science,
so as to lose them altogether, because they belong to the reason. But prudence consists not
in knowledge alone, but also in an act of the appetite, because as stated above (A. 8), its
principal act is one of command, whereby a man applies the knowledge he has, to the purpose
of appetition and operation. Hence prudence is not taken away directly by forgetfulness, but
rather is corrupted by the passions. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 5) that "pleasure
and sorrow pervert the estimate of prudence": wherefore it is written (Dan. 13:56): "Beauty
hath deceived thee, and lust hath subverted thy heart," and (Ex. 23:8): "Neither shalt thou
take bribes which blind even the prudent [Douay: 'wise']."

Nevertheless forgetfulness may hinder prudence, in so far as the latter's command depends on
knowledge which may be forgotten.

Reply Obj. 1: Science is in the reason only: hence the comparison fails, as stated above [*Cf.
I-II, Q. 53, A. 1].

Reply Obj. 2: The experience required by prudence results not from memory alone, but also from
the practice of commanding aright.

Reply Obj. 3: Prudence consists chiefly, not in the knowledge of universals, but in applying
them to action, as stated above (A. 3). Wherefore forgetting the knowledge of universals does
not destroy the principal part of prudence, but hinders it somewhat, as stated above.

QUESTION 48

OF THE PARTS OF PRUDENCE (In One Article)

We must now consider the parts of prudence, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Which are the parts of prudence?

(2) Of its integral parts;

(3) Of its subjective parts;

(4) Of its potential parts.

ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 48, Art.]

Whether Three Parts of Prudence Are Fittingly Assigned?

Objection 1: It would seem that the parts of prudence are assigned unfittingly. Tully (De Invent.
Rhet. ii, 53) assigns three parts of prudence, namely, "memory," "understanding" and "foresight."
Macrobius (In Somn. Scip. i) following the opinion of Plotinus ascribes to prudence six parts,
namely, "reasoning," "understanding," "circumspection," "foresight," "docility" and "caution."
Aristotle says (Ethic. vi, 9, 10, 11) that "good counsel," "synesis" and "gnome" belong to
prudence. Again under the head of prudence he mentions "conjecture," "shrewdness," "sense"
and "understanding." And another Greek philosopher [*Andronicus; Cf. Q. 80, Obj. 4] says that
ten things are connected with prudence, namely, "good counsel," "shrewdness," "foresight,"
"regnative [*Regnativa]," "military," "political" and "domestic prudence," "dialectics," "rhetoric"
and "physics." Therefore it seems that one or the other enumeration is either excessive or
deficient.

Obj. 2: Further, prudence is specifically distinct from science. But politics, economics, logic,
rhetoric, physics are sciences. Therefore they are not parts of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, the parts do not exceed the whole. Now the intellective memory or intelligence,
reason, sense and docility, belong not only to prudence but also to all the cognitive habits.
Therefore they should not be set down as parts of prudence.

Obj. 4: Further, just as counselling, judging and commanding are acts of the practical reason,
so also is using, as stated above (I-II, Q. 16, A. 1). Therefore, just as "eubulia" which refers
to counsel, is connected with prudence, and "synesis" and "gnome" which refer to judgment,
so also ought something to have been assigned corresponding to use.

Obj. 5: Further, solicitude pertains to prudence, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 9). Therefore
solicitude also should have been mentioned among the parts of prudence.

I answer that, Parts are of three kinds, namely, integral, as wall, roof, and foundations are
parts of a house; subjective, as ox and lion are parts of animal; and potential, as the nutritive
and sensitive powers are parts of the soul. Accordingly, parts can be assigned to a virtue
in three ways. First, in likeness to integral parts, so that the things which need to concur
for the perfect act of a virtue, are called the parts of that virtue. In this way, out of all
the things mentioned above, eight may be taken as parts of prudence, namely, the six assigned
by Macrobius; with the addition of a seventh, viz. memory mentioned by Tully; and eustochia
or shrewdness mentioned by Aristotle. For the sense of prudence is also called understanding:
wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 11): "Of such things one needs to have the sense,
and this is understanding." Of these eight, five belong to prudence as a cognitive virtue,
namely, memory, reasoning, understanding, docility and shrewdness: while the three others belong
thereto, as commanding and applying knowledge to action, namely, foresight, circumspection
and caution. The reason of their difference is seen from the fact that three things may be
observed in reference to knowledge. In the first place, knowledge itself, which, if it be of
the past, is called memory, if of the present, whether contingent or necessary, is called understanding
or intelligence. Secondly, the acquiring of knowledge, which is caused either by teaching,
to which pertains docility, or by discovery, and to this belongs to eustochia, i.e. "a happy
conjecture," of which shrewdness is a part, which is a "quick conjecture of the middle term,"
as stated in Poster. i, 9. Thirdly, the use of knowledge, in as much as we proceed from things
known to knowledge or judgment of other things, and this belongs to reasoning. And the reason,
in order to command aright, requires to have three conditions. First, to order that which is
befitting the end, and this belongs to foresight; secondly, to attend to the circumstances
of the matter in hand, and this belongs to circumspection; thirdly, to avoid obstacles, and
this belongs to caution.

The subjective parts of a virtue are its various species. In this way the parts of prudence,
if we take them properly, are the prudence whereby a man rules himself, and the prudence whereby
a man governs a multitude, which differ specifically as stated above (Q. 47, A. 11). Again,
the prudence whereby a multitude is governed, is divided into various species according to
the various kinds of multitude. There is the multitude which is united together for some particular
purpose; thus an army is gathered together to fight, and the prudence that governs this is
called military. There is also the multitude that is united together for the whole of life;
such is the multitude of a home or family, and this is ruled by domestic prudence: and such
again is the multitude of a city or kingdom, the ruling principle of which is regnative prudence
in the ruler, and political prudence, simply so called, in the subjects.

If, however, prudence be taken in a wide sense, as including also speculative knowledge, as
stated above (Q. 47, A. 2, ad 2) then its parts include dialectics, rhetoric and physics, according
to three methods of prudence in the sciences. The first of these is the attaining of science
by demonstration, which belongs to physics (if physics be understood to comprise all demonstrative
sciences). The second method is to arrive at an opinion through probable premises, and this
belongs to dialectics. The third method is to employ conjectures in order to induce a certain
suspicion, or to persuade somewhat, and this belongs to rhetoric. It may be said, however,
that these three belong also to prudence properly so called, since it argues sometimes from
necessary premises, sometimes from probabilities, and sometimes from conjectures.

The potential parts of a virtue are the virtues connected with it, which are directed to certain
secondary acts or matters, not having, as it were, the whole power of the principal virtue.
In this way the parts of prudence are good counsel, which concerns counsel, synesis, which
concerns judgment in matters of ordinary occurrence, and gnome, which concerns judgment in
matters of exception to the law: while prudence is about the chief act, viz. that of commanding.

Reply Obj. 1: The various enumerations differ, either because different kinds of parts are
assigned, or because that which is mentioned in one enumeration includes several mentioned
in another enumeration. Thus Tully includes "caution" and "circumspection" under "foresight,"
and "reasoning," "docility" and "shrewdness" under "understanding."

Reply Obj. 2: Here domestic and civic prudence are not to be taken as sciences, but as kinds
of prudence. As to the other three, the reply may be gathered from what has been said.

Reply Obj. 3: All these things are reckoned parts of prudence, not by taking them altogether,
but in so far as they are connected with things pertaining to prudence.

Reply Obj. 4: Right command and right use always go together, because the reason's command
is followed by obedience on the part of the lower powers, which pertain to use.

Reply Obj. 5: Solicitude is included under foresight.

QUESTION 49

OF EACH QUASI-INTEGRAL PART OF PRUDENCE (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider each quasi-integral part of prudence, and under this head there are eight
points of inquiry:

(1) Memory;

(2) Understanding or Intelligence;

(3) Docility;

(4) Shrewdness;

(5) Reason;

(6) Foresight;

(7) Circumspection;

(8) Caution.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 1]

Whether Memory Is a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that memory is not a part of prudence. For memory, as the Philosopher
proves (De Memor. et Remin. i), is in the sensitive part of the soul: whereas prudence is in
the rational part (Ethic. vi, 5). Therefore memory is not a part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, prudence is acquired and perfected by experience, whereas memory is in us
from nature. Therefore memory is not a part of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, memory regards the past, whereas prudence regards future matters of action,
about which counsel is concerned, as stated in Ethic. vi, 2, 7. Therefore memory is not a part
of prudence.

On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 53) places memory among the parts of prudence.

I answer that, Prudence regards contingent matters of action, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 5).
Now in such like matters a man can be directed, not by those things that are simply and necessarily
true, but by those which occur in the majority of cases: because principles must be proportionate
to their conclusions, and "like must be concluded from like" (Ethic. vi [*Anal. Post. i. 32]).
But we need experience to discover what is true in the majority of cases: wherefore the Philosopher
says (Ethic. ii, 1) that "intellectual virtue is engendered and fostered by experience and
time." Now experience is the result of many memories as stated in Metaph. i, 1, and therefore
prudence requires the memory of many things. Hence memory is fittingly accounted a part of
prudence.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 47, AA. 3, 6), prudence applies universal knowledge to particulars
which are objects of sense: hence many things belonging to the sensitive faculties are requisite
for prudence, and memory is one of them.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as aptitude for prudence is in our nature, while its perfection comes through
practice or grace, so too, as Tully says in his Rhetoric [*Ad Herenn. de Arte Rhet. iii, 16,
24], memory not only arises from nature, but is also aided by art and diligence.

There are four things whereby a man perfects his memory. First, when a man wishes to remember
a thing, he should take some suitable yet somewhat unwonted illustration of it, since the unwonted
strikes us more, and so makes a greater and stronger impression on the mind; the mind; and
this explains why we remember better what we saw when we were children. Now the reason for
the necessity of finding these illustrations or images, is that simple and spiritual impressions
easily slip from the mind, unless they be tied as it were to some corporeal image, because
human knowledge has a greater hold on sensible objects. For this reason memory is assigned
to the sensitive part of the soul. Secondly, whatever a man wishes to retain in his memory
he must carefully consider and set in order, so that he may pass easily from one memory to
another. Hence the Philosopher says (De Memor. et Remin. ii): "Sometimes a place brings memories
back to us: the reason being that we pass quickly from the one to the other." Thirdly, we must
be anxious and earnest about the things we wish to remember, because the more a thing is impressed
on the mind, the less it is liable to slip out of it. Fourthly, we should often reflect on
the things we wish to remember. Hence the Philosopher says (De Memoria i) that "reflection
preserves memories," because as he remarks (De Memoria ii) "custom is a second nature": wherefore
when we reflect on a thing frequently, we quickly call it to mind, through passing from one
thing to another by a kind of natural order.

Reply Obj. 3: It behooves us to argue, as it were, about the future from the past; wherefore
memory of the past is necessary in order to take good counsel for the future.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 2]

Whether Understanding* Is a Part of Prudence? [*Otherwise intuition; Aristotle's word is nous]

Objection 1: It would seem that understanding is not a part of prudence. When two things are
members of a division, one is not part of the other. But intellectual virtue is divided into
understanding and prudence, according to Ethic. vi, 3. Therefore understanding should not be
reckoned a part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, understanding is numbered among the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and corresponds
to faith, as stated above (Q. 8, AA. 1, 8). But prudence is a virtue other than faith, as is
clear from what has been said above (Q. 4, A. 8; I-II, Q. 62, A. 2). Therefore understanding
does not pertain to prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence is about singular matters of action (Ethic. vi, 7): whereas understanding
takes cognizance of universal and immaterial objects (De Anima iii, 4). Scip. i, 8] mentions
"understanding," which comes to the same.

I answer that, Understanding denotes here, not the intellectual power, but the right estimate
about some final principle, which is taken as self-evident: thus we are said to understand
the first principles of demonstrations. Now every deduction of reason proceeds from certain
statements which are taken as primary: wherefore every process of reasoning must needs proceed
from some understanding. Therefore since prudence is right reason applied to action, the whole
process of prudence must needs have its source in understanding. Hence it is that understanding
is reckoned a part of prudence.

Reply Obj. 1: The reasoning of prudence terminates, as in a conclusion, in the particular matter
of action, to which, as stated above (Q. 47, AA. 3, 6), it applies the knowledge of some universal
principle. Now a singular conclusion is argued from a universal and a singular proposition.
Wherefore the reasoning of prudence must proceed from a twofold understanding. The one is cognizant
of universals, and this belongs to the understanding which is an intellectual virtue, whereby
we know naturally not only speculative principles, but also practical universal principles,
such as "One should do evil to no man," as shown above (Q. 47, A. 6). The other understanding,
as stated in Ethic. vi, 11, is cognizant of an extreme, i.e. of some primary singular and contingent
practical matter, viz. the minor premiss, which must needs be singular in the syllogism of
prudence, as stated above (Q. 47, AA. 3, 6). Now this primary singular is some singular end,
as stated in the same place. Wherefore the understanding which is a part of prudence is a right
estimate of some particular end.

Reply Obj. 2: The understanding which is a gift of the Holy Ghost, is a quick insight into
divine things, as shown above (Q. 8, AA. 1, 2). It is in another sense that it is accounted
a part of prudence, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: The right estimate about a particular end is called both "understanding," in
so far as its object is a principle, and "sense," in so far as its object is a particular.
This is what the Philosopher means when he says (Ethic. v, 11): "Of such things we need to
have the sense, and this is understanding." But this is to be understood as referring, not
to the particular sense whereby we know proper sensibles, but to the interior sense, whereby
we judge of a particular.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 3]

Whether Docility Should Be Accounted a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that docility should not be accounted a part of prudence. For that
which is a necessary condition of every intellectual virtue, should not be appropriated to
one of them. But docility is requisite for every intellectual virtue. Therefore it should not
be accounted a part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, that which pertains to a human virtue is in our power, since it is for things
that are in our power that we are praised or blamed. Now it is not in our power to be docile,
for this is befitting to some through their natural disposition. Therefore it is not a part
of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, docility is in the disciple: whereas prudence, since it makes precepts, seems
rather to belong to teachers, who are also called "preceptors." Therefore docility is not a
part of prudence.

On the contrary, Macrobius [*In Somn. Scip. i, 8] following the opinion of Plotinus places
docility among the parts of prudence.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2, ad 1; Q. 47, A. 3) prudence is concerned with particular
matters of action, and since such matters are of infinite variety, no one man can consider
them all sufficiently; nor can this be done quickly, for it requires length of time. Hence
in matters of prudence man stands in very great need of being taught by others, especially
by old folk who have acquired a sane understanding of the ends in practical matters. Wherefore
the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 11): "It is right to pay no less attention to the undemonstrated
assertions and opinions of such persons as are experienced, older than we are, and prudent,
than to their demonstrations, for their experience gives them an insight into principles."
Thus it is written (Prov. 3:5): "Lean not on thy own prudence," and (Ecclus. 6:35): "Stand
in the multitude of the ancients" (i.e. the old men), "that are wise, and join thyself from
thy heart to their wisdom." Now it is a mark of docility to be ready to be taught: and consequently
docility is fittingly reckoned a part of prudence.

Reply Obj. 1: Although docility is useful for every intellectual virtue, yet it belongs to
prudence chiefly, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 2: Man has a natural aptitude for docility even as for other things connected with
prudence. Yet his own efforts count for much towards the attainment of perfect docility: and
he must carefully, frequently and reverently apply his mind to the teachings of the learned,
neither neglecting them through laziness, nor despising them through pride.

Reply Obj. 3: By prudence man makes precepts not only for others, but also for himself, as
stated above (Q. 47, A. 12, ad 3). Hence as stated (Ethic. vi, 11), even in subjects, there
is place for prudence; to which docility pertains. And yet even the learned should be docile
in some respects, since no man is altogether self-sufficient in matters of prudence, as stated
above.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 4]

Whether Shrewdness Is Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that shrewdness is not a part of prudence. For shrewdness consists
in easily finding the middle term for demonstrations, as stated in Poster. i, 34. Now the reasoning
of prudence is not a demonstration since it deals with contingencies. Therefore shrewdness
does not pertain to prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, good counsel pertains to prudence according to Ethic. vi, 5, 7, 9. Now there
is no place in good counsel for shrewdness [*Ethic. vi, 9; Poster. i, 34] which is a kind of
eustochia, i.e. "a happy conjecture": for the latter is "unreasoning and rapid," whereas counsel
needs to be slow, as stated in Ethic. vi, 9. Therefore shrewdness should not be accounted a
part of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, shrewdness as stated above (Q. 48) is a "happy conjecture." Now it belongs
to rhetoricians to make use of conjectures. Therefore shrewdness belongs to rhetoric rather
than to prudence.

On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. x): "A solicitous man is one who is shrewd and alert (solers
citus)." But solicitude belongs to prudence, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 9). Therefore shrewdness
does also.

I answer that, Prudence consists in a right estimate about matters of action. Now a right estimate
or opinion is acquired in two ways, both in practical and in speculative matters, first by
discovering it oneself, secondly by learning it from others. Now just as docility consists
in a man being well disposed to acquire a right opinion from another man, so shrewdness is
an apt disposition to acquire a right estimate by oneself, yet so that shrewdness be taken
for eustochia, of which it is a part. For eustochia is a happy conjecture about any matter,
while shrewdness is "an easy and rapid conjecture in finding the middle term" (Poster. i, 34).
Nevertheless the philosopher [*Andronicus; Cf. Q. 48, Obj. 1] who calls shrewdness a part of
prudence, takes it for eustochia, in general, hence he says: "Shrewdness is a habit whereby
congruities are discovered rapidly."

Reply Obj. 1: Shrewdness is concerned with the discovery of the middle term not only in demonstrative,
but also in practical syllogisms, as, for instance, when two men are seen to be friends they
are reckoned to be enemies of a third one, as the Philosopher says (Poster. i, 34). In this
way shrewdness belongs to prudence.

Reply Obj. 2: The Philosopher adduces the true reason (Ethic. vi, 9) to prove that euboulia,
i.e. good counsel, is not eustochia, which is commended for grasping quickly what should be
done. Now a man may take good counsel, though he be long and slow in so doing, and yet this
does not discount the utility of a happy conjecture in taking good counsel: indeed it is sometimes
a necessity, when, for instance, something has to be done without warning. It is for this reason
that shrewdness is fittingly reckoned a part of prudence.

Reply Obj. 3: Rhetoric also reasons about practical matters, wherefore nothing hinders the
same thing belonging both to rhetoric and prudence. Nevertheless, conjecture is taken here
not only in the sense in which it is employed by rhetoricians, but also as applicable to all
matters whatsoever wherein man is said to conjecture the truth.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 5]

Whether Reason Should Be Reckoned a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that reason should not be reckoned a part of prudence. For the subject
of an accident is not a part thereof. But prudence is in the reason as its subject (Ethic.
vi, 5). Therefore reason should not be reckoned a part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is common to many, should not be reckoned a part of any one of
them; or if it be so reckoned, it should be reckoned a part of that one to which it chiefly
belongs. Now reason is necessary in all the intellectual virtues, and chiefly in wisdom and
science, which employ a demonstrative reason. Therefore reason should not be reckoned a part
of prudence

Obj. 3: Further, reason as a power does not differ essentially from the intelligence, as stated
above (I, Q. 79, A. 8). If therefore intelligence be reckoned a part of prudence, it is superfluous
to add reason.

On the contrary, Macrobius [*In Somn. Scip. i], following the opinion of Plotinus, numbers
reason among the parts of prudence.

I answer that, The work of prudence is to take good counsel, as stated in Ethic. vi, 7. Now
counsel is a research proceeding from certain things to others. But this is the work of reason.
Wherefore it is requisite for prudence that man should be an apt reasoner. And since the things
required for the perfection of prudence are called requisite or quasi-integral parts of prudence,
it follows that reason should be numbered among these parts.

Reply Obj. 1: Reason denotes here, not the power of reason, but its good use.

Reply Obj. 2: The certitude of reason comes from the intellect. Yet the need of reason is from
a defect in the intellect, since those things in which the intellective power is in full vigor,
have no need for reason, for they comprehend the truth by their simple insight, as do God and
the angels. On the other hand particular matters of action, wherein prudence guides, are very
far from the condition of things intelligible, and so much the farther, as they are less certain
and fixed. Thus matters of art, though they are singular, are nevertheless more fixed and certain,
wherefore in many of them there is no room for counsel on account of their certitude, as stated
in Ethic. iii, 3. Hence, although in certain other intellectual virtues reason is more certain
than in prudence, yet prudence above all requires that man be an apt reasoner, so that he may
rightly apply universals to particulars, which latter are various and uncertain.

Reply Obj. 3: Although intelligence and reason are not different powers, yet they are named
after different acts. For intelligence takes its name from being an intimate penetration of
the truth [*Cf. II-II, Q. 8, A. 1], while reason is so called from being inquisitive and discursive.
Hence each is accounted a part of reason as explained above (A. 2; Q. 47, A. 2, 3).

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 6]

Whether Foresight* Should Be Accounted a Part of Prudence? [*"Providentia," which may be translated
either "providence" or "foresight."]

Objection 1: It would seem that foresight should not be accounted a part of prudence. For nothing
is part of itself. Now foresight seems to be the same as prudence, because according to Isidore
(Etym. x), "a prudent man is one who sees from afar (porro videns)": and this is also the derivation
of providentia (foresight), according to Boethius (De Consol. v). Therefore foresight is not
a part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, prudence is only practical, whereas foresight may be also speculative, because
seeing, whence we have the word "to foresee," has more to do with speculation than operation.
Therefore foresight is not a part of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, the chief act of prudence is to command, while its secondary act is to judge
and to take counsel. But none of these seems to be properly implied by foresight. Therefore
foresight is not part of prudence.

On the contrary stands the authority of Tully and Macrobius, who number foresight among the
parts of prudence, as stated above (Q. 48).

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 47, A. 1, ad 2, AA. 6, 13), prudence is properly about the
means to an end, and its proper work is to set them in due order to the end. And although certain
things are necessary for an end, which are subject to divine providence, yet nothing is subject
to human providence except the contingent matters of actions which can be done by man for an
end. Now the past has become a kind of necessity, since what has been done cannot be undone.
In like manner, the present as such, has a kind of necessity, since it is necessary that Socrates
sit, so long as he sits.

Consequently, future contingents, in so far as they can be directed by man to the end of human
life, are the matter of prudence: and each of these things is implied in the word foresight,
for it implies the notion of something distant, to which that which occurs in the present has
to be directed. Therefore foresight is part of prudence.

Reply Obj. 1: Whenever many things are requisite for a unity, one of them must needs be the
principal to which all the others are subordinate. Hence in every whole one part must be formal
and predominant, whence the whole has unity. Accordingly foresight is the principal of all
the parts of prudence, since whatever else is required for prudence, is necessary precisely
that some particular thing may be rightly directed to its end. Hence it is that the very name
of prudence is taken from foresight (providentia) as from its principal part.

Reply Obj. 2: Speculation is about universal and necessary things, which, in themselves, are
not distant, since they are everywhere and always, though they are distant from us, in so far
as we fail to know them. Hence foresight does not apply properly to speculative, but only to
practical matters.

Reply Obj. 3: Right order to an end which is included in the notion of foresight, contains
rectitude of counsel, judgment and command, without which no right order to the end is possible.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 7]

Whether Circumspection Can Be a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that circumspection cannot be a part of prudence. For circumspection
seems to signify looking at one's surroundings. But these are of infinite number, and cannot
be considered by the reason wherein is prudence. Therefore circumspection should not be reckoned
a part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, circumstances seem to be the concern of moral virtues rather than of prudence.
But circumspection seems to denote nothing but attention to circumstances. Therefore circumspection
apparently belongs to the moral virtues rather than to prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever can see things afar off can much more see things that are near. Now
foresight enables a man to look on distant things. Therefore there is no need to account circumspection
a part of prudence in addition to foresight.

On the contrary stands the authority of Macrobius, quoted above (Q. 48).

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), it belongs to prudence chiefly to direct something aright
to an end; and this is not done aright unless both the end be good, and the means good and
suitable.

Since, however, prudence, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 3) is about singular matters of action,
which contain many combinations of circumstances, it happens that a thing is good in itself
and suitable to the end, and nevertheless becomes evil or unsuitable to the end, by reason
of some combination of circumstances. Thus to show signs of love to someone seems, considered
in itself, to be a fitting way to arouse love in his heart, yet if pride or suspicion of flattery
arise in his heart, it will no longer be a means suitable to the end. Hence the need of circumspection
in prudence, viz. of comparing the means with the circumstances.

Reply Obj. 1: Though the number of possible circumstances be infinite, the number of actual
circumstances is not; and the judgment of reason in matters of action is influenced by things
which are few in number.

Reply Obj. 2: Circumstances are the concern of prudence, because prudence has to fix them;
on the other hand they are the concern of moral virtues, in so far as moral virtues are perfected
by the fixing of circumstances.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as it belongs to foresight to look on that which is by its nature suitable
to an end, so it belongs to circumspection to consider whether it be suitable to the end in
view of the circumstances. Now each of these presents a difficulty of its own, and therefore
each is reckoned a distinct part of prudence.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 49, Art. 8]

Whether Caution Should Be Reckoned a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that caution should not be reckoned a part of prudence. For when
no evil is possible, no caution is required. Now no man makes evil use of virtue, as Augustine
declares (De Lib. Arb. ii, 19). Therefore caution does not belong to prudence which directs
the virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, to foresee good and to avoid evil belong to the same faculty, just as the
same art gives health and cures ill-health. Now it belongs to foresight to foresee good, and
consequently, also to avoid evil. Therefore caution should not be accounted a part of prudence,
distinct from foresight.

Obj. 3: Further, no prudent man strives for the impossible. But no man can take precautions
against all possible evils. Therefore caution does not belong to prudence.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Eph. 5:15): "See how you walk cautiously [Douay: 'circumspectly']."

I answer that, The things with which prudence is concerned, are contingent matters of action,
wherein, even as false is found with true, so is evil mingled with good, on account of the
great variety of these matters of action, wherein good is often hindered by evil, and evil
has the appearance of good. Wherefore prudence needs caution, so that we may have such a grasp
of good as to avoid evil.

Reply Obj. 1: Caution is required in moral acts, that we may be on our guard, not against acts
of virtue, but against the hindrance of acts of virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: It is the same in idea, to ensue good and to avoid the opposite evil, but the
avoidance of outward hindrances is different in idea. Hence caution differs from foresight,
although they both belong to the one virtue of prudence.

Reply Obj. 3: Of the evils which man has to avoid, some are of frequent occurrence; the like
can be grasped by reason, and against them caution is directed, either that they may be avoided
altogether, or that they may do less harm. Others there are that occur rarely and by chance,
and these, since they are infinite in number, cannot be grasped by reason, nor is man able
to take precautions against them, although by exercising prudence he is able to prepare against
all the surprises of chance, so as to suffer less harm thereby.

QUESTION 50

OF THE SUBJECTIVE PARTS OF PRUDENCE (In Four Articles)

We must, in due sequence, consider the subjective parts of prudence. And since we have already
spoken of the prudence with which a man rules himself (Q. 47, seqq.), it remains for us to
discuss the species of prudence whereby a multitude is governed. Under this head there are
four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a species of prudence is regnative?

(2) Whether political and (3) domestic economy are species of prudence?

(4) Whether military prudence is?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 50, Art. 1]

Whether a Species of Prudence Is Regnative?

Objection 1: It would seem that regnative should not be reckoned a species of prudence. For
regnative prudence is directed to the preservation of justice, since according to Ethic. v,
6 the prince is the guardian of justice. Therefore regnative prudence belongs to justice rather
than to prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Polit. iii, 5) a kingdom (regnum) is one of
six species of government. But no species of prudence is ascribed to the other five forms of
government, which are "aristocracy," "polity," also called "timocracy" [*Cf. Ethic. viii, 10],
"tyranny," "oligarchy" and "democracy." Therefore neither should a regnative species be ascribed
to a kingdom.

Obj. 3: Further, lawgiving belongs not only to kings, but also to certain others placed in
authority, and even to the people, according to Isidore (Etym. v). Now the Philosopher (Ethic.
vi, 8) reckons a part of prudence to be "legislative." Therefore it is not becoming to substitute
regnative prudence in its place.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 11) that "prudence is a virtue which is
proper to the prince." Therefore a special kind of prudence is regnative.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 47, AA. 8, 10), it belongs to prudence to govern and command,
so that wherever in human acts we find a special kind of governance and command, there must
be a special kind of prudence. Now it is evident that there is a special and perfect kind of
governance in one who has to govern not only himself but also the perfect community of a city
or kingdom; because a government is the more perfect according as it is more universal, extends
to more matters, and attains a higher end. Hence prudence in its special and most perfect sense,
belongs to a king who is charged with the government of a city or kingdom: for which reason
a species of prudence is reckoned to be regnative.

Reply Obj. 1: All matters connected with moral virtue belong to prudence as their guide, wherefore
"right reason in accord with prudence" is included in the definition of moral virtue, as stated
above (Q. 47, A. 5, ad 1; I-II, Q. 58, A. 2, ad 4). For this reason also the execution of justice
in so far as it is directed to the common good, which is part of the kingly office, needs the
guidance of prudence. Hence these two virtues--prudence and justice--belong most properly to
a king, according to Jer. 23:5: "A king shall reign and shall be wise, and shall execute justice
and judgment in the earth." Since, however, direction belongs rather to the king, and execution
to his subjects, regnative prudence is reckoned a species of prudence which is directive, rather
than to justice which is executive.

Reply Obj. 2: A kingdom is the best of all governments, as stated in Ethic. viii, 10: wherefore
the species of prudence should be denominated rather from a kingdom, yet so as to comprehend
under regnative all other rightful forms of government, but not perverse forms which are opposed
to virtue, and which, accordingly, do not pertain to prudence.

Reply Obj. 3: The Philosopher names regnative prudence after the principal act of a king which
is to make laws, and although this applies to the other forms of government, this is only in
so far as they have a share of kingly government.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 50, Art. 2]

Whether Political Prudence Is Fittingly Accounted a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that political prudence is not fittingly accounted a part of prudence.
For regnative is a part of political prudence, as stated above (A. 1). But a part should not
be reckoned a species with the whole. Therefore political prudence should not be reckoned a
part of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, the species of habits are distinguished by their various objects. Now what
the ruler has to command is the same as what the subject has to execute. Therefore political
prudence as regards the subjects, should not be reckoned a species of prudence distinct from
regnative prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, each subject is an individual person. Now each individual person can direct
himself sufficiently by prudence commonly so called. Therefore there is no need of a special
kind of prudence called political.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 8) that "of the prudence which is concerned
with the state one kind is a master-prudence and is called legislative; another kind bears
the common name political, and deals with individuals."

I answer that, A slave is moved by his master, and a subject by his ruler, by command, but
otherwise than as irrational and inanimate beings are set in motion by their movers. For irrational
and inanimate beings are moved only by others and do not put themselves in motion, since they
have no free-will whereby to be masters of their own actions, wherefore the rectitude of their
government is not in their power but in the power of their movers. On the other hand, men who
are slaves or subjects in any sense, are moved by the commands of others in such a way that
they move themselves by their free-will; wherefore some kind of rectitude of government is
required in them, so that they may direct themselves in obeying their superiors; and to this
belongs that species of prudence which is called political.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above, regnative is the most perfect species of prudence, wherefore
the prudence of subjects, which falls short of regnative prudence, retains the common name
of political prudence, even as in logic a convertible term which does not denote the essence
of a thing retains the name of "proper."

Reply Obj. 2: A different aspect of the object diversifies the species of a habit, as stated
above (Q. 47, A. 5). Now the same actions are considered by the king, but under a more general
aspect, as by his subjects who obey: since many obey one king in various departments. Hence
regnative prudence is compared to this political prudence of which we are speaking, as mastercraft
to handicraft.

Reply Obj. 3: Man directs himself by prudence commonly so called, in relation to his own good,
but by political prudence, of which we speak, he directs himself in relation to the common good.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 50, Art. 3]

Whether a Part of Prudence Should Be Reckoned to Be Domestic?

Objection 1: It would seem that domestic should not be reckoned a part of prudence. For, according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5) "prudence is directed to a good life in general": whereas
domestic prudence is directed to a particular end, viz. wealth, according to Ethic. i, 1. Therefore
a species of prudence is not domestic.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 13) prudence is only in good people. But domestic
prudence may be also in wicked people, since many sinners are provident in governing their
household. Therefore domestic prudence should not be reckoned a species of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, just as in a kingdom there is a ruler and subject, so also is there in a household.
If therefore domestic like political is a species of prudence, there should be a paternal corresponding
to regnative prudence. Now there is no such prudence. Therefore neither should domestic prudence
be accounted a species of prudence.

On the contrary, The Philosopher states (Ethic. vi, 8) that there are various kinds of prudence
in the government of a multitude, "one of which is domestic, another legislative, and another
political."

I answer that, Different aspects of an object, in respect of universality and particularity,
or of totality and partiality, diversify arts and virtues; and in respect of such diversity
one act of virtue is principal as compared with another. Now it is evident that a household
is a mean between the individual and the city or kingdom, since just as the individual is part
of the household, so is the household part of the city or kingdom. And therefore, just as prudence
commonly so called which governs the individual, is distinct from political prudence, so must
domestic prudence be distinct from both.

Reply Obj. 1: Riches are compared to domestic prudence, not as its last end, but as its instrument,
as stated in Polit. i, 3. On the other hand, the end of political prudence is "a good life
in general" as regards the conduct of the household. In Ethic. i, 1 the Philosopher speaks
of riches as the end of political prudence, by way of example and in accordance with the opinion
of many.

Reply Obj. 2: Some sinners may be provident in certain matters of detail concerning the disposition
of their household, but not in regard to "a good life in general" as regards the conduct of
the household, for which above all a virtuous life is required.

Reply Obj. 3: The father has in his household an authority like that of a king, as stated in
Ethic. viii, 10, but he has not the full power of a king, wherefore paternal government is
not reckoned a distinct species of prudence, like regnative prudence.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 50, Art. 4]

Whether Military Prudence Should Be Reckoned a Part of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that military prudence should not be reckoned a part of prudence.
For prudence is distinct from art, according to Ethic. vi, 3. Now military prudence seems to
be the art of warfare, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iii, 8). Therefore military prudence
should not be accounted a species of prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, just as military business is contained under political affairs, so too are
many other matters, such as those of tradesmen, craftsmen, and so forth. But there are no species
of prudence corresponding to other affairs in the state. Neither therefore should any be assigned
to military business.

Obj. 3: Further, the soldiers' bravery counts for a great deal in warfare. Therefore military
prudence pertains to fortitude rather than to prudence.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 24:6): "War is managed by due ordering, and there shall
be safety where there are many counsels." Now it belongs to prudence to take counsel. Therefore
there is great need in warfare for that species of prudence which is called "military."

I answer that, Whatever things are done according to art or reason, should be made to conform
to those which are in accordance with nature, and are established by the Divine Reason. Now
nature has a twofold tendency: first, to govern each thing in itself, secondly, to withstand
outward assailants and corruptives: and for this reason she has provided animals not only with
the concupiscible faculty, whereby they are moved to that which is conducive to their well-being,
but also with the irascible power, whereby the animal withstands an assailant. Therefore in
those things also which are in accordance with reason, there should be not only "political"
prudence, which disposes in a suitable manner such things as belong to the common good, but
also a "military" prudence, whereby hostile attacks are repelled.

Reply Obj. 1: Military prudence may be an art, in so far as it has certain rules for the right
use of certain external things, such as arms and horses, but in so far as it is directed to
the common good, it belongs rather to prudence.

Reply Obj. 2: Other matters in the state are directed to the profit of individuals, whereas
the business of soldiering is directed to the service belongs to fortitude, but the direction,
protection of the entire common good.

Reply Obj. 3: The execution of military service belongs to fortitude, but the direction, especially
in so far as it concerns the commander-in-chief, belongs to prudence.

QUESTION 51

OF THE VIRTUES WHICH ARE CONNECTED WITH PRUDENCE (In Four Articles)

In due sequence, we must consider the virtues that are connected with prudence, and which are
its quasi-potential parts. Under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether euboulia is a virtue?

(2) Whether it is a special virtue, distinct from prudence?

(3) Whether synesis is a special virtue?

(4) Whether gnome is a special virtue?

[*These three Greek words may be rendered as the faculties of deliberating well (euboulia),
of judging well according to common law (synesis), and of judging well according to general
law (gnome), respectively.]

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 51, Art. 1]

Whether Euboulia Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that euboulia is not a virtue. Now some make evil use of euboulia
or good counsel, either through devising crafty counsels in order to achieve evil ends, or
through committing sin in order that they may achieve good ends, as those who rob that they
may give alms. Therefore euboulia is not a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue is a perfection, according to Phys. vii. But euboulia is concerned
with counsel, which implies doubt and research, and these are marks of imperfection. Therefore
euboulia is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, virtues are connected with one another, as stated above (I-II, Q. 65). Now
euboulia is not connected with the other virtues, since many sinners take good-counsel, and
many godly men are slow in taking counsel. Therefore euboulia is not a virtue.

On the contrary, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 9) euboulia "is a right counselling."
Now the perfection of virtue consists in right reason. Therefore euboulia is a virtue.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 47, A. 4) the nature of a human virtue consists in making
a human act good. Now among the acts of man, it is proper to him to take counsel, since this
denotes a research of the reason about the actions he has to perform and whereof human life
consists, for the speculative life is above man, as stated in Ethic. x. But euboulia signifies
goodness of counsel, for it is derived from the eu, good, and boule, counsel, being "a good
counsel" or rather "a disposition to take good counsel." Hence it is evident that euboulia
is a human virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: There is no good counsel either in deliberating for an evil end, or in discovering
evil means for attaining a good end, even as in speculative matters, there is no good reasoning
either in coming to a false conclusion, or in coming to a true conclusion from false premisses
through employing an unsuitable middle term. Hence both the aforesaid processes are contrary
to euboulia, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. vi, 9).

Reply Obj. 2: Although virtue is essentially a perfection, it does not follow that whatever
is the matter of a virtue implies perfection. For man needs to be perfected by virtues in all
his parts, and this not only as regards the acts of reason, of which counsel is one, but also
as regards the passions of the sensitive appetite, which are still more imperfect.

It may also be replied that human virtue is a perfection according to the mode of man, who
is unable by simple insight to comprehend with certainty the truth of things, especially in
matters of action which are contingent.

Reply Obj. 3: In no sinner as such is euboulia to be found: since all sin is contrary to taking
good counsel. For good counsel requires not only the discovery or devising of fit means for
the end, but also other circumstances. Such are suitable time, so that one be neither too slow
nor too quick in taking counsel, and the mode of taking counsel, so that one be firm in the
counsel taken, and other like due circumstances, which sinners fail to observe when they sin.
On the other hand, every virtuous man takes good counsel in those things which are directed
to the end of virtue, although perhaps he does not take good counsel in other particular matters,
for instance in matters of trade, or warfare, or the like.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 51, Art. 2]

Whether Euboulia Is a Special Virtue, Distinct from Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that euboulia is not a distinct virtue from prudence. For, according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. vi, 5), the "prudent man is, seemingly, one who takes good counsel."
Now this belongs to euboulia as stated above. Therefore euboulia is not distinct from prudence.

Obj. Now euboulia and prudence are directed to the same end, as stated in Ethic. vi, 9, not
indeed to some particular end, but to the common end of all life. Therefore euboulia is not
a distinct virtue from prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, in speculative sciences, research and decision belong to the same science.
Therefore in like manner these belong to the same virtue in practical matters. Now research
belongs to euboulia, while decision belongs to prudence. There euboulia is not a distinct virtue
from prudence.

On the contrary, Prudence is preceptive, according to Ethic. vi, 10. But this does not apply
to euboulia. Therefore euboulia is a distinct virtue from prudence.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), virtue is properly directed to an act which it renders
good; and consequently virtues must differ according to different acts, especially when there
is a different kind of goodness in the acts. For, if various acts contained the same kind of
goodness, they would belong to the same virtue: thus the goodness of love, desire and joy depends
on the same, wherefore all these belong to the same virtue of charity.

Now acts of the reason that are ordained to action are diverse, nor have they the same kind
of goodness: since it is owing to different causes that a man acquires good counsel, good judgment,
or good command, inasmuch as these are sometimes separated from one another. Consequently euboulia
which makes man take good counsel must needs be a distinct virtue from prudence, which makes
man command well. And since counsel is directed to command as to that which is principal, so
euboulia is directed to prudence as to a principal virtue, without which it would be no virtue
at all, even as neither are the moral virtues without prudence, nor the other virtues without
charity.

Reply Obj. 1: It belongs to prudence to take good counsel by commanding it, to euboulia by
eliciting it.

Reply Obj. 2: Different acts are directed in different degrees to the one end which is "a good
life in general" [*Ethic. vi, 5]: for counsel comes first, judgment follows, and command comes
last. The last named has an immediate relation to the last end: whereas the other two acts
are related thereto remotely. Nevertheless these have certain proximate ends of their own,
the end of counsel being the discovery of what has to be done, and the end of judgment, certainty.
Hence this proves not that euboulia is not a distinct virtue from prudence, but that it is
subordinate thereto, as a secondary to a principal virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Even in speculative matters the rational science of dialectics, which is directed
to research and discovery, is distinct from demonstrative science, which decides the truth.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 51, Art. 3]

Whether Synesis Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that synesis is not a virtue. Virtues are not in us by nature, according
to Ethic. ii, 1. But synesis is natural to some, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. vi, 11).
Therefore synesis is not a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated in the same book (10), synesis is nothing but "a faculty of judging."
But judgment without command can be even in the wicked. Since then virtue is only in the good,
it seems that synesis is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, there is never a defective command, unless there be a defective judgment,
at least in a particular matter of action; for it is in this that every wicked man errs. If
therefore synesis be reckoned a virtue directed to good judgment, it seems that there is no
need for any other virtue directed to good command: and consequently prudence would be superfluous,
which is not reasonable. Therefore synesis is not a virtue.

On the contrary, Judgment is more perfect than counsel. But euboulia, or good counsel, is a
virtue. Much more, therefore, is synesis a virtue, as being good judgment.

I answer that, synesis signifies a right judgment, not indeed about speculative matters, but
about particular practical matters, about which also is prudence. Hence in Greek some, in respect
of synesis are said to be synetoi, i.e. "persons of sense," or eusynetoi, i.e. "men of good
sense," just as on the other hand, those who lack this virtue are called asynetoi, i.e. "senseless."

Now, different acts which cannot be ascribed to the same cause, must correspond to different
virtues. And it is evident that goodness of counsel and goodness of judgment are not reducible
to the same cause, for many can take good counsel, without having good sense so as to judge
well. Even so, in speculative matters some are good at research, through their reason being
quick at arguing from one thing to another (which seems to be due to a disposition of their
power of imagination, which has a facility in forming phantasms), and yet such persons sometimes
lack good judgment (and this is due to a defect in the intellect arising chiefly from a defective
disposition of the common sense which fails to judge aright). Hence there is need, besides
euboulia, for another virtue, which judges well, and this is called synesis.

Reply Obj. 1: Right judgment consists in the cognitive power apprehending a thing just as it
is in reality, and this is due to the right disposition of the apprehensive power. Thus if
a mirror be well disposed the forms of bodies are reflected in it just as they are, whereas
if it be ill disposed, the images therein appear distorted and misshapen. Now that the cognitive
power be well disposed to receive things just as they are in reality, is radically due to nature,
but, as to its consummation, is due to practice or to a gift of grace, and this in two ways.
First directly, on the part of the cognitive power itself, for instance, because it is imbued,
not with distorted, but with true and correct ideas: this belongs to synesis which in this
respect is a special virtue. Secondly indirectly, through the good disposition of the appetitive
power, the result being that one judges well of the objects of appetite: and thus a good judgment
of virtue results from the habits of moral virtue; but this judgment is about the ends, whereas
synesis is rather about the means.

Reply Obj. 2: In wicked men there may be right judgment of a universal principle, but their
judgment is always corrupt in the particular matter of action, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 13).

Reply Obj. 3: Sometimes after judging aright we delay to execute or execute negligently or
inordinately. Hence after the virtue which judges aright there is a further need of a final
and principal virtue, which commands aright, and this is prudence.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 51, Art. 4]

Whether Gnome Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that gnome is not a special virtue distinct from synesis. For a
man is said, in respect of synesis, to have good judgment. Now no man can be said to have good
judgment, unless he judge aright in all things. Therefore synesis extends to all matters of
judgment, and consequently there is no other virtue of good judgment called gnome.

Obj. 2: Further, judgment is midway between counsel and precept. Now there is only one virtue
of good counsel, viz. euboulia, and only one virtue of good command, viz. prudence. Therefore
there is only one virtue of good judgment, viz. synesis.

Obj. 3: Further, rare occurrences wherein there is need to depart from the common law, seem
for the most part to happen by chance, and with such things reason is not concerned, as stated
in Phys. ii, 5. Now all the intellectual virtues depend on right reason. Therefore there is
no intellectual virtue about such matters.

On the contrary, The Philosopher concludes (Ethic. vi, 11) that gnome is a special virtue.

I answer that cognitive habits differ according to higher and lower principles: thus in speculative
matters wisdom considers higher principles than science does, and consequently is distinguished
from it; and so must it be also in practical matters. Now it is evident that what is beside
the order of a lower principle or cause, is sometimes reducible to the order of a higher principle;
thus monstrous births of animals are beside the order of the active seminal force, and yet
they come under the order of a higher principle, namely, of a heavenly body, or higher still,
of Divine Providence. Hence by considering the active seminal force one could not pronounce
a sure judgment on such monstrosities, and yet this is possible if we consider Divine Providence.

Now it happens sometimes that something has to be done which is not covered by the common rules
of actions, for instance in the case of the enemy of one's country, when it would be wrong
to give him back his deposit, or in other similar cases. Hence it is necessary to judge of
such matters according to higher principles than the common laws, according to which synesis
judges: and corresponding to such higher principles it is necessary to have a higher virtue
of judgment, which is called gnome, and which denotes a certain discrimination in judgment.

Reply Obj. 1: Synesis judges rightly about all actions that are covered by the common rules:
but certain things have to be judged beside these common rules, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Judgment about a thing should be formed from the proper principles thereof, whereas
research is made by employing also common principles. Wherefore also in speculative matters,
dialectics which aims at research proceeds from common principles; while demonstration which
tends to judgment, proceeds from proper principles. Hence euboulia to which the research of
counsel belongs is one for all, but not so synesis whose act is judicial. Command considers
in all matters the one aspect of good, wherefore prudence also is only one.

Reply Obj. 3: It belongs to Divine Providence alone to consider all things that may happen
beside the common course. On the other hand, among men, he who is most discerning can judge
a greater number of such things by his reason: this belongs to gnome, which denotes a certain
discrimination in judgment.

QUESTION 52

OF THE GIFT OF COUNSEL (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the gift of counsel which corresponds to prudence. Under this head there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether counsel should be reckoned among the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost?

(2) Whether the gift of counsel corresponds to prudence?

(3) Whether the gift of counsel remains in heaven?

(4) Whether the fifth beatitude, "Blessed are the merciful," etc. corresponds to the gift of
counsel?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 52, Art. 1]

Whether Counsel Should Be Reckoned Among the Gifts of the Holy Ghost?

Objection 1: It would seem that counsel should not be reckoned among the gifts of the Holy
Ghost. The gifts of the Holy Ghost are given as a help to the virtues, according to Gregory
(Moral. ii, 49). Now for the purpose of taking counsel, man is sufficiently perfected by the
virtue of prudence, or even of euboulia, as is evident from what has been said (Q. 47, A. 1,
ad 2; Q. 51, AA. 1, 2). Therefore counsel should not be reckoned among the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, the difference between the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost and the gratuitous
graces seems to be that the latter are not given to all, but are divided among various people,
whereas the gifts of the Holy Ghost are given to all who have the Holy Ghost. But counsel seems
to be one of those things which are given by the Holy Ghost specially to certain persons, according
to 1 Macc. 2:65: "Behold . . . your brother Simon is a man of counsel." Therefore counsel should
be numbered among the gratuitous graces rather than among the seven gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Rom. 8:14): "Whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are
the sons of God." But counselling is not consistent with being led by another. Since then the
gifts of the Holy Ghost are most befitting the children of God, who "have received the spirit
of adoption of sons," it would seem that counsel should not be numbered among the gifts of
the Holy Ghost.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 68, A. 1), the gifts of the Holy Ghost are dispositions
whereby the soul is rendered amenable to the motion of the Holy Ghost. Now God moves everything
according to the mode of the thing moved: thus He moves the corporeal creature through time
and place, and the spiritual creature through time, but not through place, as Augustine declares
(Gen. ad lit. viii, 20, 22). Again, it is proper to the rational creature to be moved through
the research of reason to perform any particular action, and this research is called counsel.
Hence the Holy Ghost is said to move the rational creature by way of counsel, wherefore counsel
is reckoned among the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 1: Prudence or euboulia, whether acquired or infused, directs man in the research
of counsel according to principles that the reason can grasp; hence prudence or euboulia makes
man take good counsel either for himself or for another. Since, however, human reason is unable
to grasp the singular and contingent things which may occur, the result is that "the thoughts
of mortal men are fearful, and our counsels uncertain" (Wis. 9:14). Hence in the research of
counsel, man requires to be directed by God who comprehends all things: and this is done through
the gift of counsel, whereby man is directed as though counseled by God, just as, in human
affairs, those who are unable to take counsel for themselves, seek counsel from those who are
wiser.

Reply Obj. 2: That a man be of such good counsel as to counsel others, may be due to a gratuitous
grace; but that a man be counselled by God as to what he ought to do in matters necessary for
salvation is common to all holy persons.

Reply Obj. 3: The children of God are moved by the Holy Ghost according to their mode, without
prejudice to their free-will which is the "faculty of will and reason" [*Sent. iii, D, 24].
Accordingly the gift of counsel is befitting the children of God in so far as the reason is
instructed by the Holy Ghost about what we have to do.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 52, Art. 2]

Whether the Gift of Counsel Corresponds to the Virtue of Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of counsel does not fittingly correspond to the virtue
of prudence. For "the highest point of that which is underneath touches that which is above,"
as Dionysius observes (Div. Nom. vii), even as a man comes into contact with the angel in respect
of his intellect. Now cardinal virtues are inferior to the gifts, as stated above (I-II, Q.
68, A. 8). Since, then, counsel is the first and lowest act of prudence, while command is its
highest act, and judgment comes between, it seems that the gift corresponding to prudence is
not counsel, but rather a gift of judgment or command.

Obj. 2: Further, one gift suffices to help one virtue, since the higher a thing is the more
one it is, as proved in De Causis. Now prudence is helped by the gift of knowledge, which is
not only speculative but also practical, as shown above (Q. 9, A. 3). Therefore the gift of
counsel does not correspond to the virtue of prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs properly to prudence to direct, as stated above (Q. 47, A. 8).
But it belongs to the gift of counsel that man should be directed by God, as stated above (A.
1). Therefore the gift of counsel does not correspond to the virtue of prudence.

On the contrary, The gift of counsel is about what has to be done for the sake of the end.
Now prudence is about the same matter. Therefore they correspond to one another.

I answer that, A lower principle of movement is helped chiefly, and is perfected through being
moved by a higher principle of movement, as a body through being moved by a spirit. Now it
is evident that the rectitude of human reason is compared to the Divine Reason, as a lower
motive principle to a higher: for the Eternal Reason is the supreme rule of all human rectitude.
Consequently prudence, which denotes rectitude of reason, is chiefly perfected and helped through
being ruled and moved by the Holy Ghost, and this belongs to the gift of counsel, as stated
above (A. 1). Therefore the gift of counsel corresponds to prudence, as helping and perfecting it.

Reply Obj. 1: To judge and command belongs not to the thing moved, but to the mover. Wherefore,
since in the gifts of the Holy Ghost, the position of the human mind is of one moved rather
than of a mover, as stated above (A. 1; I-II, Q. 68, A. 1), it follows that it would be unfitting
to call the gift corresponding to prudence by the name of command or judgment rather than of
counsel whereby it is possible to signify that the counselled mind is moved by another counselling
it.

Reply Obj. 2: The gift of knowledge does not directly correspond to prudence, since it deals
with speculative matters: yet by a kind of extension it helps it. On the other hand the gift
of counsel corresponds to prudence directly, because it is concerned about the same things.

Reply Obj. 3: The mover that is moved, moves through being moved. Hence the human mind, from
the very fact that it is directed by the Holy Ghost, is enabled to direct itself and others.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 52, Art. 3]

Whether the Gift of Counsel Remains in Heaven?

Objection 1: It would seem that the gift of counsel does not remain in heaven. For counsel
is about what has to be done for the sake of an end. But in heaven nothing will have to be
done for the sake of an end, since there man possesses the last end. Therefore the gift of
counsel is not in heaven.

Obj. 2: Further, counsel implies doubt, for it is absurd to take counsel in matters that are
evident, as the Philosopher observes (Ethic. iii, 3). Now all doubt will cease in heaven. Therefore
there is no counsel in heaven.

Obj. 3: Further, the saints in heaven are most conformed to God, according to 1 John 3:2, "When
He shall appear, we shall be like to Him." But counsel is not becoming to God, according to
Rom. 11:34, "Who hath been His counsellor?" Therefore neither to the saints in heaven is the
gift of counsel becoming.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xvii, 12): "When either the guilt or the righteousness
of each nation is brought into the debate of the heavenly Court, the guardian of that nation
is said to have won in the conflict, or not to have won."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2; I-II, Q. 68, A. 1), the gifts of the Holy Ghost are connected
with the motion of the rational creature by God. Now we must observe two points concerning
the motion of the human mind by God. First, that the disposition of that which is moved, differs
while it is being moved from its disposition when it is in the term of movement. Indeed if
the mover is the principle of the movement alone, when the movement ceases, the action of the
mover ceases as regards the thing moved, since it has already reached the term of movement,
even as a house, after it is built, ceases being built by the builder. On the other hand, when
the mover is cause not only of the movement, but also of the form to which the movement tends,
then the action of the mover does not cease even after the form has been attained: thus the
sun lightens the air even after it is lightened. In this way, then, God causes in us virtue
and knowledge, not only when we first acquire them, but also as long as we persevere in them:
and it is thus that God causes in the blessed a knowledge of what is to be done, not as though
they were ignorant, but by continuing that knowledge in them.

Nevertheless there are things which the blessed, whether angels or men, do not know: such things
are not essential to blessedness, but concern the government of things according to Divine
Providence. As regards these, we must make a further observation, namely, that God moves the
mind of the blessed in one way, and the mind of the wayfarer, in another. For God moves the
mind of the wayfarer in matters of action, by soothing the pre-existing anxiety of doubt; whereas
there is simple nescience in the mind of the blessed as regards the things they do not know.
From this nescience the angel's mind is cleansed, according to Dionysius (Coel. Hier. vii),
nor does there precede in them any research of doubt, for they simply turn to God; and this
is to take counsel of God, for as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. v, 19) "the angels take counsel
of God about things beneath them": wherefore the instruction which they receive from God in
such matters is called "counsel."

Accordingly the gift of counsel is in the blessed, in so far as God preserves in them the knowledge
that they have, and enlightens them in their nescience of what has to be done.

Reply Obj. 1: Even in the blessed there are acts directed to an end, or resulting, as it were,
from their attainment of the end, such as the acts of praising God, or of helping on others
to the end which they themselves have attained, for example the ministrations of the angels,
and the prayers of the saints. In this respect the gift of counsel finds a place in them.

Reply Obj. 2: Doubt belongs to counsel according to the present state of life, but not to that
counsel which takes place in heaven. Even so neither have the theological virtues quite the
same acts in heaven as on the way thither.

Reply Obj. 3: Counsel is in God, not as receiving but as giving it: and the saints in heaven
are conformed to God, as receivers to the source whence they receive.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 52, Art. 4]

Whether the Fifth Beatitude, Which Is That of Mercy, Corresponds to the Gift of Counsel?

Objection 1: It would seem that the fifth beatitude, which is that of mercy, does not correspond
to the gift of counsel. For all the beatitudes are acts of virtue, as stated above (I-II, Q.
69, A. 1). Now we are directed by counsel in all acts of virtue. Therefore the fifth beatitude
does not correspond more than any other to counsel.

Obj. 2: Further, precepts are given about matters necessary for salvation, while counsel is
given about matters which are not necessary for salvation. Now mercy is necessary for salvation,
according to James 2:13, "Judgment without mercy to him that hath not done mercy." On the other
hand poverty is not necessary for salvation, but belongs to the life of perfection, according
to Matt. 19:21. Therefore the beatitude of poverty corresponds to the gift of counsel, rather
than to the beatitude of mercy.

Obj. 3: Further, the fruits result from the beatitudes, for they denote a certain spiritual
delight resulting from perfect acts of virtue. Now none of the fruits correspond to the gift
of counsel, as appears from Gal. 5:22, 23. Therefore neither does the beatitude of mercy correspond
to the gift of counsel.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. iv): "Counsel is befitting the merciful, because
the one remedy is to be delivered from evils so great, to pardon, and to give."

I answer that, Counsel is properly about things useful for an end. Hence such things as are
of most use for an end, should above all correspond to the gift of counsel. Now such is mercy,
according to 1 Tim. 4:8, "Godliness [*Pietas, whence our English word pity, which is the same
as mercy; see note on II-II, Q. 30, A. 1] is profitable to all things." Therefore the beatitude
of mercy specially corresponds to the gift of counsel, not as eliciting but as directing mercy.

Reply Obj. 1: Although counsel directs in all the acts of virtue, it does so in a special way
in works of mercy, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 2: Counsel considered as a gift of the Holy Ghost guides us in all matters that
are directed to the end of eternal life whether they be necessary for salvation or not, and
yet not every work of mercy is necessary for salvation.

Reply Obj. 3: Fruit denotes something ultimate. Now the ultimate in practical matters consists
not in knowledge but in an action which is the end. Hence nothing pertaining to practical knowledge
is numbered among the fruits, but only such things as pertain to action, in which practical
knowledge is the guide. Among these we find "goodness" and "benignity" which correspond to mercy.

QUESTION 53

OF IMPRUDENCE (In Six Articles)

We must now consider the vices opposed to prudence. For Augustine says (Contra Julian. iv,
3): "There are vices opposed to every virtue, not only vices that are in manifest opposition
to virtue, as temerity is opposed to prudence, but also vices which have a kind of kinship
and not a true but a spurious likeness to virtue; thus in opposition to prudence we have craftiness."

Accordingly we must consider first of all those vices which are in evident opposition to prudence,
those namely which are due to a defect either of prudence or of those things which are requisite
for prudence, and secondly those vices which have a false resemblance to prudence, those namely
which are due to abuse of the things required for prudence. And since solicitude pertains to
prudence, the first of these considerations will be twofold: (1) Of imprudence; (2) Of negligence
which is opposed to solicitude.

Under the first head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Concerning imprudence, whether it is a sin?

(2) Whether it is a special sin?

(3) Of precipitation or temerity;

(4) Of thoughtlessness;

(5) Of inconstancy;

(6) Concerning the origin of these vices.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 53, Art. 1]

Whether Imprudence Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that imprudence is not a sin. For every sin is voluntary, according
to Augustine [*De Vera Relig. xiv]; whereas imprudence is not voluntary, since no man wishes
to be imprudent. Therefore imprudence is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, none but original sin comes to man with his birth. But imprudence comes to
man with his birth, wherefore the young are imprudent; and yet it is not original sin which
is opposed to original justice. Therefore imprudence is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every sin is taken away by repentance. But imprudence is not taken away by
repentance. Therefore imprudence is not a sin.

On the contrary, The spiritual treasure of grace is not taken away save by sin. But it is taken
away by imprudence, according to Prov. 21:20, "There is a treasure to be desired, and oil in
the dwelling of the just, and the imprudent [Douay: 'foolish'] man shall spend it." Therefore
imprudence is a sin.

I answer that, Imprudence may be taken in two ways, first, as a privation, secondly, as a contrary.
Properly speaking it is not taken as a negation, so as merely to signify the absence of prudence,
for this can be without any sin. Taken as a privation, imprudence denotes lack of that prudence
which a man can and ought to have, and in this sense imprudence is a sin by reason of a man's
negligence in striving to have prudence.

Imprudence is taken as a contrary, in so far as the movement or act of reason is in opposition
to prudence: for instance, whereas the right reason of prudence acts by taking counsel, the
imprudent man despises counsel, and the same applies to the other conditions which require
consideration in the act of prudence. In this way imprudence is a sin in respect of prudence
considered under its proper aspect, since it is not possible for a man to act against prudence,
except by infringing the rules on which the right reason of prudence depends. Wherefore, if
this should happen through aversion from the Divine Law, it will be a mortal sin, as when a
man acts precipitately through contempt and rejection of the Divine teaching: whereas if he
act beside the Law and without contempt, and without detriment to things necessary for salvation,
it will be a venial sin.

Reply Obj. 1: No man desires the deformity of imprudence, but the rash man wills the act of
imprudence, because he wishes to act precipitately. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. vi,
5) that "he who sins willingly against prudence is less to be commended."

Reply Obj. 2: This argument takes imprudence in the negative sense. It must be observed however
that lack of prudence or of any other virtue is included in the lack of original justice which
perfected the entire soul. Accordingly all such lack of virtue may be ascribed to original sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Repentance restores infused prudence, and thus the lack of this prudence ceases;
but acquired prudence is not restored as to the habit, although the contrary act is taken away,
wherein properly speaking the sin of imprudence consists.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 53, Art. 2]

Whether Imprudence Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that imprudence is not a special sin. For whoever sins, acts against
right reason, i.e. against prudence. But imprudence consists in acting against prudence, as
stated above (A. 1). Therefore imprudence is not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, prudence is more akin to moral action than knowledge is. But ignorance which
is opposed to knowledge, is reckoned one of the general causes of sin. Much more therefore
should imprudence be reckoned among those causes.

Obj. 3: Further, sin consists in the corruption of the circumstances of virtue, wherefore Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. iv) that "evil results from each single defect." Now many things are requisite
for prudence; for instance, reason, intelligence, docility, and so on, as stated above (QQ.
48, 49). Therefore there are many species of imprudence, so that it is not a special sin.

On the contrary, Imprudence is opposed to prudence, as stated above (A. 1). Now prudence is
a special virtue. Therefore imprudence too is one special vice.

I answer that, A vice or sin may be styled general in two ways; first, absolutely, because,
to wit, it is general in respect of all sins; secondly, because it is general in respect of
certain vices, which are its species. In the first way, a vice may be said to be general on
two counts: first, essentially, because it is predicated of all sins: and in this way imprudence
is not a general sin, as neither is prudence a general virtue: since it is concerned with special
acts, namely the very acts of reason: secondly, by participation; and in this way imprudence
is a general sin: for, just as all the virtues have a share of prudence, in so far as it directs
them, so have all vices and sins a share of imprudence, because no sin can occur, without some
defect in an act of the directing reason, which defect belongs to imprudence.

If, on the other hand, a sin be called general, not simply but in some particular genus, that
is, as containing several species of sin, then imprudence is a general sin. For it contains
various species in three ways. First, by opposition to the various subjective parts of prudence,
for just as we distinguish the prudence that guides the individual, from other kinds that govern
communities, as stated above (Q. 48; Q. 50, A. 7), so also we distinguish various kinds of
imprudence. Secondly, in respect of the quasi-potential parts of prudence, which are virtues
connected with it, and correspond to the several acts of reason. Thus, by defect of "counsel"
to which euboulia corresponds, "precipitation" or "temerity" is a species of imprudence; by
defect of "judgment," to which synesis (judging well according to common law) and gnome (judging
well according to general law) refer, there is "thoughtlessness"; while "inconstancy" and "negligence"
correspond to the "command" which is the proper act of prudence. Thirdly, this may be taken
by opposition to those things which are requisite for prudence, which are the quasi-integral
parts of prudence. Since however all these things are intended for the direction of the aforesaid
three acts of reason, it follows that all the opposite defects are reducible to the four parts
mentioned above. Thus incautiousness and incircumspection are included in "thoughtlessness";
lack of docility, memory, or reason is referable to "precipitation"; improvidence, lack of
intelligence and of shrewdness, belong to "negligence" and "inconstancy."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument considers generality by participation.

Reply Obj. 2: Since knowledge is further removed from morality than prudence is, according
to their respective proper natures, it follows that ignorance has the nature of mortal sin,
not of itself, but on account either of a preceding negligence, or of the consequent result,
and for this reason it is reckoned one of the general causes of sin. On the other hand imprudence,
by its very nature, denotes a moral vice; and for this reason it can be called a special sin.

Reply Obj. 3: When various circumstances are corrupted for the same motive, the species of
sin is not multiplied: thus it is the same species of sin to take what is not one's own, where
one ought not, and when one ought not. If, however, there be various motives, there are various
species: for instance, if one man were to take another's property from where he ought not,
so as to wrong a sacred place, this would constitute the species called sacrilege, while if
another were to take another's property when he ought not, merely through the lust of possession,
this would be a case of simple avarice. Hence the lack of those things which are requisite
for prudence, does not constitute a diversity of species, except in so far as they are directed
to different acts of reason, as stated above.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 53, Art. 3]

Whether Precipitation Is a Sin Included in Imprudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that precipitation is not a sin included in imprudence. Imprudence
is opposed to the virtue of prudence; whereas precipitation is opposed to the gift of counsel,
according to Gregory, who says (Moral. ii, 49) that the gift of "counsel is given as a remedy
to precipitation." Therefore precipitation is not a sin contained under imprudence.

Obj. 2: Further, precipitation seemingly pertains to rashness. Now rashness implies presumption,
which pertains to pride. Therefore precipitation is not a vice contained under imprudence.

Obj. 3: Further, precipitation seems to denote inordinate haste. Now sin happens in counselling
not only through being over hasty but also through being over slow, so that the opportunity
for action passes by, and through corruption of other circumstances, as stated in Ethic. vi,
9. Therefore there is no reason for reckoning precipitation as a sin contained under imprudence,
rather than slowness, or something else of the kind pertaining to inordinate counsel.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 4:19): "The way of the wicked is darksome, they know
not where they fall." Now the darksome ways of ungodliness belong to imprudence. Therefore
imprudence leads a man to fall or to be precipitate.

I answer that, Precipitation is ascribed metaphorically to acts of the soul, by way of similitude
to bodily movement. Now a thing is said to be precipitated as regards bodily movement, when
it is brought down from above by the impulse either of its own movement or of another's, and
not in orderly fashion by degrees. Now the summit of the soul is the reason, and the base is
reached in the action performed by the body; while the steps that intervene by which one ought
to descend in orderly fashion are memory of the past, intelligence of the present, shrewdness
in considering the future outcome, reasoning which compares one thing with another, docility
in accepting the opinions of others. He that takes counsel descends by these steps in due order,
whereas if a man is rushed into action by the impulse of his will or of a passion, without
taking these steps, it will be a case of precipitation. Since then inordinate counsel pertains
to imprudence, it is evident that the vice of precipitation is contained under imprudence.

Reply Obj. 1: Rectitude of counsel belongs to the gift of counsel and to the virtue of prudence;
albeit in different ways, as stated above (Q. 52, A. 2), and consequently precipitation is
opposed to both.

Reply Obj. 2: Things are said to be done rashly when they are not directed by reason: and this
may happen in two ways; first through the impulse of the will or of a passion, secondly through
contempt of the directing rule; and this is what is meant by rashness properly speaking, wherefore
it appears to proceed from that root of pride, which refuses to submit to another's ruling.
But precipitation refers to both, so that rashness is contained under precipitation, although
precipitation refers rather to the first.

Reply Obj. 3: Many things have to be considered in the research of reason; hence the Philosopher
declares (Ethic. vi, 9) that "one should be slow in taking counsel." Hence precipitation is
more directly opposed to rectitude of counsel than over slowness is, for the latter bears a
certain likeness to right counsel.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 53, Art. 4]

Whether Thoughtlessness Is a Special Sin Included in Imprudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that thoughtlessness is not a special sin included in imprudence.
For the Divine law does not incite us to any sin, according to Ps. 18:8, "The law of the Lord
is unspotted"; and yet it incites us to be thoughtless, according to Matt. 10:19, "Take no
thought how or what to speak." Therefore thoughtlessness is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, whoever takes counsel must needs give thought to many things. Now precipitation
is due to a defect of counsel and therefore to a defect of thought. Therefore precipitation
is contained under thoughtlessness: and consequently thoughtlessness is not a special sin.

Obj. 3: Further, prudence consists in acts of the practical reason, viz. counsel, judgment
about what has been counselled, and command [*Cf. Q. 47, A. 8]. Now thought precedes all these
acts, since it belongs also to the speculative intellect. Therefore thoughtlessness is not
a special sin contained under imprudence.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 4:25): "Let thy eyes look straight on, and let thine
eye-lids go before thy steps." Now this pertains to prudence, while the contrary pertains to
thoughtlessness. Therefore thoughtlessness is a special sin contained under imprudence.

I answer that, Thought signifies the act of the intellect in considering the truth about something.
Now just as research belongs to the reason, so judgment belongs to the intellect. Wherefore
in speculative matters a demonstrative science is said to exercise judgment, in so far as it
judges the truth of the results of research by tracing those results back to the first indemonstrable
principles. Hence thought pertains chiefly to judgment; and consequently the lack of right
judgment belongs to the vice of thoughtlessness, in so far, to wit, as one fails to judge rightly
through contempt or neglect of those things on which a right judgment depends. It is therefore
evident that thoughtlessness is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord did not forbid us to take thought, when we have the opportunity, about
what we ought to do or say, but, in the words quoted, He encourages His disciples, so that
when they had no opportunity of taking thought, either through lack of knowledge or through
a sudden call, they should trust in the guidance of God alone, because "as we know not what
to do, we can only turn our eyes to God," according to 2 Paral. 20:12: else if man, instead
of doing what he can, were to be content with awaiting God's assistance, he would seem to tempt
God.

Reply Obj. 2: All thought about those things of which counsel takes cognizance, is directed
to the formation of a right judgment, wherefore this thought is perfected in judgment. Consequently
thoughtlessness is above all opposed to the rectitude of judgment.

Reply Obj. 3: Thoughtlessness is to be taken here in relation to a determinate matter, namely,
that of human action, wherein more things have to be thought about for the purpose of right
judgment, than in speculative matters, because actions are about singulars.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 53, Art. 5]

Whether Inconstancy Is a Vice Contained Under Imprudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that inconstancy is not a vice contained under imprudence. For inconstancy
consists seemingly in a lack of perseverance in matters of difficulty. But perseverance in
difficult matters belongs to fortitude. Therefore inconstancy is opposed to fortitude rather
than to prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (James 3:16): "Where jealousy [Douay: 'envy'] and contention
are, there are inconstancy and every evil work." But jealousy pertains to envy. Therefore inconstancy
pertains not to imprudence but to envy.

Obj. 3: Further, a man would seem to be inconstant who fails to persevere in what he has proposed
to do. Now this is a mark of "incontinency" in pleasurable matters, and of "effeminacy" or
"squeamishness" in unpleasant matters, according to Ethic. vii, 1. Therefore inconstancy does
not pertain to imprudence.

On the contrary, It belongs to prudence to prefer the greater good to the lesser. Therefore
to forsake the greater good belongs to imprudence. Now this is inconstancy. Therefore inconstancy
belongs to imprudence.

I answer that, Inconstancy denotes withdrawal from a definite good purpose. Now the origin
of this withdrawal is in the appetite, for a man does not withdraw from a previous good purpose,
except on account of something being inordinately pleasing to him: nor is this withdrawal completed
except through a defect of reason, which is deceived in rejecting what before it had rightly
accepted. And since it can resist the impulse of the passions, if it fail to do this, it is
due to its own weakness in not standing to the good purpose it has conceived; hence inconstancy,
as to its completion, is due to a defect in the reason. Now just as all rectitude of the practical
reason belongs in some degree to prudence, so all lack of that rectitude belongs to imprudence.
Consequently inconstancy, as to its completion, belongs to imprudence. And just as precipitation
is due to a defect in the act of counsel, and thoughtlessness to a defect in the act of judgment,
so inconstancy arises from a defect in the act of command. For a man is stated to be inconstant
because his reason fails in commanding what has been counselled and judged.

Reply Obj. 1: The good of prudence is shared by all the moral virtues, and accordingly perseverance
in good belongs to all moral virtues, chiefly, however, to fortitude, which suffers a greater
impulse to the contrary.

Reply Obj. 2: Envy and anger, which are the source of contention, cause inconstancy on the
part of the appetite, to which power the origin of inconstancy is due, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Continency and perseverance seem to be not in the appetitive power, but in the
reason. For the continent man suffers evil concupiscences, and the persevering man suffers
grievous sorrows (which points to a defect in the appetitive power); but reason stands firm,
in the continent man, against concupiscence, and in the persevering man, against sorrow. Hence
continency and perseverance seem to be species of constancy which pertains to reason; and to
this power inconstancy pertains also.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 53, Art. 6]

Whether the Aforesaid Vices Arise from Lust?

Objection 1: It would seem that the aforesaid vices do not arise from lust. For inconstancy
arises from envy, as stated above (A. 5, ad 2). But envy is a distinct vice from lust.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (James 1:8): "A double-minded man is inconstant in all his ways."
Now duplicity does not seem to pertain to lust, but rather to deceitfulness, which is a daughter
of covetousness, according to Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45). Therefore the aforesaid vices do not
arise from lust.

Obj. 3: Further, the aforesaid vices are connected with some defect of reason. Now spiritual
vices are more akin to the reason than carnal vices. Therefore the aforesaid vices arise from
spiritual vices rather than from carnal vices.

On the contrary, Gregory declares (Moral. xxxi, 45) that the aforesaid vices arise from lust.

I answer that, As the Philosopher states (Ethic. vi, 5) "pleasure above all corrupts the estimate
of prudence," and chiefly sexual pleasure which absorbs the mind, and draws it to sensible
delight. Now the perfection of prudence and of every intellectual virtue consists in abstraction
from sensible objects. Wherefore, since the aforesaid vices involve a defect of prudence and
of the practical reason, as stated above (AA. 2, 5), it follows that they arise chiefly from lust.

Reply Obj. 1: Envy and anger cause inconstancy by drawing away the reason to something else;
whereas lust causes inconstancy by destroying the judgment of reason entirely. Hence the Philosopher
says (Ethic. vii, 6) that "the man who is incontinent through anger listens to reason, yet
not perfectly, whereas he who is incontinent through lust does not listen to it at all."

Reply Obj. 2: Duplicity also is something resulting from lust, just as inconstancy is, if by
duplicity we understand fluctuation of the mind from one thing to another. Hence Terence says
(Eunuch. act 1, sc. 1) that "love leads to war, and likewise to peace and truce."

Reply Obj. 3: Carnal vices destroy the judgment of reason so much the more as they lead us
away from reason.

QUESTION 54

OF NEGLIGENCE (In Three Articles)

We must now consider negligence, under which head there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether negligence is a special sin?

(2) To which virtue is it opposed?

(3) Whether negligence is a mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 54, Art. 1]

Whether Negligence Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that negligence is not a special sin. For negligence is opposed
to diligence. But diligence is required in every virtue. Therefore negligence is not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is common to every sin is not a special sin. Now negligence is
common to every sin, because he who sins neglects that which withdraws him from sin, and he
who perseveres in sin neglects to be contrite for his sin. Therefore negligence is not a special
sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every special sin has a determinate matter. But negligence seems to have no
determinate matter: since it is neither about evil or indifferent things (for no man is accused
of negligence if he omit them), nor about good things, for if these be done negligently, they
are no longer good. Therefore it seems that negligence is not a special vice.

On the contrary, Sins committed through negligence, are distinguished from those which are
committed through contempt.

I answer that, Negligence denotes lack of due solicitude. Now every lack of a due act is sinful:
wherefore it is evident that negligence is a sin, and that it must needs have the character
of a special sin according as solicitude is the act of a special virtue. For certain sins are
special through being about a special matter, as lust is about sexual matters, while some vices
are special on account of their having a special kind of act which extends to all kinds of
matter, and such are all vices affecting an act of reason, since every act of reason extends
to any kind of moral matter. Since then solicitude is a special act of reason, as stated above
(Q. 47, A. 9), it follows that negligence, which denotes lack of solicitude, is a special sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Diligence seems to be the same as solicitude, because the more we love (diligimus)
a thing the more solicitous are we about it. Hence diligence, no less than solicitude, is required
for every virtue, in so far as due acts of reason are requisite for every virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: In every sin there must needs be a defect affecting an act of reason, for instance
a defect in counsel or the like. Hence just as precipitation is a special sin on account of
a special act of reason which is omitted, namely counsel, although it may be found in any kind
of sin; so negligence is a special sin on account of the lack of a special act of reason, namely
solicitude, although it is found more or less in all sins.

Reply Obj. 3: Properly speaking the matter of negligence is a good that one ought to do, not
that it is a good when it is done negligently, but because on account of negligence it incurs
a lack of goodness, whether a due act be entirely omitted through lack of solicitude, or some
due circumstance be omitted.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 54, Art. 2]

Whether Negligence Is Opposed to Prudence?

Objection 1: It would seem that negligence is not opposed to prudence. For negligence seems
to be the same as idleness or laziness, which belongs to sloth, according to Gregory (Moral.
xxxi, 45). Now sloth is not opposed to prudence, but to charity, as stated above (Q. 35, A.
3). Therefore negligence is not opposed to prudence.

Obj. 2: Further, every sin of omission seems to be due to negligence. But sins of omission
are not opposed to prudence, but to the executive moral virtues. Therefore negligence is not
opposed to prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, imprudence relates to some act of reason. But negligence does not imply a
defect of counsel, for that is precipitation, nor a defect of judgment, since that is thoughtlessness,
nor a defect of command, because that is inconstancy. Therefore negligence does not pertain
to imprudence.

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (Eccles. 7:19): "He that feareth God, neglecteth nothing." But
every sin is excluded by the opposite virtue. Therefore negligence is opposed to fear rather
than to prudence.

On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 20:7): "A babbler and a fool (imprudens) will regard
no time." Now this is due to negligence. Therefore negligence is opposed to prudence.

I answer that, Negligence is directly opposed to solicitude. Now solicitude pertains to the
reason, and rectitude of solicitude to prudence. Hence, on the other hand, negligence pertains
to imprudence. This appears from its very name, because, as Isidore observes (Etym. x) "a negligent
man is one who fails to choose (nec eligens)": and the right choice of the means belongs to
prudence. Therefore negligence pertains to imprudence.

Reply Obj. 1: Negligence is a defect in the internal act, to which choice also belongs: whereas
idleness and laziness denote slowness of execution, yet so that idleness denotes slowness in
setting about the execution, while laziness denotes remissness in the execution itself. Hence
it is becoming that laziness should arise from sloth, which is "an oppressive sorrow," i.e.
hindering, the mind from action [*Cf. Q. 35, A. 1; I-II, Q. 35, A. 8].

Reply Obj. 2: Omission regards the external act, for it consists in failing to perform an act
which is due. Hence it is opposed to justice, and is an effect of negligence, even as the execution
of a just deed is the effect of right reason.

Reply Obj. 3: Negligence regards the act of command, which solicitude also regards. Yet the
negligent man fails in regard to this act otherwise than the inconstant man: for the inconstant
man fails in commanding, being hindered as it were, by something, whereas the negligent man
fails through lack of a prompt will.

Reply Obj. 4: The fear of God helps us to avoid all sins, because according to Prov. 15:27,
"by the fear of the Lord everyone declineth from evil." Hence fear makes us avoid negligence,
yet not as though negligence were directly opposed to fear, but because fear incites man to
acts of reason. Wherefore also it has been stated above (I-II, Q. 44, A. 2) when we were treating
of the passions, that "fear makes us take counsel."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 54, Art. 3]

Whether Negligence Can Be a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that negligence cannot be a mortal sin. For a gloss of Gregory [*Moral.
ix. 34] on Job 9:28, "I feared all my works," etc. says that "too little love of God aggravates
the former," viz. negligence. But wherever there is mortal sin, the love of God is done away
with altogether. Therefore negligence is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss on Ecclus. 7:34, "For thy negligences purify thyself with a few,"
says: "Though the offering be small it cleanses the negligences of many sins." Now this would
not be, if negligence were a mortal sin. Therefore negligence is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, under the law certain sacrifices were prescribed for mortal sins, as appears
from the book of Leviticus. Yet no sacrifice was prescribed for negligence. Therefore negligence
is not a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 19:16): "He that neglecteth his own life [Vulg.: 'way']
shall die."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2, ad 3), negligence arises out of a certain remissness
of the will, the result being a lack of solicitude on the part of the reason in commanding
what it should command, or as it should command. Accordingly negligence may happen to be a
mortal sin in two ways. First on the part of that which is omitted through negligence. If this
be either an act or a circumstance necessary for salvation, it will be a mortal sin. Secondly
on the part of the cause: for if the will be so remiss about Divine things, as to fall away
altogether from the charity of God, such negligence is a mortal sin, and this is the case chiefly
when negligence is due to contempt.

But if negligence consists in the omission of an act or circumstance that is not necessary
for salvation, it is not a mortal but a venial sin, provided the negligence arise, not from
contempt, but from some lack of fervor, to which venial sin is an occasional obstacle.

Reply Obj. 1: Man may be said to love God less in two ways. First through lack of the fervor
of charity, and this causes the negligence that is a venial sin: secondly through lack of charity
itself, in which sense we say that a man loves God less when he loves Him with a merely natural
love; and this causes the negligence that is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the same authority (gloss), a small offering made with a humble
mind and out of pure love, cleanses man not only from venial but also from mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 3: When negligence consists in the omission of that which is necessary for salvation,
it is drawn to the other more manifest genus of sin. Because those sins that consist of inward
actions, are more hidden, wherefore no special sacrifices were prescribed for them in the Law,
since the offering of sacrifices was a kind of public confession of sin, whereas hidden sins
should not be confessed in public.

QUESTION 55

OF VICES OPPOSED TO PRUDENCE BY WAY OF RESEMBLANCE (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider those vices opposed to prudence, which have a resemblance thereto. Under
this head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether prudence of the flesh is a sin?

(2) Whether it is a mortal sin?

(3) Whether craftiness is a special sin?

(4) Of guile;

(5) Of fraud;

(6) Of solicitude about temporal things;

(7) Of solicitude about the future;

(8) Of the origin of these vices.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 1]

Whether Prudence of the Flesh Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence of the flesh is not a sin. For prudence is more excellent
than the other moral virtues, since it governs them all. But no justice or temperance is sinful.
Neither therefore is any prudence a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, it is not a sin to act prudently for an end which it is lawful to love. But
it is lawful to love the flesh, "for no man ever hated his own flesh" (Eph. 5:29). Therefore
prudence of the flesh is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, just as man is tempted by the flesh, so too is he tempted by the world and
the devil. But no prudence of the world, or of the devil is accounted a sin. Therefore neither
should any prudence of the flesh be accounted among sins.

On the contrary, No man is an enemy to God save for wickedness according to Wis. 14:9, "To
God the wicked and his wickedness are hateful alike." Now it is written (Rom. 8:7): "The prudence
[Vulg.: 'wisdom'] of the flesh is an enemy to God." Therefore prudence of the flesh is a sin.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 47, A. 13), prudence regards things which are directed to
the end of life as a whole. Hence prudence of the flesh signifies properly the prudence of
a man who looks upon carnal goods as the last end of his life. Now it is evident that this
is a sin, because it involves a disorder in man with respect to his last end, which does not
consist in the goods of the body, as stated above (I-II, Q. 2, A. 5). Therefore prudence of
the flesh is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Justice and temperance include in their very nature that which ranks them among
the virtues, viz. equality and the curbing of concupiscence; hence they are never taken in
a bad sense. On the other hand prudence is so called from foreseeing (providendo), as stated
above (Q. 47, A. 1; Q. 49, A. 6), which can extend to evil things also. Therefore, although
prudence is taken simply in a good sense, yet, if something be added, it may be taken in a
bad sense: and it is thus that prudence of the flesh is said to be a sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The flesh is on account of the soul, as matter is on account of the form, and
the instrument on account of the principal agent. Hence the flesh is loved lawfully, if it
be directed to the good of the soul as its end. If, however, a man place his last end in a
good of the flesh, his love will be inordinate and unlawful, and it is thus that the prudence
of the flesh is directed to the love of the flesh.

Reply Obj. 3: The devil tempts us, not through the good of the appetible object, but by way
of suggestion. Wherefore, since prudence implies direction to some appetible end, we do not
speak of "prudence of the devil," as of a prudence directed to some evil end, which is the
aspect under which the world and the flesh tempt us, in so far as worldly or carnal goods are
proposed to our appetite.

We may also reply that since prudence is in a certain sense called "wisdom," as stated above
(Q. 47, A. 2, ad 1), we may distinguish a threefold prudence corresponding to the three kinds
of temptation.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 2]

Whether Prudence of the Flesh Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that prudence of the flesh is a mortal sin. For it is a mortal sin
to rebel against the Divine law, since this implies contempt of God. Now "the prudence [Douay:
'wisdom'] of the flesh . . . is not subject to the law of God" (Rom. 8:7). Therefore prudence
of the flesh is a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, every sin against the Holy Ghost is a mortal sin. Now prudence of the flesh
seems to be a sin against the Holy Ghost, for "it cannot be subject to the law of God" (Rom.
8:7), and so it seems to be an unpardonable sin, which is proper to the sin against the Holy
Ghost. Therefore prudence of the flesh is a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the greatest evil is opposed to the greatest good, as stated in Ethic. viii,
10. Now prudence of the flesh is opposed to that prudence which is the chief of the moral virtues.
Therefore prudence of the flesh is chief among mortal sins, so that it is itself a mortal sin.

On the contrary, That which diminishes a sin has not of itself the nature of a mortal sin.
Now the thoughtful quest of things pertaining to the care of the flesh, which seems to pertain
to carnal prudence, diminishes sin [*Cf. Prov. 6:30]. Therefore prudence of the flesh has not
of itself the nature of a mortal sin.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 47, A. 2, ad 1; A. 13), a man is said to be prudent in two
ways. First, simply, i.e. in relation to the end of life as a whole. Secondly, relatively,
i.e. in relation to some particular end; thus a man is said to be prudent in business or something
else of the kind. Accordingly if prudence of the flesh be taken as corresponding to prudence
in its absolute signification, so that a man place the last end of his whole life in the care
of the flesh, it is a mortal sin, because he turns away from God by so doing, since he cannot
have several last ends, as stated above (I-II, Q. 1, A. 5).

If, on the other hand, prudence of the flesh be taken as corresponding to particular prudence,
it is a venial sin. For it happens sometimes that a man has an inordinate affection for some
pleasure of the flesh, without turning away from God by a mortal sin; in which case he does
not place the end of his whole life in carnal pleasure. To apply oneself to obtain this pleasure
is a venial sin and pertains to prudence of the flesh. But if a man actually refers the care
of the flesh to a good end, as when one is careful about one's food in order to sustain one's
body, this is no longer prudence of the flesh, because then one uses the care of the flesh
as a means to an end.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle is speaking of that carnal prudence whereby a man places the end
of his whole life in the goods of the flesh, and this is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Prudence of the flesh does not imply a sin against the Holy Ghost. For when it
is stated that "it cannot be subject to the law of God," this does not mean that he who has
prudence of the flesh, cannot be converted and submit to the law of God, but that carnal prudence
itself cannot be subject to God's law, even as neither can injustice be just, nor heat cold,
although that which is hot may become cold.

Reply Obj. 3: Every sin is opposed to prudence, just as prudence is shared by every virtue.
But it does not follow that every sin opposed to prudence is most grave, but only when it is
opposed to prudence in some very grave matter.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 3]

Whether Craftiness Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that craftiness is not a special sin. For the words of Holy Writ
do not induce anyone to sin; and yet they induce us to be crafty, according to Prov. 1:4, "To
give craftiness [Douay: 'subtlety'] to little ones." Therefore craftiness is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 13:16): "The crafty [Douay: 'prudent'] man doth all things
with counsel." Therefore, he does so either for a good or for an evil end. If for a good end,
there is no sin seemingly, and if for an evil end, it would seem to pertain to carnal or worldly
prudence. Therefore craftiness is not a special sin distinct from prudence of the flesh.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory expounding the words of Job 12, "The simplicity of the just man is
laughed to scorn," says (Moral. x, 29): "The wisdom of this world is to hide one's thoughts
by artifice, to conceal one's meaning by words, to represent error as truth, to make out the
truth to be false," and further on he adds: "This prudence is acquired by the young, it is
learnt at a price by children." Now the above things seem to belong to craftiness. Therefore
craftiness is not distinct from carnal or worldly prudence, and consequently it seems not to
be a special sin.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (2 Cor. 4:2): "We renounce the hidden things of dishonesty,
not walking in craftiness, nor adulterating the word of God." Therefore craftiness is a sin.

I answer that, Prudence is right reason applied to action, just as science is right reason
applied to knowledge. In speculative matters one may sin against rectitude of knowledge in
two ways: in one way when the reason is led to a false conclusion that appears to be true;
in another way when the reason proceeds from false premises, that appear to be true, either
to a true or to a false conclusion. Even so a sin may be against prudence, through having some
resemblance thereto, in two ways. First, when the purpose of the reason is directed to an end
which is good not in truth but in appearance, and this pertains to prudence of the flesh; secondly,
when, in order to obtain a certain end, whether good or evil, a man uses means that are not
true but fictitious and counterfeit, and this belongs to the sin of craftiness. This is consequently
a sin opposed to prudence, and distinct from prudence of the flesh.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine observes (Contra Julian. iv, 3) just as prudence is sometimes improperly
taken in a bad sense, so is craftiness sometimes taken in a good sense, and this on account
of their mutual resemblance. Properly speaking, however, craftiness is taken in a bad sense,
as the Philosopher states in Ethic. vi, 12.

Reply Obj. 2: Craftiness can take counsel both for a good end and for an evil end: nor should
a good end be pursued by means that are false and counterfeit but by such as are true. Hence
craftiness is a sin if it be directed to a good end.

Reply Obj. 3: Under "worldly prudence" Gregory included everything that can pertain to false
prudence, so that it comprises craftiness also.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 4]

Whether Guile Is a Sin Pertaining to Craftiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that guile is not a sin pertaining to craftiness. For sin, especially
mortal, has no place in perfect men. Yet a certain guile is to be found in them, according
to 2 Cor. 12:16, "Being crafty I caught you by guile." Therefore guile is not always a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, guile seems to pertain chiefly to the tongue, according to Ps. 5:11, "They
dealt deceitfully with their tongues." Now craftiness like prudence is in the very act of reason.
Therefore guile does not pertain to craftiness.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 12:20): "Guile [Douay: 'Deceit'] is in the heart of them
that think evil things." But the thought of evil things does not always pertain to craftiness.
Therefore guile does not seem to belong to craftiness.

On the contrary, Craftiness aims at lying in wait, according to Eph. 4:14, "By cunning craftiness
by which they lie in wait to deceive": and guile aims at this also. Therefore guile pertains
to craftiness.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3), it belongs to craftiness to adopt ways that are not
true but counterfeit and apparently true, in order to attain some end either good or evil.
Now the adopting of such ways may be subjected to a twofold consideration; first, as regards
the process of thinking them out, and this belongs properly to craftiness, even as thinking
out right ways to a due end belongs to prudence. Secondly the adopting of such like ways may
be considered with regard to their actual execution, and in this way it belongs to guile. Hence
guile denotes a certain execution of craftiness, and accordingly belongs thereto.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as craftiness is taken properly in a bad sense, and improperly in a good
sense, so too is guile which is the execution of craftiness.

Reply Obj. 2: The execution of craftiness with the purpose of deceiving, is effected first
and foremost by words, which hold the chief place among those signs whereby a man signifies
something to another man, as Augustine states (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 3), hence guile is ascribed
chiefly to speech. Yet guile may happen also in deeds, according to Ps. 104:25, "And to deal
deceitfully with his servants." Guile is also in the heart, according to Ecclus. 19:23, "His
interior is full of deceit," but this is to devise deceits, according to Ps. 37:13: "They studied
deceits all the day long."

Reply Obj. 3: Whoever purposes to do some evil deed, must needs devise certain ways of attaining
his purpose, and for the most part he devises deceitful ways, whereby the more easily to obtain
his end. Nevertheless it happens sometimes that evil is done openly and by violence without
craftiness and guile; but as this is more difficult, it is of less frequent occurrence.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 5]

Whether Fraud Pertains to Craftiness?

Objection 1: It would seem that fraud does not pertain to craftiness. For a man does not deserve
praise if he allows himself to be deceived, which is the object of craftiness; and yet a man
deserves praise for allowing himself to be defrauded, according to 1 Cor. 6:1, "Why do you
not rather suffer yourselves to be defrauded?" Therefore fraud does not belong to craftiness.

Obj. 2: Further, fraud seems to consist in unlawfully taking or receiving external things,
for it is written (Acts 5:1) that "a certain man named Ananias with Saphira his wife, sold
a piece of land, and by fraud kept back part of the price of the land." Now it pertains to
injustice or illiberality to take possession of or retain external things unjustly. Therefore
fraud does not belong to craftiness which is opposed to prudence.

Obj. 3: Further, no man employs craftiness against himself. But the frauds of some are against
themselves, for it is written (Prov. 1:18) concerning some "that they practice frauds [Douay:
'deceits'] against their own souls." Therefore fraud does not belong to craftiness.

On the contrary, The object of fraud is to deceive, according to Job 13:9, "Shall he be deceived
as a man, with your fraudulent [Douay: 'deceitful'] dealings?" Now craftiness is directed to
the same object. Therefore fraud pertains to craftiness.

I answer that, Just as guile consists in the execution of craftiness, so also does fraud. But
they seem to differ in the fact that guile belongs in general to the execution of craftiness,
whether this be effected by words, or by deeds, whereas fraud belongs more properly to the
execution of craftiness by deeds.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle does not counsel the faithful to be deceived in their knowledge,
but to bear patiently the effect of being deceived, and to endure wrongs inflicted on them
by fraud.

Reply Obj. 2: The execution of craftiness may be carried out by another vice, just as the execution
of prudence by the virtues: and accordingly nothing hinders fraud from pertaining to covetousness
or illiberality.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who commit frauds, do not design anything against themselves or their own
souls; it is through God's just judgment that what they plot against others, recoils on themselves,
according to Ps. 7:16, "He is fallen into the hole he made."

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 6]

Whether It Is Lawful to Be Solicitous About Temporal Matters?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful to be solicitous about temporal matters. Because a superior
should be solicitous for his subjects, according to Rom. 12:8, "He that ruleth, with solicitude."
Now according to the Divine ordering, man is placed over temporal things, according to Ps.
8:8, "Thou hast subjected all things under his feet," etc. Therefore man should be solicitous
about temporal things.

Obj. 2: Further, everyone is solicitous about the end for which he works. Now it is lawful
for a man to work for the temporal things whereby he sustains life, wherefore the Apostle says
(2 Thess. 3:10): "If any man will not work, neither let him eat." Therefore it is lawful to
be solicitous about temporal things.

Obj. 3: Further, solicitude about works of mercy is praiseworthy, according to 2 Tim. 1:17,
"When he was come to Rome, he carefully sought me." Now solicitude about temporal things is
sometimes connected with works of mercy; for instance, when a man is solicitous to watch over
the interests of orphans and poor persons. Therefore solicitude about temporal things is not
unlawful.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. 6:31): "Be not solicitous . . . saying, What shall we
eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed?" And yet such things are very
necessary.

I answer that, Solicitude denotes an earnest endeavor to obtain something. Now it is evident
that the endeavor is more earnest when there is fear of failure, so that there is less solicitude
when success is assured. Accordingly solicitude about temporal things may be unlawful in three
ways. First on the part of the object of solicitude; that is, if we seek temporal things as
an end. Hence Augustine says (De Operibus Monach. xxvi): "When Our Lord said: 'Be not solicitous,
' etc. . . . He intended to forbid them either to make such things their end, or for the sake
of these things to do whatever they were commanded to do in preaching the Gospel." Secondly,
solicitude about temporal things may be unlawful, through too much earnestness in endeavoring
to obtain temporal things, the result being that a man is drawn away from spiritual things
which ought to be the chief object of his search, wherefore it is written (Matt. 13:22) that
"the care of this world . . . chokes up the word." Thirdly, through over much fear, when, to
wit, a man fears to lack necessary things if he do what he ought to do. Now our Lord gives
three motives for laying aside this fear. First, on account of the yet greater favors bestowed
by God on man, independently of his solicitude, viz. his body and soul (Matt. 6:26); secondly,
on account of the care with which God watches over animals and plants without the assistance
of man, according to the requirements of their nature; thirdly, because of Divine providence,
through ignorance of which the gentiles are solicitous in seeking temporal goods before all
others. Consequently He concludes that we should be solicitous most of all about spiritual
goods, hoping that temporal goods also may be granted us according to our needs, if we do what
we ought to do.

Reply Obj. 1: Temporal goods are subjected to man that he may use them according to his needs,
not that he may place his end in them and be over solicitous about them.

Reply Obj. 2: The solicitude of a man who gains his bread by bodily labor is not superfluous
but proportionate; hence Jerome says on Matt. 6:31, "Be not solicitous," that "labor is necessary,
but solicitude must be banished," namely superfluous solicitude which unsettles the mind.

Reply Obj. 3: In the works of mercy solicitude about temporal things is directed to charity
as its end, wherefore it is not unlawful, unless it be superfluous.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 7]

Whether We Should Be Solicitous About the Future?

Objection 1: It would seem that we should be solicitous about the future. For it is written
(Prov. 6:6-8): "Go to the ant, O sluggard, and consider her ways and learn wisdom; which, although
she hath no guide, nor master . . . provideth her meat for herself in the summer, and gathereth
her food in the harvest." Now this is to be solicitous about the future. Therefore solicitude
about the future is praiseworthy.

Obj. 2: Further, solicitude pertains to prudence. But prudence is chiefly about the future,
since its principal part is foresight of future things, as stated above (Q. 49, A. 6, ad 1).
Therefore it is virtuous to be solicitous about the future.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever puts something by that he may keep it for the morrow, is solicitous
about the future. Now we read (John 12:6) that Christ had a bag for keeping things in, which
Judas carried, and (Acts 4:34-37) that the Apostles kept the price of the land, which had been
laid at their feet. Therefore it is lawful to be solicitous about the future.

On the contrary, Our Lord said (Matt. 6:34): "Be not . . . solicitous for tomorrow"; where
"tomorrow" stands for the future, as Jerome says in his commentary on this passage.

I answer that, No work can be virtuous, unless it be vested with its due circumstances, and
among these is the due time, according to Eccles. 8:6, "There is a time and opportunity for
every business"; which applies not only to external deeds but also to internal solicitude.
For every time has its own fitting proper solicitude; thus solicitude about the crops belongs
to the summer time, and solicitude about the vintage to the time of autumn. Accordingly if
a man were solicitous about the vintage during the summer, he would be needlessly forestalling
the solicitude belonging to a future time. Hence Our Lord forbids such like excessive solicitude,
saying: "Be . . . not solicitous for tomorrow," wherefore He adds, "for the morrow will be
solicitous for itself," that is to say, the morrow will have its own solicitude, which will
be burden enough for the soul. This is what He means by adding: "Sufficient for the day is
the evil thereof," namely, the burden of solicitude.

Reply Obj. 1: The ant is solicitous at a befitting time, and it is this that is proposed for
our example.

Reply Obj. 2: Due foresight of the future belongs to prudence. But it would be an inordinate
foresight or solicitude about the future, if a man were to seek temporal things, to which the
terms "past" and "future" apply, as ends, or if he were to seek them in excess of the needs
of the present life, or if he were to forestall the time for solicitude.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 17), "when we see a servant of
God taking thought lest he lack these needful things, we must not judge him to be solicitous
for the morrow, since even Our Lord deigned for our example to have a purse, and we read in
the Acts of the Apostles that they procured the necessary means of livelihood in view of the
future on account of a threatened famine. Hence Our Lord does not condemn those who according
to human custom, provide themselves with such things, but those who oppose themselves to God
for the sake of these things."

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 55, Art. 8]

Whether These Vices Arise from Covetousness?

Objection 1: It would seem that these vices do not arise from covetousness. As stated above
(Q. 43, A. 6) lust is the chief cause of lack of rectitude in the reason. Now these vices are
opposed to right reason, i.e. to prudence. Therefore they arise chiefly from lust; especially
since the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 6) that "Venus is full of guile and her girdle is many
colored" and that "he who is incontinent in desire acts with cunning."

Obj. 2: Further, these vices bear a certain resemblance to prudence, as stated above (Q. 47,
A. 13). Now, since prudence is in the reason, the more spiritual vices seem to be more akin
thereto, such as pride and vainglory. And mark me, girl, your father is running away from the
gallows, and that thought does not make a man stand upon scruples.

If you once attempt to give me the slip, or do or say anything that can bring the bulkies upon
us--by the devil in hell!--if, indeed, there be hell or devil--my knife shall become better
acquainted with that throat--so look to it!"

And this was the father--this the condition--of her whose ear had
for months drunk no other sound than the whispers of flattering love--the
murmurs of Passion from the lips of Poetry.

They continued their journey till midnight; they then arrived at an inn, little different from
the last; but here Alice was no longer consigned to solitude. In a long room, reeking with smoke,
sat from twenty to thirty ruffians before a table on which mugs and vessels of strong potations
were formidably interspersed with sabres and pistols.

They received Walters and Darvil with a shout of welcome, and would have crowded somewhat unceremoniously
round Alice, if her father, whose well-known desperate and brutal ferocity made him a man to be
respected in such an assembly, had not said, sternly, "Hands off, messmates, and make way
by the fire for my little girl--she is meat for your masters."

So saying, he pushed Alice down into a huge chair in the chimney-nook, and, seating himself near
her, at the end of the table, hastened to turn the conversation.

"Well, Captain," said he, addressing a small thin man at the head of the table, "I and Walters have
fairly cut and run--the land has a bad air for us, and we now want the sea-breeze to cure the
rope fever. So, knowing this was your night, we have crowded sail, and here we are. You must
give the girl there a lift, though I know you don't like such lumber,
and we'll run ashore as soon as we can."

"She seems a quiet little body," replied the captain; "and we would do more than that to oblige
an old friend like you. In half an hour Oliver* puts on his nightcap, and we must then be off."

*
The moon.

"The sooner the better."

The men now appeared to forget the presence of Alice, who sat faint
with fatigue and exhaustion, for she had been too sick at heart to
touch the food brought to her at their previous halting-place, gazing
abstractedly upon the fire.

Her father, before their departure, made her swallow some morsels
of sea-biscuit, though each seemed to choke her; and then, wrapped
in a thick boat-cloak, she was placed in a small well-built cutter;
and as the sea-winds whistled round her, the present cold and the
past fatigues lulled her miserable heart into the arms of the charitable
Sleep.

CHAPTER II.

"You are once more a free woman; Here I discharge your bonds." /The Custom of the Country/.

AND
many were thy trials, poor child; many that, were this book to germinate
into volumes more numerous than monk ever composed upon the lives
of saint or martyr (though a hundred volumes contained the record
of two years only in the life of St. Anthony), it would be impossible
to describe!

We may talk of the fidelity of books, but no man ever wrote even his own biography without
being compelled to omit at least nine-tenths of the most important materials. What are three--what
six volumes? We live six volumes in a day! Thought, emotion, joy, sorrow, hope, fear, how prolix would
they be if they might each tell their hourly tale!

But man's life itself is a brief epitome of that which is infinite and everlasting; and his
most accurate confessions are a miserable abridgment of a hurried and confused compendium!

It was about three months, or more, from the night in which Alice wept herself to sleep amongst
those wild companions, when she contrived to escape from her father's
vigilant eye.

They were then on the coast of Ireland.

Darvil had separated himself from Walters--from his seafaring companions: he had run through the greater
part of the money his crimes had got together; he began seriously to attempt putting into execution
his horrible design of depending for support upon the sale of his daughter. Now Alice might have
been moulded into sinful purposes before she knew Maltravers; but from that hour her very error
made her virtuous--she had comprehended, the moment she loved, what was meant by female honour;
and by a sudden revelation, she had purchased modesty, delicacy of thought and soul, in the sacrifice
of herself. Much of our morality (prudent and right upon system) with respect to the first
false step of women, leads us, as we all know, into barbarous errors as to individual exceptions.
Where, from pure and confiding love, that first false step has been
taken, many a woman has been saved in after life from a thousand temptations.

The poor unfortunates who crowd our streets and theatres have rarely, in the first instances,
been corrupted by love; but by poverty, and the contagion of circumstance and example. It
is a miserable cant phrase to call them the victims of seduction; they have been the victims
of hunger, of vanity, of curiosity, of evil /female/ counsels; but the seduction of love hardly
ever conducts to a /life/ of vice.

If a woman has once really loved, the beloved object makes an impenetrable barrier between
her and other men; their advances terrify and revolt--she would rather die than be unfaithful
even to a memory.

Though man love the sex, woman loves only the individual; and the more she loves him, the more
cold she is to the species. For the passion of woman is in the sentiment--the fancy--the heart.
It rarely has much to do with the coarse images with which boys and
old men--the inexperienced and the worn-out--connect it.

But Alice, though her blood ran cold at her terrible father's language,
saw in his very design the prospect of escape.

In an hour of drunkenness he thrust her from the house, and stationed himself to watch her--it was
in the city of Cork. She formed her resolution instantly--turned up a narrow street, and fled
at full speed. Darvil endeavoured in vain to keep pace with her--his eyes dizzy, his steps reeling
with intoxication. She heard his last curse dying from a distance on the air, and her fear winged
her steps: she paused at last, and found herself on the outskirts of the town. She paused, overcome,
and deadly faint; and then, for the first time, she felt that a strange and new life was stirring within
her own. She had long since known that she bore in her womb the unborn
offspring of Maltravers, and that knowledge had made her struggle
and live on.

But now, the embryo had quickened into being--it moved--it appealed to her, a--thing unseen, unknown;
but still it was a living creature appealing to a mother!

Oh, the thrill, half of ineffable tenderness, half of mysterious terror, at that moment!--What
a new chapter in the life of a woman did it not announce:--Now, then, she must be watchful over herself--must
guard against fatigue--must wrestle with despair.

Solemn was the trust committed to her--the life of another--the child
of the Adored.

It was a summer night--she sat on a rude stone, the city on one side, with its lights and
lamps;--the whitened fields beyond, with the moon and the stars above; and /above/ she raised
her streaming eyes, and she thought that God, the Protector, smiled upon her from the face of the sweet
skies. So, after a pause and a silent prayer, she rose and resumed her way. When she was wearied
she crept into a shed in a farmyard, and slept, for the first time for weeks, the calm sleep of
security and hope.

CHAPTER III.

"How like a prodigal doth she return, With over-weathered ribs and
ragged sails."

/Merchant of Venice/.

"/Mer./ What are these? /Uncle./ The tenants." BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.--/Wit without Money/.

IT was just two years from the night in which Alice had been torn
from the cottage: and at that time Maltravers was wandering amongst
the ruins of ancient Egypt, when, upon the very lawn where Alice and
her lover had so often loitered hand in hand, a gay party of children
and young people were assembled.

The cottage had been purchased by an opulent and retired manufacturer. He had raised the low thatched
roof another story high--and blue slate had replaced the thatch--and the pretty verandahs overgrown
with creepers had been taken down because Mrs. Hobbs thought they
gave the rooms a dull look; and the little rustic doorway had been
replaced by four Ionic pillars in stucco; and a new dining-room, twenty-two
feet by eighteen, had been built out at one wing, and a new drawing-room
had been built over the new dining-room.

And the poor little cottage looked quite grand and villa-like.

The fountain had been taken away, because it made the house damp;
and there was such a broad carriage-drive from the gate to the house!

The gate was no longer the modest green wooden gate, ever ajar with its easy latch; but a tall,
cast-iron, well-locked gate, between two pillars to match the porch.

And on one of the gates was a brass plate, on which was graven, "Hobbs'
Lodge--Ring the bell."

The lesser Hobbses and the bigger Hobbses were all on the lawn--many
of them fresh from school--for it was the half-holiday of a Saturday
afternoon.

There was mirth, and noise, and shouting and whooping, and the respectable
old couple looked calmly on; Hobbs the father smoking his pipe (alas,
it was not the dear meerschaum); Hobbs the mother talking to her eldest
daughter (a fine young woman, three months married, for love, to a
poor man), upon the proper number of days that a leg of mutton (weight
ten pounds) should be made to last.

"Always, my dear, have large joints, they are much the most saving.

Let me see--what a noise the boys do make! No, my love, the ball's not here."

"Mamma, it is under your petticoats."

"La, child, how naughty you are!"

"Holla, you sir! it's my turn to go in now.

Biddy, wait,--girls have no innings--girls only fag out."

"Bob, you cheat."

"Pa, Ned says I cheat."

"Very likely, my dear, you are to be a lawyer."

"Where was I, my dear?" resumed Mrs. Hobbs, resettling herself, and readjusting the invaded petticoats.
"Oh, about the leg of mutton!--yes, large joints are the best--the second day a nice hash,
with dumplings; the third, broil the bone--your husband is sure to like broiled bones!--and then
keep the scraps for Saturday's pie;--you know, my dear, your father
and I were worse off than you when we began.

But now we have everything that is handsome about us--nothing like management. Saturday pies are
very nice things, and then you start clear with your joint on Sunday. A good wife like you
should never neglect the Saturday's pie!"

"Yes," said the bride, mournfully; "but Mr. Tiddy does not like pies."

"Not like pies! that very odd--Mr. Hobbs likes pies--perhaps you don't have the crust made thick
eno'. How somever, you can make it up to him with a pudding. A wife should always study her
husband's tastes--what is a man's home without love? Still a husband ought not to be aggravating,
and dislike pie on a Saturday!"

"Holla! I say, ma, do you see that 'ere gipsy? I shall go and have my fortune told."

"And I--and I!"

"Lor, if there ben't a tramper!" cried Mr. Hobbs, rising indignantly; "what can the parish
be about?"

The object of these latter remarks, filial and paternal, was a young
woman in a worn, threadbare cloak, with her face pressed to the openwork
of the gate, and looking wistfully--oh, how wistfully!--within.

The children eagerly ran up to her, but they involuntarily slackened their steps when they
drew near, for she was evidently not what they had taken her for. No gipsy hues darkened the
pale, thin, delicate cheek--no gipsy leer lurked in those large blue and streaming eyes--no
gipsy effrontery bronzed that candid and childish brow. As she thus pressed her countenance
with convulsive eagerness against the cold bars, the young people caught the contagion of inexpressible
and half-fearful sadness--they approached almost respectfully--"Do you want anything here?"
said the eldest and boldest of the boys.

"I--I--surely this is Dale Cottage?"

"It was Dale Cottage, it is Hobbs' Lodge now; can't you read?" said the heir of the Hobbs's honours,
losing, in contempt at the girl's ignorance, his first impression of sympathy.

"And--and--Mr. Butler, is he gone too?"

Poor child! she spoke as if the cottage was gone, not improved; the Ionic portico had no charm
for her!

"Butler!--no such person lives here.

Pa, do you know where Mr. Butler lives?"

Pa was now moving up to the place of conference the slow artillery of his fair round belly and
portly calves. "Butler, no--I know nothing of such a name--no Mr. Butler lives here. Go along with
you--ain't you ashamed to beg?"

"No Mr. Butler!" said the girl, gasping for breath, and clinging to the gate for support. "Are
you sure, sir?"

"Sure, yes!--what do you want with him?"

"Oh, papa, she looks faint!" said one of the /girls/ deprecatingly--"do
let her have something to eat; I'm sure she's hungry."

Mr. Hobbs looked angry; he had often been taken in, and no rich man likes beggars. Generally
speaking, the rich man is in the right. But then Mr. Hobbs turned to the suspected tramper's
sorrowful face and then to his fair pretty child--and his good angel whispered something to
Mr. Hobbs's heart--and he said, after a pause, "Heaven forbid that
we should not feel for a poor fellow-creature not so well to do as
ourselves. Come in, my lass, and have a morsel to eat."

The girl
did not seem to hear him, and he repeated the invitation, approaching
to unlock the gate.

"No, sir," said she, then; "no, I thank you.
I could not come in now. I could not eat here. But tell me, sir, I
implore you, can you not even guess where I may find Mr. Butler?"

"Butler!"
said Mrs. Hobbs, whom curiosity had now drawn to the spot. "I remember
that was the name of the gentleman who hired the place, and was robbed."

"Robbed!"
said Mr. Hobbs, falling back and relocking the gate--"and the new
tea-pot just come home," he muttered inly. "Come, be off, child--be
off; we know nothing of your Mr. Butlers."

The young woman looked
wildly in his face, cast a hurried glance over the altered spot, and
then, with a kind of shiver, as if the wind had smitten her delicate
form too rudely, she drew her cloak more closely round her shoulders,
and without saying another word, moved away. The party looked after
her as, with trembling steps, she passed down the road, and all felt
that pang of shame which is common to the human heart at the sight
of a distress it has not sought to soothe. But this feeling vanished
at once from the breast of Mrs. and Mr. Hobbs, when they saw the girl
stop where a turn of the road brought the gate before her eyes; and
for the first time, they perceived, what the worn cloak had hitherto
concealed, that the poor young thing bore an infant in her arms. She
halted, she gazed fondly back. Even at that instant the despair of
her eyes was visible; and then, as she pressed her lips to the infant's
brow, they heard a convulsive sob--they saw her turn away, and she
was gone!

"Well, I declare!" said Mrs. Hobbs.

"News for the parish,"
said Mr. Hobbs; "and she so young too!--what a shame!" In another way a thing is adjusted or
commensurated to another person, by agreement, or by common consent, when, to wit, a man deems
himself satisfied, if he receive so much. This can be done in two ways: first by private agreement,
as that which is confirmed by an agreement between private individuals; secondly, by public
agreement, as when the whole community agrees that something should be deemed as though it
were adjusted and commensurated to another person, or when this is decreed by the prince who
is placed over the people, and acts in its stead, and this is called "positive right."

Reply Obj. 1: That which is natural to one whose nature is unchangeable, must needs be such
always and everywhere. But man's nature is changeable, wherefore that which is natural to man
may sometimes fail. Thus the restitution of a deposit to the depositor is in accordance with
natural equality, and if human nature were always right, this would always have to be observed;
but since it happens sometimes that man's will is unrighteous there are cases in which a deposit
should not be restored, lest a man of unrighteous will make evil use of the thing deposited:
as when a madman or an enemy of the common weal demands the return of his weapons.

Reply Obj. 2: The human will can, by common agreement, make a thing to be just provided it
be not, of itself, contrary to natural justice, and it is in such matters that positive right
has its place. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 7) that "in the case of the legal just,
it does not matter in the first instance whether it takes one form or another, it only matters
when once it is laid down." If, however, a thing is, of itself, contrary to natural right,
the human will cannot make it just, for instance by decreeing that it is lawful to steal or
to commit adultery. Hence it is written (Isa. 10:1): "Woe to them that make wicked laws."

Reply Obj. 3: The Divine right is that which is promulgated by God. Such things are partly
those that are naturally just, yet their justice is hidden to man, and partly are made just
by God's decree. Hence also Divine right may be divided in respect of these two things, even
as human right is. For the Divine law commands certain things because they are good, and forbids
others, because they are evil, while others are good because they are prescribed, and others
evil because they are forbidden.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 57, Art. 3]

Whether the Right of Nations Is the Same As the Natural Right?

Objection 1: It would seem that the right of nations is the same as the natural right. For
all men do not agree save in that which is natural to them. Now all men agree in the right
of nations; since the jurist [*Ulpian: Digest. i, 1; De Just. et Jure i] "the right of nations
is that which is in use among all nations." Therefore the right of nations is the natural right.

Obj. 2: Further, slavery among men is natural, for some are naturally slaves according to the
Philosopher (Polit. i, 2). Now "slavery belongs to the right of nations," as Isidore states
(Etym. v, 4). Therefore the right of nations is a natural right.

Obj. 3: Further, right as stated above (A. 2) is divided into natural and positive. Now the
right of nations is not a positive right, since all nations never agreed to decree anything
by common agreement. Therefore the right of nations is a natural right.

On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. v, 4) that "right is either natural, or civil, or right
of nations," and consequently the right of nations is distinct from natural right.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), the natural right or just is that which by its very
nature is adjusted to or commensurate with another person. Now this may happen in two ways;
first, according as it is considered absolutely: thus a male by [his] very nature is commensurate
with the female to beget offspring by her, and a parent is commensurate with the offspring
to nourish it. Secondly a thing is naturally commensurate with another person, not according
as it is considered absolutely, but according to something resultant from it, for instance
the possession of property. For if a particular piece of land be considered absolutely, it
contains no reason why it should belong to one man more than to another, but if it be considered
in respect of its adaptability to cultivation, and the unmolested use of the land, it has a
certain commensuration to be the property of one and not of another man, as the Philosopher
shows (Polit. ii, 2).

Now it belongs not only to man but also to other animals to apprehend a thing absolutely: wherefore
the right which we call natural, is common to us and other animals according to the first kind
of commensuration. But the right of nations falls short of natural right in this sense, as
the jurist [*Digest. i, 1; De Just. et Jure i] says because "the latter is common to all animals,
while the former is common to men only." On the other hand to consider a thing by comparing
it with what results from it, is proper to reason, wherefore this same is natural to man in
respect of natural reason which dictates it. Hence the jurist Gaius says (Digest. i, 1; De
Just. et Jure i, 9): "whatever natural reason decrees among all men, is observed by all equally,
and is called the right of nations." This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Considered absolutely, the fact that this particular man should be a slave rather
than another man, is based, not on natural reason, but on some resultant utility, in that it
is useful to this man to be ruled by a wiser man, and to the latter to be helped by the former,
as the Philosopher states (Polit. i, 2). Wherefore slavery which belongs to the right of nations
is natural in the second way, but not in the first.

Reply Obj. 3: Since natural reason dictates matters which are according to the right of nations,
as implying a proximate equality, it follows that they need no special institution, for they
are instituted by natural reason itself, as stated by the authority quoted above.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 57, Art. 4]

Whether Paternal Right and Right of Dominion Should Be Distinguished As Special Species?

Objection 1: It would seem that "paternal right" and "right of dominion" should not be distinguished
as special species. For it belongs to justice to render to each one what is his, as Ambrose
states (De Offic. i, 24). Now right is the object of justice, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore
right belongs to each one equally; and we ought not to distinguish the rights of fathers and
masters as distinct species.

Obj. 2: Further, the law is an expression of what is just, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2). Now
a law looks to the common good of a city or kingdom, as stated above (I-II, Q. 90, A. 2), but
not to the private good of an individual or even of one household. Therefore there is no need
for a special right of dominion or paternal right, since the master and the father pertain
to a household, as stated in Polit. i, 2.

Obj. 3: Further, there are many other differences of degrees among men, for instance some are
soldiers, some are priests, some are princes. Therefore some special kind of right should be
allotted to them.

On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. v, 6) distinguishes right of dominion, paternal right
and so on as species distinct from civil right.

I answer that, Right or just depends on commensuration with another person. Now "another" has
a twofold signification. First, it may denote something that is other simply, as that which
is altogether distinct; as, for example, two men neither of whom is subject to the other, and
both of whom are subjects of the ruler of the state; and between these according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. v, 6) there is the "just" simply. Secondly a thing is said to be other from something
else, not simply, but as belonging in some way to that something else: and in this way, as
regards human affairs, a son belongs to his father, since he is part of him somewhat, as stated
in Ethic. viii, 12, and a slave belongs to his master, because he is his instrument, as stated
in Polit. i, 2 [*Cf. Ethic. viii, 11]. Hence a father is not compared to his son as to another
simply, and so between them there is not the just simply, but a kind of just, called "paternal."
In like manner neither is there the just simply, between master and servant, but that which
is called "dominative." A wife, though she is something belonging to the husband, since she
stands related to him as to her own body, as the Apostle declares (Eph. 5:28), is nevertheless
more distinct from her husband, than a son from his father, or a slave from his master: for
she is received into a kind of social life, that of matrimony, wherefore according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. v, 6) there is more scope for justice between husband and wife than between father
and son, or master and slave, because, as husband and wife have an immediate relation to the
community of the household, as stated in Polit. i, 2, 5, it follows that between them there
is "domestic justice" rather than "civic."

Reply Obj. 1: It belongs to justice to render to each one his right, the distinction between
individuals being presupposed: for if a man gives himself his due, this is not strictly called
"just." And since what belongs to the son is his father's, and what belongs to the slave is
his master's, it follows that properly speaking there is not justice of father to son, or of
master to slave.

Reply Obj. 2: A son, as such, belongs to his father, and a slave, as such, belongs to his master;
yet each, considered as a man, is something having separate existence and distinct from others.
Hence in so far as each of them is a man, there is justice towards them in a way: and for this
reason too there are certain laws regulating the relations of father to his son, and of a master
to his slave; but in so far as each is something belonging to another, the perfect idea of
"right" or "just" is wanting to them.

Reply Obj. 3: All other differences between one person and another in a state, have an immediate
relation to the community of the state and to its ruler, wherefore there is just towards them
in the perfect sense of justice. This "just" however is distinguished according to various
offices, hence when we speak of "military," or "magisterial," or "priestly" right, it is not
as though such rights fell short of the simply right, as when we speak of "paternal" right,
or right of "dominion," but for the reason that something proper is due to each class of person
in respect of his particular office.

QUESTION 58

OF JUSTICE (In Twelve Articles)

We must now consider justice. Under this head there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) What is justice?

(2) Whether justice is always towards another?

(3) Whether it is a virtue?

(4) Whether it is in the will as its subject?

(5) Whether it is a general virtue?

(6) Whether, as a general virtue, it is essentially the same as every virtue?

(7) Whether there is a particular justice?

(8) Whether particular justice has a matter of its own?

(9) Whether it is about passions, or about operations only?

(10) Whether the mean of justice is the real mean?

(11) Whether the act of justice is to render to everyone his own?

(12) Whether justice is the chief of the moral virtues?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 1]

Whether Justice Is Fittingly Defined As Being the Perpetual and Constant Will to Render to
Each One His Right?

Objection 1: It would seem that lawyers have unfittingly defined justice as being "the perpetual
and constant will to render to each one his right" [*Digest. i, 1; De Just. et Jure 10]. For,
according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1), justice is a habit which makes a man "capable of
doing what is just, and of being just in action and in intention." Now "will" denotes a power,
or also an act. Therefore justice is unfittingly defined as being a will.

Obj. 2: Further, rectitude of the will is not the will; else if the will were its own rectitude,
it would follow that no will is unrighteous. Yet, according to Anselm (De Veritate xii), justice
is rectitude. Therefore justice is not the will.

Obj. 3: Further, no will is perpetual save God's. If therefore justice is a perpetual will,
in God alone will there be justice.

Obj. 4: Further, whatever is perpetual is constant, since it is unchangeable. Therefore it
is needless in defining justice, to say that it is both "perpetual" and "constant."

Obj. 5: Further, it belongs to the sovereign to give each one his right. Therefore, if justice
gives each one his right, it follows that it is in none but the sovereign: which is absurd.

Obj. Therefore it does not render to each one his right.

I answer that, The aforesaid definition of justice is fitting if understood aright. For since
every virtue is a habit that is the principle of a good act, a virtue must needs be defined
by means of the good act bearing on the matter proper to that virtue. Now the proper matter
of justice consists of those things that belong to our intercourse with other men, as shall
be shown further on (A. 2). Hence the act of justice in relation to its proper matter and object
is indicated in the words, "Rendering to each one his right," since, as Isidore says (Etym.
x), "a man is said to be just because he respects the rights (jus) of others."

Now in order that an act bearing upon any matter whatever be virtuous, it requires to be voluntary,
stable, and firm, because the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 4) that in order for an act to be
virtuous it needs first of all to be done "knowingly," secondly to be done "by choice," and
"for a due end," thirdly to be done "immovably." Now the first of these is included in the
second, since "what is done through ignorance is involuntary" (Ethic. iii, 1). Hence the definition
of justice mentions first the "will," in order to show that the act of justice must be voluntary;
and mention is made afterwards of its "constancy" and "perpetuity" in order to indicate the
firmness of the act.

Accordingly, this is a complete definition of justice; save that the act is mentioned instead
of the habit, which takes its species from that act, because habit implies relation to act.
And if anyone would reduce it to the proper form of a definition, he might say that "justice
is a habit whereby a man renders to each one his due by a constant and perpetual will": and
this is about the same definition as that given by the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 5) who says that
"justice is a habit whereby a man is said to be capable of doing just actions in accordance
with his choice."

Reply Obj. 1: Will here denotes the act, not the power: and it is customary among writers to
define habits by their acts: thus Augustine says (Tract. in Joan. xl) that "faith is to believe
what one sees not."

Reply Obj. 2: Justice is the same as rectitude, not essentially but causally; for it is a habit
which rectifies the deed and the will.

Reply Obj. 3: The will may be called perpetual in two ways. First on the part of the will's
act which endures for ever, and thus God's will alone is perpetual. Secondly on the part of
the subject, because, to wit, a man wills to do a certain thing always, and this is a necessary
condition of justice. For it does not satisfy the conditions of justice that one wish to observe
justice in some particular matter for the time being, because one could scarcely find a man
willing to act unjustly in every case; and it is requisite that one should have the will to
observe justice at all times and in all cases.

Reply Obj. 4: Since "perpetual" does not imply perpetuity of the act of the will, it is not
superfluous to add "constant": for while the "perpetual will" denotes the purpose of observing
justice always, "constant" signifies a firm perseverance in this purpose.

Reply Obj. 5: A judge renders to each one what belongs to him, by way of command and direction,
because a judge is the "personification of justice," and "the sovereign is its guardian" (Ethic.
v, 4). On the other hand, the subjects render to each one what belongs to him, by way of execution.

Reply Obj. 6: Just as love of God includes love of our neighbor, as stated above (Q. 25, A.
1), so too the service of God includes rendering to each one his due.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 2]

Whether Justice Is Always Towards Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not always towards another. For the Apostle says
(Rom. 3:22) that "the justice of God is by faith of Jesus Christ." Now faith does not concern
the dealings of one man with another. Neither therefore does justice.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Augustine (De Moribus Eccl. xv), "it belongs to justice that
man should direct to the service of God his authority over the things that are subject to him."
Now the sensitive appetite is subject to man, according to Gen. 4:7, where it is written: "The
lust thereof," viz. of sin, "shall be under thee, and thou shalt have dominion over it." Therefore
it belongs to justice to have dominion over one's own appetite: so that justice is towards oneself.

Obj. 3: Further, the justice of God is eternal. But nothing else is co-eternal with God. Therefore
justice is not essentially towards another.

Obj. 4: Further, man's dealings with himself need to be rectified no less than his dealings
with another. Now man's dealings are rectified by justice, according to Prov. 11:5, "The justice
of the upright shall make his way prosperous." Therefore justice is about our dealings not
only with others, but also with ourselves.

On the contrary, Tully says (De Officiis i, 7) that "the object of justice is to keep men together
in society and mutual intercourse." Now this implies relationship of one man to another. Therefore
justice is concerned only about our dealings with others.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 57, A. 1) since justice by its name implies equality, it
denotes essentially relation to another, for a thing is equal, not to itself, but to another.
And forasmuch as it belongs to justice to rectify human acts, as stated above (Q. 57, A. 1;
I-II, Q. 113, A. 1) this otherness which justice demands must needs be between beings capable
of action. Now actions belong to supposits [*Cf. I, Q. 29, A. 2] and wholes and, properly speaking,
not to parts and forms or powers, for we do not say properly that the hand strikes, but a man
with his hand, nor that heat makes a thing hot, but fire by heat, although such expressions
may be employed metaphorically. Hence, justice properly speaking demands a distinction of supposits,
and consequently is only in one man towards another. Nevertheless in one and the same man we
may speak metaphorically of his various principles of action such as the reason, the irascible,
and the concupiscible, as though they were so many agents: so that metaphorically in one and
the same man there is said to be justice in so far as the reason commands the irascible and
concupiscible, and these obey reason; and in general in so far as to each part of man is ascribed
what is becoming to it. Hence the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 11) calls this "metaphorical justice."

Reply Obj. 1: The justice which faith works in us, is that whereby the ungodly is justified:
it consists in the due coordination of the parts of the soul, as stated above (I-II, Q. 113,
A. 1) where we were treating of the justification of the ungodly. Now this belongs to metaphorical
justice, which may be found even in a man who lives all by himself.

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: God's justice is from eternity in respect of the eternal will and purpose (and
it is chiefly in this that justice consists); although it is not eternal as regards its effect,
since nothing is co-eternal with God.

Reply Obj. 4: Man's dealings with himself are sufficiently rectified by the rectification of
the passions by the other moral virtues. But his dealings with others need a special rectification,
not only in relation to the agent, but also in relation to the person to whom they are directed.
Hence about such dealings there is a special virtue, and this is justice.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 3]

Whether Justice Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not a virtue. For it is written (Luke 17:10): "When
you shall have done all these things that are commanded you, say: We are unprofitable servants;
we have done that which we ought to do." Now it is not unprofitable to do a virtuous deed:
for Ambrose says (De Officiis ii, 6): "We look to a profit that is estimated not by pecuniary
gain but by the acquisition of godliness." Therefore to do what one ought to do, is not a virtuous
deed. And yet it is an act of justice. Therefore justice is not a virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is done of necessity, is not meritorious. But to render to a man
what belongs to him, as justice requires, is of necessity. Therefore it is not meritorious.
Yet it is by virtuous actions that we gain merit. Therefore justice is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, every moral virtue is about matters of action. Now those things which are
wrought externally are not things concerning behavior but concerning handicraft, according
to the Philosopher (Metaph. ix) [*Didot ed., viii, 8]. Therefore since it belongs to justice
to produce externally a deed that is just in itself, it seems that justice is not a moral virtue.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. ii, 49) that "the entire structure of good works is built
on four virtues," viz. temperance, prudence, fortitude and justice.

I answer that, A human virtue is one "which renders a human act and man himself good" [*Ethic.
ii, 6], and this can be applied to justice. For a man's act is made good through attaining
the rule of reason, which is the rule whereby human acts are regulated. Hence, since justice
regulates human operations, it is evident that it renders man's operations good, and, as Tully
declares (De Officiis i, 7), good men are so called chiefly from their justice, wherefore,
as he says again (De Officiis i, 7) "the luster of virtue appears above all in justice."

Reply Obj. 1: When a man does what he ought, he brings no gain to the person to whom he does
what he ought, but only abstains from doing him a harm. He does however profit himself, in
so far as he does what he ought, spontaneously and readily, and this is to act virtuously.
Hence it is written (Wis. 8:7) that Divine wisdom "teacheth temperance, and prudence, and justice,
and fortitude, which are such things as men (i.e. virtuous men) can have nothing more profitable
in life."

Reply Obj. 2: Necessity is twofold. One arises from constraint, and this removes merit, since
it runs counter to the will. The other arises from the obligation of a command, or from the
necessity of obtaining an end, when, to wit, a man is unable to achieve the end of virtue without
doing some particular thing. The latter necessity does not remove merit, when a man does voluntarily
that which is necessary in this way. It does however exclude the credit of supererogation,
according to 1 Cor. 9:16, "If I preach the Gospel, it is no glory to me, for a necessity lieth
upon me."

Reply Obj. 3: Justice is concerned about external things, not by making them, which pertains
to art, but by using them in our dealings with other men.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 4]

Whether Justice Is in the Will As Its Subject?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not in the will as its subject. For justice is sometimes
called truth. But truth is not in the will, but in the intellect. Therefore justice is not
in the will as its subject.

Obj. 2: Further, justice is about our dealings with others. Now it belongs to the reason to
direct one thing in relation to another. Therefore justice is not in the will as its subject
but in the reason.

Obj. 3: Further, justice is not an intellectual virtue, since it is not directed to knowledge;
wherefore it follows that it is a moral virtue. Now the subject of moral virtue is the faculty
which is "rational by participation," viz. the irascible and the concupiscible, as the Philosopher
declares (Ethic. i, 13). Therefore justice is not in the will as its subject, but in the irascible
and concupiscible.

On the contrary, Anselm says (De Verit. xii) that "justice is rectitude of the will observed
for its own sake."

I answer that, The subject of a virtue is the power whose act that virtue aims at rectifying.
Now justice does not aim at directing an act of the cognitive power, for we are not said to
be just through knowing something aright. Hence the subject of justice is not the intellect
or reason which is a cognitive power. But since we are said to be just through doing something
aright, and because the proximate principle of action is the appetitive power, justice must
needs be in some appetitive power as its subject.

Now the appetite is twofold; namely, the will which is in the reason and the sensitive appetite
which follows on sensitive apprehension, and is divided into the irascible and the concupiscible,
as stated in the First Part (Q. 81, A. 2). Again the act of rendering his due to each man cannot
proceed from the sensitive appetite, because sensitive apprehension does not go so far as to
be able to consider the relation of one thing to another; but this is proper to the reason.
Therefore justice cannot be in the irascible or concupiscible as its subject, but only in the
will: hence the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1) defines justice by an act of the will, as may be
seen above (A. 1).

Reply Obj. 1: Since the will is the rational appetite, when the rectitude of the reason which
is called truth is imprinted on the will on account of its nighness to the reason, this imprint
retains the name of truth; and hence it is that justice sometimes goes by the name of truth.

Reply Obj. 2: The will is borne towards its object consequently on the apprehension of reason:
wherefore, since the reason directs one thing in relation to another, the will can will one
thing in relation to another, and this belongs to justice.

Reply Obj. 3: Not only the irascible and concupiscible parts are rational by participation,
but the entire appetitive faculty, as stated in Ethic. i, 13, because all appetite is subject
to reason. Now the will is contained in the appetitive faculty, wherefore it can be the subject
of moral virtue.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 5]

Whether Justice Is a General Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is not a general virtue. Now the "general" is not specified
or reckoned together with the species contained under the same "general." Therefore justice
is not a general virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, as justice is accounted a cardinal virtue, so are temperance and fortitude.
Now neither temperance nor fortitude is reckoned to be a general virtue. Therefore neither
should justice in any way be reckoned a general virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, justice is always towards others, as stated above (A. 2). But a sin committed
against one's neighbor cannot be a general sin, because it is condivided with sin committed
against oneself. Therefore neither is justice a general virtue.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "justice is every virtue."

I answer that, Justice, as stated above (A. 2) directs man in his relations with other men.
Now this may happen in two ways: first as regards his relation with individuals, secondly as
regards his relations with others in general, in so far as a man who serves a community, serves
all those who are included in that community. Accordingly justice in its proper acceptation
can be directed to another in both these senses. Now it is evident that all who are included
in a community, stand in relation to that community as parts to a whole; while a part, as such,
belongs to a whole, so that whatever is the good of a part can be directed to the good of the
whole. It follows therefore that the good of any virtue, whether such virtue direct man in
relation to himself, or in relation to certain other individual persons, is referable to the
common good, to which justice directs: so that all acts of virtue can pertain to justice, in
so far as it directs man to the common good. It is in this sense that justice is called a general
virtue. And since it belongs to the law to direct to the common good, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 90, A. 2), it follows that the justice which is in this way styled general, is called "legal
justice," because thereby man is in harmony with the law which directs the acts of all the
virtues to the common good.

Reply Obj. 1: Justice is specified or enumerated with the other virtues, not as a general but
as a special virtue, as we shall state further on (AA. 7, 12).

Reply Obj. 2: Temperance and fortitude are in the sensitive appetite, viz. in the concupiscible
and irascible. Now these powers are appetitive of certain particular goods, even as the senses
are cognitive of particulars. On the other hand justice is in the intellective appetite as
its subject, which can have the universal good as its object, knowledge whereof belongs to
the intellect. Hence justice can be a general virtue rather than temperance or fortitude.

Reply Obj. 3: Things referable to oneself are referable to another, especially in regard to
the common good. Wherefore legal justice, in so far as it directs to the common good, may be
called a general virtue: and in like manner injustice may be called a general sin; hence it
is written (1 John 3:4) that all "sin is iniquity."

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 6]

Whether Justice, As a General Virtue, Is Essentially the Same As All Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice, as a general virtue, is essentially the same as all
virtue. For the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "virtue and legal justice are the same
as all virtue, but differ in their mode of being." Now things that differ merely in their mode
of being or logically do not differ essentially. Therefore justice is essentially the same
as every virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, every virtue that is not essentially the same as all virtue is a part of virtue.
Now the aforesaid justice, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v. 1) "is not a part but the
whole of virtue." Therefore the aforesaid justice is essentially the same as all virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the essence of a virtue does not change through that virtue directing its
act to some higher end even as the habit of temperance remains essentially the same even though
its act be directed to a Divine good. Now it belongs to legal justice that the acts of all
the virtues are directed to a higher end, namely the common good of the multitude, which transcends
the good of one single individual. Therefore it seems that legal justice is essentially all virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, every good of a part can be directed to the good of the whole, so that if
it be not thus directed it would seem without use or purpose. But that which is in accordance
with virtue cannot be so. Therefore it seems that there can be no act of any virtue, that does
not belong to general justice, which directs to the common good; and so it seems that general
justice is essentially the same as all virtue.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that "many are able to be virtuous in matters
affecting themselves, but are unable to be virtuous in matters relating to others," and (Polit.
iii, 2) that "the virtue of the good man is not strictly the same as the virtue of the good
citizen." Now the virtue of a good citizen is general justice, whereby a man is directed to
the common good. Therefore general justice is not the same as virtue in general, and it is
possible to have one without the other.

I answer that, A thing is said to be "general" in two ways. First, by predication: thus "animal"
is general in relation to man and horse and the like: and in this sense that which is general
must needs be essentially the same as the things in relation to which it is general, for the
reason that the genus belongs to the essence of the species, and forms part of its definition.
Secondly a thing is said to be general virtually; thus a universal cause is general in relation
to all its effects, the sun, for instance, in relation to all bodies that are illumined, or
transmuted by its power; and in this sense there is no need for that which is "general" to
be essentially the same as those things in relation to which it is general, since cause and
effect are not essentially the same. Now it is in the latter sense that, according to what
has been said (A. 5), legal justice is said to be a general virtue, in as much, to wit, as
it directs the acts of the other virtues to its own end, and this is to move all the other
virtues by its command; for just as charity may be called a general virtue in so far as it
directs the acts of all the virtues to the Divine good, so too is legal justice, in so far
as it directs the acts of all the virtues to the common good. Accordingly, just as charity
which regards the Divine good as its proper object, is a special virtue in respect of its essence,
so too legal justice is a special virtue in respect of its essence, in so far as it regards
the common good as its proper object. And thus it is in the sovereign principally and by way
of a mastercraft, while it is secondarily and administratively in his subjects.

However the name of legal justice can be given to every virtue, in so far as every virtue is
directed to the common good by the aforesaid legal justice, which though special essentially
is nevertheless virtually general. Speaking in this way, legal justice is essentially the same
as all virtue, but differs therefrom logically: and it is in this sense that the Philosopher
speaks.

Wherefore the Replies to the First and Second Objections are manifest.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument again takes legal justice for the virtue commanded by legal justice.

Reply Obj. 4: Every virtue strictly speaking directs its act to that virtue's proper end: that
it should happen to be directed to a further end either always or sometimes, does not belong
to that virtue considered strictly, for it needs some higher virtue to direct it to that end.
Consequently there must be one supreme virtue essentially distinct from every other virtue,
which directs all the virtues to the common good; and this virtue is legal justice.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 7]

Whether There Is a Particular Besides a General Justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is not a particular besides a general justice. For there
is nothing superfluous in the virtues, as neither is there in nature. Now general justice directs
man sufficiently in all his relations with other men. Therefore there is no need for a particular
justice.

Obj. 2: Further, the species of a virtue does not vary according to "one" and "many." But legal
justice directs one man to another in matters relating to the multitude, as shown above (AA.
5, 6). Therefore there is not another species of justice directing one man to another in matters
relating to the individual.

Obj. 3: Further, between the individual and the general public stands the household community.
Consequently, if in addition to general justice there is a particular justice corresponding
to the individual, for the same reason there should be a domestic justice directing man to
the common good of a household: and yet this is not the case. Therefore neither should there
be a particular besides a legal justice.

On the contrary, Chrysostom in his commentary on Matt. 5:6, "Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after justice," says (Hom. xv in Matth.): "By justice He signifies either the general
virtue, or the particular virtue which is opposed to covetousness."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), legal justice is not essentially the same as every virtue,
and besides legal justice which directs man immediately to the common good, there is a need
for other virtues to direct him immediately in matters relating to particular goods: and these
virtues may be relative to himself or to another individual person. Accordingly, just as in
addition to legal justice there is a need for particular virtues to direct man in relation
to himself, such as temperance and fortitude, so too besides legal justice there is need for
particular justice to direct man in his relations to other individuals.

Reply Obj. 1: Legal justice does indeed direct man sufficiently in his relations towards others.
As regards the common good it does so immediately, but as to the good of the individual, it
does so mediately. Wherefore there is need for particular justice to direct a man immediately
to the good of another individual.

Reply Obj. 2: The common good of the realm and the particular good of the individual differ
not only in respect of the many and the few, but also under a formal aspect. For the aspect
of the common good differs from the aspect of the individual good, even as the aspect of whole
differs from that of part. Wherefore the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 1) that "they are wrong
who maintain that the State and the home and the like differ only as many and few and not specifically."

Reply Obj. 3: The household community, according to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 2), differs
in respect of a threefold fellowship; namely "of husband and wife, father and son, master and
slave," in each of which one person is, as it were, part of the other. Wherefore between such
persons there is not justice simply, but a species of justice, viz. domestic justice, as stated
in Ethic. v, 6.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 8]

Whether Particular Justice Has a Special Matter?

Objection 1: It would seem that particular justice has no special matter. Because a gloss on
Gen. 2:14, "The fourth river is Euphrates," says: "Euphrates signifies 'fruitful'; nor is it
stated through what country it flows, because justice pertains to all the parts of the soul."
Now this would not be the case, if justice had a special matter, since every special matter
belongs to a special power. Therefore particular justice has no special matter.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (QQ. lxxxiii, qu. 61) that "the soul has four virtues whereby,
in this life, it lives spiritually, viz. temperance, prudence, fortitude and justice;" and
he says that "the fourth is justice, which pervades all the virtues." Therefore particular
justice, which is one of the four cardinal virtues, has no special matter.

Obj. 3: Further, justice directs man sufficiently in matters relating to others. Now a man
can be directed to others in all matters relating to this life. Therefore the matter of justice
is general and not special.

On the contrary, The Philosopher reckons (Ethic. v, 2) particular justice to be specially about
those things which belong to social life.

I answer that, Whatever can be rectified by reason is the matter of moral virtue, for this
is defined in reference to right reason, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6). Now the
reason can rectify not only the internal passions of the soul, but also external actions, and
also those external things of which man can make use. And yet it is in respect of external
actions and external things by means of which men can communicate with one another, that the
relation of one man to another is to be considered; whereas it is in respect of internal passions
that we consider man's rectitude in himself. Consequently, since justice is directed to others,
it is not about the entire matter of moral virtue, but only about external actions and things,
under a certain special aspect of the object, in so far as one man is related to another through
them.

Reply Obj. 1: It is true that justice belongs essentially to one part of the soul, where it
resides as in its subject; and this is the will which moves by its command all the other parts
of the soul; and accordingly justice belongs to all the parts of the soul, not directly but
by a kind of diffusion.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (I-II, Q. 61, AA. 3, 4), the cardinal virtues may be taken in
two ways: first as special virtues, each having a determinate matter; secondly, as certain
general modes of virtue. In this latter sense Augustine speaks in the passage quoted: for he
says that "prudence is knowledge of what we should seek and avoid, temperance is the curb on
the lust for fleeting pleasures, fortitude is strength of mind in bearing with passing trials,
justice is the love of God and our neighbor which pervades the other virtues, that is to say,
is the common principle of the entire order between one man and another."

Reply Obj. 3: A man's internal passions which are a part of moral matter, are not in themselves
directed to another man, which belongs to the specific nature of justice; yet their effects,
i.e. external actions, are capable of being directed to another man. Consequently it does not
follow that the matter of justice is general.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 9]

Whether Justice Is About the Passions?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice is about the passions. For the Philosopher says (Ethic.
ii, 3) that "moral virtue is about pleasure and pain." Now pleasure or delight, and pain are
passions, as stated above [*I-II, Q. 23, A. 4; Q. 31, A. 1; Q. 35, A. 1] when we were treating
of the passions. Therefore justice, being a moral virtue, is about the passions.

Obj. 2: Further, justice is the means of rectifying a man's operations in relation to another
man. Now such like operations cannot be rectified unless the passions be rectified, because
it is owing to disorder of the passions that there is disorder in the aforesaid operations:
thus sexual lust leads to adultery, and overmuch love of money leads to theft. Therefore justice
must needs be about the passions.

Obj. 3: Further, even as particular justice is towards another person so is legal justice.
Now legal justice is about the passions, else it would not extend to all the virtues, some
of which are evidently about the passions. Therefore justice is about the passions.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1) that justice is about operations.

I answer that, The true answer to this question may be gathered from a twofold source. First
from the subject of justice, i.e. from the will, whose movements or acts are not passions,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 22, A. 3; Q. 59, A. 4), for it is only the sensitive appetite whose
movements are called passions. Hence justice is not about the passions, as are temperance and
fortitude, which are in the irascible and concupiscible parts. Secondly, on he part of the
matter, because justice is about man's relations with another, and we are not directed immediately
to another by the internal passions. Therefore justice is not about the passions.

Reply Obj. 1: Not every moral virtue is about pleasure and pain as its proper matter, since
fortitude is about fear and daring: but every moral virtue is directed to pleasure and pain,
as to ends to be acquired, for, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. vii, 11), "pleasure and pain
are the principal end in respect of which we say that this is an evil, and that a good": and
in this way too they belong to justice, since "a man is not just unless he rejoice in just
actions" (Ethic. i, 8).

Reply Obj. 2: External operations are as it were between external things, which are their matter,
and internal passions, which are their origin. Now it happens sometimes that there is a defect
in one of these, without there being a defect in the other. Thus a man may steal another's
property, not through the desire to have the thing, but through the will to hurt the man; or
vice versa, a man may covet another's property without wishing to steal it. Accordingly the
directing of operations in so far as they tend towards external things, belongs to justice,
but in so far as they arise from the passions, it belongs to the other moral virtues which
are about the passions. Hence justice hinders theft of another's property, in so far as stealing
is contrary to the equality that should be maintained in external things, while liberality
hinders it as resulting from an immoderate desire for wealth. Since, however, external operations
take their species, not from the internal passions but from external things as being their
objects, it follows that, external operations are essentially the matter of justice rather
than of the other moral virtues.

Reply Obj. 3: The common good is the end of each individual member of a community, just as
the good of the whole is the end of each part. On the other hand the good of one individual
is not the end of another individual: wherefore legal justice which is directed to the common
good, is more capable of extending to the internal passions whereby man is disposed in some
way or other in himself, than particular justice which is directed to the good of another individual:
although legal justice extends chiefly to other virtues in the point of their external operations,
in so far, to wit, as "the law commands us to perform the actions of a courageous person .
. . the actions of a temperate person . . . and the actions of a gentle person" (Ethic. v, 5).

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 10]

Whether the Mean of Justice Is the Real Mean?

Objection 1: It would seem that the mean of justice is not the real mean. For the generic nature
remains entire in each species. Now moral virtue is defined (Ethic. ii, 6) to be "an elective
habit which observes the mean fixed, in our regard, by reason." Therefore justice observes
the rational and not the real mean.

Obj. 2: Further, in things that are good simply, there is neither excess nor defect, and consequently
neither is there a mean; as is clearly the case with the virtues, according to Ethic. ii, 6.
Now justice is about things that are good simply, as stated in Ethic. v. Therefore justice
does not observe the real mean.

Obj. 3: Further, the reason why the other virtues are said to observe the rational and not
the real mean, is because in their case the mean varies according to different persons, since
what is too much for one is too little for another (Ethic. ii, 6). Now this is also the case
in justice: for one who strikes a prince does not receive the same punishment as one who strikes
a private individual. Therefore justice also observes, not the real, but the rational mean.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6; v, 4) that the mean of justice is to be
taken according to "arithmetical" proportion, so that it is the real mean.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 9; I-II, Q. 59, A. 4), the other moral virtues are chiefly
concerned with the passions, the regulation of which is gauged entirely by a comparison with
the very man who is the subject of those passions, in so far as his anger and desire are vested
with their various due circumstances. Hence the mean in such like virtues is measured not by
the proportion of one thing to another, but merely by comparison with the virtuous man himself,
so that with them the mean is only that which is fixed by reason in our regard.

On the other hand, the matter of justice is external operation, in so far as an operation or
the thing used in that operation is duly proportionate to another person, wherefore the mean
of justice consists in a certain proportion of equality between the external thing and the
external person. Now equality is the real mean between greater and less, as stated in Metaph.
x [*Didot ed., ix, 5; Cf. Ethic. v, 4]: wherefore justice observes the real mean.

Reply Obj. 1: This real mean is also the rational mean, wherefore justice satisfies the conditions
of a moral virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: We may speak of a thing being good simply in two ways. First a thing may be good
in every way: thus the virtues are good; and there is neither mean nor extremes in things that
are good simply in this sense. Secondly a thing is said to be good simply through being good
absolutely i.e. in its nature, although it may become evil through being abused. Such are riches
and honors; and in the like it is possible to find excess, deficiency and mean, as regards
men who can use them well or ill: and it is in this sense that justice is about things that
are good simply.

Reply Obj. 3: The injury inflicted bears a different proportion to a prince from that which
it bears to a private person: wherefore each injury requires to be equalized by vengeance in
a different way: and this implies a real and not merely a rational diversity.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 11]

Whether the Act of Justice Is to Render to Each One His Own?

Objection 1: It would seem that the act of justice is not to render to each one his own. For
Augustine (De Trin. xiv, 9) ascribes to justice the act of succoring the needy. Now in succoring
the needy we give them what is not theirs but ours. Therefore the act of justice does not consist
in rendering to each one his own.

Obj. 2: Further, Tully says (De Offic. i, 7) that "beneficence which we may call kindness or
liberality, belongs to justice." Now it pertains to liberality to give to another of one's
own, not of what is his. Therefore the act of justice does not consist in rendering to each
one his own.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to justice not only to distribute things duly, but also to repress
injurious actions, such as murder, adultery and so forth. But the rendering to each one of
what is his seems to belong solely to the distribution of things. Therefore the act of justice
is not sufficiently described by saying that it consists in rendering to each one his own.

On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 24): "It is justice that renders to each one what
is his, and claims not another's property; it disregards its own profit in order to preserve
the common equity."

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 8, 10), the matter of justice is an external operation
in so far as either it or the thing we use by it is made proportionate to some other person
to whom we are related by justice. Now each man's own is that which is due to him according
to equality of proportion. Therefore the proper act of justice is nothing else than to render
to each one his own.

Reply Obj. 1: Since justice is a cardinal virtue, other secondary virtues, such as mercy, liberality
and the like are connected with it, as we shall state further on (Q. 80, A. 1). Wherefore to
succor the needy, which belongs to mercy or pity, and to be liberally beneficent, which pertains
to liberality, are by a kind of reduction ascribed to justice as to their principal virtue.

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Philosopher states (Ethic. v, 4), in matters of justice, the name of "profit"
is extended to whatever is excessive, and whatever is deficient is called "loss." The reason
for this is that justice is first of all and more commonly exercised in voluntary interchanges
of things, such as buying and selling, wherein those expressions are properly employed; and
yet they are transferred to all other matters of justice. The same applies to the rendering
to each one of what is his own.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 58, Art. 12]

Whether Justice Stands Foremost Among All Moral Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice does not stand foremost among all the moral virtues.
Because it belongs to justice to render to each one what is his, whereas it belongs to liberality
to give of one's own, and this is more virtuous. Therefore liberality is a greater virtue than
justice.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing is adorned by a less excellent thing than itself. Now magnanimity
is the ornament both of justice and of all the virtues, according to Ethic. iv, 3. Therefore
magnanimity is more excellent than justice.

Obj. 3: Further, virtue is about that which is "difficult" and "good," as stated in Ethic.
ii, 3. But fortitude is about more difficult things than justice is, since it is about dangers
of death, according to Ethic. iii, 6. Therefore fortitude is more excellent than justice.

On the contrary, Tully says (De Offic. i, 7): "Justice is the most resplendent of the virtues,
and gives its name to a good man."

I answer that, If we speak of legal justice, it is evident that it stands foremost among all
the moral virtues, for as much as the common good transcends the individual good of one person.
In this sense the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v, 1) that "the most excellent of the virtues
would seem to be justice, and more glorious than either the evening or the morning star." But,
even if we speak of particular justice, it excels the other moral virtues for two reasons.
The first reason may be taken from the subject, because justice is in the more excellent part
of the soul, viz. the rational appetite or will, whereas the other moral virtues are in the
sensitive appetite, whereunto appertain the passions which are the matter of the other moral
virtues. The second reason is taken from the object, because the other virtues are commendable
in respect of the sole good of the virtuous person himself, whereas justice is praiseworthy
in respect of the virtuous person being well disposed towards another, so that justice is somewhat
the good of another person, as stated in Ethic. v, 1. Hence the Philosopher says (Rhet. i,
9): "The greatest virtues must needs be those which are most profitable to other persons, because
virtue is a faculty of doing good to others. For this reason the greatest honors are accorded
the brave and the just, since bravery is useful to others in warfare, and justice is useful
to others both in warfare and in time of peace."

Reply Obj. 1: Although the liberal man gives of his own, yet he does so in so far as he takes
into consideration the good of his own virtue, while the just man gives to another what is
his, through consideration of the common good. Moreover justice is observed towards all, whereas
liberality cannot extend to all. Again liberality which gives of a man's own is based on justice,
whereby one renders to each man what is his.

Reply Obj. 2: When magnanimity is added to justice it increases the latter's goodness; and
yet without justice it would not even be a virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Although fortitude is about the most difficult things, it is not about the best,
for it is only useful in warfare, whereas justice is useful both in war and in peace, as stated
above.

QUESTION 59

OF INJUSTICE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider injustice, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether injustice is a special vice?

(2) Whether it is proper to the unjust man to do unjust deeds?

(3) Whether one can suffer injustice willingly?

(4) Whether injustice is a mortal sin according to its genus?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 59, Art. 1]

Whether Injustice Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that injustice is not a special vice. For it is written (1 John
3:4): "All sin is iniquity [*Vulg.: 'Whosoever committeth sin, committeth also iniquity; and
sin is iniquity']." Now iniquity would seem to be the same as injustice, because justice is
a kind of equality, so that injustice is apparently the same as inequality or iniquity. Therefore
injustice is not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no special sin is contrary to all the virtues. But injustice is contrary to
all the virtues: for as regards adultery it is opposed to chastity, as regards murder it is
opposed to meekness, and in like manner as regards the other sins. Therefore injustice is not
a special sin.

Obj. 3: Further, injustice is opposed to justice which is in the will. But every sin is in
the will, as Augustine declares (De Duabus Anim. x). Therefore injustice is not a special sin.

On the contrary, Injustice is contrary to justice. But justice is a special virtue. Therefore
injustice is a special vice.

I answer that, Injustice is twofold. First there is illegal injustice which is opposed to legal
justice: and this is essentially a special vice, in so far as it regards a special object,
namely the common good which it contemns; and yet it is a general vice, as regards the intention,
since contempt of the common good may lead to all kinds of sin. Thus too all vices, as being
repugnant to the common good, have the character of injustice, as though they arose from injustice,
in accord with what has been said above about justice (Q. 58, AA. 5, 6). Secondly we speak
of injustice in reference to an inequality between one person and another, when one man wishes
to have more goods, riches for example, or honors, and less evils, such as toil and losses,
and thus injustice has a special matter and is a particular vice opposed to particular justice.

Reply Obj. 1: Even as legal justice is referred to human common good, so Divine justice is
referred to the Divine good, to which all sin is repugnant, and in this sense all sin is said
to be iniquity.

Reply Obj. 2: Even particular justice is indirectly opposed to all the virtues; in so far,
to wit, as even external acts pertain both to justice and to the other moral virtues, although
in different ways as stated above (Q. 58, A. 9, ad 2).

Reply Obj. 3: The will, like the reason, extends to all moral matters, i.e. passions and those
external operations that relate to another person. On the other hand justice perfects the will
solely in the point of its extending to operations that relate to another: and the same applies
to injustice.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 59, Art. 2]

Whether a Man Is Called Unjust Through Doing an Unjust Thing?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is called unjust through doing an unjust thing. For habits
are specified by their objects, as stated above (I-II, Q. 54, A. 2). Now the proper object
of justice is the just, and the proper object of injustice is the unjust. Therefore a man should
be called just through doing a just thing, and unjust through doing an unjust thing.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v, 9) that they hold a false opinion who
maintain that it is in a man's power to do suddenly an unjust thing, and that a just man is
no less capable of doing what is unjust than an unjust man. But this opinion would not be false
unless it were proper to the unjust man to do what is unjust. Therefore a man is to be deemed
unjust from the fact that he does an unjust thing.

Obj. 3: Further, every virtue bears the same relation to its proper act, and the same applies
to the contrary vices. But whoever does what is intemperate, is said to be intemperate. Therefore
whoever does an unjust thing, is said to be unjust.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 6) that "a man may do an unjust thing without
being unjust."

I answer that, Even as the object of justice is something equal in external things, so too
the object of injustice is something unequal, through more or less being assigned to some person
than is due to him. To this object the habit of injustice is compared by means of its proper
act which is called an injustice. Accordingly it may happen in two ways that a man who does
an unjust thing, is not unjust: first, on account of a lack of correspondence between the operation
and its proper object. For the operation takes its species and name from its direct and not
from its indirect object: and in things directed to an end the direct is that which is intended,
and the indirect is what is beside the intention. Hence if a man do that which is unjust, without
intending to do an unjust thing, for instance if he do it through ignorance, being unaware
that it is unjust, properly speaking he does an unjust thing, not directly, but only indirectly,
and, as it were, doing materially that which is unjust: hence such an operation is not called
an injustice. Secondly, this may happen on account of a lack of proportion between the operation
and the habit. For an injustice may sometimes arise from a passion, for instance, anger or
desire, and sometimes from choice, for instance when the injustice itself is the direct object
of one's complacency. In the latter case properly speaking it arises from a habit, because
whenever a man has a habit, whatever befits that habit is, of itself, pleasant to him. Accordingly,
to do what is unjust intentionally and by choice is proper to the unjust man, in which sense
the unjust man is one who has the habit of injustice: but a man may do what is unjust, unintentionally
or through passion, without having the habit of injustice.

Reply Obj. 1: A habit is specified by its object in its direct and formal acceptation, not
in its material and indirect acceptation.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not easy for any man to do an unjust thing from choice, as though it were
pleasing for its own sake and not for the sake of something else: this is proper to one who
has the habit, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v, 9).

Reply Obj. 3: The object of temperance is not something established externally, as is the object
of justice: the object of temperance, i.e. the temperate thing, depends entirely on proportion
to the man himself. Consequently what is accidental and unintentional cannot be said to be
temperate either materially or formally. In like manner neither can it be called intemperate:
and in this respect there is dissimilarity between justice and the other moral virtues; but
as regards the proportion between operation and habit, there is similarity in all respects.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 59, Art. 3]

Whether We Can Suffer Injustice Willingly?

Objection 1: It would seem that one can suffer injustice willingly. For injustice is inequality,
as stated above (A. 2). Now a man by injuring himself, departs from equality, even as by injuring
another. Therefore a man can do an injustice to himself, even as to another. But whoever does
himself an injustice, does so involuntarily. Therefore a man can voluntarily suffer injustice
especially if it be inflicted by himself.

Obj. 2: Further, no man is punished by the civil law, except for having committed some injustice.
Now suicides were formerly punished according to the law of the state by being deprived of
an honorable burial, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v, 11). Therefore a man can do himself
an injustice, and consequently it may happen that a man suffers injustice voluntarily.

Obj. 3: Further, no man does an injustice save to one who suffers that injustice. But it may
happen that a man does an injustice to one who wishes it, for instance if he sell him a thing
for more than it is worth. Therefore a man may happen to suffer an injustice voluntarily.

On the contrary, To suffer an injustice and to do an injustice are contraries. Now no man does
an injustice against his will. Therefore on the other hand no man suffers an injustice except
against his will.

I answer that, Action by its very nature proceeds from an agent, whereas passion as such is
from another: wherefore the same thing in the same respect cannot be both agent and patient,
as stated in Phys. iii, 1; viii, 5. Now the proper principle of action in man is the will,
wherefore man does properly and essentially what he does voluntarily, and on the other hand
a man suffers properly what he suffers against his will, since in so far as he is willing,
he is a principle in himself, and so, considered thus, he is active rather than passive. Accordingly
we must conclude that properly and strictly speaking no man can do an injustice except voluntarily,
nor suffer an injustice save involuntarily; but that accidentally and materially so to speak,
it is possible for that which is unjust in itself either to be done involuntarily (as when
a man does anything unintentionally), or to be suffered voluntarily (as when a man voluntarily
gives to another more than he owes him).

Reply Obj. 1: When one man gives voluntarily to another that which he does not owe him, he
causes neither injustice nor inequality. For a man's ownership depends on his will, so there
is no disproportion if he forfeit something of his own free-will, either by his own or by another's
action.

Reply Obj. 2: An individual person may be considered in two ways. First, with regard to himself;
and thus, if he inflict an injury on himself, it may come under the head of some other kind
of sin, intemperance for instance or imprudence, but not injustice; because injustice no less
than justice, is always referred to another person. Secondly, this or that man may be considered
as belonging to the State as part thereof, or as belonging to God, as His creature and image;
and thus a man who kills himself, does an injury not indeed to himself, but to the State and
to God. Wherefore he is punished in accordance with both Divine and human law, even as the
Apostle declares in respect of the fornicator (1 Cor. 3:17): "If any man violate the temple
of God, him shall God destroy."

Reply Obj. 3: Suffering is the effect of external action. Now in the point of doing and suffering
injustice, the material element is that which is done externally, considered in itself, as
stated above (A. 2), and the formal and essential element is on the part of the will of agent
and patient, as stated above (A. 2). Accordingly we must reply that injustice suffered by one
man and injustice done by another man always accompany one another, in the material sense.
But if we speak in the formal sense a man can do an injustice with the intention of doing an
injustice, and yet the other man does not suffer an injustice, because he suffers voluntarily;
and on the other hand a man can suffer an injustice if he suffer an injustice against his will,
while the man who does the injury unknowingly, does an injustice, not formally but only materially.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 59, Art. 4]

Whether Whoever Does an Injustice Sins Mortally?

Objection 1: It would seem that not everyone who does an injustice sins mortally. For venial
sin is opposed to mortal sin. Now it is sometimes a venial sin to do an injury: for the Philosopher
says (Ethic. v, 8) in reference to those who act unjustly: "Whatever they do not merely in
ignorance but through ignorance is a venial matter." Therefore not everyone that does an injustice
sins mortally.

Obj. 2: Further, he who does an injustice in a small matter, departs but slightly from the
mean. Now this seems to be insignificant and should be accounted among the least of evils,
as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. ii, 9). Therefore not everyone that does an injustice sins
mortally.

Obj. 3: Further, charity is the "mother of all the virtues" [*Peter Lombard, Sent. iii, D.
23], and it is through being contrary thereto that a sin is called mortal. But not all the
sins contrary to the other virtues are mortal. Therefore neither is it always a mortal sin
to do an injustice.

On the contrary, Whatever is contrary to the law of God is a mortal sin. Now whoever does an
injustice does that which is contrary to the law of God, since it amounts either to theft,
or to adultery, or to murder, or to something of the kind, as will be shown further on (Q.
64, seqq.). Therefore whoever does an injustice sins mortally.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 12, A. 5), when we were treating of the distinction
of sins, a mortal sin is one that is contrary to charity which gives life to the soul. Now
every injury inflicted on another person is of itself contrary to charity, which moves us to
will the good of another. And so since injustice always consists in an injury inflicted on
another person, it is evident that to do an injustice is a mortal sin according to its genus.

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of the Philosopher is to be understood as referring to ignorance
of fact, which he calls "ignorance of particular circumstances" [*Ethic. iii, 1], and which
deserves pardon, and not to ignorance of the law which does not excuse: and he who does an
injustice through ignorance, does no injustice except accidentally, as stated above (A. 2)

Reply Obj. 2: He who does an injustice in small matters falls short of the perfection of an
unjust deed, in so far as what he does may be deemed not altogether contrary to the will of
the person who suffers therefrom: for instance, if a man take an apple or some such thing from
another man, in which case it is probable that the latter is not hurt or displeased.

Reply Obj. 3: The sins which are contrary to the other virtues are not always hurtful to another
person, but imply a disorder affecting human passions; hence there is no comparison.

QUESTION 60

OF JUDGMENT (In Six Articles)

In due sequence we must consider judgment, under which head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether judgment is an act of justice?

(2) Whether it is lawful to judge?

(3) Whether judgment should be based on suspicions?

(4) Whether doubts should be interpreted favorably?

(5) Whether judgment should always be given according to the written law?

(6) Whether judgment is perverted by being usurped?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 60, Art. 1]

Whether Judgment Is an Act of Justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that judgment is not an act of justice. The Philosopher says (Ethic.
i, 3) that "everyone judges well of what he knows," so that judgment would seem to belong to
the cognitive faculty. Now the cognitive faculty is perfected by prudence. Therefore judgment
belongs to prudence rather than to justice, which is in the will, as stated above (Q. 58, A. 4).

Obj. Therefore judgment belongs to charity rather than to justice.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to every virtue to judge aright of its proper matter, because "the
virtuous man is the rule and measure in everything," according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iii,
4). Therefore judgment does not belong to justice any more than to the other moral virtues.

Obj. 4: Further, judgment would seem to belong only to judges. But the act of justice is to
be found in every just man. Since then judges are not the only just men, it seems that judgment
is not the proper act of justice.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 93:15): "Until justice be turned into judgment."

I answer that, Judgment properly denotes the act of a judge as such. Now a judge (judex) is
so called because he asserts the right (jus dicens) and right is the object of justice, as
stated above (Q. 57, A. 1). Consequently the original meaning of the word "judgment" is a statement
or decision of the just or right. Now to decide rightly about virtuous deeds proceeds, properly
speaking, from the virtuous habit; thus a chaste person decides rightly about matters relating
to chastity. Therefore judgment, which denotes a right decision about what is just, belongs
properly to justice. For this reason the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 4) that "men have recourse
to a judge as to one who is the personification of justice."

Reply Obj. 1: The word "judgment," from its original meaning of a right decision about what
is just, has been extended to signify a right decision in any matter whether speculative or
practical. Now a right judgment in any matter requires two things. The first is the virtue
itself that pronounces judgment: and in this way, judgment is an act of reason, because it
belongs to the reason to pronounce or define. The other is the disposition of the one who judges,
on which depends his aptness for judging aright. In this way, in matters of justice, judgment
proceeds from justice, even as in matters of fortitude, it proceeds from fortitude. Accordingly
judgment is an act of justice in so far as justice inclines one to judge aright, and of prudence
in so far as prudence pronounces judgment: wherefore synesis which belongs to prudence is said
to "judge rightly," as stated above (Q. 51, A. 3).

Reply Obj. 2: The spiritual man, by reason of the habit of charity, has an inclination to judge
aright of all things according to the Divine rules; and it is in conformity with these that
he pronounces judgment through the gift of wisdom: even as the just man pronounces judgment
through the virtue of prudence conformably with the ruling of the law.

Reply Obj. 3: The other virtues regulate man in himself, whereas justice regulates man in his
dealings with others, as shown above (Q. 58, A. 2). Now man is master in things concerning
himself, but not in matters relating to others. Consequently where the other virtues are in
question, there is no need for judgment other than that of a virtuous man, taking judgment
in its broader sense, as explained above (ad 1). But in matters of justice, there is further
need for the judgment of a superior, who is "able to reprove both, and to put his hand between
both" [*Job 9:33]. Hence judgment belongs more specifically to justice than to any other virtue.

Reply Obj. 4: Justice is in the sovereign as a master-virtue [*Cf. Q. 58, A. 6], commanding
and prescribing what is just; while it is in the subjects as an executive and administrative
virtue. Hence judgment, which denotes a decision of what is just, belongs to justice, considered
as existing chiefly in one who has authority.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 60, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful to Judge?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to judge. For nothing is punished except what is unlawful.
Now those who judge are threatened with punishment, which those who judge not will escape,
according to Matt. 7:1, "Judge not, and ye shall not be judged." Therefore it is unlawful to judge.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Rom. 14:4): "Who art thou that judgest another man's servant[?]
To his own lord he standeth or falleth." Now God is the Lord of all. Therefore to no man is
it lawful to judge.

Obj. 3: Further, no man is sinless, according to 1 John 1:8, "If we say that we have no sin,
we deceive ourselves." Now it is unlawful for a sinner to judge, according to Rom. Therefore
to no man is it lawful to judge.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 16:18): "Thou shalt appoint judges and magistrates in
all thy gates . . . that they may judge the people with just judgment."

I answer that, Judgment is lawful in so far as it is an act of justice. Now it follows from
what has been stated above (A. 1, ad 1, 3) that three conditions are requisite for a judgment
to be an act of justice: first, that it proceed from the inclination of justice; secondly,
that it come from one who is in authority; thirdly, that it be pronounced according to the
right ruling of prudence. If any one of these be lacking, the judgment will be faulty and unlawful.
First, when it is contrary to the rectitude of justice, and then it is called "perverted" or
"unjust": secondly, when a man judges about matters wherein he has no authority, and this is
called judgment "by usurpation": thirdly, when the reason lacks certainty, as when a man, without
any solid motive, forms a judgment on some doubtful or hidden matter, and then it is called
judgment by "suspicion" or "rash" judgment.

Reply Obj. 1: In these words our Lord forbids rash judgment which is about the inward intention,
or other uncertain things, as Augustine states (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 18). Or else He
forbids judgment about Divine things, which we ought not to judge, but simply believe, since
they are above us, as Hilary declares in his commentary on Matt. 5. Or again according to Chrysostom
[*Hom. xvii in Matth. in the Opus Imperfectum falsely ascribed to St. John Chrysostom], He
forbids the judgment which proceeds not from benevolence but from bitterness of heart.

Reply Obj. 2: A judge is appointed as God's servant; wherefore it is written (Deut. 1:16):
"Judge that which is just," and further on (Deut. 1:17), "because it is the judgment of God."

Reply Obj. 3: Those who stand guilty of grievous sins should not judge those who are guilty
of the same or lesser sins, as Chrysostom [*Hom. xxiv] says on the words of Matt. 7:1, "Judge
not." Above all does this hold when such sins are public, because there would be an occasion
of scandal arising in the hearts of others. If however they are not public but hidden, and
there be an urgent necessity for the judge to pronounce judgment, because it is his duty, he
can reprove or judge with humility and fear. And yet it is not through acting thus that a man
condemns himself so as to deserve to be condemned once again, but when, in condemning another,
he shows himself to be equally deserving of condemnation on account of another or a like sin.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 60, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Unlawful to Form a Judgment from Suspicions?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not unlawful to form a judgment from suspicions. For
suspicion is seemingly an uncertain opinion about an evil, wherefore the Philosopher states
(Ethic. vi, 3) that suspicion is about both the true and the false. Now it is impossible to
have any but an uncertain opinion about contingent singulars. Since then human judgment is
about human acts, which are about singular and contingent matters, it seems that no judgment
would be lawful, if it were not lawful to judge from suspicions.

Obj. 2: Further, a man does his neighbor an injury by judging him unlawfully. But an evil suspicion
consists in nothing more than a man's opinion, and consequently does not seem to pertain to
the injury of another man. Therefore judgment based on suspicion is not unlawful.

Obj. 3: Further, if it is unlawful, it must needs be reducible to an injustice, since judgment
is an act of justice, as stated above (A. 1). Now an injustice is always a mortal sin according
to its genus, as stated above (Q. 59, A. 4). Therefore a judgment based on suspicion would
always be a mortal sin, if it were unlawful. But this is false, because "we cannot avoid suspicions,"
according to a gloss of Augustine (Tract. xc in Joan.) on 1 Cor. 4:5, "Judge not before the
time." Therefore a judgment based on suspicion would seem not to be unlawful. 7:1, "Judge not,"
etc., says: "By this commandment our Lord does not forbid Christians to reprove others from
kindly motives, but that Christian should despise Christian by boasting his own righteousness,
by hating and condemning others for the most part on mere suspicion."

I answer that, As Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii), suspicion denotes evil thinking based on
slight indications, and this is due to three causes. First, from a man being evil in himself,
and from this very fact, as though conscious of his own wickedness, he is prone to think evil
of others, according to Eccles. 10:3, "The fool when he walketh in the way, whereas he himself
is a fool, esteemeth all men fools." Secondly, this is due to a man being ill-disposed towards
another: for when a man hates or despises another, or is angry with or envious of him, he is
led by slight indications to think evil of him, because everyone easily believes what he desires.
Thirdly, this is due to long experience: wherefore the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 13) that
"old people are very suspicious, for they have often experienced the faults of others." The
first two causes of suspicion evidently connote perversity of the affections, while the third
diminishes the nature of suspicion, in as much as experience leads to certainty which is contrary
to the nature of suspicion. Consequently suspicion denotes a certain amount of vice, and the
further it goes, the more vicious it is.

Now there are three degrees of suspicion. The first degree is when a man begins to doubt of
another's goodness from slight indications. This is a venial and a light sin; for "it belongs
to human temptation without which no man can go through this life," according to a gloss on
1 Cor. 4:5, "Judge not before the time." The second degree is when a man, from slight indications,
esteems another man's wickedness as certain. This is a mortal sin, if it be about a grave matter,
since it cannot be without contempt of one's neighbor. Hence the same gloss goes on to say:
"If then we cannot avoid suspicions, because we are human, we must nevertheless restrain our
judgment, and refrain from forming a definite and fixed opinion." The third degree is when
a judge goes so far as to condemn a man on suspicion: this pertains directly to injustice,
and consequently is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Some kind of certainty is found in human acts, not indeed the certainty of a
demonstration, but such as is befitting the matter in point, for instance when a thing is proved
by suitable witnesses.

Reply Obj. 2: From the very fact that a man thinks evil of another without sufficient cause,
he despises him unduly, and therefore does him an injury.

Reply Obj. 3: Since justice and injustice are about external operations, as stated above (Q.
58, AA. 8, 10, 11; Q. 59, A. 1, ad 3), the judgment of suspicion pertains directly to injustice
when it is betrayed by external action, and then it is a mortal sin, as stated above. The internal
judgment pertains to justice, in so far as it is related to the external judgment, even as
the internal to the external act, for instance as desire is related to fornication, or anger
to murder.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 60, Art. 4]

Whether Doubts Should Be Interpreted for the Best?

Objection 1: It would seem that doubts should not be interpreted for the best. Because we should
judge from what happens for the most part. But it happens for the most part that evil is done,
since "the number of fools is infinite" (Eccles. 1:15), "for the imagination and thought of
man's heart are prone to evil from his youth" (Gen. 8:21). Therefore doubts should be interpreted
for the worst rather than for the best.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 27) that "he leads a godly and just life
who is sound in his estimate of things, and turns neither to this side nor to that." Now he
who interprets a doubtful point for the best, turns to one side. Therefore this should not be done.

Obj. 3: Further, man should love his neighbor as himself. Now with regard to himself, a man
should interpret doubtful matters for the worst, according to Job 9:28, "I feared all my works."
Therefore it seems that doubtful matters affecting one's neighbor should be interpreted for
the worst.

On the contrary, A gloss on Rom. 14:3, "He that eateth not, let him not judge him that eateth,"
says: "Doubts should be interpreted in the best sense."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3, ad 2), from the very fact that a man thinks ill of another
without sufficient cause, he injures and despises him. Now no man ought to despise or in any
way injure another man without urgent cause: and, consequently, unless we have evident indications
of a person's wickedness, we ought to deem him good, by interpreting for the best whatever
is doubtful about him.

Reply Obj. 1: He who interprets doubtful matters for the best, may happen to be deceived more
often than not; yet it is better to err frequently through thinking well of a wicked man, than
to err less frequently through having an evil opinion of a good man, because in the latter
case an injury is inflicted, but not in the former.

Reply Obj. 2: It is one thing to judge of things and another to judge of men. For when we judge
of things, there is no question of the good or evil of the thing about which we are judging,
since it will take no harm no matter what kind of judgment we form about it; but there is question
of the good of the person who judges, if he judge truly, and of his evil if he judge falsely
because "the true is the good of the intellect, and the false is its evil," as stated in Ethic.
vi, 2, wherefore everyone should strive to make his judgment accord with things as they are.
On the other hand when we judge of men, the good and evil in our judgment is considered chiefly
on the part of the person about whom judgment is being formed; for he is deemed worthy of honor
from the very fact that he is judged to be good, and deserving of contempt if he is judged
to be evil. For this reason we ought, in this kind of judgment, to aim at judging a man good,
unless there is evident proof of the contrary. And though we may judge falsely, our judgment
in thinking well of another pertains to our good feeling and not to the evil of the intellect,
even as neither does it pertain to the intellect's perfection to know the truth of contingent
singulars in themselves.

Reply Obj. 3: One may interpret something for the worst or for the best in two ways. First,
by a kind of supposition; and thus, when we have to apply a remedy to some evil, whether our
own or another's, in order for the remedy to be applied with greater certainty of a cure, it
is expedient to take the worst for granted, since if a remedy be efficacious against a worse
evil, much more is it efficacious against a lesser evil. Secondly we may interpret something
for the best or for the worst, by deciding or determining, and in this case when judging of
things we should try to interpret each thing according as it is, and when judging of persons,
to interpret things for the best as stated above.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 60, Art. 5]

Whether We Should Always Judge According to the Written Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not always to judge according to the written law.
For we ought always to avoid judging unjustly. But written laws sometimes contain injustice,
according to Isa. 10:1, "Woe to them that make wicked laws, and when they write, write injustice."
Therefore we ought not always to judge according to the written law.

Obj. 2: Further, judgment has to be formed about individual happenings. But no written law
can cover each and every individual happening, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. v, 10).
Therefore it seems that we are not always bound to judge according to the written law.

Obj. 3: Further, a law is written in order that the lawgiver's intention may be made clear.
But it happens sometimes that even if the lawgiver himself were present he would judge otherwise.
Therefore we ought not always to judge according to the written law.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Vera Relig. xxxi): "In these earthly laws, though men judge
about them when they are making them, when once they are established and passed, the judges
may judge no longer of them, but according to them."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), judgment is nothing else but a decision or determination
of what is just. Now a thing becomes just in two ways: first by the very nature of the case,
and this is called "natural right," secondly by some agreement between men, and this is called
"positive right," as stated above (Q. 57, A. 2). Now laws are written for the purpose of manifesting
both these rights, but in different ways. For the written law does indeed contain natural right,
but it does not establish it, for the latter derives its force, not from the law but from nature:
whereas the written law both contains positive right, and establishes it by giving it force
of authority.

Hence it is necessary to judge according to the written law, else judgment would fall short
either of the natural or of the positive right.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as the written law does not give force to the natural right, so neither
can it diminish or annul its force, because neither can man's will change nature. Hence if
the written law contains anything contrary to the natural right, it is unjust and has no binding
force. For positive right has no place except where "it matters not," according to the natural
right, "whether a thing be done in one way or in another"; as stated above (Q. 57, A. 2, ad
2). Wherefore such documents are to be called, not laws, but rather corruptions of law, as
stated above (I-II, Q. 95, A. 2): and consequently judgment should not be delivered according
to them.

Reply Obj. 2: Even as unjust laws by their very nature are, either always or for the most part,
contrary to the natural right, so too laws that are rightly established, fail in some cases,
when if they were observed they would be contrary to the natural right. Wherefore in such cases
judgment should be delivered, not according to the letter of the law, but according to equity
which the lawgiver has in view. Hence the jurist says [*Digest. i, 3; De leg. senatusque consult.
25]: "By no reason of law, or favor of equity, is it allowable for us to interpret harshly,
and render burdensome, those useful measures which have been enacted for the welfare of man."
In such cases even the lawgiver himself would decide otherwise; and if he had foreseen the
case, he might have provided for it by law.

This suffices for the Reply to the Third Objection.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 60, Art. 6]

Whether Judgment Is Rendered Perverse by Being Usurped?

Objection 1: It would seem that judgment is not rendered perverse by being usurped. For justice
is rectitude in matters of action. Now truth is not impaired, no matter who tells it, but it
may suffer from the person who ought to accept it. Therefore again justice loses nothing, no
matter who declares what is just, and this is what is meant by judgment.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to judgment to punish sins. Now it is related to the praise of
some that they punished sins without having authority over those whom they punished; such as
Moses in slaying the Egyptian (Ex. 2:12), and Phinees the son of Eleazar in slaying Zambri
the son of Salu (Num. 25:7-14), and "it was reputed to him unto justice" (Ps. 105:31). Therefore
usurpation of judgment pertains not to injustice.

Obj. 3: Further, spiritual power is distinct from temporal. Now prelates having spiritual power
sometimes interfere in matters concerning the secular power. Therefore usurped judgment is
not unlawful.

Obj. 4: Further, even as the judge requires authority in order to judge aright, so also does
he need justice and knowledge, as shown above (A. 1, ad 1, 3; A. 2). But a judgment is not
described as unjust, if he who judges lacks the habit of justice or the knowledge of the law.
Neither therefore is it always unjust to judge by usurpation, i.e. without authority.

I answer that, Since judgment should be pronounced according to the written law, as stated
above (A. 5), he that pronounces judgment, interprets, in a way, the letter of the law, by
applying it to some particular case. Now since it belongs to the same authority to interpret
and to make a law, just as a law cannot be made save by public authority, so neither can a
judgment be pronounced except by public authority, which extends over those who are subject
to the community. Wherefore even as it would be unjust for one man to force another to observe
a law that was not approved by public authority, so too it is unjust, if a man compels another
to submit to a judgment that is pronounced by other than the public authority.

Reply Obj. 1: When the truth is declared there is no obligation to accept it, and each one
is free to receive it or not, as he wishes. On the other hand judgment implies an obligation,
wherefore it is unjust for anyone to be judged by one who has no public authority.

Reply Obj. 2: Moses seems to have slain the Egyptian by authority received as it were, by divine
inspiration; this seems to follow from Acts 7:24, 25, where it is said that "striking the Egyptian
. . . he thought that his brethren understood that God by his hand would save Israel [Vulg.:
'them']." Or it may be replied that Moses slew the Egyptian in order to defend the man who
was unjustly attacked, without himself exceeding the limits of a blameless defence. Wherefore
Ambrose says (De Offic. i, 36) that "whoever does not ward off a blow from a fellow man when
he can, is as much in fault as the striker"; and he quotes the example of Moses. Again we may
reply with Augustine (QQ. Exod. qu. 2) [*Cf. Contra Faust. xxii, 70] that just as "the soil
gives proof of its fertility by producing useless herbs before the useful seeds have grown,
so this deed of Moses was sinful although it gave a sign of great fertility," in so far, to
wit, as it was a sign of the power whereby he was to deliver his people.

With regard to Phinees the reply is that he did this out of zeal for God by Divine inspiration;
or because though not as yet high-priest, he was nevertheless the high-priest's son, and this
judgment was his concern as of the other judges, to whom this was commanded [*Ex. 22:20; Lev.
20; Deut. 13, 17].

Reply Obj. 3: The secular power is subject to the spiritual, even as the body is subject to
the soul. Consequently the judgment is not usurped if the spiritual authority interferes in
those temporal matters that are subject to the spiritual authority or which have been committed
to the spiritual by the temporal authority.

Reply Obj. 4: The habits of knowledge and justice are perfections of the individual, and consequently
their absence does not make a judgment to be usurped, as in the absence of public authority
which gives a judgment its coercive force.

QUESTION 61

OF THE PARTS OF JUSTICE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the parts of justice; (1) the subjective parts, which are the species
of justice, i.e. distributive and commutative justice; (2) the quasi-integral parts; (3) the
quasi-potential parts, i.e. the virtues connected with justice. The first consideration will
be twofold: (1) The parts of justice; (2) their opposite vices. And since restitution would
seem to be an act of commutative justice, we must consider (1) the distinction between commutative
and distributive justice; (2) restitution.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there are two species of justice, viz. distributive and commutative?

(2) Whether in either case the mean is take in the same way?

(3) Whether their matter is uniform or manifold?

(4) Whether in any of these species the just is the same as counter-passion?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 61, Art. 1]

Whether Two Species of Justice Are Suitably Assigned, Viz. Commutative and Distributive?

Objection 1: It would seem that the two species of justice are unsuitably assigned, viz. distributive
and commutative. That which is hurtful to the many cannot be a species of justice, since justice
is directed to the common good. Now it is hurtful to the common good of the many, if the goods
of the community are distributed among many, both because the goods of the community would
be exhausted, and because the morals of men would be corrupted. For Tully says (De Offic. ii,
15): "He who receives becomes worse, and the more ready to expect that he will receive again."
Therefore distribution does not belong to any species of justice.

Obj. 2: Further, the act of justice is to render to each one what is his own, as stated above
(Q. 58, A. 2). But when things are distributed, a man does not receive what was his, but becomes
possessed of something which belonged to the community. Therefore this does not pertain to justice.

Obj. 3: Further, justice is not only in the sovereign, but also in the subject, as stated above
(Q. 58, A. 6). But it belongs exclusively to the sovereign to distribute. Therefore distribution
does not always belong to justice.

Obj. 4: Further, "Distributive justice regards common goods" (Ethic. v, 4). Now matters regarding
the community pertain to legal justice. Therefore distributive justice is a part, not of particular,
but of legal justice.

Obj. 5: Further, unity or multitude do not change the species of a virtue. Now commutative
justice consists in rendering something to one person, while distributive justice consists
in giving something to many. Therefore they are not different species of justice.

On the contrary, The Philosopher assigns two parts to justice and says (Ethic. v, 2) that "one
directs distributions, the other, commutations."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 58, AA. 7, 8), particular justice is directed to the private
individual, who is compared to the community as a part to the whole. Now a twofold order may
be considered in relation to a part. In the first place there is the order of one part to another,
to which corresponds the order of one private individual to another. This order is directed
by commutative justice, which is concerned about the mutual dealings between two persons. In
the second place there is the order of the whole towards the parts, to which corresponds the
order of that which belongs to the community in relation to each single person. This order
is directed by distributive justice, which distributes common goods proportionately. Hence
there are two species of justice, distributive and commutative.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as a private individual is praised for moderation in his bounty, and blamed
for excess therein, so too ought moderation to be observed in the distribution of common goods,
wherein distributive justice directs.

Reply Obj. 2: Even as part and whole are somewhat the same, so too that which pertains to the
whole, pertains somewhat to the part also: so that when the goods of the community are distributed
among a number of individuals each one receives that which, in a way, is his own.

Reply Obj. 3: The act of distributing the goods of the community, belongs to none but those
who exercise authority over those goods; and yet distributive justice is also in the subjects
to whom those goods are distributed in so far as they are contented by a just distribution.
Moreover distribution of common goods is sometimes made not to the state but to the members
of a family, and such distribution can be made by authority of a private individual.

Reply Obj. 4: Movement takes its species from the term whereunto. Hence it belongs to legal
justice to direct to the common good those matters which concern private individuals: whereas
on the contrary it belongs to particular justice to direct the common good to particular individuals
by way of distribution.

Reply Obj. 5: Distributive and commutative justice differ not only in respect of unity and
multitude, but also in respect of different kinds of due: because common property is due to
an individual in one way, and his personal property in another way.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 61, Art. 2]

Whether the Mean Is to Be Observed in the Same Way in Distributive As in Commutative Justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that the mean in distributive justice is to be observed in the same
way as in commutative justice. For each of these is a kind of particular justice, as stated
above (A. 1). Now the mean is taken in the same way in all the parts of temperance or fortitude.
Therefore the mean should also be observed in the same way in both distributive and commutative
justice.

Obj. 2: Further, the form of a moral virtue consists in observing the mean which is determined
in accordance with reason. Since, then, one virtue has one form, it seems that the mean for
both should be the same.

Obj. 3: Further, in order to observe the mean in distributive justice we have to consider the
various deserts of persons. Now a person's deserts are considered also in commutative justice,
for instance, in punishments; thus a man who strikes a prince is punished more than one who
strikes a private individual. Therefore the mean is observed in the same way in both kinds
of justice.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 3, 4) that the mean in distributive justice
is observed according to "geometrical proportion," whereas in commutative justice it follows
"arithmetical proportion."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), in distributive justice something is given to a private
individual, in so far as what belongs to the whole is due to the part, and in a quantity that
is proportionate to the importance of the position of that part in respect of the whole. Consequently
in distributive justice a person receives all the more of the common goods, according as he
holds a more prominent position in the community. This prominence in an aristocratic community
is gauged according to virtue, in an oligarchy according to wealth, in a democracy according
to liberty, and in various ways according to various forms of community. Hence in distributive
justice the mean is observed, not according to equality between thing and thing, but according
to proportion between things and persons: in such a way that even as one person surpasses another,
so that which is given to one person surpasses that which is allotted to another. Hence the
Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 3, 4) that the mean in the latter case follows "geometrical proportion,"
wherein equality depends not on quantity but on proportion. For example we say that 6 is to
4 as 3 is to 2, because in either case the proportion equals 1½; since the greater number is
the sum of the lesser plus its half: whereas the equality of excess is not one of quantity,
because 6 exceeds 4 by 2, while 3 exceeds 2 by 1.

On the other hand in commutations something is paid to an individual on account of something
of his that has been received, as may be seen chiefly in selling and buying, where the notion
of commutation is found primarily. Hence it is necessary to equalize thing with thing, so that
the one person should pay back to the other just so much as he has become richer out of that
which belonged to the other. The result of this will be equality according to the "arithmetical
mean" which is gauged according to equal excess in quantity. Thus 5 is the mean between 6 and
4, since it exceeds the latter and is exceeded by the former, by 1. Accordingly if, at the
start, both persons have 5, and one of them receives 1 out of the other's belongings, the one
that is the receiver, will have 6, and the other will be left with 4: and so there will be
justice if both be brought back to the mean, 1 being taken from him that has 6, and given to
him that has 4, for then both will have 5 which is the mean.

Reply Obj. 1: In the other moral virtues the rational, not the real mean, is to be followed:
but justice follows the real mean; wherefore the mean, in justice, depends on the diversity
of things.

Reply Obj. 2: Equality is the general form of justice, wherein distributive and commutative
justice agree: but in one we find equality of geometrical proportion, whereas in the other
we find equality of arithmetical proportion.

Reply Obj. 3: In actions and passions a person's station affects the quantity of a thing: for
it is a greater injury to strike a prince than a private person. Hence in distributive justice
a person's station is considered in itself, whereas in commutative justice it is considered
in so far as it causes a diversity of things.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 61, Art. 3]

Whether There Is a Different Matter for Both Kinds of Justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that there is not a different matter for both kinds of justice.
Diversity of matter causes diversity of virtue, as in the case of fortitude and temperance.
Therefore, if distributive and commutative justice have different matters, it would seem that
they are not comprised under the same virtue, viz. justice.

Obj. 2: Further, the distribution that has to do with distributive justice is one of "wealth
or of honors, or of whatever can be distributed among the members of the community" (Ethic.
v, 2), which very things are the subject matter of commutations between one person and another,
and this belongs to commutative justice. Therefore the matters of distributive and commutative
justice are not distinct.

Obj. 3: Further, if the matter of distributive justice differs from that of commutative justice,
for the reason that they differ specifically, where there is no specific difference, there
ought to be no diversity of matter. Now the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 2) reckons commutative justice
as one species, and yet this has many kinds of matter. Therefore the matter of these species
of justice is, seemingly, not of many kinds.

On the contrary, It is stated in Ethic. v, 2 that "one kind of justice directs distributions,
and another commutations."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 51, AA. 8, 10), justice is about certain external operations,
namely distribution and commutation. These consist in the use of certain externals, whether
things, persons or even works: of things, as when one man takes from or restores to another
that which is his; of persons, as when a man does an injury to the very person of another,
for instance by striking or insulting him, or even by showing respect for him; and of works,
as when a man justly exacts a work of another, or does a work for him. Accordingly, if we take
for the matter of each kind of justice the things themselves of which the operations are the
use, the matter of distributive and commutative justice is the same, since things can be distributed
out of the common property to individuals, and be the subject of commutation between one person
and another; and again there is a certain distribution and payment of laborious works.

If, however, we take for the matter of both kinds of justice the principal actions themselves,
whereby we make use of persons, things, and works, there is then a difference of matter between
them. For distributive justice directs distributions, while commutative justice directs commutations
that can take place between two persons. Of these some are involuntary, some voluntary. They
are involuntary when anyone uses another man's chattel, person, or work against his will, and
this may be done secretly by fraud, or openly by violence. In either case the offence may be
committed against the other man's chattel or person, or against a person connected with him.
If the offence is against his chattel and this be taken secretly, it is called "theft," if
openly, it is called "robbery." If it be against another man's person, it may affect either
the very substance of his person, or his dignity. If it be against the substance of his person,
a man is injured secretly if he is treacherously slain, struck or poisoned, and openly, if
he is publicly slain, imprisoned, struck or maimed. If it be against his personal dignity,
a man is injured secretly by false witness, detractions and so forth, whereby he is deprived
of his good name, and openly, by being accused in a court of law, or by public insult. If it
be against a personal connection, a man is injured in the person of his wife, secretly (for
the most part) by adultery, in the person of his slave, if the latter be induced to leave his
master: which things can also be done openly. The same applies to other personal connections,
and whatever injury may be committed against the principal, may be committed against them also.
Adultery, however, and inducing a slave to leave his master are properly injuries against the
person; yet the latter, since a slave is his master's chattel, is referred to theft. Voluntary
commutations are when a man voluntarily transfers his chattel to another person. And if he
transfer it simply so that the recipient incurs no debt, as in the case of gifts, it is an
act, not of justice but of liberality. A voluntary transfer belongs to justice in so far as
it includes the notion of debt, and this may occur in many ways. First when one man simply
transfers his thing to another in exchange for another thing, as happens in selling and buying.
Secondly when a man transfers his thing to another, that the latter may have the use of it
with the obligation of returning it to its owner. If he grant the use of a thing gratuitously,
it is called "usufruct" in things that bear fruit; and simply "borrowing" on "loan" in things
that bear no fruit, such as money, pottery, etc.; but if not even the use is granted gratis,
it is called "letting" or "hiring." Thirdly, a man transfers his thing with the intention of
recovering it, not for the purpose of its use, but that it may be kept safe, as in a "deposit,"
or under some obligation, as when a man pledges his property, or when one man stands security
for another. In all these actions, whether voluntary or involuntary, the mean is taken in the
same way according to the equality of repayment. Hence all these actions belong to the one
same species of justice, namely commutative justice. And this suffices for the Replies to the
Objections.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 61, Art. 4]

Whether the Just Is Absolutely the Same As Retaliation?

Objection 1: It would seem that the just is absolutely the same as retaliation. For the judgment
of God is absolutely just. Now the judgment of God is such that a man has to suffer in proportion
with his deeds, according to Matt. 7:2: "With what measure you judge, you shall be judged:
and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again." Therefore the just is absolutely
the same as retaliation.

Obj. 2: Further, in either kind of justice something is given to someone according to a kind
of equality. In distributive justice this equality regards personal dignity, which would seem
to depend chiefly on what a person has done for the good of the community; while in commutative
justice it regards the thing in which a person has suffered loss. Now in respect of either
equality there is retaliation in respect of the deed committed. Therefore it would seem that
the just is absolutely the same as retaliation.

Obj. 3: Further, the chief argument against retaliation is based on the difference between
the voluntary and the involuntary; for he who does an injury involuntarily is less severely
punished. Now voluntary and involuntary taken in relation to ourselves, do not diversify the
mean of justice since this is the real mean and does not depend on us. Therefore it would seem
that the just is absolutely the same as retaliation.

On the contrary, The Philosopher proves (Ethic. v, 5) that the just is not always the same
as retaliation.

I answer that, Retaliation (contrapassum) denotes equal passion repaid for previous action;
and the expression applies most properly to injurious passions and actions, whereby a man harms
the person of his neighbor; for instance if a man strike, that he be struck back. This kind
of just is laid down in the Law (Ex. 21:23, 24): "He shall render life for life, eye for eye,"
etc. And since also to take away what belongs to another is to do an unjust thing, it follows
that secondly retaliation consists in this also, that whosoever causes loss to another, should
suffer loss in his belongings. This just loss is also found in the Law (Ex. 22:1): "If any
man steal an ox or a sheep, and kill or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for one ox and
four sheep for one sheep." Thirdly retaliation is transferred to voluntary commutations, where
action and passion are on both sides, although voluntariness detracts from the nature of passion,
as stated above (Q. 59, A. 3).

In all these cases, however, repayment must be made on a basis of equality according to the
requirements of commutative justice, namely that the meed of passion be equal to the action.
Now there would not always be equality if passion were in the same species as the action. Because,
in the first place, when a person injures the person of one who is greater, the action surpasses
any passion of the same species that he might undergo, wherefore he that strikes a prince,
is not only struck back, but is much more severely punished. In like manner when a man despoils
another of his property against the latter's will, the action surpasses the passion if he be
merely deprived of that thing, because the man who caused another's loss, himself would lose
nothing, and so he is punished by making restitution several times over, because not only did
he injure a private individual, but also the common weal, the security of whose protection
he has infringed. Nor again would there be equality of passion in voluntary commutations, were
one always to exchange one's chattel for another man's, because it might happen that the other
man's chattel is much greater than our own: so that it becomes necessary to equalize passion
and action in commutations according to a certain proportionate commensuration, for which purpose
money was invented. Hence retaliation is in accordance with commutative justice: but there
is no place for it in distributive justice, because in distributive justice we do not consider
the equality between thing and thing or between passion and action (whence the expression contrapassum),
but according to proportion between things and persons, as stated above (A. 2).

Reply Obj. 1: This form of the Divine judgment is in accordance with the conditions of commutative
justice, in so far as rewards are apportioned to merits, and punishments to sins.

Reply Obj. 2: When a man who has served the community is paid for his services, this is to
be referred to commutative, not distributive, justice. Because distributive justice considers
the equality, not between the thing received and the thing done, but between the thing received
by one person and the thing received by another according to the respective conditions of those
persons.

Reply Obj. 3: When the injurious action is voluntary, the injury is aggravated and consequently
is considered as a greater thing. Hence it requires a greater punishment in repayment, by reason
of a difference, not on our part, but on the part of the thing.

QUESTION 62

OF RESTITUTION (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider restitution, under which head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Of what is it an act?

(2) Whether it is always of necessity for salvation to restore what one has taken away?

(3) Whether it is necessary to restore more than has been taken away?

(4) Whether it is necessary to restore what one has not taken away?

(5) Whether it is necessary to make restitution to the person from whom something has been taken?

(6) Whether the person who has taken something away is bound to restore it?

(7) Whether any other person is bound to restitution?

(8) Whether one is bound to restore at once?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 1]

Whether Restitution Is an Act of Commutative Justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that restitution is not an act of commutative justice. For justice
regards the notion of what is due. Now one may restore, even as one may give, that which is
not due. Therefore restitution is not the act of any part of justice.

Obj. 2: Further, that which has passed away and is no more cannot be restored. Now justice
and injustice are about certain actions and passions, which are unenduring and transitory.
Therefore restitution would not seem to be the act of a part of justice.

Obj. 3: Further, restitution is repayment of something taken away. Now something may be taken
away from a man not only in commutation, but also in distribution, as when, in distributing,
one gives a man less than his due. Therefore restitution is not more an act of commutative
than of distributive justice.

On the contrary, Restitution is opposed to taking away. Now it is an act of commutative injustice
to take away what belongs to another. Therefore to restore it is an act of that justice which
directs commutations.

I answer that, To restore is seemingly the same as to reinstate a person in the possession
or dominion of his thing, so that in restitution we consider the equality of justice attending
the payment of one thing for another, and this belongs to commutative justice. Hence restitution
is an act of commutative justice, occasioned by one person having what belongs to another,
either with his consent, for instance on loan or deposit, or against his will, as in robbery
or theft.

Reply Obj. 1: That which is not due to another is not his properly speaking, although it may
have been his at some time: wherefore it is a mere gift rather than a restitution, when anyone
renders to another what is not due to him. It is however somewhat like a restitution, since
the thing itself is materially the same; yet it is not the same in respect of the formal aspect
of justice, which considers that thing as belonging to this particular man: and so it is not
restitution properly so called.

Reply Obj. 2: In so far as the word restitution denotes something done over again, it implies
identity of object. Hence it would seem originally to have applied chiefly to external things,
which can pass from one person to another, since they remain the same both substantially and
in respect of the right of dominion. But, even as the term "commutation" has passed from such
like things to those actions and passions which confer reverence or injury, harm or profit
on another person, so too the term "restitution" is applied, to things which though they be
transitory in reality, yet remain in their effect; whether this touch his body, as when the
body is hurt by being struck, or his reputation, as when a man remains defamed or dishonored
by injurious words.

Reply Obj. 3: Compensation is made by the distributor to the man to whom less was given than
his due, by comparison of thing with thing, when the latter receives so much the more according
as he received less than his due: and consequently it pertains to commutative justice.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 2]

Whether Restitution of What Has Been Taken Away Is Necessary for Salvation?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not necessary to restore what has been taken away. For
that which is impossible is not necessary for salvation. But sometimes it is impossible to
restore what has been taken, as when a man has taken limb or life. Therefore it does not seem
necessary for salvation to restore what one has taken from another.

Obj. 2: Further, the commission of a sin is not necessary for salvation, for then a man would
be in a dilemma. But sometimes it is impossible, without sin, to restore what has been taken,
as when one has taken away another's good name by telling the truth. Therefore it is not necessary
for salvation to restore what one has taken from another.

Obj. 3: Further, what is done cannot be undone. Now sometimes a man loses his personal honor
by being unjustly insulted. Therefore that which has been taken from him cannot be restored
to him: so that it is not necessary for salvation to restore what one has taken.

Obj. 4: Further, to prevent a person from obtaining a good thing is seemingly the same as to
take it away from him, since "to lack little is almost the same as to lack nothing at all,"
as the Philosopher says (Phys. ii, 5). Now when anyone prevents a man from obtaining a benefice
or the like, seemingly he is not bound to restore the benefice, since this would be sometimes
impossible. Therefore it is not necessary for salvation to restore what one has taken.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. ad Maced. cxliii): "Unless a man restore what he has purloined,
his sin is not forgiven."

I answer that, Restitution as stated above (A. 1) is an act of commutative justice, and this
demands a certain equality. Wherefore restitution denotes the return of the thing unjustly
taken; since it is by giving it back that equality is reestablished. If, however, it be taken
away justly, there will be equality, and so there will be no need for restitution, for justice
consists in equality. Since therefore the safeguarding of justice is necessary for salvation,
it follows that it is necessary for salvation to restore what has been taken unjustly.

Reply Obj. 1: When it is impossible to repay the equivalent, it suffices to repay what one
can, as in the case of honor due to God and our parents, as the Philosopher states (Ethic.
viii, 14). Wherefore when that which has been taken cannot be restored in equivalent, compensation
should be made as far as possible: for instance if one man has deprived another of a limb,
he must make compensation either in money or in honor, the condition of either party being
duly considered according to the judgment of a good man.

Reply Obj. 2: There are three ways in which one may take away another's good name. First, by
saying what is true, and this justly, as when a man reveals another's sin, while observing
the right order of so doing, and then he is not bound to restitution. Secondly, by saying what
is untrue and unjustly, and then he is bound to restore that man's good name, by confessing
that he told an untruth. Thirdly, by saying what is true, but unjustly, as when a man reveals
another's sin contrarily to the right order of so doing, and then he is bound to restore his
good name as far as he can, and yet without telling an untruth; for instance by saying that
he spoke ill, or that he defamed him unjustly; or if he be unable to restore his good name,
he must compensate him otherwise, the same as in other cases, as stated above (ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: The action of the man who has defamed another cannot be undone, but it is possible,
by showing him deference, to undo its effect, viz. the lowering of the other man's personal
dignity in the opinion of other men.

Reply Obj. 4: There are several ways of preventing a man from obtaining a benefice. First,
justly: for instance, if having in view the honor of God or the good of the Church, one procures
its being conferred on a more worthy subject, and then there is no obligation whatever to make
restitution or compensation. Secondly, unjustly, if the intention is to injure the person whom
one hinders, through hatred, revenge or the like. In this case, if before the benefice has
been definitely assigned to anyone, one prevents its being conferred on a worthy subject by
counseling that it be not conferred on him, one is bound to make some compensation, after taking
account of the circumstances of persons and things according to the judgment of a prudent person:
but one is not bound in equivalent, because that man had not obtained the benefice and might
have been prevented in many ways from obtaining it. If, on the other hand, the benefice had
already been assigned to a certain person, and someone, for some undue cause procures its revocation,
it is the same as though he had deprived a man of what he already possessed, and consequently
he would be bound to compensation in equivalent, in proportion, however, to his means.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 3]

Whether It Suffices to Restore the Exact Amount Taken?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not sufficient to restore the exact amount taken. For
it is written (Ex. Now everyone is bound to keep the commandments of the Divine law. Therefore
a thief is bound to restore four- or fivefold.

Obj. 2: Further, "What things soever were written, were written for our learning" (Rom. 15:4).
Now Zachaeus said (Luke 19:8) to our Lord: "If I have wronged any man of any thing, I restore
him fourfold." Therefore a man is bound to restore several times over the amount he has taken
unjustly.

Obj. 3: Further, no one can be unjustly deprived of what he is not bound to give. Now a judge
justly deprives a thief of more than the amount of his theft, under the head of damages. Therefore
a man is bound to pay it, and consequently it is not sufficient to restore the exact amount.

On the contrary, Restitution re-establishes equality where an unjust taking has caused inequality.
Now equality is restored by repaying the exact amount taken. Therefore there is no obligation
to restore more than the exact amount taken.

I answer that, When a man takes another's thing unjustly, two things must be considered. One
is the inequality on the part of the thing, which inequality is sometimes void of injustice,
as is the case in loans. The other is the sin of injustice, which is consistent with equality
on the part of the thing, as when a person intends to use violence but fails.

As regards the first, the remedy is applied by making restitution, since thereby equality is
re-established; and for this it is enough that a man restore just so much as he has belonging
to another. But as regards the sin, the remedy is applied by punishment, the infliction of
which belongs to the judge: and so, until a man is condemned by the judge, he is not bound
to restore more than he took, but when once he is condemned, he is bound to pay the penalty.

Hence it is clear how to answer the First Objection: because this law fixes the punishment
to be inflicted by the judge. Nor is this commandment to be kept now, because since the coming
of Christ no man is bound to keep the judicial precepts, as stated above (I-II, Q. 104, A.
3). Nevertheless the same might be determined by human law, and then the same answer would apply.

Reply Obj. 2: Zachaeus said this being willing to do more than he was bound to do; hence he
had said already: "Behold . . . the half of my goods I give to the poor."

Reply Obj. 3: By condemning the man justly, the judge can exact more by way of damages; and
yet this was not due before the sentence.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Restore What He Has Not Taken?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is bound to restore what he has not taken. For he that
has inflicted a loss on a man is bound to remove that loss. Now it happens sometimes that the
loss sustained is greater than the thing taken: for instance, if you dig up a man's seeds,
you inflict on the sower a loss equal to the coming harvest, and thus you would seem to be
bound to make restitution accordingly. Therefore a man is bound to restore what he has not taken.

Obj. 2: Further, he who retains his creditor's money beyond the stated time, would seem to
occasion his loss of all his possible profits from that money, and yet he does not really take
them. Therefore it seems that a man is bound to restore what he did not take.

Obj. 3: Further, human justice is derived from Divine justice. Now a man is bound to restore
to God more than he has received from Him, according to Matt. 25:26, "Thou knewest that I reap
where I sow not, and gather where I have not strewed." Therefore it is just that one should
restore to a man also, something that one has not taken.

On the contrary, Restitution belongs to justice, because it re-establishes equality. But if
one were to restore what one did not take, there would not be equality. Therefore it is not
just to make such a restitution.

I answer that, Whoever brings a loss upon another person, seemingly, takes from him the amount
of the loss, since, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 4) loss is so called from a man
having less* than his due. [*The derivation is more apparent in English than in Latin, where
damnum stands for loss, and minus for less. Aristotle merely says that to have more than your
own is called "gain," and to have less than you started with is called "loss."] Therefore a
man is bound to make restitution according to the loss he has brought upon another.

Now a man suffers a loss in two ways. First, by being deprived of what he actually has; and
a loss of this kind is always to be made good by repayment in equivalent: for instance if a
man damnifies another by destroying his house he is bound to pay him the value of the house.
Secondly, a man may damnify another by preventing him from obtaining what he was on the way
to obtain. A loss of this kind need not be made good in equivalent; because to have a thing
virtually is less than to have it actually, and to be on the way to obtain a thing is to have
it merely virtually or potentially, and so were he to be indemnified by receiving the thing
actually, he would be paid, not the exact value taken from him, but more, and this is not necessary
for salvation, as stated above. However he is bound to make some compensation, according to
the condition of persons and things.

From this we see how to answer the First and Second Objections: because the sower of the seed
in the field, has the harvest, not actually but only virtually. In like manner he that has
money has the profit not yet actually but only virtually: and both may be hindered in many ways.

Reply Obj. 3: God requires nothing from us but what He Himself has sown in us. Hence this saying
is to be understood as expressing either the shameful thought of the lazy servant, who deemed
that he had received nothing from the other, or the fact that God expects from us the fruit
of His gifts, which fruit is from Him and from us, although the gifts themselves are from God
without us.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 5]

Whether Restitution Must Always Be Made to the Person from Whom a Thing Has Been Taken?

Objection 1: It would seem that restitution need not always be made to the person from whom
a thing has been taken. For it is not lawful to injure anyone. Now it would sometimes be injurious
to the man himself, or to others, were one to restore to him what has been taken from him;
if, for instance, one were to return a madman his sword. Therefore restitution need not always
be made to the person from whom a thing has been taken.

Obj. 2: Further, if a man has given a thing unlawfully, he does not deserve to recover it.
Now sometimes a man gives unlawfully that which another accepts unlawfully, as in the case
of the giver and receiver who are guilty of simony. Therefore it is not always necessary to
make restitution to the person from whom one has taken something.

Obj. 3: Further, no man is bound to do what is impossible. Now it is sometimes impossible to
make restitution to the person from whom a thing has been taken, either because he is dead,
or because he is too far away, or because he is unknown to us. Therefore restitution need not
always be made to the person from whom a thing has been taken.

Obj. 4: Further, we owe more compensation to one from whom we have received a greater favor.
Now we have received greater favors from others (our parents for instance) than from a lender
or depositor. Therefore sometimes we ought to succor some other person rather than make restitution
to one from whom we have taken something.

Obj. 5: Further, it is useless to restore a thing which reverts to the restorer by being restored.
Now if a prelate has unjustly taken something from the Church and makes restitution to the
Church, it reverts into his hands, since he is the guardian of the Church's property. Therefore
he ought not to restore to the Church from whom he has taken: and so restitution should not
always be made to the person from whom something has been taken away.

On the contrary, It is written (Rom. 13:7): "Render . . . to all men their dues; tribute to
whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom."

I answer that, Restitution re-establishes the equality of commutative justice, which equality
consists in the equalizing of thing to thing, as stated above (A. 2; Q. 58, A. 10). Now this
equalizing of things is impossible, unless he that has less than his due receive what is lacking
to him: and for this to be done, restitution must be made to the person from whom a thing has
been taken.

Reply Obj. 1: When the thing to be restored appears to be grievously injurious to the person
to whom it is to be restored, or to some other, it should not be restored to him there and
then, because restitution is directed to the good of the person to whom it is made, since all
possessions come under the head of the useful. Yet he who retains another's property must not
appropriate it, but must either reserve it, that he may restore it at a fitting time, or hand
it over to another to keep it more securely.

Reply Obj. 2: A person may give a thing unlawfully in two ways. First through the giving itself
being illicit and against the law, as is the case when a man gives a thing simoniacally. Such
a man deserves to lose what he gave, wherefore restitution should not be made to him: and,
since the receiver acted against the law in receiving, he must not retain the price, but must
use it for some pious object. Secondly a man gives unlawfully, through giving for an unlawful
purpose, albeit the giving itself is not unlawful, as when a woman receives payment for fornication:
wherefore she may keep what she has received. If, however, she has extorted overmuch by fraud
or deceit, she would be bound to restitution.

Reply Obj. 3: If the person to whom restitution is due is unknown altogether, restitution must
be made as far as possible, for instance by giving an alms for his spiritual welfare (whether
he be dead or living): but not without previously making a careful inquiry about his person.
If the person to whom restitution is due be dead, restitution should be made to his heir, who
is looked upon as one with him. If he be very far away, what is due to him should be sent to
him, especially if it be of great value and can easily be sent: else it should be deposited
in a safe place to be kept for him, and the owner should be advised of the fact.

Reply Obj. 4: A man is bound, out of his own property, to succor his parents, or those from
whom he has received greater benefits; but he ought not to compensate a benefactor out of what
belongs to others; and he would be doing this if he were to compensate one with what is due
to another. Exception must be made in cases of extreme need, for then he could and should even
take what belongs to another in order to succor a parent.

Reply Obj. 5: There are three ways in which a prelate can rob the Church of her property. First
by laying hands on Church property which is committed, not to him but to another; for instance,
if a bishop appropriates the property of the chapter. In such a case it is clear that he is
bound to restitution, by handing it over to those who are its lawful owners. Secondly by transferring
to another person (for instance a relative or a friend) Church property committed to himself:
in which case he must make restitution to the Church, and have it under his own care, so as
to hand it over to his successor. Thirdly, a prelate may lay hands on Church property, merely
in intention, when, to wit, he begins to have a mind to hold it as his own and not in the name
of the Church: in which case he must make restitution by renouncing his intention.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 6]

Whether He That Has Taken a Thing Is Always Bound to Restitution?

Objection 1: It would seem that he who has taken a thing is not always bound to restore it.
Restitution re-establishes the equality of justice, by taking away from him that has more and
giving to him that has less. Now it happens sometimes that he who has taken that which belongs
to another, no longer has it, through its having passed into another's hands. Therefore it
should be restored, not by the person that took it, but by the one that has it.

Obj. 2: Further, no man is bound to reveal his own crime. But by making restitution a man would
sometimes reveal his crime, as in the case of theft. Therefore he that has taken a thing is
not always bound to restitution.

Obj. 3: Further, the same thing should not be restored several times. Now sometimes several
persons take a thing at the same time, and one of them restores it in its entirety. Therefore
he that takes a thing is not always bound to restitution.

On the contrary, He that has sinned is bound to satisfaction. Now restitution belongs to satisfaction.
Therefore he that has taken a thing is bound to restore it.

I answer that, With regard to a man who has taken another's property, two points must be considered:
the thing taken, and the taking. By reason of the thing taken, he is bound to restore it as
long as he has it in his possession, since the thing that he has in addition to what is his,
should be taken away from him, and given to him who lacks it according to the form of commutative
justice. On the other hand, the taking of the thing that is another's property, may be threefold.
For sometimes it is injurious, i.e. against the will of the owner, as in theft and robbery:
in which case the thief is bound to restitution not only by reason of the thing, but also by
reason of the injurious action, even though the thing is no longer in his possession. For just
as a man who strikes another, though he gain nothing thereby, is bound to compensate the injured
person, so too he that is guilty of theft or robbery, is bound to make compensation for the
loss incurred, although he be no better off; and in addition he must be punished for the injustice
committed. Secondly, a man takes another's property for his own profit but without committing
an injury, i.e. with the consent of the owner, as in the case of a loan: and then, the taker
is bound to restitution, not only by reason of the thing, but also by reason of the taking,
even if he has lost the thing: for he is bound to compensate the person who has done him a
favor, and he would not be doing so if the latter were to lose thereby. Thirdly, a man takes
another's property without injury to the latter or profit to himself, as in the case of a deposit;
wherefore he that takes a thing thus, incurs no obligation on account of the taking, in fact
by taking he grants a favor; but he is bound to restitution on account of the thing taken.
Consequently if this thing be taken from him without any fault on his part, he is not bound
to restitution, although he would be, if he were to lose the thing through a grievous fault
on his part.

Reply Obj. 1: The chief end of restitution is, not that he who has more than his due may cease
to have it, but that he who has less than his due may be compensated. Wherefore there is no
place for restitution in those things which one man may receive from another without loss to
the latter, as when a person takes a light from another's candle. Consequently although he
that has taken something from another, may have ceased to have what he took, through having
transferred it to another, yet since that other is deprived of what is his, both are bound
to restitution, he that took the thing, on account of the injurious taking, and he that has
it, on account of the thing.

Reply Obj. 2: Although a man is not bound to reveal his crime to other men, yet is he bound
to reveal it to God in confession; and so he may make restitution of another's property through
the priest to whom he confesses.

Reply Obj. 3: Since restitution is chiefly directed to the compensation for the loss incurred
by the person from whom a thing has been taken unjustly, it stands to reason that when he has
received sufficient compensation from one, the others are not bound to any further restitution
in his regard: rather ought they to refund the person who has made restitution, who, nevertheless,
may excuse them from so doing.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 7]

Whether Restitution Is Binding on Those Who Have Not Taken?

Objection 1: It would seem that restitution is not binding on those who have not taken. For
restitution is a punishment of the taker. Now none should be punished except the one who sinned.
Therefore none are bound to restitution save the one who has taken.

Obj. 2: Further, justice does not bind one to increase another's property. Now if restitution
were binding not only on the man who takes a thing but also on all those who cooperate with
him in any way whatever, the person from whom the thing was taken would be the gainer, both
because he would receive restitution many times over, and because sometimes a person cooperates
towards a thing being taken away from someone, without its being taken away in effect. Therefore
the others are not bound to restitution.

Obj. 3: Further, no man is bound to expose himself to danger, in order to safeguard another's
property. Now sometimes a man would expose himself to the danger of death, were he to betray
a thief, or withstand him. Therefore one is not bound to restitution, through not betraying
or withstanding a thief.

On the contrary, It is written (Rom. 1:32): "They who do such things are worthy of death, and
not only they that do them, but also they that consent to them that do them." Therefore in
like manner they that consent are bound to restitution.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), a person is bound to restitution not only on account
of someone else's property which he has taken, but also on account of the injurious taking.
Hence whoever is cause of an unjust taking is bound to restitution. This happens in two ways,
directly and indirectly. Directly, when a man induces another to take, and this in three ways.
First, on the part of the taking, by moving a man to take, either by express command, counsel,
or consent, or by praising a man for his courage in thieving. Secondly, on the part of the
taker, by giving him shelter or any other kind of assistance. Thirdly, on the part of the thing
taken, by taking part in the theft or robbery, as a fellow evil-doer. Indirectly, when a man
does not prevent another from evil-doing (provided he be able and bound to prevent him), either
by omitting the command or counsel which would hinder him from thieving or robbing, or by omitting
to do what would have hindered him, or by sheltering him after the deed. All these are expressed
as follows:

"By command, by counsel, by consent, by flattery, by receiving, by participation, by silence,
by not preventing, by not denouncing."

It must be observed, however, that in five of these cases the cooperator is always bound to
restitution. First, in the case of command: because he that commands is the chief mover, wherefore
he is bound to restitution principally. Secondly, in the case of consent; namely of one without
whose consent the robbery cannot take place. Thirdly, in the case of receiving; when, to wit,
a man is a receiver of thieves, and gives them assistance. Fourthly, in the case of participation;
when a man takes part in the theft and in the booty. Fifthly, he who does not prevent the theft,
whereas he is bound to do so; for instance, persons in authority who are bound to safeguard
justice on earth, are bound to restitution, if by their neglect thieves prosper, because their
salary is given to them in payment of their preserving justice here below.

In the other cases mentioned above, a man is not always bound to restitution: because counsel
and flattery are not always the efficacious cause of robbery. Hence the counsellor or flatterer
is bound to restitution, only when it may be judged with probability that the unjust taking
resulted from such causes.

Reply Obj. 1: Not only is he bound to restitution who commits the sin, but also he who is in
any way cause of the sin, whether by counselling, or by commanding, or in any other way whatever.

Reply Obj. 2: He is bound chiefly to restitution, who is the principal in the deed; first of
all, the commander; secondly, the executor, and in due sequence, the others: yet so that, if
one of them make restitution, another is not bound to make restitution to the same person.
Yet those who are principals in the deed, and who took possession of the thing, are bound to
compensate those who have already made restitution. When a man commands an unjust taking that
does not follow, no restitution has to be made, since its end is chiefly to restore the property
of the person who has been unjustly injured.

Reply Obj. 3: He that fails to denounce a thief or does not withstand or reprehend him is not
always bound to restitution, but only when he is obliged, in virtue of his office, to do so:
as in the case of earthly princes who do not incur any great danger thereby; for they are invested
with public authority, in order that they may maintain justice.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 62, Art. 8]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Immediate Restitution, or May He Put It Off?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is not bound to immediate restitution, and can lawfully
delay to restore. For affirmative precepts do not bind for always. Now the necessity of making
restitution is binding through an affirmative precept. Therefore a man is not bound to immediate
restitution.

Obj. 2: Further, no man is bound to do what is impossible. But it is sometimes impossible to
make restitution at once. Therefore no man is bound to immediate restitution.

Obj. 3: Further, restitution is an act of virtue, viz. of justice. Now time is one of the circumstances
requisite for virtuous acts. Since then the other circumstances are not determinate for acts
of virtue, but are determinable according to the dictate of prudence, it seems that neither
in restitution is there any fixed time, so that a man be bound to restore at once.

On the contrary, All matters of restitution seem to come under one head. Now a man who hires
the services of a wage-earner, must not delay compensation, as appears from Lev. 19:13, "The
wages of him that hath been hired by thee shall not abide with thee until the morning." Therefore
neither is it lawful, in other cases of restitution, to delay, and restitution should be made
at once.

I answer that, Even as it is a sin against justice to take another's property, so also is it
to withhold it, since, to withhold the property of another against the owner's will, is to
deprive him of the use of what belongs to him, and to do him an injury. Now it is clear that
it is wrong to remain in sin even for a short time; and one is bound to renounce one's sin
at once, according to Ecclus. 21:2, "Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent." Consequently
one is bound to immediate restitution, if possible, or to ask for a respite from the person
who is empowered to grant the use of the thing.

Reply Obj. 1: Although the precept about the making of restitution is affirmative in form,
it implies a negative precept forbidding us to withhold another's property.

Reply Obj. 2: When one is unable to restore at once, this very inability excuses one from immediate
restitution: even as a person is altogether excused from making restitution if he is altogether
unable to make it. He is, however, bound either himself or through another to ask the person
to whom he owes compensation to grant him a remission or a respite.

Reply Obj. 3: Whenever the omission of a circumstance is contrary to virtue that circumstance
must be looked upon as determinate, and we are bound to observe it: and since delay of restitution
involves a sin of unjust detention which is opposed to just detention, it stands to reason
that the time is determinate in the point of restitution being immediate.

QUESTION 63

OF RESPECT OF PERSONS (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the vices opposed to the aforesaid parts of justice. First we shall consider
respect of persons which is opposed to distributive justice; secondly we shall consider the
vices opposed to commutative justice.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether respect of persons is a sin?

(2) Whether it takes place in the dispensation of spiritualities?

(3) Whether it takes place in showing honor?

(4) Whether it takes place in judicial sentences?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 63, Art. 1]

Whether Respect of Persons Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that respect of persons is not a sin. For the word "person" includes
a reference to personal dignity [*Cf. I, Q. 29, A. 3, ad 2]. Now it belongs to distributive
justice to consider personal dignity. Therefore respect of persons is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, in human affairs persons are of more importance than things, since things
are for the benefit of persons and not conversely. But respect of things is not a sin. Much
less, therefore, is respect of persons.

Obj. 3: Further, no injustice or sin can be in God. Yet God seems to respect persons, since
of two men circumstanced alike He sometimes upraises one by grace, and leaves the other in
sin, according to Matt. 24:40: "Two shall be in a bed [Vulg.: 'field'] [*'Bed' is the reading
of Luke 17:34], one shall be taken, and one shall be left." Therefore respect of persons is
not a sin.

On the contrary, Nothing but sin is forbidden in the Divine law. Now respect of persons is
forbidden, Deut. 1:17: "Neither shall you respect any man's person." Therefore respect of persons
is a sin.

I answer that, Respect of persons is opposed to distributive justice. For the equality of distributive
justice consists in allotting various things to various persons in proportion to their personal
dignity. Accordingly, if one considers that personal property by reason of which the thing
allotted to a particular person is due to him, this is respect not of the person but of the
cause. Hence a gloss on Eph. 6:9, "There is no respect of persons with God [Vulg.: 'Him'],"
says that "a just judge regards causes, not persons." For instance if you promote a man to
a professorship on account of his having sufficient knowledge, you consider the due cause,
not the person; but if, in conferring something on someone, you consider in him not the fact
that what you give him is proportionate or due to him, but the fact that he is this particular
man (e.g. Peter or Martin), then there is respect of the person, since you give him something
not for some cause that renders him worthy of it, but simply because he is this person. And
any circumstance that does not amount to a reason why this man be worthy of this gift, is to
be referred to his person: for instance if a man promote someone to a prelacy or a professorship,
because he is rich or because he is a relative of his, it is respect of persons. It may happen,
however, that a circumstance of person makes a man worthy as regards one thing, but not as
regards another: thus consanguinity makes a man worthy to be appointed heir to an estate, but
not to be chosen for a position of ecclesiastical authority: wherefore consideration of the
same circumstance of person will amount to respect of persons in one matter and not in another.
It follows, accordingly, that respect of persons is opposed to distributive justice in that
it fails to observe due proportion. Now nothing but sin is opposed to virtue: and therefore
respect of persons is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: In distributive justice we consider those circumstances of a person which result
in dignity or right, whereas in respect of persons we consider circumstances that do not so result.

Reply Obj. 2: Persons are rendered proportionate to and worthy of things which are distributed
among them, by reason of certain things pertaining to circumstances of person, wherefore such
conditions ought to be considered as the proper cause. But when we consider the persons themselves,
that which is not a cause is considered as though it were; and so it is clear that although
persons are more worthy, absolutely speaking, yet they are not more worthy in this regard.

Reply Obj. 3: There is a twofold giving. One belongs to justice, and occurs when we give a
man his due: in such like givings respect of persons takes place. The other giving belongs
to liberality, when one gives gratis that which is not a man's due: such is the bestowal of
the gifts of grace, whereby sinners are chosen by God. In such a giving there is no place for
respect of persons, because anyone may, without injustice, give of his own as much as he will,
and to whom he will, according to Matt. 20:14, 15, "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will?
. . . Take what is thine, and go thy way."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 63, Art. 2]

Whether Respect of Persons Takes Place in the Dispensation of Spiritual Goods?

Objection 1: It would seem that respect of persons does not take place in the dispensation
of spiritual goods. For it would seem to savor of respect of persons if a man confers ecclesiastical
dignity or benefice on account of consanguinity, since consanguinity is not a cause whereby
a man is rendered worthy of an ecclesiastical benefice. Yet this apparently is not a sin, for
ecclesiastical prelates are wont to do so. Therefore the sin of respect of persons does not
take place in the conferring of spiritual goods.

Obj. 2: Further, to give preference to a rich man rather than to a poor man seems to pertain
to respect of persons, according to James 2:2, 3. Nevertheless dispensations to marry within
forbidden degrees are more readily granted to the rich and powerful than to others. Therefore
the sin of respect of persons seems not to take place in the dispensation of spiritual goods.

Obj. 3: Further, according to jurists [*Cap. Cum dilectus.] it suffices to choose a good man,
and it is not requisite that one choose the better man. But it would seem to savor of respect
of persons to choose one who is less good for a higher position. Therefore respect of persons
is not a sin in spiritual matters.

Obj. 4: Further, according to the law of the Church (Cap. Cum dilectus.) the person to be chosen
should be "a member of the flock." Now this would seem to imply respect of persons, since sometimes
more competent persons would be found elsewhere. Therefore respect of persons is not a sin
in spiritual matters.

On the contrary, It is written (James 2:1): "Have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ .
. . with respect of persons." On these words a gloss of Augustine says: "Who is there that
would tolerate the promotion of a rich man to a position of honor in the Church, to the exclusion
of a poor man more learned and holier?" [*Augustine, Ep. ad Hieron. clxvii.]

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), respect of persons is a sin, in so far as it is contrary
to justice. Now the graver the matter in which justice is transgressed, the more grievous the
sin: so that, spiritual things being of greater import than temporal, respect of persons is
a more grievous sin in dispensing spiritualities than in dispensing temporalities. And since
it is respect of persons when something is allotted to a person out of proportion to his deserts,
it must be observed that a person's worthiness may be considered in two ways. First, simply
and absolutely: and in this way the man who abounds the more in the spiritual gifts of grace
is the more worthy. Secondly, in relation to the common good; for it happens at times that
the less holy and less learned man may conduce more to the common good, on account of worldly
authority or activity, or something of the kind. And since the dispensation of spiritualities
is directed chiefly to the common good, according to 1 Cor. 12:7, "The manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every man unto profit," it follows that in the dispensation of spiritualities
the simply less good are sometimes preferred to the better, without respect of persons, just
as God sometimes bestows gratuitous graces on the less worthy.

Reply Obj. 1: We must make a distinction with regard to a prelate's kinsfolk: for sometimes
they are less worthy, both absolutely speaking, and in relation to the common good: and then
if they are preferred to the more worthy, there is a sin of respect of persons in the dispensation
of spiritual goods, whereof the ecclesiastical superior is not the owner, with power to give
them away as he will, but the dispenser, according to 1 Cor. 4:1, "Let a man so account of
us as of the ministers of Christ, and the dispensers of the mysteries of God." Sometimes however
the prelate's kinsfolk are as worthy as others, and then without respect of persons he can
lawfully give preference to his kindred since there is at least this advantage, that he can
trust the more in their being of one mind with him in conducting the business of the Church.
Yet he would have to forego so doing for fear of scandal, if anyone might take an example from
him and give the goods of the Church to their kindred without regard to their deserts.

Reply Obj. 2: Dispensations for contracting marriage came into use for the purpose of strengthening
treaties of peace: and this is more necessary for the common good in relation to persons of
standing, so that there is no respect of persons in granting dispensations more readily to
such persons.

Reply Obj. 3: In order that an election be not rebutted in a court of law, it suffices to elect
a good man, nor is it necessary to elect the better man, because otherwise every election might
have a flaw. But as regards the conscience of an elector, it is necessary to elect one who
is better, either absolutely speaking, or in relation to the common good. For if it is possible
to have one who is more competent for a post, and yet another be preferred, it is necessary
to have some cause for this. If this cause have anything to do with the matter in point, he
who is elected will, in this respect, be more competent; and if that which is taken for cause
have nothing to do with the matter, it will clearly be respect of persons.

Reply Obj. 4: The man who is taken from among the members of a particular Church, is generally
speaking more useful as regards the common good, since he loves more the Church wherein he
was brought up. For this reason it was commanded (Deut. 17:15): "Thou mayest not make a man
of another nation king, who is not thy brother."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 63, Art. 3]

Whether Respect of Persons Takes Place in Showing Honor and Respect?

Objection 1: It would seem that respect of persons does not take place in showing honor and
respect. For honor is apparently nothing else than "reverence shown to a person in recognition
of his virtue," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. i, 5). Now prelates and princes should be
honored although they be wicked, even as our parents, of whom it is written (Ex. 20:12): "Honor
thy father and thy mother." Again masters, though they be wicked, should be honored by their
servants, according to 1 Tim. 6:1: "Whoever are servants under the yoke, let them count their
masters worthy of all honor." Therefore it seems that it is not a sin to respect persons in
showing honor.

Obj. 2: Further, it is commanded (Lev. 19:32): "Rise up before the hoary head, and, honor the
person of the aged man." But this seems to savor of respect of persons, since sometimes old
men are not virtuous; according to Dan. 13:5: "Iniquity came out from the ancients of the people
[*Vulg.: 'Iniquity came out of Babylon from the ancient judges, that seemed to govern the people.']."
Therefore it is not a sin to respect persons in showing honor.

Obj. 3: Further, on the words of James 2:1, "Have not the faith . . . with respect of persons,"
a gloss of Augustine [*Ep. ad Hieron. clxvii.] says: "If the saying of James, 'If there shall
come into your assembly a man having a golden ring,' etc., refer to our daily meetings, who
sins not here, if however he sin at all?" Yet it is respect of persons to honor the rich for
their riches, for Gregory says in a homily (xxviii in Evang.): "Our pride is blunted, since
in men we honor, not the nature wherein they are made to God's image, but wealth," so that,
wealth not being a due cause of honor, this will savor of respect of persons. Therefore it
is not a sin to respect persons in showing honor.

On the contrary, A gloss on James 2:1, says: "Whoever honors the rich for their riches, sins,"
and in like manner, if a man be honored for other causes that do not render him worthy of honor.
Now this savors of respect of persons. Therefore it is a sin to respect persons in showing honor.

I answer that, To honor a person is to recognize him as having virtue, wherefore virtue alone
is the due cause of a person being honored. Now it is to be observed that a person may be honored
not only for his own virtue, but also for another's: thus princes and prelates, although they
be wicked, are honored as standing in God's place, and as representing the community over which
they are placed, according to Prov. 26:8, "As he that casteth a stone into the heap of Mercury,
so is he that giveth honor to a fool." For, since the gentiles ascribed the keeping of accounts
to Mercury, "the heap of Mercury" signifies the casting up of an account, when a merchant sometimes
substitutes a pebble [*Lapillus or calculus whence the English word 'calculate'] for one hundred
marks. So too, is a fool honored if he stand in God's place or represent the whole community:
and in the same way parents and masters should be honored, on account of their having a share
of the dignity of God Who is the Father and Lord of all. The aged should be honored, because
old age is a sign of virtue, though this sign fail at times: wherefore, according to Wis. 4:8,
9, "venerable old age is not that of long time, nor counted by the number of years; but the
understanding of a man is gray hairs, and a spotless life is old age." The rich ought to be
honored by reason of their occupying a higher position in the community: but if they be honored
merely for their wealth, it will be the sin of respect of persons.

Hence the Replies to the Objections are clear.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 63, Art. 4]

Whether the Sin of Respect of Persons Takes Place in Judicial Sentences?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of respect of persons does not take place in judicial
sentences. For respect of persons is opposed to distributive justice, as stated above (A. 1):
whereas judicial sentences seem to pertain chiefly to commutative justice. Therefore respect
of persons does not take place in judicial sentences.

Obj. 2: Further, penalties are inflicted according to a sentence. Now it is not a sin to respect
persons in pronouncing penalties, since a heavier punishment is inflicted on one who injures
the person of a prince than on one who injures the person of others. Therefore respect of persons
does not take place in judicial sentences.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 4:10): "In judging be merciful to the fatherless."
But this seems to imply respect of the person of the needy. Therefore in judicial sentences
respect of persons is not a sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 18:5): "It is not good to accept the person in judgment
[*Vulg.: 'It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to decline from the truth of judgment.']."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 60, A. 1), judgment is an act of justice, in as much as
the judge restores to the equality of justice, those things which may cause an opposite inequality.
Now respect of persons involves a certain inequality, in so far as something is allotted to
a person out of that proportion to him in which the equality of justice consists. Wherefore
it is evident that judgment is rendered corrupt by respect of persons.

Reply Obj. 1: A judgment may be looked at in two ways. First, in view of the thing judged,
and in this way judgment is common to commutative and distributive justice: because it may
be decided by judgment how some common good is to be distributed among many, and how one person
is to restore to another what he has taken from him. Secondly, it may be considered in view
of the form of judgment, in as much as, even in commutative justice, the judge takes from one
and gives to another, and this belongs to distributive justice. In this way respect of persons
may take place in any judgment.

Reply Obj. 2: When a person is more severely punished on account of a crime committed against
a greater person, there is no respect of persons, because the very difference of persons causes,
in that case, a diversity of things, as stated above (Q. 58, A. 10, ad 3; Q. 61, A. 2, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 3: In pronouncing judgment one ought to succor the needy as far as possible, yet
without prejudice to justice: else the saying of Ex. 23:3 would apply: "Neither shalt thou
favor a poor man in judgment."

QUESTION 64

OF MURDER (In Eight Articles)

In due sequence we must consider the vices opposed to commutative justice. We must consider
(1) those sins that are committed in relation to involuntary commutations; (2) those that are
committed with regard to voluntary commutations. Sins are committed in relation to involuntary
commutations by doing an injury to one's neighbor against his will: and this can be done in
two ways, namely by deed or by word. By deed when one's neighbor is injured either in his own
person, or in a person connected with him, or in his possessions.

We must therefore consider these points in due order, and in the first place we shall consider
murder whereby a man inflicts the greatest injury on his neighbor. Under this head there are
eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is a sin to kill dumb animals or even plants?

(2) Whether it is lawful to kill a sinner?

(3) Whether this is lawful to a private individual, or to a public person only?

(4) Whether this is lawful to a cleric?

(5) Whether it is lawful to kill oneself?

(6) Whether it is lawful to kill a just man?

(7) Whether it is lawful to kill a man in self-defense?

(8) Whether accidental homicide is a mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Unlawful to Kill Any Living Thing?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to kill any living thing. For the Apostle says (Rom. Now
Divine providence has ordained that all living things should be preserved, according to Ps.
146:8, 9, "Who maketh grass to grow on the mountains . . . Who giveth to beasts their food."
Therefore it seems unlawful to take the life of any living thing.

Obj. 2: Further, murder is a sin because it deprives a man of life. Now life is common to all
animals and plants. Hence for the same reason it is apparently a sin to slay dumb animals and
plants.

Obj. 3: Further, in the Divine law a special punishment is not appointed save for a sin. Now
a special punishment had to be inflicted, according to the Divine law, on one who killed another
man's ox or sheep (Ex. 22:1). Therefore the slaying of dumb animals is a sin.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 20): "When we hear it said, 'Thou shalt not
kill,' we do not take it as referring to trees, for they have no sense, nor to irrational animals,
because they have no fellowship with us. Hence it follows that the words, 'Thou shalt not kill'
refer to the killing of a man."

I answer that, There is no sin in using a thing for the purpose for which it is. Now the order
of things is such that the imperfect are for the perfect, even as in the process of generation
nature proceeds from imperfection to perfection. Hence it is that just as in the generation
of a man there is first a living thing, then an animal, and lastly a man, so too things, like
the plants, which merely have life, are all alike for animals, and all animals are for man.
Wherefore it is not unlawful if man use plants for the good of animals, and animals for the
good of man, as the Philosopher states (Polit. i, 3).

Now the most necessary use would seem to consist in the fact that animals use plants, and men
use animals, for food, and this cannot be done unless these be deprived of life: wherefore
it is lawful both to take life from plants for the use of animals, and from animals for the
use of men. In fact this is in keeping with the commandment of God Himself: for it is written
(Gen. 1:29, 30): "Behold I have given you every herb . . . and all trees . . . to be your meat,
and to all beasts of the earth": and again (Gen. 9:3): "Everything that moveth and liveth shall
be meat to you."

Reply Obj. 1: According to the Divine ordinance the life of animals and plants is preserved
not for themselves but for man. Hence, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 20), "by a most just
ordinance of the Creator, both their life and their death are subject to our use."

Reply Obj. 2: Dumb animals and plants are devoid of the life of reason whereby to set themselves
in motion; they are moved, as it were by another, by a kind of natural impulse, a sign of which
is that they are naturally enslaved and accommodated to the uses of others.

Reply Obj. 3: He that kills another's ox, sins, not through killing the ox, but through injuring
another man in his property. Wherefore this is not a species of the sin of murder but of the
sin of theft or robbery.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful to Kill Sinners?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to kill men who have sinned. For our Lord in the parable
(Matt. 13) forbade the uprooting of the cockle which denotes wicked men according to a gloss.
Now whatever is forbidden by God is a sin. Therefore it is a sin to kill a sinner.

Obj. 2: Further, human justice is conformed to Divine justice. Now according to Divine justice
sinners are kept back for repentance, according to Ezech. 33:11, "I desire not the death of
the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live." Therefore it seems altogether
unjust to kill sinners.

Obj. 3: Further, it is not lawful, for any good end whatever, to do that which is evil in itself,
according to Augustine (Contra Mendac. vii) and the Philosopher (Ethic. ii, 6). Now to kill
a man is evil in itself, since we are bound to have charity towards all men, and "we wish our
friends to live and to exist," according to Ethic. ix, 4. Therefore it is nowise lawful to
kill a man who has sinned.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), it is lawful to kill dumb animals, in so far as they
are naturally directed to man's use, as the imperfect is directed to the perfect. Now every
part is directed to the whole, as imperfect to perfect, wherefore every part is naturally for
the sake of the whole. For this reason we observe that if the health of the whole body demands
the excision of a member, through its being decayed or infectious to the other members, it
will be both praiseworthy and advantageous to have it cut away. Now every individual person
is compared to the whole community, as part to whole. Therefore if a man be dangerous and infectious
to the community, on account of some sin, it is praiseworthy and advantageous that he be killed
in order to safeguard the common good, since "a little leaven corrupteth the whole lump" (1
Cor. 5:6).

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord commanded them to forbear from uprooting the cockle in order to spare
the wheat, i.e. the good. This occurs when the wicked cannot be slain without the good being
killed with them, either because the wicked lie hidden among the good, or because they have
many followers, so that they cannot be killed without danger to the good, as Augustine says
(Contra Parmen. iii, 2). Wherefore our Lord teaches that we should rather allow the wicked
to live, and that vengeance is to be delayed until the last judgment, rather than that the
good be put to death together with the wicked. When, however, the good incur no danger, but
rather are protected and saved by the slaying of the wicked, then the latter may be lawfully
put to death.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the order of His wisdom, God sometimes slays sinners forthwith in
order to deliver the good, whereas sometimes He allows them time to repent, according as He
knows what is expedient for His elect. This also does human justice imitate according to its
powers; for it puts to death those who are dangerous to others, while it allows time for repentance
to those who sin without grievously harming others.

Reply Obj. 3: By sinning man departs from the order of reason, and consequently falls away
from the dignity of his manhood, in so far as he is naturally free, and exists for himself,
and he falls into the slavish state of the beasts, by being disposed of according as he is
useful to others. This is expressed in Ps. 48:21: "Man, when he was in honor, did not understand;
he hath been compared to senseless beasts, and made like to them," and Prov. 11:29: "The fool
shall serve the wise." Hence, although it be evil in itself to kill a man so long as he preserve
his dignity, yet it may be good to kill a man who has sinned, even as it is to kill a beast.
For a bad man is worse than a beast, and is more harmful, as the Philosopher states (Polit.
i, 1 and Ethic. vii, 6).

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Lawful for a Private Individual to Kill a Man Who Has Sinned?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for a private individual to kill a man who has sinned. For
nothing unlawful is commanded in the Divine law. Yet, on account of the sin of the molten calf,
Moses commanded (Ex. 32:27): "Let every man kill his brother, and friend, and neighbor." Therefore
it is lawful for private individuals to kill a sinner.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (A. 2, ad 3), man, on account of sin, is compared to the beasts.
Now it is lawful for any private individual to kill a wild beast, especially if it be harmful.
Therefore for the same reason, it is lawful for any private individual to kill a man who has
sinned.

Obj. 3: Further, a man, though a private individual, deserves praise for doing what is useful
for the common good. Now the slaying of evildoers is useful for the common good, as stated
above (A. 2). Therefore it is deserving of praise if even private individuals kill evil-doers.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i) [*Can. Quicumque percutit, caus. xxiii, qu.
8]: "A man who, without exercising public authority, kills an evil-doer, shall be judged guilty
of murder, and all the more, since he has dared to usurp a power which God has not given him."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), it is lawful to kill an evildoer in so far as it is
directed to the welfare of the whole community, so that it belongs to him alone who has charge
of the community's welfare. Thus it belongs to a physician to cut off a decayed limb, when
he has been entrusted with the care of the health of the whole body. Now the care of the common
good is entrusted to persons of rank having public authority: wherefore they alone, and not
private individuals, can lawfully put evildoers to death.

Reply Obj. 1: The person by whose authority a thing is done really does the thing as Dionysius
declares (Coel. Hier. iii). Hence according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei i, 21), "He slays not
who owes his service to one who commands him, even as a sword is merely the instrument to him
that wields it." Wherefore those who, at the Lord's command, slew their neighbors and friends,
would seem not to have done this themselves, but rather He by whose authority they acted thus:
just as a soldier slays the foe by the authority of his sovereign, and the executioner slays
the robber by the authority of the judge.

Reply Obj. 2: A beast is by nature distinct from man, wherefore in the case of a wild beast
there is no need for an authority to kill it; whereas, in the case of domestic animals, such
authority is required, not for their sake, but on account of the owner's loss. On the other
hand a man who has sinned is not by nature distinct from good men; hence a public authority
is requisite in order to condemn him to death for the common good.

Reply Obj. 3: It is lawful for any private individual to do anything for the common good, provided
it harm nobody: but if it be harmful to some other, it cannot be done, except by virtue of
the judgment of the person to whom it pertains to decide what is to be taken from the parts
for the welfare of the whole.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Lawful for Clerics to Kill Evil-doers?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for clerics to kill evil-doers. Now the very God whom we
worship puts evildoers to death, according to Ps. 135:10, "Who smote Egypt with their firstborn."
Again Moses made the Levites slay twenty-three thousand men on account of the worship of the
calf (Ex. 32), the priest Phinees slew the Israelite who went in to the woman of Madian (Num.
25), Samuel killed Agag king of Amalec (1 Kings 15), Elias slew the priests of Baal (3 Kings
18), Mathathias killed the man who went up to the altar to sacrifice (1 Mac. 2); and, in the
New Testament, Peter killed Ananias and Saphira (Acts 5). Therefore it seems that even clerics
may kill evil-doers.

Obj. 2: Further, spiritual power is greater than the secular and is more united to God. Now
the secular power as "God's minister" lawfully puts evil-doers to death, according to Rom.
13:4. Much more therefore may clerics, who are God's ministers and have spiritual power, put
evil-doers to death.

Obj. 3: Further, whosoever lawfully accepts an office, may lawfully exercise the functions
of that office. Now it belongs to the princely office to slay evildoers, as stated above (A.
3). Therefore those clerics who are earthly princes may lawfully slay malefactors.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Tim. 3:2, 3): "It behooveth . . . a bishop to be without
crime [*Vulg.: 'blameless.' 'Without crime' is the reading in Tit. 1:7] . . . not given to
wine, no striker."

I answer that, It is unlawful for clerics to kill, for two reasons. First, because they are
chosen for the ministry of the altar, whereon is represented the Passion of Christ slain "Who,
when He was struck did not strike [Vulg.: 'When He suffered, He threatened not']" (1 Pet. 2:23).
Therefore it becomes not clerics to strike or kill: for ministers should imitate their master,
according to Ecclus. 10:2, "As the judge of the people is himself, so also are his ministers."
The other reason is because clerics are entrusted with the ministry of the New Law, wherein
no punishment of death or of bodily maiming is appointed: wherefore they should abstain from
such things in order that they may be fitting ministers of the New Testament.

Reply Obj. 1: God works in all things without exception whatever is right, yet in each one
according to its mode. Wherefore everyone should imitate God in that which is specially becoming
to him. Hence, though God slays evildoers even corporally, it does not follow that all should
imitate Him in this. As regards Peter, he did not put Ananias and Saphira to death by his own
authority or with his own hand, but published their death sentence pronounced by God. The Priests
or Levites of the Old Testament were the ministers of the Old Law, which appointed corporal
penalties, so that it was fitting for them to slay with their own hands.

Reply Obj. 2: The ministry of clerics is concerned with better things than corporal slayings,
namely with things pertaining to spiritual welfare, and so it is not fitting for them to meddle
with minor matters.

Reply Obj. 3: Ecclesiastical prelates accept the office of earthly princes, not that they may
inflict capital punishment themselves, but that this may be carried into effect by others in
virtue of their authority.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 5]

Whether It Is Lawful to Kill Oneself?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for a man to kill himself. For murder is a sin in so far
as it is contrary to justice. But no man can do an injustice to himself, as is proved in Ethic.
v, 11. Therefore no man sins by killing himself.

Obj. 2: Further, it is lawful, for one who exercises public authority, to kill evil-doers.
Now he who exercises public authority is sometimes an evil-doer. Therefore he may lawfully
kill himself.

Obj. 3: Further, it is lawful for a man to suffer spontaneously a lesser danger that he may
avoid a greater: thus it is lawful for a man to cut off a decayed limb even from himself, that
he may save his whole body. Now sometimes a man, by killing himself, avoids a greater evil,
for example an unhappy life, or the shame of sin. Therefore a man may kill himself.

Obj. 4: Further, Samson killed himself, as related in Judges 16, and yet he is numbered among
the saints (Heb. 11). Therefore it is lawful for a man to kill himself.

Obj. 5: Further, it is related (2 Mac. 14:42) that a certain Razias killed himself, "choosing
to die nobly rather than to fall into the hands of the wicked, and to suffer abuses unbecoming
his noble birth." Now nothing that is done nobly and bravely is unlawful. Therefore suicide
is not unlawful.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 20): "Hence it follows that the words 'Thou
shalt not kill' refer to the killing of a man--not another man; therefore, not even thyself.
For he who kills himself, kills nothing else than a man."

I answer that, It is altogether unlawful to kill oneself, for three reasons. First, because
everything naturally loves itself, the result being that everything naturally keeps itself
in being, and resists corruptions so far as it can. Wherefore suicide is contrary to the inclination
of nature, and to charity whereby every man should love himself. Hence suicide is always a
mortal sin, as being contrary to the natural law and to charity. Secondly, because every part,
as such, belongs to the whole. Now every man is part of the community, and so, as such, he
belongs to the community. Hence by killing himself he injures the community, as the Philosopher
declares (Ethic. v, 11). Thirdly, because life is God's gift to man, and is subject to His
power, Who kills and makes to live. Hence whoever takes his own life, sins against God, even
as he who kills another's slave, sins against that slave's master, and as he who usurps to
himself judgment of a matter not entrusted to him. For it belongs to God alone to pronounce
sentence of death and life, according to Deut. 32:39, "I will kill and I will make to live."

Reply Obj. 1: Murder is a sin, not only because it is contrary to justice, but also because
it is opposed to charity which a man should have towards himself: in this respect suicide is
a sin in relation to oneself. In relation to the community and to God, it is sinful, by reason
also of its opposition to justice.

Reply Obj. 2: One who exercises public authority may lawfully put to death an evil-doer, since
he can pass judgment on him. But no man is judge of himself. Wherefore it is not lawful for
one who exercises public authority to put himself to death for any sin whatever: although he
may lawfully commit himself to the judgment of others.

Reply Obj. 3: Man is made master of himself through his free-will: wherefore he can lawfully
dispose of himself as to those matters which pertain to this life which is ruled by man's free-will.
But the passage from this life to another and happier one is subject not to man's free-will
but to the power of God. Hence it is not lawful for man to take his own life that he may pass
to a happier life, nor that he may escape any unhappiness whatsoever of the present life, because
the ultimate and most fearsome evil of this life is death, as the Philosopher states (Ethic.
iii, 6). Therefore to bring death upon oneself in order to escape the other afflictions of
this life, is to adopt a greater evil in order to avoid a lesser. In like manner it is unlawful
to take one's own life on account of one's having committed a sin, both because by so doing
one does oneself a very great injury, by depriving oneself of the time needful for repentance,
and because it is not lawful to slay an evildoer except by the sentence of the public authority.
Again it is unlawful for a woman to kill herself lest she be violated, because she ought not
to commit on herself the very great sin of suicide, to avoid the lesser sin of another. For
she commits no sin in being violated by force, provided she does not consent, since "without
consent of the mind there is no stain on the body," as the Blessed Lucy declared. Now it is
evident that fornication and adultery are less grievous sins than taking a man's, especially
one's own, life: since the latter is most grievous, because one injures oneself, to whom one
owes the greatest love. Moreover it is most dangerous since no time is left wherein to expiate
it by repentance. Again it is not lawful for anyone to take his own life for fear he should
consent to sin, because "evil must not be done that good may come" (Rom. 3:8) or that evil
may be avoided especially if the evil be of small account and an uncertain event, for it is
uncertain whether one will at some future time consent to a sin, since God is able to deliver
man from sin under any temptation whatever.

Reply Obj. 4: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 21), "not even Samson is to be excused that
he crushed himself together with his enemies under the ruins of the house, except the Holy
Ghost, Who had wrought many wonders through him, had secretly commanded him to do this." He
assigns the same reason in the case of certain holy women, who at the time of persecution took
their own lives, and who are commemorated by the Church.

Reply Obj. 5: It belongs to fortitude that a man does not shrink from being slain by another,
for the sake of the good of virtue, and that he may avoid sin. But that a man take his own
life in order to avoid penal evils has indeed an appearance of fortitude (for which reason
some, among whom was Razias, have killed themselves thinking to act from fortitude), yet it
is not true fortitude, but rather a weakness of soul unable to bear penal evils, as the Philosopher
(Ethic. iii, 7) and Augustine (De Civ. Dei 22, 23) declare.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 6]

Whether It Is Lawful to Kill the Innocent?

Objection 1: It would seem that in some cases it is lawful to kill the innocent. The fear of
God is never manifested by sin, since on the contrary "the fear of the Lord driveth out sin"
(Ecclus. 1:27). Now Abraham was commended in that he feared the Lord, since he was willing
to slay his innocent son. Therefore one may, without sin, kill an innocent person.

Obj. 2: Further, among those sins that are committed against one's neighbor, the more grievous
seem to be those whereby a more grievous injury is inflicted on the person sinned against.
Now to be killed is a greater injury to a sinful than to an innocent person, because the latter,
by death, passes forthwith from the unhappiness of this life to the glory of heaven. Since
then it is lawful in certain cases to kill a sinful man, much more is it lawful to slay an
innocent or a righteous person.

Obj. 3: Further, what is done in keeping with the order of justice is not a sin. But sometimes
a man is forced, according to the order of justice, to slay an innocent person: for instance,
when a judge, who is bound to judge according to the evidence, condemns to death a man whom
he knows to be innocent but who is convicted by false witnesses; and again the executioner,
who in obedience to the judge puts to death the man who has been unjustly sentenced.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 23:7): "The innocent and just person thou shalt not put
to death."

I answer that, An individual man may be considered in two ways: first, in himself; secondly,
in relation to something else. If we consider a man in himself, it is unlawful to kill any
man, since in every man though he be sinful, we ought to love the nature which God has made,
and which is destroyed by slaying him. Nevertheless, as stated above (A. 2) the slaying of
a sinner becomes lawful in relation to the common good, which is corrupted by sin. On the other
hand the life of righteous men preserves and forwards the common good, since they are the chief
part of the community. Therefore it is in no way lawful to slay the innocent.

Reply Obj. 1: God is Lord of death and life, for by His decree both the sinful and the righteous
die. Hence he who at God's command kills an innocent man does not sin, as neither does God
Whose behest he executes: indeed his obedience to God's commands is a proof that he fears Him.

Reply Obj. 2: In weighing the gravity of a sin we must consider the essential rather than the
accidental. Wherefore he who kills a just man, sins more grievously than he who slays a sinful
man: first, because he injures one whom he should love more, and so acts more in opposition
to charity: secondly, because he inflicts an injury on a man who is less deserving of one,
and so acts more in opposition to justice: thirdly, because he deprives the community of a
greater good: fourthly, because he despises God more, according to Luke 10:16, "He that despiseth
you despiseth Me." On the other hand it is accidental to the slaying that the just man whose
life is taken be received by God into glory.

Reply Obj. 3: If the judge knows that a man who has been convicted by false witnesses, is innocent
he must, like Daniel, examine the witnesses with great care, so as to find a motive for acquitting
the innocent: but if he cannot do this he should remit him for judgment by a higher tribunal.
If even this is impossible, he does not sin if he pronounce sentence in accordance with the
evidence, for it is not he that puts the innocent man to death, but they who stated him to
be guilty. He that carries out the sentence of the judge who has condemned an innocent man,
if the sentence contains an inexcusable error, he should not obey, else there would be an excuse
for the executions of the martyrs: if however it contain no manifest injustice, he does not
sin by carrying out the sentence, because he has no right to discuss the judgment of his superior;
nor is it he who slays the innocent man, but the judge whose minister he is.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 7]

Whether It Is Lawful to Kill a Man in Self-defense?

Objection 1: It would seem that nobody may lawfully kill a man in self-defense. For Augustine
says to Publicola (Ep. xlvii): "I do not agree with the opinion that one may kill a man lest
one be killed by him; unless one be a soldier, exercise a public office, so that one does it
not for oneself but for others, having the power to do so, provided it be in keeping with one's
person." Now he who kills a man in self-defense, kills him lest he be killed by him. Therefore
this would seem to be unlawful.

Obj. 2: Further, he says (De Lib. Arb. i, 5): "How are they free from sin in sight of Divine
providence, who are guilty of taking a man's life for the sake of these contemptible things?"
Now among contemptible things he reckons "those which men may forfeit unwillingly," as appears
from the context (De Lib. Arb. i, 5): and the chief of these is the life of the body. Therefore
it is unlawful for any man to take another's life for the sake of the life of his own body.

Obj. 3: Further, Pope Nicolas [*Nicolas I, Dist. 1, can. De his clericis] says in the Decretals:
"Concerning the clerics about whom you have consulted Us, those, namely, who have killed a
pagan in self-defense, as to whether, after making amends by repenting, they may return to
their former state, or rise to a higher degree; know that in no case is it lawful for them
to kill any man under any circumstances whatever." Now clerics and laymen are alike bound to
observe the moral precepts. Therefore neither is it lawful for laymen to kill anyone in self-defense.

Obj. 4: Further, murder is a more grievous sin than fornication or adultery. Now nobody may
lawfully commit simple fornication or adultery or any other mortal sin in order to save his
own life; since the spiritual life is to be preferred to the life of the body. Therefore no
man may lawfully take another's life in self-defense in order to save his own life.

Obj. 5: Further, if the tree be evil, so is the fruit, according to Matt. 7:17. Now self-defense
itself seems to be unlawful, according to Rom. 12:19: "Not defending [Douay: 'revenging'] yourselves,
my dearly beloved." Therefore its result, which is the slaying of a man, is also unlawful.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 22:2): "If a thief be found breaking into a house or undermining
it, and be wounded so as to die; he that slew him shall not be guilty of blood." Now it is
much more lawful to defend one's life than one's house. Therefore neither is a man guilty of
murder if he kill another in defense of his own life.

I answer that, Nothing hinders one act from having two effects, only one of which is intended,
while the other is beside the intention. Now moral acts take their species according to what
is intended, and not according to what is beside the intention, since this is accidental as
explained above (Q. 43, A. 3; I-II, Q. 12, A. 1). Accordingly the act of self-defense may have
two effects, one is the saving of one's life, the other is the slaying of the aggressor. Therefore
this act, since one's intention is to save one's own life, is not unlawful, seeing that it
is natural to everything to keep itself in being, as far as possible. And yet, though proceeding
from a good intention, an act may be rendered unlawful, if it be out of proportion to the end.
Wherefore if a man, in self-defense, uses more than necessary violence, it will be unlawful:
whereas if he repel force with moderation his defense will be lawful, because according to
the jurists [*Cap. Significasti, De Homicid. volunt. vel casual.], "it is lawful to repel force
by force, provided one does not exceed the limits of a blameless defense." Nor is it necessary
for salvation that a man omit the act of moderate self-defense in order to avoid killing the
other man, since one is bound to take more care of one's own life than of another's. But as
it is unlawful to take a man's life, except for the public authority acting for the common
good, as stated above (A. 3), it is not lawful for a man to intend killing a man in self-defense,
except for such as have public authority, who while intending to kill a man in self-defense,
refer this to the public good, as in the case of a soldier fighting against the foe, and in
the minister of the judge struggling with robbers, although even these sin if they be moved
by private animosity.

Reply Obj. 1: The words quoted from Augustine refer to the case when one man intends to kill
another to save himself from death. The passage quoted in the Second Objection is to be understood
in the same sense. Hence he says pointedly, "for the sake of these things," whereby he indicates
the intention. This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: Irregularity results from the act though sinless of taking a man's life, as appears
in the case of a judge who justly condemns a man to death. For this reason a cleric, though
he kill a man in self-defense, is irregular, albeit he intends not to kill him, but to defend
himself.

Reply Obj. 4: The act of fornication or adultery is not necessarily directed to the preservation
of one's own life, as is the act whence sometimes results the taking of a man's life.

Reply Obj. 5: The defense forbidden in this passage is that which comes from revengeful spite.
Hence a gloss says: "Not defending yourselves--that is, not striking your enemy back."

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 64, Art. 8]

Whether One Is Guilty of Murder Through Killing Someone by Chance?

Objection 1: It would seem that one is guilty of murder through killing someone by chance.
For we read (Gen. 4:23, 24) that Lamech slew a man in mistake for a wild beast [*The text of
the Bible does not say so, but this was the Jewish traditional commentary on Gen. 4:23], and
that he was accounted guilty of murder. Therefore one incurs the guilt of murder through killing
a man by chance.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ex. 21:22): "If . . . one strike a woman with child, and she
miscarry indeed . . . if her death ensue thereupon, he shall render life for life." Yet this
may happen without any intention of causing her death. Therefore one is guilty of murder through
killing someone by chance.

Obj. 3: Further, the Decretals [*Dist. 1] contain several canons prescribing penalties for
unintentional homicide. Now penalty is not due save for guilt. Therefore he who kills a man
by chance, incurs the guilt of murder.

On the contrary, Augustine says to Publicola (Ep. xlvii): "When we do a thing for a good and
lawful purpose, if thereby we unintentionally cause harm to anyone, it should by no means be
imputed to us." Now it sometimes happens by chance that a person is killed as a result of something
done for a good purpose. Therefore the person who did it is not accounted guilty.

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Phys. ii, 6) "chance is a cause that acts beside
one's intention." Hence chance happenings, strictly speaking, are neither intended nor voluntary.
And since every sin is voluntary, according to Augustine (De Vera Relig. xiv) it follows that
chance happenings, as such, are not sins.

Nevertheless it happens that what is not actually and directly voluntary and intended, is voluntary
and intended accidentally, according as that which removes an obstacle is called an accidental
cause. Wherefore he who does not remove something whence homicide results whereas he ought
to remove it, is in a sense guilty of voluntary homicide. This happens in two ways: first when
a man causes another's death through occupying himself with unlawful things which he ought
to avoid: secondly, when he does not take sufficient care. Hence, according to jurists, if
a man pursue a lawful occupation and take due care, the result being that a person loses his
life, he is not guilty of that person's death: whereas if he be occupied with something unlawful,
or even with something lawful, but without due care, he does not escape being guilty of murder,
if his action results in someone's death.

Reply Obj. 1: Lamech did not take sufficient care to avoid taking a man's life: and so he was
not excused from being guilty of homicide.

Reply Obj. 2: He that strikes a woman with child does something unlawful: wherefore if there
results the death either of the woman or of the animated fetus, he will not be excused from
homicide, especially seeing that death is the natural result of such a blow.

Reply Obj. 3: According to the canons a penalty is inflicted on those who cause death unintentionally,
through doing something unlawful, or failing to take sufficient care.

QUESTION 65

OF OTHER INJURIES COMMITTED ON THE PERSON (In Four Articles)

We must now consider other sinful injuries committed on the person. Under this head there are
four points of inquiry:

(1) The mutilation of members;

(2) Blows;

(3) Imprisonment;

(4) Whether the sins that consist in inflicting such like injuries are aggravated through being
perpetrated on persons connected with others?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 65, Art. 1]

Whether in Some Cases It May Be Lawful to Maim Anyone?

Objection 1: It would seem that in no case can it be lawful to maim anyone. For Damascene says
(De Fide Orth. iv, 20) that "sin consists in departing from what is according to nature, towards
that which is contrary to nature." Now according to nature it is appointed by God that a man's
body should be entire in its members, and it is contrary to nature that it should be deprived
of a member. Therefore it seems that it is always a sin to maim a person.

Obj. 2: Further, as the whole soul is to the whole body, so are the parts of the soul to the
parts of the body (De Anima ii, 1). But it is unlawful to deprive a man of his soul by killing
him, except by public authority. Therefore neither is it lawful to maim anyone, except perhaps
by public authority.

Obj. 3: Further, the welfare of the soul is to be preferred to the welfare of the body. Now
it is not lawful for a man to maim himself for the sake of the soul's welfare: since the council
of Nicea [*P. I, sect. 4, can. i] punished those who castrated themselves that they might preserve
chastity. Therefore it is not lawful for any other reason to maim a person.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex.

I answer that, Since a member is part of the whole human body, it is for the sake of the whole,
as the imperfect for the perfect. Hence a member of the human body is to be disposed of according
as it is expedient for the body. Now a member of the human body is of itself useful to the
good of the whole body, yet, accidentally it may happen to be hurtful, as when a decayed member
is a source of corruption to the whole body. Accordingly so long as a member is healthy and
retains its natural disposition, it cannot be cut off without injury to the whole body. But
as the whole of man is directed as to his end to the whole of the community of which he is
a part, as stated above (Q. 61, A. 1; Q. 64, AA. 2, 5), it may happen that although the removal
of a member may be detrimental to the whole body, it may nevertheless be directed to the good
of the community, in so far as it is applied to a person as a punishment for the purpose of
restraining sin. Hence just as by public authority a person is lawfully deprived of life altogether
on account of certain more heinous sins, so is he deprived of a member on account of certain
lesser sins. But this is not lawful for a private individual, even with the consent of the
owner of the member, because this would involve an injury to the community, to whom the man
and all his parts belong. If, however, the member be decayed and therefore a source of corruption
to the whole body, then it is lawful with the consent of the owner of the member, to cut away
the member for the welfare of the whole body, since each one is entrusted with the care of
his own welfare. The same applies if it be done with the consent of the person whose business
it is to care for the welfare of the person who has a decayed member: otherwise it is altogether
unlawful to maim anyone.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing prevents that which is contrary to a particular nature from being in
harmony with universal nature: thus death and corruption, in the physical order, are contrary
to the particular nature of the thing corrupted, although they are in keeping with universal
nature. In like manner to maim anyone, though contrary to the particular nature of the body
of the person maimed, is nevertheless in keeping with natural reason in relation to the common
good.

Reply Obj. 2: The life of the entire man is not directed to something belonging to man; on
the contrary whatever belongs to man is directed to his life. Hence in no case does it pertain
to a person to take anyone's life, except to the public authority to whom is entrusted the
procuring of the common good. But the removal of a member can be directed to the good of one
man, and consequently in certain cases can pertain to him.

Reply Obj. 3: A member should not be removed for the sake of the bodily health of the whole,
unless otherwise nothing can be done to further the good of the whole. Now it is always possible
to further one's spiritual welfare otherwise than by cutting off a member, because sin is always
subject to the will: and consequently in no case is it allowable to maim oneself, even to avoid
any sin whatever. Hence Chrysostom, in his exposition on Matt. 19:12 (Hom. lxii in Matth.),
"There are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven," says: "Not
by maiming themselves, but by destroying evil thoughts, for a man is accursed who maims himself,
since they are murderers who do such things." And further on he says: "Nor is lust tamed thereby,
on the contrary it becomes more importunate, for the seed springs in us from other sources,
and chiefly from an incontinent purpose and a careless mind: and temptation is curbed not so
much by cutting off a member as by curbing one's thoughts."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 65, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful for Parents to Strike Their Children, or Masters Their Slaves?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for parents to strike their children, or masters their
slaves. For the Apostle says (Eph. 6:4): "You, fathers, provoke not your children to anger";
and further on (Eph. 9:6): "And you, masters, do the same thing to your slaves [Vulg.: 'to
them'] forbearing threatenings." Now some are provoked to anger by blows, and become more troublesome
when threatened. Therefore neither should parents strike their children, nor masters their slaves.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 9) that "a father's words are admonitory and
not coercive." Now blows are a kind of coercion. Therefore it is unlawful for parents to strike
their children.

Obj. 3: Further, everyone is allowed to impart correction, for this belongs to the spiritual
almsdeeds, as stated above (Q. 32, A. 2). If, therefore, it is lawful for parents to strike
their children for the sake of correction, for the same reason it will be lawful for any person
to strike anyone, which is clearly false. Therefore the same conclusion follows.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 13:24): "He that spareth the rod hateth his son," and
further on (Prov. 23:13): "Withhold not correction from a child, for if thou strike him with
the rod, he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and deliver his soul from hell."
Again it is written (Ecclus. 33:28): "Torture and fetters are for a malicious slave."

I answer that, Harm is done a body by striking it, yet not so as when it is maimed: since maiming
destroys the body's integrity, while a blow merely affects the sense with pain, wherefore it
causes much less harm than cutting off a member. Now it is unlawful to do a person a harm,
except by way of punishment in the cause of justice. Again, no man justly punishes another,
except one who is subject to his jurisdiction. Therefore it is not lawful for a man to strike
another, unless he have some power over the one whom he strikes. And since the child is subject
to the power of the parent, and the slave to the power of his master, a parent can lawfully
strike his child, and a master his slave that instruction may be enforced by correction.

Reply Obj. 1: Since anger is a desire for vengeance, it is aroused chiefly when a man deems
himself unjustly injured, as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii). Hence when parents are forbidden
to provoke their children to anger, they are not prohibited from striking their children for
the purpose of correction, but from inflicting blows on them without moderation. The command
that masters should forbear from threatening their slaves may be understood in two ways. First
that they should be slow to threaten, and this pertains to the moderation of correction; secondly,
that they should not always carry out their threats, that is that they should sometimes by
a merciful forgiveness temper the judgment whereby they threatened punishment.

Reply Obj. 2: The greater power should exercise the greater coercion. Now just as a city is
a perfect community, so the governor of a city has perfect coercive power: wherefore he can
inflict irreparable punishments such as death and mutilation. On the other hand the father
and the master who preside over the family household, which is an imperfect community, have
imperfect coercive power, which is exercised by inflicting lesser punishments, for instance
by blows, which do not inflict irreparable harm.

Reply Obj. 3: It is lawful for anyone to impart correction to a willing subject. But to impart
it to an unwilling subject belongs to those only who have charge over him. To this pertains
chastisement by blows.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 65, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Lawful to Imprison a Man?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to imprison a man. An act which deals with undue matter
is evil in its genus, as stated above (I-II, Q. 18, A. 2). Now man, having a free-will, is
undue matter for imprisonment which is inconsistent with free-will. Therefore it is unlawful
to imprison a man.

Obj. 2: Further, human justice should be ruled by Divine justice. Now according to Ecclus.
15:14, "God left man in the hand of his own counsel." Therefore it seems that a man ought not
to be coerced by chains or prisons.

Obj. 3: Further, no man should be forcibly prevented except from doing an evil deed; and any
man can lawfully prevent another from doing this. If, therefore, it were lawful to imprison
a man, in order to restrain him from evil deeds, it would be lawful for anyone to put a man
in prison; and this is clearly false. Therefore the same conclusion follows.

On the contrary, We read in Lev. 24 that a man was imprisoned for the sin of blasphemy.

I answer that, In the goods of the body three things may be considered in due order. First,
the substantial integrity of the body, and this is injured by death or maiming. Secondly, pleasure
or rest of the senses, and to this striking or anything causing a sense of pain is opposed.
Thirdly, the movement or use of the members, and this is hindered by binding or imprisoning
or any kind of detention.

Therefore it is unlawful to imprison or in any way detain a man, unless it be done according
to the order of justice, either in punishment, or as a measure of precaution against some evil.

Reply Obj. 1: A man who abuses the power entrusted to him deserves to lose it, and therefore
when a man by sinning abuses the free use of his members, he becomes a fitting matter for imprisonment.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the order of His wisdom God sometimes restrains a sinner from accomplishing
a sin, according to Job 5:12: "Who bringeth to nought the designs of the malignant, so that
their hand cannot accomplish what they had begun, while sometimes He allows them to do what
they will." In like manner, according to human justice, men are imprisoned, not for every sin
but for certain ones.

Reply Obj. 3: It is lawful for anyone to restrain a man for a time from doing some unlawful
deed there and then: as when a man prevents another from throwing himself over a precipice,
or from striking another. But to him alone who has the right of disposing in general of the
actions and of the life of another does it belong primarily to imprison or fetter, because
by so doing he hinders him from doing not only evil but also good deeds.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 65, Art. 4]

Whether the Sin Is Aggravated by the Fact That the Aforesaid Injuries Are Perpetrated on Those
Who Are Connected with Others?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin is not aggravated by the fact that the aforesaid injuries
are perpetrated on those who are connected with others. Such like injuries take their sinful
character from inflicting an injury on another against his will. Now the evil inflicted on
a man's own person is more against his will than that which is inflicted on a person connected
with him. Therefore an injury inflicted on a person connected with another is less grievous.

Obj. 2: Further, Holy Writ reproves those especially who do injuries to orphans and widows:
hence it is written (Ecclus. 35:17): "He will not despise the prayers of the fatherless, nor
the widow when she poureth out her complaint." Now the widow and the orphan are not connected
with other persons. Therefore the sin is not aggravated through an injury being inflicted on
one who is connected with others.

Obj. 3: Further, the person who is connected has a will of his own just as the principal person
has, so that something may be voluntary for him and yet against the will of the principal person,
as in the case of adultery which pleases the woman but not the husband. Now these injuries
are sinful in so far as they consist in an involuntary commutation. Therefore such like injuries
are of a less sinful nature.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 28:32) as though indicating an aggravating circumstance:
"Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given to another people, thy eyes looking on [*Vulg.:
'May thy sons and thy daughters be given,' etc.]."

I answer that, Other things being equal, an injury is a more grievous sin according as it affects
more persons; and hence it is that it is a more grievous sin to strike or injure a person in
authority than a private individual, because it conduces to the injury of the whole community,
as stated above (I-II, Q. 73, A. 9). Now when an injury is inflicted on one who is connected
in any way with another, that injury affects two persons, so that, other things being equal,
the sin is aggravated by this very fact. It may happen, however, that in view of certain circumstances,
a sin committed against one who is not connected with any other person, is more grievous, on
account of either the dignity of the person, or the greatness of the injury.

Reply Obj. 1: An injury inflicted on a person connected with others is less harmful to the
persons with whom he is connected, than if it were perpetrated immediately on them, and from
this point of view it is a less grievous sin. But all that belongs to the injury of the person
with whom he is connected, is added to the sin of which a man is guilty through injuring the
other one in himself.

Reply Obj. 2: Injuries done to widows and orphans are more insisted upon both through being
more opposed to mercy, and because the same injury done to such persons is more grievous to
them since they have no one to turn to for relief.

Reply Obj. 3: The fact that the wife voluntarily consents to the adultery, lessens the sin
and injury, so far as the woman is concerned, for it would be more grievous, if the adulterer
oppressed her by violence. But this does not remove the injury as affecting her husband, since
"the wife hath not power of her own body; but the husband" (1 Cor. 7:4). The same applies to
similar cases. Of adultery, however, as it is opposed not only to justice but also to chastity,
we shall speak in the treatise on Temperance (Q. 154, A. 8).

QUESTION 66

OF THEFT AND ROBBERY (In Nine Articles)

We must now consider the sins opposed to justice, whereby a man injures his neighbor in his
belongings; namely theft and robbery.

Under this head there are nine points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is natural to man to possess external things?

(2) Whether it is lawful for a man to possess something as his own?

(3) Whether theft is the secret taking of another's property?

(4) Whether robbery is a species of sin distinct from theft?

(5) Whether every theft is a sin?

(6) Whether theft is a mortal sin?

(7) Whether it is lawful to thieve in a case of necessity?

(8) Whether every robbery is a mortal sin?

(9) Whether robbery is a more grievous sin than theft?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Natural for Man to Possess External Things?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not natural for man to possess external things. For no
man should ascribe to himself that which is God's. Now the dominion over all creatures is proper
to God, according to Ps. 23:1, "The earth is the Lord's," etc. Therefore it is not natural
for man to possess external things.

Obj. 2: Further, Basil in expounding the words of the rich man (Luke 12:18), "I will gather
all things that are grown to me, and my goods," says [*Hom. in Luc. xii, 18]: "Tell me: which
are thine? where did you take them from and bring them into being?" Now whatever man possesses
naturally, he can fittingly call his own. Therefore man does not naturally possess external things.

Obj. 3: Further, according to Ambrose (De Trin. i [*De Fide, ad Gratianum, i, 1]) "dominion
denotes power." But man has no power over external things, since he can work no change in their
nature. Therefore the possession of external things is not natural to man.

I answer that, External things can be considered in two ways. First, as regards their nature,
and this is not subject to the power of man, but only to the power of God Whose mere will all
things obey. Secondly, as regards their use, and in this way, man has a natural dominion over
external things, because, by his reason and will, he is able to use them for his own profit,
as they were made on his account: for the imperfect is always for the sake of the perfect,
as stated above (Q. 64, A. 1). It is by this argument that the Philosopher proves (Polit. i,
3) that the possession of external things is natural to man. Moreover, this natural dominion
of man over other creatures, which is competent to man in respect of his reason wherein God's
image resides, is shown forth in man's creation (Gen. 1:26) by the words: "Let us make man
to our image and likeness: and let him have dominion over the fishes of the sea," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: God has sovereign dominion over all things: and He, according to His providence,
directed certain things to the sustenance of man's body. For this reason man has a natural
dominion over things, as regards the power to make use of them.

Reply Obj. 2: The rich man is reproved for deeming external things to belong to him principally,
as though he had not received them from another, namely from God.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers the dominion over external things as regards their nature.
Such a dominion belongs to God alone, as stated above.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful for a Man to Possess a Thing As His Own?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for a man to possess a thing as his own. For whatever is
contrary to the natural law is unlawful. Now according to the natural law all things are common
property: and the possession of property is contrary to this community of goods. Therefore
it is unlawful for any man to appropriate any external thing to himself.

Obj. 2: Further, Basil in expounding the words of the rich man quoted above (A. 1, Obj. 2),
says: "The rich who deem as their own property the common goods they have seized upon, are
like to those who by going beforehand to the play prevent others from coming, and appropriate
to themselves what is intended for common use." Now it would be unlawful to prevent others
from obtaining possession of common goods. Therefore it is unlawful to appropriate to oneself
what belongs to the community.

Obj. 3: Further, Ambrose says [*Serm. lxiv, de temp.], and his words are quoted in the Decretals
[*Dist. xlvii., Can. Sicut hi.]: "Let no man call his own that which is common property": and
by "common" he means external things, as is clear from the context. Therefore it seems unlawful
for a man to appropriate an external thing to himself.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Haeres., haer. 40): "The 'Apostolici' are those who with
extreme arrogance have given themselves that name, because they do not admit into their communion
persons who are married or possess anything of their own, such as both monks and clerics who
in considerable number are to be found in the Catholic Church." Now the reason why these people
are heretics was because severing themselves from the Church, they think that those who enjoy
the use of the above things, which they themselves lack, have no hope of salvation. Therefore
it is erroneous to maintain that it is unlawful for a man to possess property.

I answer that, Two things are competent to man in respect of exterior things. One is the power
to procure and dispense them, and in this regard it is lawful for man to possess property.
Moreover this is necessary to human life for three reasons. First because every man is more
careful to procure what is for himself alone than that which is common to many or to all: since
each one would shirk the labor and leave to another that which concerns the community, as happens
where there is a great number of servants. Secondly, because human affairs are conducted in
more orderly fashion if each man is charged with taking care of some particular thing himself,
whereas there would be confusion if everyone had to look after any one thing indeterminately.
Thirdly, because a more peaceful state is ensured to man if each one is contented with his
own. Hence it is to be observed that quarrels arise more frequently where there is no division
of the things possessed.

The second thing that is competent to man with regard to external things is their use. In this
respect man ought to possess external things, not as his own, but as common, so that, to wit,
he is ready to communicate them to others in their need. Hence the Apostle says (1 Tim. 6:17,
18): "Charge the rich of this world . . . to give easily, to communicate to others," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: Community of goods is ascribed to the natural law, not that the natural law dictates
that all things should be possessed in common and that nothing should be possessed as one's
own: but because the division of possessions is not according to the natural law, but rather
arose from human agreement which belongs to positive law, as stated above (Q. 57, AA. 2, 3).
Hence the ownership of possessions is not contrary to the natural law, but an addition thereto
devised by human reason.

Reply Obj. 2: A man would not act unlawfully if by going beforehand to the play he prepared
the way for others: but he acts unlawfully if by so doing he hinders others from going. In
like manner a rich man does not act unlawfully if he anticipates someone in taking possession
of something which at first was common property, and gives others a share: but he sins if he
excludes others indiscriminately from using it. Hence Basil says (Hom. in Luc. xii, 18): "Why
are you rich while another is poor, unless it be that you may have the merit of a good stewardship,
and he the reward of patience?"

Reply Obj. 3: When Ambrose says: "Let no man call his own that which is common," he is speaking
of ownership as regards use, wherefore he adds: "He who spends too much is a robber."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 3]

Whether the Essence of Theft Consists in Taking Another's Thing Secretly?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not essential to theft to take another's thing secretly.
For that which diminishes a sin, does not, apparently, belong to the essence of a sin. Now
to sin secretly tends to diminish a sin, just as, on the contrary, it is written as indicating
an aggravating circumstance of the sin of some (Isa. 3:9): "They have proclaimed abroad their
sin as Sodom, and they have not hid it." Therefore it is not essential to theft that it should
consist in taking another's thing secretly.

Obj. 2: Further, Ambrose says [*Serm. lxiv, de temp., A. 2, Obj. 3, Can. Sicut hi.]: and his
words are embodied in the Decretals [*Dist. xlvii]: "It is no less a crime to take from him
that has, than to refuse to succor the needy when you can and are well off." Therefore just
as theft consists in taking another's thing, so does it consist in keeping it back.

Obj. 3: Further, a man may take by stealth from another, even that which is his own, for instance
a thing that he has deposited with another, or that has been taken away from him unjustly.
Therefore it is not essential to theft that it should consist in taking another's thing secretly.

On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. x): "Fur (thief) is derived from furvus and so from fuscus
(dark), because he takes advantage of the night."

I answer that, Three things combine together to constitute theft. The first belongs to theft
as being contrary to justice, which gives to each one that which is his, so that it belongs
to theft to take possession of what is another's. The second thing belongs to theft as distinct
from those sins which are committed against the person, such as murder and adultery, and in
this respect it belongs to theft to be about a thing possessed: for if a man takes what is
another's not as a possession but as a part (for instance, if he amputates a limb), or as a
person connected with him (for instance, if he carry off his daughter or his wife), it is not
strictly speaking a case of theft. The third difference is that which completes the nature
of theft, and consists in a thing being taken secretly: and in this respect it belongs properly
to theft that it consists in "taking another's thing secretly."

Reply Obj. 1: Secrecy is sometimes a cause of sin, as when a man employs secrecy in order to
commit a sin, for instance in fraud and guile. In this way it does not diminish sin, but constitutes
a species of sin: and thus it is in theft. In another way secrecy is merely a circumstance
of sin, and thus it diminishes sin, both because it is a sign of shame, and because it removes
scandal.

Reply Obj. 2: To keep back what is due to another, inflicts the same kind of injury as taking
a thing unjustly: wherefore an unjust detention is included in an unjust taking.

Reply Obj. 3: Nothing prevents that which belongs to one person simply, from belonging to another
in some respect: thus a deposit belongs simply to the depositor, but with regard to its custody
it is the depositary's, and the thing stolen is the thief's, not simply, but as regards its
custody.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 4]

Whether Theft and Robbery Are Sins of Different Species?

Objection 1: It would seem that theft and robbery are not sins of different species. For theft
and robbery differ as "secret" and "manifest": because theft is taking something secretly,
while robbery is to take something violently and openly. Now in the other kinds of sins, the
secret and the manifest do not differ specifically. Therefore theft and robbery are not different
species of sin.

Obj. Now theft and robbery are directed to the same end, viz. the possession of another's property.
Therefore they do not differ specifically.

Obj. 3: Further, just as a thing is taken by force for the sake of possession, so is a woman
taken by force for pleasure: wherefore Isidore says (Etym. x) that "he who commits a rape is
called a corrupter, and the victim of the rape is said to be corrupted." Now it is a case of
rape whether the woman be carried off publicly or secretly. Therefore the thing appropriated
is said to be taken by force, whether it be done secretly or publicly. Therefore theft and
robbery do not differ.

On the contrary, The Philosopher (Ethic. v, 2) distinguishes theft from robbery, and states
that theft is done in secret, but that robbery is done openly.

I answer that, Theft and robbery are vices contrary to justice, in as much as one man does
another an injustice. Now "no man suffers an injustice willingly," as stated in Ethic. v, 9.
Wherefore theft and robbery derive their sinful nature, through the taking being involuntary
on the part of the person from whom something is taken. Now the involuntary is twofold, namely,
through violence and through ignorance, as stated in Ethic. iii, 1. Therefore the sinful aspect
of robbery differs from that of theft: and consequently they differ specifically.

Reply Obj. 1: In the other kinds of sin the sinful nature is not derived from something involuntary,
as in the sins opposed to justice: and so where there is a different kind of involuntary, there
is a different species of sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The remote end of robbery and theft is the same. But this is not enough for identity
of species, because there is a difference of proximate ends, since the robber wishes to take
a thing by his own power, but the thief, by cunning.

Reply Obj. 3: The robbery of a woman cannot be secret on the part of the woman who is taken:
wherefore even if it be secret as regards the others from whom she is taken, the nature of
robbery remains on the part of the woman to whom violence is done.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 5]

Whether Theft Is Always a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that theft is not always a sin. For no sin is commanded by God,
since it is written (Ecclus. 15:21): "He hath commanded no man to do wickedly." Yet we find
that God commanded theft, for it is written (Ex. 12:35, 36): "And the children of Israel did
as the Lord had commanded Moses [Vulg.: 'as Moses had commanded']. . . and they stripped the
Egyptians." Therefore theft is not always a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, if a man finds a thing that is not his and takes it, he seems to commit a
theft, for he takes another's property. Yet this seems lawful according to natural equity,
as the jurists hold. [*See loc. cit. in Reply.] Therefore it seems that theft is not always a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, he that takes what is his own does not seem to sin, because he does not act
against justice, since he does not destroy its equality. Yet a man commits a theft even if
he secretly take his own property that is detained by or in the safe-keeping of another. Therefore
it seems that theft is not always a sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 20:15): "Thou shalt not steal."

I answer that, If anyone consider what is meant by theft, he will find that it is sinful on
two counts. First, because of its opposition to justice, which gives to each one what is his,
so that for this reason theft is contrary to justice, through being a taking of what belongs
to another. Secondly, because of the guile or fraud committed by the thief, by laying hands
on another's property secretly and cunningly. Wherefore it is evident that every theft is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: It is no theft for a man to take another's property either secretly or openly
by order of a judge who has commanded him to do so, because it becomes his due by the very
fact that it is adjudicated to him by the sentence of the court. Hence still less was it a
theft for the Israelites to take away the spoils of the Egyptians at the command of the Lord,
Who ordered this to be done on account of the ill-treatment accorded to them by the Egyptians
without any cause: wherefore it is written significantly (Wis. 10:19): "The just took the spoils
of the wicked."

Reply Obj. 2: With regard to treasure-trove a distinction must be made. For some there are
that were never in anyone's possession, for instance precious stones and jewels, found on the
seashore, and such the finder is allowed to keep [*Dig. I, viii, De divis. rerum: Inst. II,
i, De rerum divis.]. The same applies to treasure hidden underground long since and belonging
to no man, except that according to civil law the finder is bound to give half to the owner
of the land, if the treasure trove be in the land of another person [*Inst. II, i, 39: Cod.
X, xv, De Thesauris]. Hence in the parable of the Gospel (Matt. 13:44) it is said of the finder
of the treasure hidden in a field that he bought the field, as though he purposed thus to acquire
the right of possessing the whole treasure. On the other Land the treasure-trove may be nearly
in someone's possession: and then if anyone take it with the intention, not of keeping it but
of returning it to the owner who does not look upon such things as unappropriated, he is not
guilty of theft. In like manner if the thing found appears to be unappropriated, and if the
finder believes it to be so, although he keep it, he does not commit a theft [*Inst. II, i,
47]. In any other case the sin of theft is committed [*Dig. XLI, i, De acquirend. rerum dominio,
9: Inst. II, i, 48]: wherefore Augustine says in a homily (Serm. clxxviii; De Verb. Apost.):
"If thou hast found a thing and not returned it, thou hast stolen it" (Dig. xiv, 5, can. Si
quid invenisti).

Reply Obj. 3: He who by stealth takes his own property which is deposited with another man
burdens the depositary, who is bound either to restitution, or to prove himself innocent. Hence
he is clearly guilty of sin, and is bound to ease the depositary of his burden. On the other
hand he who, by stealth, takes his own property, if this be unjustly detained by another, he
sins indeed; yet not because he burdens the retainer, and so he is not bound to restitution
or compensation: but he sins against general justice by disregarding the order of justice and
usurping judgment concerning his own property. Hence he must make satisfaction to God and endeavor
to allay whatever scandal he may have given his neighbor by acting this way.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 6]

Whether Theft Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that theft is not a mortal sin. For it is written (Prov. 6:30):
"The fault is not so great when a man hath stolen." But every mortal sin is a great fault.
Therefore theft is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, mortal sin deserves to be punished with death. But in the Law theft is punished
not by death but by indemnity, according to Ex. 22:1, "If any man steal an ox or a sheep .
. . he shall restore have oxen for one ox, and four sheep for one sheep." Therefore theft is
not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, theft can be committed in small even as in great things. But it seems unreasonable
for a man to be punished with eternal death for the theft of a small thing such as a needle
or a quill. Therefore theft is not a mortal sin.

On the contrary, No man is condemned by the Divine judgment save for a mortal sin. Yet a man
is condemned for theft, according to Zech. 5:3, "This is the curse that goeth forth over the
face of the earth; for every thief shall be judged as is there written." Therefore theft is
a mortal sin.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 59, A. 4; I-II, Q. 72, A. 5), a mortal sin is one that is
contrary to charity as the spiritual life of the soul. Now charity consists principally in
the love of God, and secondarily in the love of our neighbor, which is shown in our wishing
and doing him well. But theft is a means of doing harm to our neighbor in his belongings; and
if men were to rob one another habitually, human society would be undone. Therefore theft,
as being opposed to charity, is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: The statement that theft is not a great fault is in view of two cases. First,
when a person is led to thieve through necessity. This necessity diminishes or entirely removes
sin, as we shall show further on (A. 7). Hence the text continues: "For he stealeth to fill
his hungry soul." Secondly, theft is stated not to be a great fault in comparison with the
guilt of adultery, which is punished with death. Hence the text goes on to say of the thief
that "if he be taken, he shall restore sevenfold . . . but he that is an adulterer . . . shall
destroy his own soul."

Reply Obj. 2: The punishments of this life are medicinal rather than retributive. For retribution
is reserved to the Divine judgment which is pronounced against sinners "according to truth"
(Rom. 2:2). Wherefore, according to the judgment of the present life the death punishment is
inflicted, not for every mortal sin, but only for such as inflict an irreparable harm, or again
for such as contain some horrible deformity. Hence according to the present judgment the pain
of death is not inflicted for theft which does not inflict an irreparable harm, except when
it is aggravated by some grave circumstance, as in the case of sacrilege which is the theft
of a sacred thing, of peculation, which is theft of common property, as Augustine states (Tract.
1, Super Joan.), and of kidnaping which is stealing a man, for which the pain of death is inflicted
(Ex. 21:16).

Reply Obj. 3: Reason accounts as nothing that which is little: so that a man does not consider
himself injured in very little matters: and the person who takes such things can presume that
this is not against the will of the owner. And if a person take such like very little things,
he may be proportionately excused from mortal sin. Yet if his intention is to rob and injure
his neighbor, there may be a mortal sin even in these very little things, even as there may
be through consent in a mere thought.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 7]

Whether It Is Lawful to Steal Through Stress of Need?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to steal through stress of need. For penance is not imposed
except on one who has sinned. Now it is stated (Extra, De furtis, Cap. Si quis): "If anyone,
through stress of hunger or nakedness, steal food, clothing or beast, he shall do penance for
three weeks." Therefore it is not lawful to steal through stress of need.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. ii, 6) that "there are some actions whose very
name implies wickedness," and among these he reckons theft. Now that which is wicked in itself
may not be done for a good end. Therefore a man cannot lawfully steal in order to remedy a need.

Obj. 3: Further, a man should love his neighbor as himself. Now, according to Augustine (Contra
Mendac. vii), it is unlawful to steal in order to succor one's neighbor by giving him an alms.
Therefore neither is it lawful to steal in order to remedy one's own needs.

On the contrary, In cases of need all things are common property, so that there would seem
to be no sin in taking another's property, for need has made it common.

I answer that, Things which are of human right cannot derogate from natural right or Divine
right. Now according to the natural order established by Divine Providence, inferior things
are ordained for the purpose of succoring man's needs by their means. Wherefore the division
and appropriation of things which are based on human law, do not preclude the fact that man's
needs have to be remedied by means of these very things. Hence whatever certain people have
in superabundance is due, by natural law, to the purpose of succoring the poor. For this reason
Ambrose [*Loc. cit., A. 2, Obj. 3] says, and his words are embodied in the Decretals (Dist.
xlvii, can. Sicut ii): "It is the hungry man's bread that you withhold, the naked man's cloak
that you store away, the money that you bury in the earth is the price of the poor man's ransom
and freedom."

Since, however, there are many who are in need, while it is impossible for all to be succored
by means of the same thing, each one is entrusted with the stewardship of his own things, so
that out of them he may come to the aid of those who are in need. Nevertheless, if the need
be so manifest and urgent, that it is evident that the present need must be remedied by whatever
means be at hand (for instance when a person is in some imminent danger, and there is no other
possible remedy), then it is lawful for a man to succor his own need by means of another's
property, by taking it either openly or secretly: nor is this properly speaking theft or robbery.

Reply Obj. 1: This decretal considers cases where there is no urgent need.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not theft, properly speaking, to take secretly and use another's property
in a case of extreme need: because that which he takes for the support of his life becomes
his own property by reason of that need.

Reply Obj. 3: In a case of a like need a man may also take secretly another's property in order
to succor his neighbor in need.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 8]

Whether Robbery May Be Committed Without Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that robbery may be committed without sin. For spoils are taken
by violence, and this seems to belong to the essence of robbery, according to what has been
said (A. 4). Now it is lawful to take spoils from the enemy; for Ambrose says (De Patriarch.
4 [*De Abraham i, 3]): "When the conqueror has taken possession of the spoils, military discipline
demands that all should be reserved for the sovereign," in order, to wit, that he may distribute
them. Therefore in certain cases robbery is lawful.

Obj. 2: Further, it is lawful to take from a man what is not his. Now the things which unbelievers
have are not theirs, for Augustine says (Ep. ad Vincent. Donat. xciii.): "You falsely call
things your own, for you do not possess them justly, and according to the laws of earthly kings
you are commanded to forfeit them." Therefore it seems that one may lawfully rob unbelievers.

Obj. 3: Further, earthly princes violently extort many things from their subjects: and this
seems to savor of robbery. Now it would seem a grievous matter to say that they sin in acting
thus, for in that case nearly every prince would be damned. Therefore in some cases robbery
is lawful.

On the contrary, Whatever is taken lawfully may be offered to God in sacrifice and oblation.
Now this cannot be done with the proceeds of robbery, according to Isa. 61:8, "I am the Lord
that love judgment, and hate robbery in a holocaust." Therefore it is not lawful to take anything
by robbery.

I answer that, Robbery implies a certain violence and coercion employed in taking unjustly
from a man that which is his. Now in human society no man can exercise coercion except through
public authority: and, consequently, if a private individual not having public authority takes
another's property by violence, he acts unlawfully and commits a robbery, as burglars do. As
regards princes, the public power is entrusted to them that they may be the guardians of justice:
hence it is unlawful for them to use violence or coercion, save within the bounds of justice--either
by fighting against the enemy, or against the citizens, by punishing evil-doers: and whatever
is taken by violence of this kind is not the spoils of robbery, since it is not contrary to
justice. On the other hand to take other people's property violently and against justice, in
the exercise of public authority, is to act unlawfully and to be guilty of robbery; and whoever
does so is bound to restitution.

Reply Obj. 1: A distinction must be made in the matter of spoils. For if they who take spoils
from the enemy, are waging a just war, such things as they seize in the war become their own
property. This is no robbery, so that they are not bound to restitution. Nevertheless even
they who are engaged in a just war may sin in taking spoils through cupidity arising from an
evil intention, if, to wit, they fight chiefly not for justice but for spoil. For Augustine
says (De Verb. Dom. xix; Serm. lxxxii) that "it is a sin to fight for booty." If, however,
those who take the spoil, are waging an unjust war, they are guilty of robbery, and are bound
to restitution.

Reply Obj. 2: Unbelievers possess their goods unjustly in so far as they are ordered by the
laws of earthly princes to forfeit those goods. Hence these may be taken violently from them,
not by private but by public authority.

Reply Obj. 3: It is no robbery if princes exact from their subjects that which is due to them
for the safe-guarding of the common good, even if they use violence in so doing: but if they
extort something unduly by means of violence, it is robbery even as burglary is. Hence Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei iv, 4): "If justice be disregarded, what is a king but a mighty robber? since
what is a robber but a little king?" And it is written (Ezech. 22:27): "Her princes in the
midst of her, are like wolves ravening the prey." Wherefore they are bound to restitution,
just as robbers are, and by so much do they sin more grievously than robbers, as their actions
are fraught with greater and more universal danger to public justice whose wardens they are.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 66, Art. 9]

Whether Theft Is a More Grievous Sin Than Robbery?

Objection 1: It would seem that theft is a more grievous sin than robbery. For theft adds fraud
and guile to the taking of another's property: and these things are not found in robbery. Now
fraud and guile are sinful in themselves, as stated above (Q. 55, AA. 4, 5). Therefore theft
is a more grievous sin than robbery.

Obj. 2: Further, shame is fear about a wicked deed, as stated in Ethic. iv, 9. Now men are
more ashamed of theft than of robbery. Therefore theft is more wicked than robbery.

Obj. 3: Further, the more persons a sin injures the more grievous it would seem to be. Now
the great and the lowly may be injured by theft: whereas only the weak can be injured by robbery,
since it is possible to use violence towards them. Therefore the sin of theft seems to be more
grievous than the sin of robbery.

On the contrary, According to the laws robbery is more severely punished than theft.

I answer that, Robbery and theft are sinful, as stated above (AA. 4, 6), on account of the
involuntariness on the part of the person from whom something is taken: yet so that in theft
the involuntariness is due to ignorance, whereas in robbery it is due to violence. Now a thing
is more involuntary through violence than through ignorance, because violence is more directly
opposed to the will than ignorance. Therefore robbery is a more grievous sin than theft. There
is also another reason, since robbery not only inflicts a loss on a person in his things, but
also conduces to the ignominy and injury of his person, and this is of graver import than fraud
or guile which belong to theft. Hence the Reply to the First Objection is evident.

Reply Obj. 2: Men who adhere to sensible things think more of external strength which is evidenced
in robbery, than of internal virtue which is forfeit through sin: wherefore they are less ashamed
of robbery than of theft.

Reply Obj. 3: Although more persons may be injured by theft than by robbery, yet more grievous
injuries may be inflicted by robbery than by theft: for which reason also robbery is more odious.

QUESTION 67

OF THE INJUSTICE OF A JUDGE, IN JUDGING (In Four Articles)

We must now consider those vices opposed to commutative justice, that consist in words injurious
to our neighbors. We shall consider (1) those which are connected with judicial proceedings,
and (2) injurious words uttered extra-judicially.

Under the first head five points occur for our consideration: (1) The injustice of a judge
in judging; (2) The injustice of the prosecutor in accusing; (3) The injustice of the defendant
in defending himself; (4) The injustice of the witnesses in giving evidence; (5) The injustice
of the advocate in defending.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a man can justly judge one who is not his subject?

(2) Whether it is lawful for a judge, on account of the evidence, to deliver judgment in opposition
to the truth which is known to him?

(3) Whether a judge can justly sentence a man who is not accused?

(4) Whether he can justly remit the punishment?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 67, Art. 1]

Whether a Man Can Justly Judge One Who Is Not Subject to His Jurisdiction?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man can justly judge one who is not subject to his jurisdiction.
For it is stated (Dan. 13) that Daniel sentenced the ancients who were convicted of bearing
false witness. But these ancients were not subject to Daniel; indeed they were judges of the
people. Therefore a man may lawfully judge one that is not subject to his jurisdiction.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ was no man's subject, indeed He was "King of kings and Lord of lords"
(Apoc. 19:16). Yet He submitted to the judgment of a man. Therefore it seems that a man may
lawfully judge one that is not subject to his jurisdiction.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the law [*Cap. Licet ratione, de Foro Comp.] a man is tried in
this or that court according to his kind of offense. Now sometimes the defendant is not the
subject of the man whose business it is to judge in that particular place, for instance when
the defendant belongs to another diocese or is exempt. Therefore it seems that a man may judge
one that is not his subject.

On the contrary, Gregory [*Regist. xi, epist. 64] in commenting on Deut. 23:25, "If thou go
into thy friend's corn," etc. says: "Thou mayest not put the sickle of judgment to the corn
that is entrusted to another."

I answer that, A judge's sentence is like a particular law regarding some particular fact.
Wherefore just as a general law should have coercive power, as the Philosopher states (Ethic.
x, 9), so too the sentence of a judge should have coercive power, whereby either party is compelled
to comply with the judge's sentence; else the judgment would be of no effect. Now coercive
power is not exercised in human affairs, save by those who hold public authority: and those
who have this authority are accounted the superiors of those over whom they preside whether
by ordinary or by delegated authority. Hence it is evident that no man can judge others than
his subjects and this in virtue either of delegated or of ordinary authority.

Reply Obj. 1: In judging those ancients Daniel exercised an authority delegated to him by Divine
instinct. This is indicated where it is said (Dan. 13:45) that "the Lord raised up the . .
. spirit of a young boy."

Reply Obj. 2: In human affairs a man may submit of his own accord to the judgment of others
although these be not his superiors, an example of which is when parties agree to a settlement
by arbitrators. Wherefore it is necessary that the arbitrator should be upheld by a penalty,
since the arbitrators through not exercising authority in the case, have not of themselves
full power of coercion. Accordingly in this way did Christ of his own accord submit to human
judgment: and thus too did Pope Leo [*Leo IV] submit to the judgment of the emperor [*Can.
Nos si incompetenter, caus. ii, qu. 7].

Reply Obj. 3: The bishop of the defendant's diocese becomes the latter's superior as regards
the fault committed, even though he be exempt: unless perchance the defendant offend in a matter
exempt from the bishop's authority, for instance in administering the property of an exempt
monastery. But if an exempt person commits a theft, or a murder or the like, he may be justly
condemned by the ordinary.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 67, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful for a Judge to Pronounce Judgment Against the Truth That He Knows, on
Account of Evidence to the Contrary?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for a judge to pronounce judgment against the truth that
he knows, on account of evidence to the contrary. For it is written (Deut. 17:9): "Thou shalt
come to the priests of the Levitical race, and to the judge that shall be at that time; and
thou shalt ask of them, and they shall show thee the truth of the judgment." Now sometimes
certain things are alleged against the truth, as when something is proved by means of false
witnesses. Therefore it is unlawful for a judge to pronounce judgment according to what is
alleged and proved in opposition to the truth which he knows.

Obj. 2: Further, in pronouncing judgment a man should conform to the Divine judgment, since
"it is the judgment of God" (Deut. 1:17). Now "the judgment of God is according to the truth"
(Rom. 2:2), and it was foretold of Christ (Isa. 11:3, 4): "He shall not judge according to
the sight of the eyes, nor reprove according to the hearing of the ears. But He shall judge
the poor with justice, and shall reprove with equity for the meek of the earth." Therefore
the judge ought not to pronounce judgment according to the evidence before him if it be contrary
to what he knows himself.

Obj. 3: Further, the reason why evidence is required in a court of law, is that the judge may
have a faithful record of the truth of the matter, wherefore in matters of common knowledge
there is no need of judicial procedure, according to 1 Tim. 5:24, "Some men's sins are manifest,
going before to judgment." Consequently, if the judge by his personal knowledge is aware of
the truth, he should pay no heed to the evidence, but should pronounce sentence according to
the truth which he knows.

Obj. 4: Further, the word "conscience" denotes application of knowledge to a matter of action
as stated in the First Part (Q. 79, A. 13). Now it is a sin to act contrary to one's knowledge.
Therefore a judge sins if he pronounces sentence according to the evidence but against his
conscience of the truth.

On the contrary, Augustine [*Ambrose, Super Ps. 118, serm. 20] says in his commentary on the
Psalter: "A good judge does nothing according to his private opinion but pronounces sentence
according to the law and the right." Now this is to pronounce judgment according to what is
alleged and proved in court. Therefore a judge ought to pronounce judgment in accordance with
these things, and not according to his private opinion.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1; Q. 60, AA. 2, 6) it is the duty of a judge to pronounce
judgment in as much as he exercises public authority, wherefore his judgment should be based
on information acquired by him, not from his knowledge as a private individual, but from what
he knows as a public person. Now the latter knowledge comes to him both in general and in particular--in
general through the public laws, whether Divine or human, and he should admit no evidence that
conflicts therewith--in some particular matter, through documents and witnesses, and other
legal means of information, which in pronouncing his sentence, he ought to follow rather than
the information he has acquired as a private individual. And yet this same information may
be of use to him, so that he can more rigorously sift the evidence brought forward, and discover
its weak points. If, however, he is unable to reject that evidence juridically, he must, as
stated above, follow it in pronouncing sentence.

Reply Obj. 1: The reason why, in the passage quoted, it is stated that the judges should first
of all be asked their reasons, is to make it clear that the judges ought to judge the truth
in accordance with the evidence.

Reply Obj. 2: To judge belongs to God in virtue of His own power: wherefore His judgment is
based on the truth which He Himself knows, and not on knowledge imparted by others: the same
is to be said of Christ, Who is true God and true man: whereas other judges do not judge in
virtue of their own power, so that there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: The Apostle refers to the case where something is well known not to the judge
alone, but both to him and to others, so that the guilty party can by no means deny his guilt
(as in the case of notorious criminals), and is convicted at once from the evidence of the
fact. If, on the other hand, it be well known to the judge, but not to others, or to others,
but not to the judge, then it is necessary for the judge to sift the evidence.

Reply Obj. 4: In matters touching his own person, a man must form his conscience from his own
knowledge, but in matters concerning the public authority, he must form his conscience in accordance
with the knowledge attainable in the public judicial procedure.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 67, Art. 3]

Whether a Judge May Condemn a Man Who Is Not Accused?

Objection 1: It would seem that a judge may pass sentence on a man who is not accused. For
human justice is derived from Divine justice. Now God judges the sinner even though there be
no accuser. Therefore it seems that a man may pass sentence of condemnation on a man even though
there be no accuser.

Obj. 2: Further, an accuser is required in judicial procedure in order that he may relate the
crime to the judge. Now sometimes the crime may come to the judge's knowledge otherwise than
by accusation; for instance, by denunciation, or by evil report, or through the judge himself
being an eye-witness. Therefore a judge may condemn a man without there being an accuser.

Obj. 3: Further, the deeds of holy persons are related in Holy Writ, as models of human conduct.
Now Daniel was at the same time the accuser and the judge of the wicked ancients (Dan. 13).
Therefore it is not contrary to justice for a man to condemn anyone as judge while being at
the same time his accuser.

On the contrary, Ambrose in his commentary on 1 Cor. 5:2, expounding the Apostle's sentence
on the fornicator, says that "a judge should not condemn without an accuser, since our Lord
did not banish Judas, who was a thief, yet was not accused."

I answer that, A judge is an interpreter of justice. Now, as stated above (Q. 58, A. 2), justice
is not between a man and himself but between one man and another. Hence a judge must needs
judge between two parties, which is the case when one is the prosecutor, and the other the
defendant. Therefore in criminal cases the judge cannot sentence a man unless the latter has
an accuser, according to Acts 25:16: "It is not the custom of the Romans to condemn any man,
before that he who is accused have his accusers present, and have liberty to make his answer,
to clear himself of the crimes" of which he is accused.

Reply Obj. 1: God, in judging man, takes the sinner's conscience as his accuser, according
to Rom. 2:15, "Their thoughts between themselves accusing, or also defending one another";
or again, He takes the evidence of the fact as regards the deed itself, according to Gen. 4:10,
"The voice of thy brother's blood crieth to Me from the earth."

Reply Obj. 2: Public disgrace takes the place of an accuser. Hence a gloss on Gen. 4:10, "The
voice of thy brother's blood," etc. says: "There is no need of an accuser when the crime committed
is notorious." In a case of denunciation, as stated above (Q. 33, A. 7), the amendment, not
the punishment, of the sinner is intended: wherefore when a man is denounced for a sin, nothing
is done against him, but for him, so that no accuser is required. The punishment that is inflicted
is on account of his rebellion against the Church, and since this rebellion is manifest, it
stands instead of an accuser. The fact that the judge himself was an eye-witness, does not
authorize him to proceed to pass sentence, except according to the order of judicial procedure.

Reply Obj. 3: God, in judging man, proceeds from His own knowledge of the truth, whereas man
does not, as stated above (A. 2). Hence a man cannot be accuser, witness and judge at the same
time, as God is. Daniel was at once accuser and judge, because he was the executor of the sentence
of God, by whose instinct he was moved, as stated above (A. 1, ad 1).

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 67, Art. 4]

Whether the Judge Can Lawfully Remit the Punishment?

Objection 1: It would seem that the judge can lawfully remit the punishment. For it is written
(James 2:13): "Judgment without mercy" shall be done "to him that hath not done mercy." Now
no man is punished for not doing what he cannot do lawfully. Therefore any judge can lawfully
do mercy by remitting the punishment.

Obj. 2: Further, human judgment should imitate the Divine judgment. Now God remits the punishment
to sinners, because He desires not the death of the sinner, according to Ezech. 18:23. Therefore
a human judge also may lawfully remit the punishment to one who repents.

Obj. 3: Further, it is lawful for anyone to do what is profitable to some one and harmful to
none. Now the remission of his punishment profits the guilty man and harms nobody. Therefore
the judge can lawfully loose a guilty man from his punishment.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 13:8, 9) concerning anyone who would persuade a man to
serve strange gods: "Neither let thy eye spare him to pity and conceal him, but thou shalt
presently put him to death": and of the murderer it is written (Deut. 19:12, 13): "He shall
die. Thou shalt not pity him."

I answer that, As may be gathered from what has been said (AA. 2, 3), with regard to the question
in point, two things may be observed in connection with a judge. One is that he has to judge
between accuser and defendant, while the other is that he pronounces the judicial sentence,
in virtue of his power, not as a private individual but as a public person. Accordingly on
two counts a judge is hindered from loosing a guilty person from his punishment. First on the
part of the accuser, whose right it sometimes is that the guilty party should be punished--for
instance on account of some injury committed against the accuser--because it is not in the
power of a judge to remit such punishment, since every judge is bound to give each man his
right. Secondly, he finds a hindrance on the part of the commonwealth, whose power he exercises,
and to whose good it belongs that evil-doers should be punished.

Nevertheless in this respect there is a difference between judges of lower degree and the supreme
judge, i.e. the sovereign, to whom the entire public authority is entrusted. For the inferior
judge has no power to exempt a guilty man from punishment against the laws imposed on him by
his superior. Wherefore Augustine in commenting on John 19:11, "Thou shouldst not have any
power against Me," says (Tract. cxvi in Joan.): "The power which God gave Pilate was such that
he was under the power of Caesar, so that he was by no means free to acquit the person accused."
On the other hand the sovereign who has full authority in the commonwealth, can lawfully remit
the punishment to a guilty person, provided the injured party consent to the remission, and
that this do not seem detrimental to the public good.

Reply Obj. 1: There is a place for the judge's mercy in matters that are left to the judge's
discretion, because in like matters a good man is slow to punish as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. v, 10). But in matters that are determined in accordance with Divine or human laws,
it is not left to him to show mercy.

Reply Obj. 2: God has supreme power of judging, and it concerns Him whatever is done sinfully
against anyone. Therefore He is free to remit the punishment, especially since punishment is
due to sin chiefly because it is done against Him. He does not, however, remit the punishment,
except in so far as it becomes His goodness, which is the source of all laws.

Reply Obj. 3: If the judge were to remit punishment inordinately, he would inflict an injury
on the community, for whose good it behooves ill-deeds to be punished, in order that men may
avoid sin. Hence the text, after appointing the punishment of the seducer, adds (Deut. 13:11):
"That all Israel hearing may fear, and may do no more anything like this." He would also inflict
harm on the injured person; who is compensated by having his honor restored in the punishment
of the man who has injured him.

QUESTION 68

OF MATTERS CONCERNING UNJUST ACCUSATION (In Four Articles)

We must now consider matters pertaining to unjust accusation. Under this head there are four
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a man is bound to accuse?

(2) Whether the accusation should be made in writing?

(3) How is an accusation vitiated?

(4) How should those be punished who have accused a man wrongfully?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 68, Art. 1]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Accuse?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is not bound to accuse. For no man is excused on account
of sin from fulfilling a Divine precept, since he would thus profit by his sin. Yet on account
of sin some are disqualified from accusing, such as those who are excommunicate or of evil
fame, or who are accused of grievous crimes and are not yet proved to be innocent [*1 Tim.
1:5]. Therefore a man is not bound by a Divine precept to accuse.

Obj. 2: Further, every duty depends on charity which is "the end of the precept" [*Can. Definimus,
caus. iv, qu. 1; caus. vi, qu. 1]: wherefore it is written (Rom. 13:8): "Owe no man anything,
but to love one another." Now that which belongs to charity is a duty that man owes to all
both of high and of low degree, both superiors and inferiors. Since therefore subjects should
not accuse their superiors, nor persons of lower degree, those of a higher degree, as shown
in several chapters (Decret. II, qu. vii), it seems that it is no man's duty to accuse.

Obj. 3: Further, no man is bound to act against the fidelity which he owes his friend; because
he ought not to do to another what he would not have others do to him. Now to accuse anyone
is sometimes contrary to the fidelity that one owes a friend; for it is written (Prov. 11:13):
"He that walketh deceitfully, revealeth secrets; but he that is faithful, concealeth the thing
committed to him by his friend." Therefore a man is not bound to accuse.

On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 5:1): "If any one sin, and hear the voice of one swearing,
and is a witness either because he himself hath seen, or is privy to it: if he do not utter
it, he shall bear his iniquity."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 33, AA. 6, 7; Q. 67, A. 3, ad 2), the difference between
denunciation and accusation is that in denunciation we aim at a brother's amendment, whereas
in accusation we intend the punishment of his crime. Now the punishments of this life are sought,
not for their own sake, because this is not the final time of retribution, but in their character
of medicine, conducing either to the amendment of the sinner, or to the good of the commonwealth
whose calm is ensured by the punishment of evil-doers. The former of these is intended in denunciation,
as stated, whereas the second regards properly accusation. Hence in the case of a crime that
conduces to the injury of the commonwealth, a man is bound to accusation, provided he can offer
sufficient proof, since it is the accuser's duty to prove: as, for example, when anyone's sin
conduces to the bodily or spiritual corruption of the community. If, however, the sin be not
such as to affect the community, or if he cannot offer sufficient proof, a man is not bound
to attempt to accuse, since no man is bound to do what he cannot duly accomplish.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing prevents a man being debarred by sin from doing what men are under an
obligation to do: for instance from meriting eternal life, and from receiving the sacraments
of the Church. Nor does a man profit by this: indeed it is a most grievous fault to fail to
do what one is bound to do, since virtuous acts are perfections of man.

Reply Obj. 2: Subjects are debarred from accusing their superiors, "if it is not the affection
of charity but their own wickedness that leads them to defame and disparage the conduct of
their superiors" [*Append. Grat. ad can. Sunt nonnulli, caus. ii, qu. 7]--or again if the subject
who wishes to accuse his superior is himself guilty of crime [*Decret. II, qu. vii, can. Praesumunt.].
Otherwise, provided they be in other respects qualified to accuse, it is lawful for subjects
to accuse their superiors out of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: It is contrary to fidelity to make known secrets to the injury of a person; but
not if they be revealed for the good of the community, which should always be preferred to
a private good. Hence it is unlawful to receive any secret in detriment to the common good:
and yet a thing is scarcely a secret when there are sufficient witnesses to prove it.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 68, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Necessary for the Accusation to Be Made in Writing?

Objection 1: It would seem unnecessary for the accusation to be made in writing. For writing
was devised as an aid to the human memory of the past. But an accusation is made in the present.
Therefore the accusation needs not to be made in writing.

Obj. 2: Further, it is laid down (Decret. II, qu. viii, can. Per scripta) that "no man may
accuse or be accused in his absence." Now writing seems to be useful in the fact that it is
a means of notifying something to one who is absent, as Augustine declares (De Trin. x, 1).
Therefore the accusation need not be in writing: and all the more that the canon declares that
"no accusation in writing should be accepted."

Obj. 3: Further, a man's crime is made known by denunciation, even as by accusation. Now writing
is unnecessary in denunciation. Therefore it is seemingly unnecessary in accusation.

On the contrary, It is laid down (Decret. II, qu. viii, can. Accusatorum) that "the role of
accuser must never be sanctioned without the accusation be in writing."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 67, A. 3), when the process in a criminal case goes by way
of accusation, the accuser is in the position of a party, so that the judge stands between
the accuser and the accused for the purpose of the trial of justice, wherein it behooves one
to proceed on certainties, as far as possible. Since however verbal utterances are apt to escape
one's memory, the judge would be unable to know for certain what had been said and with what
qualifications, when he comes to pronounce sentence, unless it were drawn up in writing. Hence
it has with reason been established that the accusation, as well as other parts of the judicial
procedure, should be put into writing.

Reply Obj. 1: Words are so many and so various that it is difficult to remember each one. A
proof of this is the fact that if a number of people who have heard the same words be asked
what was said, they will not agree in repeating them, even after a short time. And since a
slight difference of words changes the sense, even though the judge's sentence may have to
be pronounced soon afterwards, the certainty of judgment requires that the accusation be drawn
up in writing.

Reply Obj. 2: Writing is needed not only on account of the absence of the person who has something
to notify, or of the person to whom something is notified, but also on account of the delay
of time as stated above (ad 1). Hence when the canon says, "Let no accusation be accepted in
writing" it refers to the sending of an accusation by one who is absent: but it does not exclude
the necessity of writing when the accuser is present.

Reply Obj. 3: The denouncer does not bind himself to give proofs: wherefore he is not punished
if he is unable to prove. For this reason writing is unnecessary in a denunciation: and it
suffices that the denunciation be made verbally to the Church, who will proceed, in virtue
of her office, to the correction of the brother.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 68, Art. 3]

Whether an Accusation Is Rendered Unjust by Calumny, Collusion or Evasion?

Objection 1: It would seem that an accusation is not rendered unjust by calumny, collusion
or evasion. For according to Decret. II, qu. iii [*Append. Grat. ad can. Si quem poenituerit.],
"calumny consists in falsely charging a person with a crime." Now sometimes one man falsely
accuses another of a crime through ignorance of fact which excuses him. Therefore it seems
that an accusation is not always rendered unjust through being slanderous.

Obj. 2: Further, it is stated by the same authority that "collusion consists in hiding the
truth about a crime." But seemingly this is not unlawful, because one is not bound to disclose
every crime, as stated above (A. 1; Q. 33, A. 7). Therefore it seems that an accusation is
not rendered unjust by collusion.

Obj. 3: Further, it is stated by the same authority that "evasion consists in withdrawing altogether
from an accusation." But this can be done without injustice: for it is stated there also: "If
a man repent of having made a wicked accusation and inscription* in a matter which he cannot
prove, and come to an understanding with the innocent party whom he has accused, let them acquit
one another."

On the contrary, It is stated by the same authority: "The rashness of accusers shows itself
in three ways. For they are guilty either of calumny, or of collusion, or of evasion."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), accusation is ordered for the common good which it aims
at procuring by means of knowledge of the crime. Now no man ought to injure a person unjustly,
in order to promote the common good. Wherefore a man may sin in two ways when making an accusation:
first through acting unjustly against the accused, by charging him falsely with the commission
of a crime, i.e. by calumniating him; secondly, on the part of the commonwealth, whose good
is intended chiefly in an accusation, when anyone with wicked intent hinders a sin being punished.
This again happens in two ways: first by having recourse to fraud in making the accusation.
This belongs to collusion (prevaricatio) for "he that is guilty of collusion is like one who
rides astraddle (varicator), because he helps the other party, and betrays his own side" [*Append.
Grat. ad can. Si quem poenituerit.]. Secondly by withdrawing altogether from the accusation.
This is evasion (tergiversatio) for by desisting from what he had begun he seems to turn his
back (tergum vertere).

Reply Obj. 1: A man ought not to proceed to accuse except of what he is quite certain about,
wherein ignorance of fact has no place. Yet he who falsely charges another with a crime is
not a calumniator unless he gives utterance to false accusations out of malice. For it happens
sometimes that a man through levity of mind proceeds to accuse someone, because he believes
too readily what he hears, and this pertains to rashness; while, on the other hand sometimes
a man is led to make an accusation on account of an error for which he is not to blame. All
these things must be weighed according to the judge's prudence, lest he should declare a man
to have been guilty of calumny, who through levity of mind or an error for which he is not
to be blamed has uttered a false accusation.

Reply Obj. 2: Not everyone who hides the truth about a crime is guilty of collusion, but only
he who deceitfully hides the matter about which he makes the accusation, by collusion with
the defendant, dissembling his proofs, and admitting false excuses.

Reply Obj. 3: Evasion consists in withdrawing altogether from the accusation, by renouncing
the intention of accusing, not anyhow, but inordinately. There are two ways, however, in which
a man may rightly desist from accusing without committing a sin--in one way, in the very process
of accusation, if it come to his knowledge that the matter of his accusation is false, and
then by mutual consent the accuser and the defendant acquit one another--in another way, if
the accusation be quashed by the sovereign to whom belongs the care of the common good, which
it is intended to procure by the accusation.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 68, Art. 4]

Whether an Accuser Who Fails to Prove His Indictment Is Bound to the Punishment of Retaliation?

Objection 1: It would seem that the accuser who fails to prove his indictment is not bound
to the punishment of retaliation.

Obj. 2: Further, if the punishment of retaliation ought to be inflicted on one who has accused
unjustly, this will be on account of the injury he has done to someone--but not on account
of any injury done to the person of the accused, for in that case the sovereign could not remit
this punishment, nor on account of an injury to the commonwealth, because then the accused
could not acquit him. Therefore the punishment of retaliation is not due to one who has failed
to prove his accusation.

Obj. 3: Further, the one same sin does not deserve a twofold punishment, according to Nahum
1:9 [*Septuagint version]: "God shall not judge the same thing a second time." But he who fails
to prove his accusation, incurs the punishment due to defamation [*Can. Infames, caus. vi,
qu. 1], which punishment even the Pope seemingly cannot remit, according to a statement of
Pope Gelasius [*Callist. I, Epist. ad omn. Gall. episc.]: "Although we are able to save souls
by Penance, we are unable to remove the defamation." Therefore he is not bound to suffer the
punishment of retaliation.

On the contrary, Pope Hadrian I says (Cap. lii): "He that fails to prove his accusation, must
himself suffer the punishment which his accusation inferred."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), in a case, where the procedure is by way of accusation,
the accuser holds the position of a party aiming at the punishment of the accused. Now the
duty of the judge is to establish the equality of justice between them: and the equality of
justice requires that a man should himself suffer whatever harm he has intended to be inflicted
on another, according to Ex. 21:24, "Eye for eye, tooth for tooth." Consequently it is just
that he who by accusing a man has put him in danger of being punished severely, should himself
suffer a like punishment.

Reply Obj. 1: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 5) justice does not always require counterpassion,
because it matters considerably whether a man injures another voluntarily or not. Voluntary
injury deserves punishment, involuntary deserves forgiveness. Hence when the judge becomes
aware that a man has made a false accusation, not with a mind to do harm, but involuntarily
through ignorance or a just error, he does not impose the punishment of retaliation.

Reply Obj. 2: He who accuses wrongfully sins both against the person of the accused and against
the commonwealth; wherefore he is punished on both counts. This is the meaning of what is written
(Deut. 19:18-20): "And when after most diligent inquisition, they shall find that the false
witness hath told a lie against his brother: they shall render to him as he meant to do to
his brother," and this refers to the injury done to the person: and afterwards, referring to
the injury done to the commonwealth, the text continues: "And thou shalt take away the evil
out of the midst of thee, that others hearing may fear, and may not dare to do such things."
Specially, however, does he injure the person of the accused, if he accuse him falsely. Wherefore
the accused, if innocent, may condone the injury done to himself, particularly if the accusation
were made not calumniously but out of levity of mind. But if the accuser desist from accusing
an innocent man, through collusion with the latter's adversary, he inflicts an injury on the
commonwealth: and this cannot be condoned by the accused, although it can be remitted by the
sovereign, who has charge of the commonwealth.

Reply Obj. 3: The accuser deserves the punishment of retaliation in compensation for the harm
he attempts to inflict on his neighbor: but the punishment of disgrace is due to him for his
wickedness in accusing another man calumniously. Sometimes the sovereign remits the punishment,
and not the disgrace, and sometimes he removes the disgrace also: wherefore the Pope also can
remove this disgrace. When Pope Gelasius says: "We cannot remove the disgrace," he may mean
either the disgrace attaching to the deed (infamia facti), or that sometimes it is not expedient
to remove it, or again he may be referring to the disgrace inflicted by the civil judge, as
Gratian states (Callist. I, Epist. ad omn. Gall. episc.).

QUESTION 69

OF SINS COMMITTED AGAINST JUSTICE ON THE PART OF THE DEFENDANT (In Four Articles)

We must now consider those sins which are committed against justice on the part of the defendant.
Under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is a mortal sin to deny the truth which would lead to one's condemnation?

(2) Whether it is lawful to defend oneself with calumnies?

(3) Whether it is lawful to escape condemnation by appealing?

(4) Whether it is lawful for one who has been condemned to defend himself by violence if he
be able to do so?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 69, Art. 1]

Whether One Can, Without a Mortal Sin, Deny the Truth Which Would Lead to One's Condemnation?

Objection 1: It would seem one can, without a mortal sin, deny the truth which would lead to
one's condemnation. For Chrysostom says (Hom. xxxi super Ep. ad Heb.): "I do not say that you
should lay bare your guilt publicly, nor accuse yourself before others." Now if the accused
were to confess the truth in court, he would lay bare his guilt and be his own accuser. Therefore
he is not bound to tell the truth: and so he does not sin mortally if he tell a lie in court.

Obj. 2: Further, just as it is an officious lie when one tells a lie in order to rescue another
man from death, so is it an officious lie when one tells a lie in order to free oneself from
death, since one is more bound towards oneself than towards another. Now an officious lie is
considered not a mortal but a venial sin. Therefore if the accused denies the truth in court,
in order to escape death, he does not sin mortally.

Obj. 3: Further, every mortal sin is contrary to charity, as stated above (Q. 24, A. 12). But
that the accused lie by denying himself to be guilty of the crime laid to his charge is not
contrary to charity, neither as regards the love we owe God, nor as to the love due to our
neighbor. Therefore such a lie is not a mortal sin.

On the contrary, Whatever is opposed to the glory of God is a mortal sin, because we are bound
by precept to "do all to the glory of God" (1 Cor. 10:31). Now it is to the glory of God that
the accused confess that which is alleged against him, as appears from the words of Josue to
Achan, "My son, give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and confess and tell me what thou hast
done, hide it not" (Joshua 7:19). Therefore it is a mortal sin to lie in order to cover one's
guilt.

I answer that, Whoever acts against the due order of justice, sins mortally, as stated above
(Q. 59, A. 4). Now it belongs to the order of justice that a man should obey his superior in
those matters to which the rights of his authority extend. Again, the judge, as stated above
(Q. 67, A. 1), is the superior in relation to the person whom he judges. Therefore the accused
is in duty bound to tell the judge the truth which the latter exacts from him according to
the form of law. Hence if he refuse to tell the truth which he is under obligation to tell,
or if he mendaciously deny it, he sins mortally. If, on the other hand, the judge asks of him
that which he cannot ask in accordance with the order of justice, the accused is not bound
to satisfy him, and he may lawfully escape by appealing or otherwise: but it is not lawful
for him to lie.

Reply Obj. 1: When a man is examined by the judge according to the order of justice, he does
not lay bare his own guilt, but his guilt is unmasked by another, since the obligation of answering
is imposed on him by one whom he is bound to obey.

Reply Obj. 2: To lie, with injury to another person, in order to rescue a man from death is
not a purely officious lie, for it has an admixture of the pernicious lie: and when a man lies
in court in order to exculpate himself, he does an injury to one whom he is bound to obey,
since he refuses him his due, namely an avowal of the truth.

Reply Obj. 3: He who lies in court by denying his guilt, acts both against the love of God
to whom judgment belongs, and against the love of his neighbor, and this not only as regards
the judge, to whom he refuses his due, but also as regards his accuser, who is punished if
he fail to prove his accusation. Hence it is written (Ps. 140:4): "Incline not my heart to
evil words, to make excuses in sins": on which words a gloss says: "Shameless men are wont
by lying to deny their guilt when they have been found out." And Gregory in expounding Job
31:33, "If as a man I have hid my sin," says (Moral. xxii, 15): "It is a common vice of mankind
to sin in secret, by lying to hide the sin that has been committed, and when convicted to aggravate
the sin by defending oneself."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 69, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful for the Accused to Defend Himself with Calumnies?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful for the accused to defend himself with calumnies. Because,
according to civil law (Cod. II, iv, De transact. 18), when a man is on trial for his life
it is lawful for him to bribe his adversary. Now this is done chiefly by defending oneself
with calumnies. Therefore the accused who is on trial for his life does not sin if he defend
himself with calumnies.

Obj. 2: Further, an accuser who is guilty of collusion with the accused, is punishable by law
(Decret. II, qu. iii, can. Si quem poenit.). Yet no punishment is imposed on the accused for
collusion with the accuser. Therefore it would seem lawful for the accused to defend himself
with calumnies.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 14:16): "A wise man feareth and declineth from evil,
the fool leapeth over and is confident." Now what is done wisely is no sin. Therefore no matter
how a man declines from evil, he does not sin.

On the contrary, In criminal cases an oath has to be taken against calumnious allegations (Extra,
De juramento calumniae, cap. Inhaerentes): and this would not be the case if it were lawful
to defend oneself with calumnies. Therefore it is not lawful for the accused to defend himself
with calumnies.

I answer that, It is one thing to withhold the truth, and another to utter a falsehood. The
former is lawful sometimes, for a man is not bound to divulge all truth, but only such as the
judge can and must require of him according to the order of justice; as, for instance, when
the accused is already disgraced through the commission of some crime, or certain indications
of his guilt have already been discovered, or again when his guilt is already more or less
proven. On the other hand it is never lawful to make a false declaration.

As regards what he may do lawfully, a man can employ either lawful means, and such as are adapted
to the end in view, which belongs to prudence; or he can use unlawful means, unsuitable to
the proposed end, and this belongs to craftiness, which is exercised by fraud and guile, as
shown above (Q. 55, AA. 3, seqq.). His conduct in the former case is praiseworthy, in the latter
sinful. Accordingly it is lawful for the accused to defend himself by withholding the truth
that he is not bound to avow, by suitable means, for instance by not answering such questions
as he is not bound to answer. This is not to defend himself with calumnies, but to escape prudently.
But it is unlawful for him, either to utter a falsehood, or to withhold a truth that he is
bound to avow, or to employ guile or fraud, because fraud and guile have the force of a lie,
and so to use them would be to defend oneself with calumnies.

Reply Obj. 1: Human laws leave many things unpunished, which according to the Divine judgment
are sins, as, for example, simple fornication; because human law does not exact perfect virtue
from man, for such virtue belongs to few and cannot be found in so great a number of people
as human law has to direct. That a man is sometimes unwilling to commit a sin in order to escape
from the death of the body, the danger of which threatens the accused who is on trial for his
life, is an act of perfect virtue, since "death is the most fearful of all temporal things"
(Ethic. iii, 6). Wherefore if the accused, who is on trial for his life, bribes his adversary,
he sins indeed by inducing him to do what is unlawful, yet the civil law does not punish this
sin, and in this sense it is said to be lawful.

Reply Obj. 2: If the accuser is guilty of collusion with the accused and the latter is guilty,
he incurs punishment, and so it is evident that he sins. Wherefore, since it is a sin to induce
a man to sin, or to take part in a sin in any way--for the Apostle says (Rom. 1:32), that "they
. . . are worthy of death . . . that consent" to those who sin--it is evident that the accused
also sins if he is guilty of collusion with his adversary. Nevertheless according to human
laws no punishment is inflicted on him, for the reason given above.

Reply Obj. 3: The wise man hides himself not by slandering others but by exercising prudence.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 69, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Lawful for the Accused to Escape Judgment by Appealing?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for the accused to escape judgment by appealing. The Apostle
says (Rom. 13:1): "Let every soul be subject to the higher powers." Now the accused by appealing
refuses to be subject to a higher power, viz. the judge. Therefore he commits a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, ordinary authority is more binding than that which we choose for ourselves.
Now according to the Decretals (II, qu. vi, cap. A judicibus) it is unlawful to appeal from
the judges chosen by common consent. Much less therefore is it lawful to appeal from ordinary
judges.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is lawful once is always lawful. But it is not lawful to appeal after
the tenth day [*Can. Anteriorum, caus. ii, qu. 6], nor a third time on the same point [*Can.
Si autem, caus. ii, qu. 6]. Therefore it would seem that an appeal is unlawful in itself.

On the contrary, Paul appealed to Caesar (Acts 25).

I answer that, There are two motives for which a man appeals. First through confidence in the
justice of his cause, seeing that he is unjustly oppressed by the judge, and then it is lawful
for him to appeal, because this is a prudent means of escape. Hence it is laid down (Decret.
II, qu. vi, can. Omnis oppressus): "All those who are oppressed are free, if they so wish,
to appeal to the judgment of the priests, and no man may stand in their way." Secondly, a man
appeals in order to cause a delay, lest a just sentence be pronounced against him. This is
to defend oneself calumniously, and is unlawful as stated above (A. 2). For he inflicts an
injury both on the judge, whom he hinders in the exercise of his office, and on his adversary,
whose justice he disturbs as far as he is able. Hence it is laid down (II, qu. vi, can. Omnino
puniendus): "Without doubt a man should be punished if his appeal be declared unjust."

Reply Obj. 1: A man should submit to the lower authority in so far as the latter observes the
order of the higher authority. If the lower authority departs from the order of the higher,
we ought not to submit to it, for instance "if the proconsul order one thing and the emperor
another," according to a gloss on Rom. 13:2. Now when a judge oppresses anyone unjustly, in
this respect he departs from the order of the higher authority, whereby he is obliged to judge
justly. Hence it is lawful for a man who is oppressed unjustly, to have recourse to the authority
of the higher power, by appealing either before or after sentence has been pronounced. And
since it is to be presumed that there is no rectitude where true faith is lacking, it is unlawful
for a Catholic to appeal to an unbelieving judge, according to Decret. II, qu. vi, can. Catholicus:
"The Catholic who appeals to the decision of a judge of another faith shall be excommunicated,
whether his case be just or unjust." Hence the Apostle also rebuked those who went to law before
unbelievers (1 Cor. 6:6).

Reply Obj. 2: It is due to a man's own fault or neglect that, of his own accord, he submits
to the judgment of one in whose justice he has no confidence. Moreover it would seem to point
to levity of mind for a man not to abide by what he has once approved of. Hence it is with
reason that the law refuses us the faculty of appealing from the decision of judges of our
own choice, who have no power save by virtue of the consent of the litigants. On the other
hand the authority of an ordinary judge depends, not on the consent of those who are subject
to his judgment, but on the authority of the king or prince who appointed him. Hence, as a
remedy against his unjust oppression, the law allows one to have recourse to appeal, so that
even if the judge be at the same time ordinary and chosen by the litigants, it is lawful to
appeal from his decision, since seemingly his ordinary authority occasioned his being chosen
as arbitrator. Nor is it to be imputed as a fault to the man who consented to his being arbitrator,
without adverting to the fact that he was appointed ordinary judge by the prince.

Reply Obj. 3: The equity of the law so guards the interests of the one party that the other
is not oppressed. Thus it allows ten days for appeal to be made, this being considered sufficient
time for deliberating on the expediency of an appeal. If on the other hand there were no fixed
time limit for appealing, the certainty of judgment would ever be in suspense, so that the
other party would suffer an injury. The reason why it is not allowed to appeal a third time
on the same point, is that it is not probable that the judges would fail to judge justly so
many times.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 69, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Who Is Condemned to Death May Lawfully Defend Himself If He Can?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man who is condemned to death may lawfully defend himself
if he can. For it is always lawful to do that to which nature inclines us, as being of natural
right, so to speak. Now, to resist corruption is an inclination of nature not only in men and
animals but also in things devoid of sense. Therefore if he can do so, the accused, after condemnation,
may lawfully resist being put to death.

Obj. 2: Further, just as a man, by resistance, escapes the death to which he has been condemned,
so does he by flight. Now it is lawful seemingly to escape death by flight, according to Ecclus.
9:18, "Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill [and not to quicken]" [*The words
in the brackets are not in the Vulgate]. Therefore it is also lawful for the accused to resist.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 24:11): "Deliver them that are led to death: and those
that are drawn to death forbear not to deliver." Now a man is under greater obligation to himself
than to another. Therefore it is lawful for a condemned man to defend himself from being put
to death.

On the contrary, The Apostle says (Rom. Now a condemned man, by defending himself, resists
the power in the point of its being ordained by God "for the punishment of evil-doers, and
for the praise of the good" [*1 Pet. 2:14]. Therefore he sins in defending himself.

I answer that, A man may be condemned to death in two ways. First justly, and then it is not
lawful for the condemned to defend himself, because it is lawful for the judge to combat his
resistance by force, so that on his part the fight is unjust, and consequently without any
doubt he sins.

Secondly a man is condemned unjustly: and such a sentence is like the violence of robbers,
according to Ezech. Wherefore even as it is lawful to resist robbers, so is it lawful, in a
like case, to resist wicked princes; except perhaps in order to avoid scandal, whence some
grave disturbance might be feared to arise.

Reply Obj. 1: Reason was given to man that he might ensue those things to which his nature
inclines, not in all cases, but in accordance with the order of reason. Hence not all self-defense
is lawful, but only such as is accomplished with due moderation.

Reply Obj. 2: When a man is condemned to death, he has not to kill himself, but to suffer death:
wherefore he is not bound to do anything from which death would result, such as to stay in
the place whence he would be led to execution. But he may not resist those who lead him to
death, in order that he may not suffer what is just for him to suffer. Even so, if a man were
condemned to die of hunger, he does not sin if he partakes of food brought to him secretly,
because to refrain from taking it would be to kill himself.

Reply Obj. 3: This saying of the wise man does not direct that one should deliver a man from
death in opposition to the order of justice: wherefore neither should a man deliver himself
from death by resisting against justice.

QUESTION 70

OF INJUSTICE WITH REGARD TO THE PERSON OF THE WITNESS (In Four Articles)

We must now consider injustice with regard to the person of the witness. Under this head there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether a man is bound to give evidence?

(2) Whether the evidence of two or three witnesses suffices?

(3) Whether a man's evidence may be rejected without any fault on his part?

(4) Whether it is a mortal sin to bear false witness?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 70, Art. 1]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Give Evidence?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is not bound to give evidence. Augustine says (QQ. Gen.
1:26) [*Cf. Contra Faust. xxii, 33, 34], that when Abraham said of his wife (Gen. 20:2), "She
is my sister," he wished the truth to be concealed and not a lie be told. Now, by hiding the
truth a man abstains from giving evidence. Therefore a man is not bound to give evidence.

Obj. 2: Further, no man is bound to act deceitfully.

Obj. 3: Further, clerics and priests, more than others, are bound to those things that are
necessary for salvation. Yet clerics and priests are forbidden to give evidence when a man
is on trial for his life. Therefore it is not necessary for salvation to give evidence.

On the contrary, Augustine [*Can. Quisquis, caus. xi, qu. 3, cap. Falsidicus; cf. Isidore,
Sentent. iii, 55] says: "Both he who conceals the truth and he who tells a lie are guilty,
the former because he is unwilling to do good, the latter because he desires to hurt."

I answer that, We must make a distinction in the matter of giving evidence: because sometimes
a certain man's evidence is necessary, and sometimes not. If the necessary evidence is that
of a man subject to a superior whom, in matters pertaining to justice, he is bound to obey,
without doubt he is bound to give evidence on those points which are required of him in accordance
with the order of justice, for instance on manifest things or when ill-report has preceded.
If however he is required to give evidence on other points, for instance secret matters, and
those of which no ill-report has preceded, he is not bound to give evidence. On the other hand,
if his evidence be required by authority of a superior whom he is bound to obey, we must make
a distinction: because if his evidence is required in order to deliver a man from an unjust
death or any other penalty, or from false defamation, or some loss, in such cases he is bound
to give evidence. Even if his evidence is not demanded, he is bound to do what he can to declare
the truth to someone who may profit thereby. 24:11): "Deliver them that are led to death";
and (Rom. 1:32): "They are worthy of death, not only they that do them, but they also that
consent to them that do them," on which words a gloss says: "To be silent when one can disprove
is to consent." In matters pertaining to a man's condemnation, one is not bound to give evidence,
except when one is constrained by a superior in accordance with the order of justice; since
if the truth of such a matter be concealed, no particular injury is inflicted on anyone. Or,
if some danger threatens the accuser, it matters not since he risked the danger of his own
accord: whereas it is different with the accused, who incurs the danger against his will.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is speaking of concealment of the truth in a case when a man is not
compelled by his superior's authority to declare the truth, and when such concealment is not
specially injurious to any person.

Reply Obj. 2: A man should by no means give evidence on matters secretly committed to him in
confession, because he knows such things, not as man but as God's minister: and the sacrament
is more binding than any human precept. But as regards matters committed to man in some other
way under secrecy, we must make a distinction. Sometimes they are of such a nature that one
is bound to make them known as soon as they come to our knowledge, for instance if they conduce
to the spiritual or corporal corruption of the community, or to some grave personal injury,
in short any like matter that a man is bound to make known either by giving evidence or by
denouncing it. Against such a duty a man cannot be obliged to act on the plea that the matter
is committed to him under secrecy, for he would break the faith he owes to another. On the
other hand sometimes they are such as one is not bound to make known, so that one may be under
obligation not to do so on account of their being committed to one under secrecy. In such a
case one is by no means bound to make them known, even if the superior should command; because
to keep faith is of natural right, and a man cannot be commanded to do what is contrary to
natural right.

Reply Obj. 3: It is unbecoming for ministers of the altar to slay a man or to cooperate in
his slaying, as stated above (Q. 64, A. 4); hence according to the order of justice they cannot
be compelled to give evidence when a man is on trial for his life.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 70, Art. 2]

Whether the Evidence of Two or Three Persons Suffices?

Objection 1: It would seem that the evidence of two or three persons is not sufficient. For
judgment requires certitude. Now certitude of the truth is not obtained by the assertions of
two or three witnesses, for we read that Naboth was unjustly condemned on the evidence of two
witnesses (3 Kings 21). Therefore the evidence of two or three witnesses does not suffice.

Obj. 2: Further, in order for evidence to be credible it must agree. But frequently the evidence
of two or three disagrees in some point. Therefore it is of no use for proving the truth in court.

Obj. 3: Further, it is laid down (Decret. II, qu. iv, can. Praesul.): "A bishop shall not be
condemned save on the evidence of seventy-two witnesses; nor a cardinal priest of the Roman
Church, unless there be sixty-four witnesses. Nor a cardinal deacon of the Roman Church, unless
there be twenty-seven witnesses; nor a subdeacon, an acolyte, an exorcist, a reader or a doorkeeper
without seven witnesses." Now the sin of one who is of higher dignity is more grievous, and
consequently should be treated more severely. Therefore neither is the evidence of two or three
witnesses sufficient for the condemnation of other persons.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 17:6): "By the mouth of two or three witnesses shall
he die that is to be slain," and further on (Deut. 19:15): "In the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word shall stand."

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 3), "we must not expect to find certitude
equally in every matter." For in human acts, on which judgments are passed and evidence required,
it is impossible to have demonstrative certitude, because they are about things contingent
and variable. Hence the certitude of probability suffices, such as may reach the truth in the
greater number of cases, although it fail in the minority. Now it is probable that the assertion
of several witnesses contains the truth rather than the assertion of one: and since the accused
is the only one who denies, while several witness affirm the same as the prosecutor, it is
reasonably established both by Divine and by human law, that the assertion of several witnesses
should be upheld. Now all multitude is comprised of three elements, the beginning, the middle
and the end. Wherefore, according to the Philosopher (De Coelo i, 1), "we reckon 'all' and
'whole' to consist of three parts." Now we have a triple voucher when two agree with the prosecutor:
hence two witnesses are required; or for the sake of greater certitude three, which is the
perfect number. Wherefore it is written (Eccles. 4:12): "A threefold cord is not easily broken":
and Augustine, commenting on John 8:17, "The testimony of two men is true," says (Tract. xxxvi)
that "there is here a mystery by which we are given to understand that Trinity wherein is perpetual
stability of truth."

Reply Obj. 1: No matter how great a number of witnesses may be determined, the evidence might
sometimes be unjust, since is written (Ex. 23:2): "Thou shalt not follow the multitude to do
evil." And yet the fact that in so many it is not possible to have certitude without fear of
error, is no reason why we should reject the certitude which can probably be had through two
or three witnesses, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: If the witnesses disagree in certain principal circumstances which change the
substance of the fact, for instance in time, place, or persons, which are chiefly in question,
their evidence is of no weight, because if they disagree in such things, each one would seem
to be giving distinct evidence and to be speaking of different facts. For instance, one say
that a certain thing happened at such and such a time or place, while another says it happened
at another time or place, they seem not to be speaking of the same event. The evidence is not
weakened if one witness says that he does not remember, while the other attests to a determinate
time or place. And if on such points as these the witness for prosecution and defense disagree
altogether, and if they be equal in number on either side, and of equal standing, the accused
should have the benefit of the doubt, because the judge ought to be more inclined to acquit
than to condemn, except perhaps in favorable suits, such as a pleading for liberty and the
like. If, however, the witnesses for the same side disagree, the judge ought to use his own
discretion in discerning which side to favor, by considering either the number of witnesses,
or their standing, or the favorableness of the suit, or the nature of the business and of the
evidence.

Much more ought the evidence of one witness to be rejected if he contradict himself when questioned
about what he has seen and about what he knows; not, however, if he contradict himself when
questioned about matters of opinion and report, since he may be moved to answer differently
according to the different things he has seen and heard.

On the other hand if there be discrepancy of evidence in circumstances not touching the substance
of the fact, for instance, whether the weather were cloudy or fine, whether the house were
painted or not, or such like matters, such discrepancy does not weaken the evidence, because
men are not wont to take much notice of such things, wherefore they easily forget them. Indeed,
a discrepancy of this kind renders the evidence more credible, as Chrysostom states (Hom. i
in Matth.), because if the witnesses agreed in every point, even in the minutest of details,
they would seem to have conspired together to say the same thing: but this must be left to
the prudent discernment of the judge.

Reply Obj. 3: This passage refers specially to the bishops, priests, deacons and clerics of
the Roman Church, on account of its dignity: and this for three reasons. First because in that
Church those men ought to be promoted whose sanctity makes their evidence of more weight than
that of many witnesses. Secondly, because those who have to judge other men, often have many
opponents on account of their justice, wherefore those who give evidence against them should
not be believed indiscriminately, unless they be very numerous. Thirdly, because the condemnation
of any one of them would detract in public opinion from the dignity and authority of that Church,
a result which would be more fraught with danger than if one were to tolerate a sinner in that
same Church, unless he were very notorious and manifest, so that a grave scandal would arise
if he were tolerated.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 70, Art. 3]

Whether a Man's Evidence Can Be Rejected Without Any Fault of His?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man's evidence ought not to be rejected except on account
of some fault. For it is inflicted as a penalty on some that their evidence is inadmissible,
as in the case of those who are branded with infamy. Now a penalty must not be inflicted save
for a fault. Therefore it would seem that no man's evidence ought to be rejected save on account
of a fault.

Obj. 2: Further, "Good is to be presumed of every one, unless the contrary appear" [*Cap. Dudum,
de Praesumpt.]. Now it pertains to a man's goodness that he should give true evidence. Since
therefore there can be no proof of the contrary, unless there be some fault of his, it would
seem that no man's evidence should be rejected save for some fault.

Obj. 3: Further, no man is rendered unfit for things necessary for salvation except by some
sin. But it is necessary for salvation to give true evidence, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore
no man should be excluded from giving evidence save for some fault.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Regist. xiii, 44): "As to the bishop who is said to have been
accused by his servants, you are to know that they should by no means have been heard": which
words are embodied in the Decretals (II, qu. 1, can. Imprimis).

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), the authority of evidence is not infallible but probable;
and consequently the evidence for one side is weakened by whatever strengthens the probability
of the other. Now the reliability of a person's evidence is weakened, sometimes indeed on account
of some fault of his, as in the case of unbelievers and persons of evil repute, as well as
those who are guilty of a public crime and who are not allowed even to accuse; sometimes, without
any fault on his part, and this owing either to a defect in the reason, as in the case of children,
imbeciles and women, or to personal feeling, as in the case of enemies, or persons united by
family or household ties, or again owing to some external condition, as in the case of poor
people, slaves, and those who are under authority, concerning whom it is to be presumed that
they might easily be induced to give evidence against the truth.

Thus it is manifest that a person's evidence may be rejected either with or without some fault
of his.

Reply Obj. 1: If a person is disqualified from giving evidence this is done as a precaution
against false evidence rather than as a punishment. Hence the argument does not prove.

Reply Obj. 2: Good is to be presumed of everyone unless the contrary appear, provided this
does not threaten injury to another: because, in that case, one ought to be careful not to
believe everyone readily, according to 1 John 4:1: "Believe not every spirit."

Reply Obj. 3: To give evidence is necessary for salvation, provided the witness be competent,
and the order of justice observed. Hence nothing hinders certain persons being excused from
giving evidence, if they be considered unfit according to law.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 70, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Always a Mortal Sin to Give False Evidence?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not always a mortal sin to give false evidence. For a
person may happen to give false evidence, through ignorance of fact. Now such ignorance excuses
from mortal sin. Therefore the giving of false evidence is not always a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, a lie that benefits someone and hurts no man is officious, and this is not
a mortal sin. Now sometimes a lie of this kind occurs in false evidence, as when a person gives
false evidence in order to save a man from death, or from an unjust sentence which threatens
him through other false witnesses or a perverse judge. Therefore in such cases it is not a
mortal sin to give false evidence.

Obj. 3: Further, a witness is required to take an oath in order that he may fear to commit
a mortal sin of perjury. But this would not be necessary, if it were already a mortal sin to
give false evidence. Therefore the giving of false evidence is not always mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 19:5): "A false witness shall not be unpunished."

I answer that, False evidence has a threefold deformity. The first is owing to perjury, since
witnesses are admitted only on oath and on this count it is always a mortal sin. Secondly,
owing to the violation of justice, and on this account it is a mortal sin generically, even
as any kind of injustice. Hence the prohibition of false evidence by the precept of the decalogue
is expressed in this form when it is said (Ex. 20:16), "Thou shalt not bear false witness against
thy neighbor." For one does nothing against a man by preventing him from doing someone an injury,
but only by taking away his justice. Thirdly, owing to the falsehood itself, by reason of which
every lie is a sin: on this account, the giving of false evidence is not always a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: In giving evidence a man ought not to affirm as certain, as though he knew it,
that about which he is not certain; and he should confess his doubt in doubtful terms, and
that which he is certain about, in terms of certainty. Owing however to the frailty of the
human memory, a man sometimes thinks he is certain about something that is not true; and then
if after thinking over the matter with due care he deems himself certain about that false thing,
he does not sin mortally if he asserts it, because the evidence which he gives is not directly
and intentionally, but accidentally contrary to what he intends.

Reply Obj. 2: An unjust judgment is not a judgment, wherefore the false evidence given in an
unjust judgment, in order to prevent injustice is not a mortal sin by virtue of the judgment,
but only by reason of the oath violated.

Reply Obj. 3: Men abhor chiefly those sins that are against God, as being most grievous; and
among them is perjury: whereas they do not abhor so much sins against their neighbor. Consequently,
for the greater certitude of evidence, the witness is required to take a oath.

QUESTION 71

OF INJUSTICE IN JUDGMENT ON THE PART OF COUNSEL (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the injustice which takes place in judgment on the part of counsel, and
under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether an advocate is bound to defend the suits of the poor?

(2) Whether certain persons should be prohibited from exercising the office of advocate?

(3) Whether an advocate sins by defending an unjust cause?

(4) Whether he sins if he accept a fee for defending a suit?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 71, Art. 1]

Whether an Advocate Is Bound to Defend the Suits of the Poor?

Objection 1: It would seem that an advocate is bound to defend the suits of the poor. For it
is written (Ex. 23:5): "If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lie underneath his burden,
thou shalt not pass by, but shall lift him up with him." Now no less a danger threatens the
poor man whose suit is being unjustly prejudiced, than if his ass were to lie underneath its
burden. Therefore an advocate is bound to defend the suits of the poor.

Obj. Now every man is bound, not to hide but faithfully to dispense the talent committed to
him; as evidenced by the punishment inflicted on the servant who hid his talent (Matt. 25:30).
Therefore an advocate is bound to plead for the poor.

Obj. 3: Further, the precept about performing works of mercy, being affirmative, is binding
according to time and place, and this is chiefly in cases of need. Now it seems to be a case
of need when the suit of a poor man is being prejudiced. Therefore it seems that in such a
case an advocate is bound to defend the poor man's suit.

On the contrary, He that lacks food is no less in need than he that lacks an advocate. Yet
he that is able to give food is not always bound to feed the needy. Therefore neither is an
advocate always bound to defend the suits of the poor.

I answer that, Since defense of the poor man's suit belongs to the works of mercy, the answer
to this inquiry is the same as the one given above with regard to the other works of mercy
(Q. 32, AA. 5, 9). Now no man is sufficient to bestow a work of mercy on all those who need
it. He says "by reason of place," because one is not bound to search throughout the world for
the needy that one may succor them; and it suffices to do works of mercy to those one meets
with. Hence it is written (Ex. 23:4): "If thou meet thy enemy's ass going astray, bring it
back to him." He says also "by reason of time," because one is not bound to provide for the
future needs of others, and it suffices to succor present needs. Hence it is written (1 John
3:17): "He that . . . shall see his brother in need, and shall put up his bowels from him,
how doth the charity of God abide in him?" Lastly he says, "or any other circumstance," because
one ought to show kindness to those especially who are by any tie whatever united to us, according
to 1 Tim.

It may happen however that these circumstances concur, and then we have to consider whether
this particular man stands in such a need that it is not easy to see how he can be succored
otherwise, and then one is bound to bestow the work of mercy on him. If, however, it is easy
to see how he can be otherwise succored, either by himself, or by some other person still more
closely united to him, or in a better position to help him, one is not bound so strictly to
help the one in need that it would be a sin not to do so: although it would be praiseworthy
to do so where one is not bound to. Therefore an advocate is not always bound to defend the
suits of the poor, but only when the aforesaid circumstances concur, else he would have to
put aside all other business, and occupy himself entirely in defending the suits of poor people.
The same applies to a physician with regard to attendance on the sick.

Reply Obj. 1: So long as the ass lies under the burden, there is no means of help in this case,
unless those who are passing along come to the man's aid, and therefore they are bound to help.
But they would not be so bound if help were possible from another quarter.

Reply Obj. 2: A man is bound to make good use of the talent bestowed on him, according to the
opportunities afforded by time, place, and other circumstances, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Not every need is such that it is one's duty to remedy it, but only such as we
have stated above.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 71, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Fitting That the Law Should Debar Certain Persons from the Office of Advocate?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting for the law to debar certain persons from the office of
advocate. For no man should be debarred from doing works of mercy. Now it belongs to the works
of mercy to defend a man's suit, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore no man should be debarred
from this office.

Obj. 2: Further, contrary causes have not, seemingly, the same effect. Now to be busy with
Divine things and to be busy about sin are contrary to one another. Therefore it is unfitting
that some should be debarred from the office of advocate, on account of religion, as monks
and clerics, while others are debarred on account of sin, as persons of ill-repute and heretics.

Obj. 3: Further, a man should love his neighbor as himself. Now it is a duty of love for an
advocate to plead a person's cause. Therefore it is unfitting that certain persons should be
debarred from pleading the cause of others, while they are allowed to advocate their own cause.

On the contrary, According to Decret. III, qu. vii, can. Infames, many persons are debarred
from the office of advocate.

I answer that, In two ways a person is debarred from performing a certain act: first because
it is impossible to him, secondly because it is unbecoming to him: but, whereas the man to
whom a certain act is impossible, is absolutely debarred from performing it, he to whom an
act is unbecoming is not debarred altogether, since necessity may do away with its unbecomingness.
Accordingly some are debarred from the office of advocate because it is impossible to them
through lack of sense--either interior, as in the case of madmen and minors--or exterior, as
in the case of the deaf and dumb. For an advocate needs to have both interior skill so that
he may be able to prove the justice of the cause he defends, and also speech and hearing, that
he may speak and hear what is said to him. Consequently those who are defective in these points,
are altogether debarred from being advocates either in their own or in another's cause. The
becomingness of exercising this office is removed in two ways. First, through a man being engaged
in higher things. Wherefore it is unfitting that monks or priests should be advocates in any
cause whatever, or that clerics should plead in a secular court, because such persons are engaged
in Divine things. Secondly, on account of some personal defect, either of body (for instance
a blind man whose attendance in a court of justice would be unbecoming) or of soul, for it
ill becomes one who has disdained to be just himself, to plead for the justice of another.
Wherefore it is unbecoming that persons of ill repute, unbelievers, and those who have been
convicted of grievous crimes should be advocates. Nevertheless this unbecomingness is outweighed
by necessity: and for this reason such persons can plead either their own cause or that of
persons closely connected with them. Moreover, clerics can be advocates in the cause of their
own church, and monks in the cause of their own monastery, if the abbot direct them to do so.

Reply Obj. 1: Certain persons are sometimes debarred by unbecomingness, and others by inability
from performing works of mercy: for not all the works of mercy are becoming to all persons:
thus it ill becomes a fool to give counsel, or the ignorant to teach.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as virtue is destroyed by "too much" and "too little," so does a person
become incompetent by "more" and "less." For this reason some, like religious and clerics,
are debarred from pleading in causes, because they are above such an office; and others because
they are less than competent to exercise it, such as persons of ill-repute and unbelievers.

Reply Obj. 3: The necessity of pleading the causes of others is not so pressing as the necessity
of pleading one's own cause, because others are able to help themselves otherwise: hence the
comparison fails.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 71, Art. 3]

Whether an Advocate Sins by Defending an Unjust Cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that an advocate does not sin by defending an unjust cause. For
just as a physician proves his skill by healing a desperate disease, so does an advocate prove
his skill, if he can defend an unjust cause. Now a physician is praised if he heals a desperate
malady. Therefore an advocate also commits no sin, but ought to be praised, if he defends an
unjust cause.

Obj. 2: Further, it is always lawful to desist from committing a sin. Yet an advocate is punished
if he throws up his brief (Decret. II, qu. iii, can. Si quem poenit.). Therefore an advocate
does not sin by defending an unjust cause, when once he has undertaken its defense.

Obj. 3: Further, it would seem to be a greater sin for an advocate to use unjust means in defense
of a just cause (e.g. by producing false witnesses, or alleging false laws), than to defend
an unjust cause, since the former is a sin against the form, the latter against the matter
of justice. Yet it is seemingly lawful for an advocate to make use of such underhand means,
even as it is lawful for a soldier to lay ambushes in a battle. Therefore it would seem that
an advocate does not sin by defending an unjust cause.

On the contrary, It is said (2 Paralip. 19:2): "Thou helpest the ungodly . . . and therefore
thou didst deserve . . . the wrath of the Lord." Now an advocate by defending an unjust cause,
helps the ungodly. Therefore he sins and deserves the wrath of the Lord.

I answer that, It is unlawful to cooperate in an evil deed, by counseling, helping, or in any
way consenting, because to counsel or assist an action is, in a way, to do it, and the Apostle
says (Rom. 1:32) that "they . . . are worthy of death, not only they that do" a sin, "but they
also that consent to them that do" it. Hence it was stated above (Q. 62, A. 7), that all such
are bound to restitution. Now it is evident that an advocate provides both assistance and counsel
to the party for whom he pleads. Wherefore, if knowingly he defends an unjust cause, without
doubt he sins grievously, and is bound to restitution of the loss unjustly incurred by the
other party by reason of the assistance he has provided. If, however, he defends an unjust
cause unknowingly, thinking it just, he is to be excused according to the measure in which
ignorance is excusable.

Reply Obj. 1: The physician injures no man by undertaking to heal a desperate malady, whereas
the advocate who accepts service in an unjust cause, unjustly injures the party against whom
he pleads unjustly. Hence the comparison fails. For though he may seem to deserve praise for
showing skill in his art, nevertheless he sins by reason of injustice in his will, since he
abuses his art for an evil end.

Reply Obj. 2: If an advocate believes from the outset that the cause is just, and discovers
afterwards while the case is proceeding that it is unjust, he ought not to throw up his brief
in such a way as to help the other side, or so as to reveal the secrets of his client to the
other party. But he can and must give up the case, or induce his client to give way, or make
some compromise without prejudice to the opposing party.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 40, A. 3), it is lawful for a soldier, or a general to lay
ambushes in a just war, by prudently concealing what he has a mind to do, but not by means
of fraudulent falsehoods, since we should keep faith even with a foe, as Tully says (De offic.
iii, 29). Hence it is lawful for an advocate, in defending his case, prudently to conceal whatever
might hinder its happy issue, but it is unlawful for him to employ any kind of falsehood.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 71, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Lawful for an Advocate to Take a Fee for Pleading?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful for an advocate to take a fee for pleading. Now it is a
work of mercy to plead another's cause, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore it is not lawful
for an advocate to take payment in money for pleading.

Obj. 2: Further, spiritual things are not to be bartered with temporal things. But pleading
a person's cause seems to be a spiritual good since it consists in using one's knowledge of
law. Therefore it is not lawful for an advocate to take a fee for pleading.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the person of the advocate concurs towards the pronouncement of the
verdict, so do the persons of the judge and of the witness. Now, according to Augustine (Ep.
cliii ad Macedon.), "the judge should not sell a just sentence, nor the witness true evidence."
Therefore neither can an advocate sell a just pleading.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Ep. cliii ad Macedon.) that "an advocate may lawfully sell
his pleading, and a lawyer his advice."

I answer that, A man may justly receive payment for granting what he is not bound to grant.
Now it is evident that an advocate is not always bound to consent to plead, or to give advice
in other people's causes. Wherefore, if he sell his pleading or advice, he does not act against
justice. The same applies to the physician who attends on a sick person to heal him, and to
all like persons; provided, however, they take a moderate fee, with due consideration for persons,
for the matter in hand, for the labor entailed, and for the custom of the country. If, however,
they wickedly extort an immoderate fee, they sin against justice. Hence Augustine says (Ep.
cliii ad Macedon.) that "it is customary to demand from them restitution of what they have
extorted by a wicked excess, but not what has been given to them in accordance with a commendable
custom."

Reply Obj. 1: Man is not bound to do gratuitously whatever he can do from motives of mercy:
else no man could lawfully sell anything, since anything may be given from motives of mercy.
But when a man does give a thing out of mercy, he should seek, not a human, but a Divine reward.
In like manner an advocate, when he mercifully pleads the cause of a poor man, should have
in view not a human but a Divine meed; and yet he is not always bound to give his services
gratuitously.

Reply Obj. 2: Though knowledge of law is something spiritual, the use of that knowledge is
accomplished by the work of the body: hence it is lawful to take money in payment of that use,
else no craftsman would be allowed to make profit by his art.

Reply Obj. 3: The judge and witnesses are common to either party, since the judge is bound
to pronounce a just verdict, and the witness to give true evidence. Now justice and truth do
not incline to one side rather than to the other: and consequently judges receive out of the
public funds a fixed pay for their labor; and witnesses receive their expenses (not as payment
for giving evidence, but as a fee for their labor) either from both parties or from the party
by whom they are adduced, because no man "serveth as a soldier at any time at his own charge
[*Vulg.: 'Who serveth as a soldier,']" (1 Cor. 9:7). On the other hand an advocate defends
one party only, and so he may lawfully accept fee from the party he assists.

QUESTION 72

OF REVILING (In Four Articles)

We must now consider injuries inflicted by words uttered extrajudicially. We shall consider
(1) reviling, (2) backbiting, (3) tale bearing, (4) derision, (5) cursing.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) What is reviling?

(2) Whether every reviling is a mortal sin?

(3) Whether one ought to check revilers?

(4) Of the origin of reviling.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 72, Art. 1]

Whether Reviling Consists in Words?

Objection 1: It would seem that reviling does not consist in words. Reviling implies some injury
inflicted on one's neighbor, since it is a kind of injustice. But words seem to inflict no
injury on one's neighbor, either in his person, or in his belongings. Therefore reviling does
not consist in words.

Obj. 2: Further, reviling seems to imply dishonor. But a man can be dishonored or slighted
by deeds more than by words. Therefore it seems that reviling consists, not in words but in deeds.

Obj. 3: Further, a dishonor inflicted by words is called a railing or a taunt. But reviling
seems to differ from railing or taunt. Therefore reviling does not consist in words.

On the contrary, Nothing, save words, is perceived by the hearing. Now reviling is perceived
by the hearing according to Jer. 20:10, "I heard reviling [Douay: 'contumelies'] on every side."
Therefore reviling consists in words.

I answer that, Reviling denotes the dishonoring of a person, and this happens in two ways:
for since honor results from excellence, one person dishonors another, first, by depriving
him of the excellence for which he is honored. This is done by sins of deed, whereof we have
spoken above (Q. 64, seqq.). Secondly, when a man publishes something against another's honor,
thus bringing it to the knowledge of the latter and of other men. This reviling properly so
called, and is done by some kind of signs. Now, according to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. ii,
3), "compared with words all other signs are very few, for words have obtained the chief place
among men for the purpose of expressing whatever the mind conceives." Hence reviling, properly
speaking, consists in words: wherefore, Isidore says (Etym. x) that a reviler (contumeliosus)
"is hasty and bursts out (tumet) in injurious words." Since, however, things are also signified
by deeds, which on this account have the same significance as words, it follows that reviling
in a wider sense extends also to deeds. Wherefore a gloss on Rom. 1:30, "contumelious, proud,"
says: "The contumelious are those who by word or deed revile and shame others."

Reply Obj. 1: Our words, if we consider them in their essence, i.e. as audible sounds, injure
no man, except perhaps by jarring of the ear, as when a person speaks too loud. But, considered
as signs conveying something to the knowledge of others, they may do many kinds of harm. Such
is the harm done to a man to the detriment of his honor, or of the respect due to him from
others. Hence the reviling is greater if one man reproach another in the presence of many:
and yet there may still be reviling if he reproach him by himself, in so far as the speaker
acts unjustly against the respect due to the hearer.

Reply Obj. 2: One man slights another by deeds in so far as such deeds cause or signify that
which is against that other man's honor. In the former case it is not a matter of reviling
but of some other kind of injustice, of which we have spoken above (QQ. 64, 65, 66): where
as in the latter case there is reviling, in so far as deeds have the significant force of words.

Reply Obj. 3: Railing and taunts consist in words, even as reviling, because by all of them
a man's faults are exposed to the detriment of his honor. Such faults are of three kinds. First,
there is the fault of guilt, which is exposed by reviling words. Secondly, there is the fault
of both guilt and punishment, which is exposed by taunts (convicium), because vice is commonly
spoken of in connection with not only the soul but also the body. Hence if one man says spitefully
to another that he is blind, he taunts but does not revile him: whereas if one man calls another
a thief, he not only taunts but also reviles him. Thirdly, a man reproaches another for his
inferiority or indigence, so as to lessen the honor due to him for any kind of excellence.
This is done by upbraiding words, and properly speaking, occurs when one spitefully reminds
a man that one has succored him when he was in need. Hence it is written (Ecclus. 20:15): "He
will give a few things and upbraid much." Nevertheless these terms are sometimes employed one
for the other.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 72, Art. 2]

Whether Reviling or Railing Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that reviling or railing is not a mortal sin. For no mortal sin
is an act of virtue. Now railing is the act of a virtue, viz. of wittiness (eutrapelia) [*Cf.
I-II, Q. 60, A. 5] to which it pertains to rail well, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
iv, 8). Therefore railing or reviling is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, mortal sin is not to be found in perfect men; and yet these sometimes give
utterance to railing or reviling. Thus the Apostle says (Gal. 3:1): "O senseless Galatians!,"
and our Lord said (Luke 24:25): "O foolish and slow of heart to believe!" Therefore railing
or reviling is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, although that which is a venial sin by reason of its genus may become mortal,
that which is mortal by reason of its genus cannot become venial, as stated above (I-II, Q.
88, AA. 4, 6). Hence if by reason of its genus it were a mortal sin to give utterance to railing
or reviling, it would follow that it is always a mortal sin. But this is apparently untrue,
as may be seen in the case of one who utters a reviling word indeliberately or through slight
anger. Therefore reviling or railing is not a mortal sin, by reason of its genus.

On the contrary, Nothing but mortal sin deserves the eternal punishment of hell. Now railing
or reviling deserves the punishment of hell, according to Matt. 5:22, "Whosoever shall say
to his brother . . . Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire." Therefore railing or reviling
is a mortal sin.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), words are injurious to other persons, not as sounds,
but as signs, and this signification depends on the speaker's inward intention. Hence, in sins
of word, it seems that we ought to consider with what intention the words are uttered. Since
then railing or reviling essentially denotes a dishonoring, if the intention of the utterer
is to dishonor the other man, this is properly and essentially to give utterance to railing
or reviling: and this is a mortal sin no less than theft or robbery, since a man loves his
honor no less than his possessions. If, on the other hand, a man says to another a railing
or reviling word, yet with the intention, not of dishonoring him, but rather perhaps of correcting
him or with some like purpose, he utters a railing or reviling not formally and essentially,
but accidentally and materially, in so far to wit as he says that which might be a railing
or reviling. Hence this may be sometimes a venial sin, and sometimes without any sin at all.
Nevertheless there is need of discretion in such matters, and one should use such words with
moderation, because the railing might be so grave that being uttered inconsiderately it might
dishonor the person against whom it is uttered. In such a case a man might commit a mortal
sin, even though he did not intend to dishonor the other man: just as were a man incautiously
to injure grievously another by striking him in fun, he would not be without blame.

Reply Obj. 1: It belongs to wittiness to utter some slight mockery, not with intent to dishonor
or pain the person who is the object of the mockery, but rather with intent to please and amuse:
and this may be without sin, if the due circumstances be observed. On the other hand if a man
does not shrink from inflicting pain on the object of his witty mockery, so long as he makes
others laugh, this is sinful, as stated in the passage quoted.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as it is lawful to strike a person, or damnify him in his belongings for
the purpose of correction, so too, for the purpose of correction, may one say a mocking word
to a person whom one has to correct. It is thus that our Lord called the disciples "foolish,"
and the Apostle called the Galatians "senseless." Yet, as Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in
Monte ii, 19), "seldom and only when it is very necessary should we have recourse to invectives,
and then so as to urge God's service, not our own."

Reply Obj. 3: Since the sin of railing or reviling depends on the intention of the utterer,
it may happen to be a venial sin, if it be a slight railing that does not inflict much dishonor
on a man, and be uttered through lightness of heart or some slight anger, without the fixed
purpose of dishonoring him, for instance when one intends by such a word to give but little pain.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 72, Art. 3]

Whether One Ought to Suffer Oneself to Be Reviled?

Objection 1: It would seem that one ought not to suffer oneself to be reviled. For he that
suffers himself to be reviled, encourages the reviler. But one ought not to do this. Therefore
one ought not to suffer oneself to be reviled, but rather reply to the reviler.

Obj. 2: Further, one ought to love oneself more than another. Now one ought not to suffer another
to be reviled, wherefore it is written (Prov. 26:10): "He that putteth a fool to silence appeaseth
anger." Therefore neither should one suffer oneself to be reviled.

Obj. 3: Further, a man is not allowed to revenge himself, for it is said: "Vengeance belongeth
to Me, I will repay" [*Heb. 10:30]. Now by submitting to be reviled a man revenges himself,
according to Chrysostom (Hom. xxii, in Ep. ad Rom.): "If thou wilt be revenged, be silent;
thou hast dealt him a fatal blow." Therefore one ought not by silence to submit to reviling
words, but rather answer back.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 37:13): "They that sought evils to me spoke vain things,"
and afterwards (Ps. 37:14) he says: "But I as a deaf man, heard not; and as a dumb man not
opening his mouth."

I answer that, Just as we need patience in things done against us, so do we need it in those
said against us. Now the precepts of patience in those things done against us refer to the
preparedness of the mind, according to Augustine's (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 19) exposition
on our Lord's precept, "If one strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him also the other"
[*The words as quoted by St. Thomas are a blending of Matt. 5:39 and Luke 6:29]: that is to
say, a man ought to be prepared to do so if necessary. But he is not always bound to do this
actually: since not even did our Lord do so, for when He received a blow, He said: "Why strikest
thou Me?" (John 18:23). Consequently the same applies to the reviling words that are said against
us. For we are bound to hold our minds prepared to submit to be reviled, if it should be expedient.
Nevertheless it sometimes behooves us to withstand against being reviled, and this chiefly
for two reasons. First, for the good of the reviler; namely, that his daring may be checked,
and that he may not repeat the attempt, according to Prov. 26:5, "Answer a fool according to
his folly, lest he imagine himself to be wise." Secondly, for the good of many who would be
prevented from progressing in virtue on account of our being reviled. Hence Gregory says (Hom.
ix, Super Ezech.): "Those who are so placed that their life should be an example to others,
ought, if possible, to silence their detractors, lest their preaching be not heard by those
who could have heard it, and they continue their evil conduct through contempt of a good life."

Reply Obj. 1: The daring of the railing reviler should be checked with moderation, i.e. as
a duty of charity, and not through lust for one's own honor. Hence it is written (Prov. 26:4):
"Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou be like him."

Reply Obj. 2: When one man prevents another from being reviled there is not the danger of lust
for one's own honor as there is when a man defends himself from being reviled: indeed rather
would it seem to proceed from a sense of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: It would be an act of revenge to keep silence with the intention of provoking
the reviler to anger, but it would be praiseworthy to be silent, in order to give place to
anger. Hence it is written (Ecclus. 8:4): "Strive not with a man that is full of tongue, and
heap not wood upon his fire."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 72, Art. 4]

Whether Reviling Arises from Anger?

Objection 1: It would seem that reviling does not arise from anger. For it is written (Prov.
11:2): "Where pride is, there shall also be reviling [Douay: 'reproach']." But anger is a vice
distinct from pride. Therefore reviling does not arise from anger.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 20:3): "All fools are meddling with revilings [Douay:
'reproaches']." Now folly is a vice opposed to wisdom, as stated above (Q. 46, A. 1); whereas
anger is opposed to meekness. Therefore reviling does not arise from anger.

Obj. 3: Further, no sin is diminished by its cause. But the sin of reviling is diminished if
one gives vent to it through anger: for it is a more grievous sin to revile out of hatred than
out of anger. Therefore reviling does not arise from anger.

On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 45) that "anger gives rise to revilings."

I answer that, While one sin may arise from various causes, it is nevertheless said to have
its source chiefly in that one from which it is wont to arise most frequently, through being
closely connected with its end. Now reviling is closely connected with anger's end, which is
revenge: since the easiest way for the angry man to take revenge on another is to revile him.
Therefore reviling arises chiefly from anger.

Reply Obj. 1: Reviling is not directed to the end of pride which is excellency. Hence reviling
does not arise directly from pride. Nevertheless pride disposes a man to revile, in so far
as those who think themselves to excel, are more prone to despise others and inflict injuries
on them, because they are more easily angered, through deeming it an affront to themselves
whenever anything is done against their will.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. vii, 6) "anger listens imperfectly to reason":
wherefore an angry man suffers a defect of reason, and in this he is like the foolish man.
Hence reviling arises from folly on account of the latter's kinship with anger.

Reply Obj. 3: According to the Philosopher (Rhet. ii, 4) "an angry man seeks an open offense,
but he who hates does not worry about this." Hence reviling which denotes a manifest injury
belongs to anger rather than to hatred.

QUESTION 73

OF BACKBITING [*Or detraction] (In Four Articles)

We must now consider backbiting, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) What is backbiting?

(2) Whether it is a mortal sin?

(3) Of its comparison with other sins;

(4) Whether it is a sin to listen to backbiting?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 73, Art. 1]

Whether Backbiting Is Suitably Defined As the Blackening of Another's Character by Secret Words?

Objection 1: It would seem that backbiting is not as defined by some [*Albert the Great, Sum.
Theol. II, cxvii.], "the blackening of another's good name by words uttered in secret." For
"secretly" and "openly" are circumstances that do not constitute the species of a sin, because
it is accidental to a sin that it be known by many or by few. Now that which does not constitute
the species of a sin, does not belong to its essence, and should not be included in its definition.
Therefore it does not belong to the essence of backbiting that it should be done by secret words.

Obj. 2: Further, the notion of a good name implies something known to the public. If, therefore,
a person's good name is blackened by backbiting, this cannot be done by secret words, but by
words uttered openly.

Obj. 3: Further, to detract is to subtract, or to diminish something already existing. But
sometimes a man's good name is blackened, even without subtracting from the truth: for instance,
when one reveals the crimes which a man has in truth committed. Therefore not every blackening
of a good name is backbiting.

On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 10:11): "If a serpent bite in silence, he is nothing
better that backbiteth."

I answer that, Just as one man injures another by deed in two ways--openly, as by robbery or
by doing him any kind of violence--and secretly, as by theft, or by a crafty blow, so again
one man injures another by words in two ways--in one way, openly, and this is done by reviling
him, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 1)--and in another way secretly, and this is done by backbiting.
Now from the fact that one man openly utters words against another man, he would appear to
think little of him, so that for this reason he dishonors him, so that reviling is detrimental
to the honor of the person reviled. On the other hand, he that speaks against another secretly,
seems to respect rather than slight him, so that he injures directly, not his honor but his
good name, in so far as by uttering such words secretly, he, for his own part, causes his hearers
to have a bad opinion of the person against whom he speaks. For the backbiter apparently intends
and aims at being believed. It is therefore evident that backbiting differs from reviling in
two points: first, in the way in which the words are uttered, the reviler speaking openly against
someone, and the backbiter secretly; secondly, as to the end in view, i.e. as regards the injury
inflicted, the reviler injuring a man's honor, the backbiter injuring his good name.

Reply Obj. 1: In involuntary commutations, to which are reduced all injuries inflicted on our
neighbor, whether by word or by deed, the kind of sin is differentiated by the circumstances
"secretly" and "openly," because involuntariness itself is diversified by violence and by ignorance,
as stated above (Q. 65, A. 4; I-II, Q. 6, AA. 5, 8).

Reply Obj. 2: The words of a backbiter are said to be secret, not altogether, but in relation
to the person of whom they are said, because they are uttered in his absence and without his
knowledge. On the other hand, the reviler speaks against a man to his face. Wherefore if a
man speaks ill of another in the presence of several, it is a case of backbiting if he be absent,
but of reviling if he alone be present: although if a man speak ill of an absent person to
one man alone, he destroys his good name not altogether but partly.

Reply Obj. 3: A man is said to backbite (detrahere) another, not because he detracts from the
truth, but because he lessens his good name. This is done sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly.
Directly, in four ways: first, by saying that which is false about him; secondly, by stating
his sin to be greater than it is; thirdly, by revealing something unknown about him; fourthly,
by ascribing his good deeds to a bad intention. Indirectly, this is done either by gainsaying
his good, or by maliciously concealing it, or by diminishing it.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 73, Art. 2]

Whether Backbiting Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that backbiting is not a mortal sin. For no act of virtue is a mortal
sin. Now, to reveal an unknown sin, which pertains to backbiting, as stated above (A. 1, ad
3), is an act of the virtue of charity, whereby a man denounces his brother's sin in order
that he may amend: or else it is an act of justice, whereby a man accuses his brother. Therefore
backbiting is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss on Prov. 24:21, "Have nothing to do with detractors," says: "The whole
human race is in peril from this vice." But no mortal sin is to be found in the whole of mankind,
since many refrain from mortal sin: whereas they are venial sins that are found in all. Therefore
backbiting is a venial sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine in a homily on the Fire of Purgatory [*Serm. civ in the appendix
to St. Augustine's work] reckons it a slight sin "to speak ill without hesitation or forethought."
But this pertains to backbiting. Therefore backbiting is a venial sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Rom. 1:30): "Backbiters, hateful to God," which epithet, according
to a gloss, is inserted, "lest it be deemed a slight sin because it consists in words."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 72, A. 2), sins of word should be judged chiefly from the
intention of the speaker. Now backbiting by its very nature aims at blackening a man's good
name. Wherefore, properly speaking, to backbite is to speak ill of an absent person in order
to blacken his good name. Now it is a very grave matter to blacken a man's good name, because
of all temporal things a man's good name seems the most precious, since for lack of it he is
hindered from doing many things well. For this reason it is written (Ecclus. 41:15): "Take
care of a good name, for this shall continue with thee, more than a thousand treasures precious
and great." Therefore backbiting, properly speaking, is a mortal sin. Nevertheless it happens
sometimes that a man utters words, whereby someone's good name is tarnished, and yet he does
not intend this, but something else. This is not backbiting strictly and formally speaking,
but only materially and accidentally as it were. And if such defamatory words be uttered for
the sake of some necessary good, and with attention to the due circumstances, it is not a sin
and cannot be called backbiting. But if they be uttered out of lightness of heart or for some
unnecessary motive, it is not a mortal sin, unless perchance the spoken word be of such a grave
nature, as to cause a notable injury to a man's good name, especially in matters pertaining
to his moral character, because from the very nature of the words this would be a mortal sin.
And one is bound to restore a man his good name, no less than any other thing one has taken
from him, in the manner stated above (Q. 62, A. 2) when we were treating of restitution.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above, it is not backbiting to reveal a man's hidden sin in order that
he may mend, whether one denounce it, or accuse him for the good of public justice.

Reply Obj. 2: This gloss does not assert that backbiting is to be found throughout the whole
of mankind, but "almost," both because "the number of fools is infinite," [*Eccles. 1:15] and
few are they that walk in the way of salvation, [*Cf. Matt. 7:14] and because there are few
or none at all who do not at times speak from lightness of heart, so as to injure someone's
good name at least slightly, for it is written (James 3:2): "If any man offend not in word,
the same is a perfect man."

Reply Obj. 3: Augustine is referring to the case when a man utters a slight evil about someone,
not intending to injure him, but through lightness of heart or a slip of the tongue.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 73, Art. 3]

Whether Backbiting Is the Gravest of All Sins Committed Against One's Neighbor?

Objection 1: It would seem that backbiting is the gravest of all sins committed against one's
neighbor. Because a gloss on Ps. 108:4, "Instead of making me a return of love they detracted
me," a gloss says: "Those who detract Christ in His members and slay the souls of future believers
are more guilty than those who killed the flesh that was soon to rise again." From this it
seems to follow that backbiting is by so much a graver sin than murder, as it is a graver matter
to kill the soul than to kill the body. Now murder is the gravest of the other sins that are
committed against one's neighbor. Therefore backbiting is absolutely the gravest of all.

Obj. 2: Further, backbiting is apparently a graver sin than reviling, because a man can withstand
reviling, but not a secret backbiting. Now backbiting is seemingly a graver sin than adultery,
because adultery unites two persons in one flesh, whereas reviling severs utterly those who
were united. Therefore backbiting is more grievous than adultery: and yet of all other sins
a man commits against his neighbor, adultery is most grave.

Obj. 3: Further, reviling arises from anger, while backbiting arises from envy, according to
Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 45). But envy is a graver sin than anger. Therefore backbiting is a graver
sin than reviling; and so the same conclusion follows as before.

Obj. 4: Further, the gravity of a sin is measured by the gravity of the defect that it causes.
Now backbiting causes a most grievous defect, viz. blindness of mind. For Gregory says (Regist.
xi, Ep. 2): "What else do backbiters but blow on the dust and stir up the dirt into their eyes,
so that the more they breathe of detraction, the less they see of the truth?" Therefore backbiting
is the most grievous sin committed against one's neighbor.

On the contrary, It is more grievous to sin by deed than by word. But backbiting is a sin of
word, while adultery, murder, and theft are sins of deed. Therefore backbiting is not graver
than the other sins committed against one's neighbor.

I answer that, The essential gravity of sins committed against one's neighbor must be weighed
by the injury they inflict on him, since it is thence that they derive their sinful nature.
Now the greater the good taken away, the greater the injury. And while man's good is threefold,
namely the good of his soul, the good of his body, and the good of external things; the good
of the soul, which is the greatest of all, cannot be taken from him by another save as an occasional
cause, for instance by an evil persuasion, which does not induce necessity. On the other hand
the two latter goods, viz. of the body and of external things, can be taken away by violence.
Since, however, the goods of the body excel the goods of external things, those sins which
injure a man's body are more grievous than those which injure his external things. Consequently,
among other sins committed against one's neighbor, murder is the most grievous, since it deprives
man of the life which he already possesses: after this comes adultery, which is contrary to
the right order of human generation, whereby man enters upon life. In the last place come external
goods, among which a man's good name takes precedence of wealth because it is more akin to
spiritual goods, wherefore it is written (Prov. 22:1): "A good name is better than great riches."
Therefore backbiting according to its genus is a more grievous sin than theft, but is less
grievous than murder or adultery. Nevertheless the order may differ by reason of aggravating
or extenuating circumstances.

The accidental gravity of a sin is to be considered in relation to the sinner, who sins more
grievously, if he sins deliberately than if he sins through weakness or carelessness. In this
respect sins of word have a certain levity, in so far as they are apt to occur through a slip
of the tongue, and without much forethought.

Reply Obj. 1: Those who detract Christ by hindering the faith of His members, disparage His
Godhead, which is the foundation of our faith. Wherefore this is not simple backbiting but
blasphemy.

Reply Obj. 2: Reviling is a more grievous sin than backbiting, in as much as it implies greater
contempt of one's neighbor: even as robbery is a graver sin than theft, as stated above (Q.
66, A. 9). Yet reviling is not a more grievous sin than adultery. For the gravity of adultery
is measured, not from its being a union of bodies, but from being a disorder in human generation.
Moreover the reviler is not the sufficient cause of unfriendliness in another man, but is only
the occasional cause of division among those who were united, in so far, to wit, as by declaring
the evils of another, he for his own part severs that man from the friendship of other men,
though they are not forced by his words to do so. Accordingly a backbiter is a murderer occasionally,
since by his words he gives another man an occasion for hating or despising his neighbor. For
this reason it is stated in the Epistle of Clement [*Ad Jacob. Ep. i] that "backbiters are
murderers," i.e. occasionally; because "he that hateth his brother is a murderer" (1 John 3:15).

Reply Obj. 3: Anger seeks openly to be avenged, as the Philosopher states (Rhet. ii, 2): wherefore
backbiting which takes place in secret, is not the daughter of anger, as reviling is, but rather
of envy, which strives by any means to lessen one's neighbor's glory. Nor does it follow from
this that backbiting is more grievous than reviling: since a lesser vice can give rise to a
greater sin, just as anger gives birth to murder and blasphemy. For the origin of a sin depends
on its inclination to an end, i.e. on the thing to which the sin turns, whereas the gravity
of a sin depends on what it turns away from.

Reply Obj. 4: Since "a man rejoiceth in the sentence of his mouth" (Prov. 15:23), it follows
that a backbiter more and more loves and believes what he says, and consequently more and more
hates his neighbor, and thus his knowledge of the truth becomes less and less. This effect
however may also result from other sins pertaining to hate of one's neighbor.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 73, Art. 4]

Whether It Is a Grave Sin for the Listener to Suffer the Backbiter?

Objection 1: It would seem that the listener who suffers a backbiter does not sin grievously.
For a man is not under greater obligations to others than to himself. But it is praiseworthy
for a man to suffer his own backbiters: for Gregory says (Hom. ix, super Ezech): "Just as we
ought not to incite the tongue of backbiters, lest they perish, so ought we to suffer them
with equanimity when they have been incited by their own wickedness, in order that our merit
may be the greater." Therefore a man does not sin if he does not withstand those who backbite
others.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 4:30): "In no wise speak against the truth." Now sometimes
a person tells the truth while backbiting, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3). Therefore it seems
that one is not always bound to withstand a backbiter.

Obj. 3: Further, no man should hinder what is profitable to others. Now backbiting is often
profitable to those who are backbitten: for Pope Pius [*St. Pius I] says [*Append. Grat. ad
can. Oves, caus. vi, qu. 1]: "Not unfrequently backbiting is directed against good persons,
with the result that those who have been unduly exalted through the flattery of their kindred,
or the favor of others, are humbled by backbiting." Therefore one ought not to withstand backbiters.

On the contrary, Jerome says (Ep. ad Nepot. lii): "Take care not to have an itching tongue,
nor tingling ears, that is, neither detract others nor listen to backbiters."

I answer that, According to the Apostle (Rom. 1:32), they "are worthy of death . . . not only
they that" commit sins, "but they also that consent to them that do them." Now this happens
in two ways. First, directly, when, to wit, one man induces another to sin, or when the sin
is pleasing to him: secondly, indirectly, that is, if he does not withstand him when he might
do so, and this happens sometimes, not because the sin is pleasing to him, but on account of
some human fear.

Accordingly we must say that if a man listens to backbiting without resisting it, he seems
to consent to the backbiter, so that he becomes a participator in his sin. And if he induces
him to backbite, or at least if the detraction be pleasing to him on account of his hatred
of the person detracted, he sins no less than the detractor, and sometimes more. Wherefore
Bernard says (De Consid. ii, 13): "It is difficult to say which is the more to be condemned[:]
the backbiter or he that listens to backbiting." If however the sin is not pleasing to him,
and he fails to withstand the backbiter, through fear, negligence, or even shame, he sins indeed,
but much less than the backbiter, and, as a rule venially. Sometimes too this may be a mortal
sin, either because it is his official duty to correct the backbiter, or by reason of some
consequent danger; or on account of the radical reason for which human fear may sometimes be
a mortal sin, as stated above (Q. 19, A. 3).

Reply Obj. 1: No man hears himself backbitten, because when a man is spoken evil of in his
hearing, it is not backbiting, properly speaking, but reviling, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2).
Yet it is possible for the detractions uttered against a person to come to his knowledge through
others telling him, and then it is left to his discretion whether he will suffer their detriment
to his good name, unless this endanger the good of others, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 3). Wherefore
his patience may deserve commendation for as much as he suffers patiently being detracted himself.
But it is not left to his discretion to permit an injury to be done to another's good name,
hence he is accounted guilty if he fails to resist when he can, for the same reason whereby
a man is bound to raise another man's ass lying "underneath his burden," as commanded in Deut.
21:4 [*Ex. 23:5].

Reply Obj. 2: One ought not always to withstand a backbiter by endeavoring to convince him
of falsehood, especially if one knows that he is speaking the truth: rather ought one to reprove
him with words, for that he sins in backbiting his brother, or at least by our pained demeanor
show him that we are displeased with his backbiting, because according to Prov. 25:23, "the
north wind driveth away rain, as doth a sad countenance a backbiting tongue."

Reply Obj. 3: The profit one derives from being backbitten is due, not to the intention of
the backbiter, but to the ordinance of God Who produces good out of every evil. Hence we should
none the less withstand backbiters, just as those who rob or oppress others, even though the
oppressed and the robbed may gain merit by patience.

QUESTION 74

OF TALE-BEARING [*Susurratio, i.e. whispering] (In Two Articles)

We must now consider tale-bearing: under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether tale-bearing is a sin distinct from backbiting?

(2) Which of the two is the more grievous?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 74, Art. 1]

Whether Tale-bearing Is a Sin Distinct from Backbiting?

Objection 1: It would seem that tale-bearing is not a distinct sin from backbiting. Isidore
says (Etym. x): "The susurro (tale-bearer) takes his name from the sound of his speech, for
he speaks disparagingly not to the face but into the ear." But to speak of another disparagingly
belongs to backbiting. Therefore tale-bearing is not a distinct sin from backbiting.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Lev. 19:16): "Thou shalt not be an informer [Douay: 'a detractor']
nor a tale-bearer [Douay: 'whisperer'] among the people." But an informer is apparently the
same as a backbiter. Therefore neither does tale-bearing differ from backbiting.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 28:15): "The tale-bearer [Douay: 'whisperer'] and the
double-tongued is accursed." But a double-tongued man is apparently the same as a backbiter,
because a backbiter speaks with a double tongue, with one in your absence, with another in
your presence. Therefore a tale-bearer is the same as a backbiter.

On the contrary, A gloss on Rom. 1:29, 30, "Tale-bearers, backbiters [Douay: 'whisperers, detractors']"
says: "Tale-bearers sow discord among friends; backbiters deny or disparage others' good points."

I answer that, The tale-bearer and the backbiter agree in matter, and also in form or mode
of speaking, since they both speak evil secretly of their neighbor: and for this reason these
terms are sometimes used one for the other. Hence a gloss on Ecclus. 5:16, "Be not called a
tale-bearer [Douay: 'whisperer']" says: "i.e. a backbiter." They differ however in end, because
the backbiter intends to blacken his neighbor's good name, wherefore he brings forward those
evils especially about his neighbor which are likely to defame him, or at least to depreciate
his good name: whereas a tale-bearer intends to sever friendship, as appears from the gloss
quoted above and from the saying of Prov. 26:20, "Where the tale-bearer is taken away, contentions
shall cease." Hence it is that a tale-bearer speaks such ill about his neighbors as may stir
his hearer's mind against them, according to Ecclus. 28:11, "A sinful man will trouble his
friends, and bring in debate in the midst of them that are at peace."

Reply Obj. 1: A tale-bearer is called a backbiter in so far as he speaks ill of another; yet
he differs from a backbiter since he intends not to speak ill as such, but to say anything
that may stir one man against another, though it be good simply, and yet has a semblance of
evil through being unpleasant to the hearer.

Reply Obj. 2: An informer differs from a tale-bearer and a backbiter, for an informer is one
who charges others publicly with crimes, either by accusing or by railing them, which does
not apply to a backbiter or tale-bearer.

Reply Obj. 3: A double-tongued person is properly speaking a tale-bearer. For since friendship
is between two, the tale-bearer strives to sever friendship on both sides.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 74, Art. 2]

Whether Backbiting Is a Graver Sin Than Tale-bearing?

Objection 1: It would seem that backbiting is a graver sin than tale-bearing. For sins of word
consist in speaking evil. Now a backbiter speaks of his neighbor things that are evil simply,
for such things lead to the loss or depreciation of his good name: whereas a tale-bearer is
only intent on saying what is apparently evil, because to wit they are unpleasant to the hearer.
Therefore backbiting is a graver sin than tale-bearing.

Obj. 2: Further, he that deprives a man of his good name, deprives him not merely of one friend,
but of many, because everyone is minded to scorn the friendship of a person with a bad name.
Hence it is reproached against a certain individual [*King Josaphat] (2 Paralip. 19:2): "Thou
art joined in friendship with them that hate the Lord." But tale-bearing deprives one of only
one friend. Therefore backbiting is a graver sin than tale-bearing.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (James 4:11): "He that backbiteth [Douay: 'detracteth'] his
brother . . . detracteth the law," and consequently God the giver of the law. Wherefore the
sin of backbiting seems to be a sin against God, which is most grievous, as stated above (Q.
20, A. 3; I-II, Q. 73, A. 3). On the other hand the sin of tale-bearing is against one's neighbor.
Therefore the sin of backbiting is graver than the sin of tale-bearing.

On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 5:17): "An evil mark of disgrace is upon the double-tongued;
but to the tale-bearer [Douay: 'whisperer'] hatred, and enmity, and reproach."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 73, A. 3; I-II, Q. 73, A. 8), sins against one's neighbor
are the more grievous, according as they inflict a greater injury on him: and an injury is
so much the greater, according to the greatness of the good which it takes away. Now of all
one's external goods a friend takes the first place, since "no man can live without friends,"
as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. viii, 1). Hence it is written (Ecclus. 6:15): "Nothing
can be compared to a faithful friend." Again, a man's good name whereof backbiting deprives
him, is most necessary to him that he may be fitted for friendship. Therefore tale-bearing
is a greater sin than backbiting or even reviling, because a friend is better than honor, and
to be loved is better than to be honored, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii).

Reply Obj. 1: The species and gravity of a sin depend on the end rather than on the material
object, wherefore, by reason of its end, tale-bearing is worse than backbiting, although sometimes
the backbiter says worse things.

Reply Obj. 2: A good name is a disposition for friendship, and a bad name is a disposition
for enmity. But a disposition falls short of the thing for which it disposes. Hence to do anything
that leads to a disposition for enmity is a less grievous sin than to do what conduces directly
to enmity.

Reply Obj. 3: He that backbites his brother, seems to detract the law, in so far as he despises
the precept of love for one's neighbor: while he that strives to sever friendship seems to
act more directly against this precept. Hence the latter sin is more specially against God,
because "God is charity" 6:19) that soweth discord among brethren."

QUESTION 75

OF DERISION [*Or mockery] (In Two Articles)

We must now speak of derision, under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether derision is a special sin distinct from the other sins whereby one's neighbor is
injured by words?

(2) Whether derision is a mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 75, Art. 1]

Whether Derision Is a Special Sin Distinct from Those Already Mentioned?

Objection 1: It would seem that derision is not a special sin distinct from those mentioned
above. For laughing to scorn is apparently the same as derision. But laughing to scorn pertains
to reviling. Therefore derision would seem not to differ from reviling.

Obj. 2: Further, no man is derided except for something reprehensible which puts him to shame.
Now such are sins; and if they be imputed to a person publicly, it is a case of reviling, if
privately, it amounts to backbiting or tale-bearing. Therefore derision is not distinct from
the foregoing vices.

Obj. 3: Further, sins of this kind are distinguished by the injury they inflict on one's neighbor.
Now the injury inflicted on a man by derision affects either his honor, or his good name, or
is detrimental to his friendship. Therefore derision is not a sin distinct from the foregoing.

On the contrary, Derision is done in jest, wherefore it is described as "making fun." Now all
the foregoing are done seriously and not in jest. Therefore derision differs from all of them.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 72, A. 2), sins of word should be weighed chiefly by the
intention of the speaker, wherefore these sins are differentiated according to the various
intentions of those who speak against another. Now just as the railer intends to injure the
honor of the person he rails, the backbiter to depreciate a good name, and the tale-bearer
to destroy friendship, so too the derider intends to shame the person he derides. And since
this end is distinct from the others, it follows that the sin of derision is distinct from
the foregoing sins.

Reply Obj. 1: Laughing to scorn and derision agree as to the end but differ in mode, because
derision is done with the "mouth," i.e. by words and laughter, while laughing to scorn is done
by wrinkling the nose, as a gloss says on Ps. 2:4, "He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh
at them": and such a distinction does not differentiate the species. Yet they both differ from
reviling, as being shamed differs from being dishonored: for to be ashamed is "to fear dishonor,"
as Damascene states (De Fide Orth. ii, 15).

Reply Obj. 2: For doing a virtuous deed a man deserves both respect and a good name in the
eyes of others, and in his own eyes the glory of a good conscience, according to 2 Cor. 1:12,
"Our glory is this, the testimony of our conscience." Hence, on the other hand, for doing a
reprehensible, i.e. a vicious action, a man forfeits his honor and good name in the eyes of
others--and for this purpose the reviler and the backbiter speak of another person--while in
his own eyes, he loses the glory of his conscience through being confused and ashamed at reprehensible
deeds being imputed to him--and for this purpose the derider speaks ill of him. It is accordingly
evident that derision agrees with the foregoing vices as to the matter but differs as to the end.

Reply Obj. 3: A secure and calm conscience is a great good, according to Prov. 15:15, "A secure
mind is like a continual feast." Wherefore he that disturbs another's conscience by confounding
him inflicts a special injury on him: hence derision is a special kind of sin.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 75, Art. 2]

Whether Derision Can Be a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that derision cannot be a mortal sin. Every mortal sin is contrary
to charity. But derision does not seem contrary to charity, for sometimes it takes place in
jest among friends, wherefore it is known as "making fun." Therefore derision cannot be a mortal
sin.

Obj. 2: Further, the greatest derision would appear to be that which is done as an injury to
God. But derision is not always a mortal sin when it tends to the injury of God: else it would
be a mortal sin to relapse into a venial sin of which one has repented. For Isidore says (De
Sum. Bon. ii, 16) that "he who continues to do what he has repented of, is a derider and not
a penitent." It would likewise follow that all hypocrisy is a mortal sin, because, according
to Gregory (Moral. xxxi, 15) "the ostrich signifies the hypocrite, who derides the horse, i.e.
the just man, and his rider, i.e. God." Therefore derision is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, reviling and backbiting seem to be graver sins than derision, because it is
more to do a thing seriously than in jest. But not all backbiting or reviling is a mortal sin.
Much less therefore is derision a mortal sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 3:34): "He derideth [Vulg.: 'shall scorn'] the scorners."
But God's derision is eternal punishment for mortal sin, as appears from the words of Ps. 2:4,
"He that dwelleth in heaven shall laugh at them." Therefore derision is a mortal sin.

I answer that, The object of derision is always some evil or defect. Now when an evil is great,
it is taken, not in jest, but seriously: consequently if it is taken in jest or turned to ridicule
(whence the terms 'derision' and 'jesting'), this is because it is considered to be slight.
Now an evil may be considered to be slight in two ways: first, in itself, secondly, in relation
to the person. When anyone makes game or fun of another's evil or defect, because it is a slight
evil in itself, this is a venial sin by reason of its genus. On the other hand this defect
may be considered as a slight evil in relation to the person, just as we are wont to think
little of the defects of children and imbeciles: and then to make game or fun of a person,
is to scorn him altogether, and to think him so despicable that his misfortune troubles us
not one whit, but is held as an object of derision. In this way derision is a mortal sin, and
more grievous than reviling, which is also done openly: because the reviler would seem to take
another's evil seriously; whereas the derider does so in fun, and so would seem the more to
despise and dishonor the other man. Wherefore, in this sense, derision is a grievous sin, and
all the more grievous according as a greater respect is due to the person derided.

Consequently it is an exceedingly grievous sin to deride God and the things of God, according
to Isa. 37:23, "Whom hast thou reproached, and whom hast thou blasphemed, and against whom
hast thou exalted thy voice?" and he replies: "Against the Holy One of Israel." In the second
place comes derision of one's parents, wherefore it is written (Prov. 30:17): "The eye that
mocketh at his father, and that despiseth the labor of his mother in bearing him, let the ravens
of the brooks pick it out, and the young eagles eat it." Further, the derision of good persons
is grievous, because honor is the reward of virtue, and against this it is written (Job 12:4):
"The simplicity of the just man is laughed to scorn." Such like derision does very much harm:
because it turns men away from good deeds, according to Gregory (Moral. xx, 14), "Who when
they perceive any good points appearing in the acts of others, directly pluck them up with
the hand of a mischievous reviling."

Reply Obj. 1: Jesting implies nothing contrary to charity in relation to the person with whom
one jests, but it may imply something against charity in relation to the person who is the
object of the jest, on account of contempt, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Neither he that relapses into a sin of which he has repented, nor a hypocrite,
derides God explicitly, but implicitly, in so far as either's behavior is like a derider's.
Nor is it true that to commit a venial sin is to relapse or dissimulate altogether, but only
dispositively and imperfectly.

Reply Obj. 3: Derision considered in itself is less grievous than backbiting or reviling, because
it does not imply contempt, but jest. Sometimes however it includes greater contempt than reviling
does, as stated above, and then it is a grave sin.

QUESTION 76

OF CURSING (In Four Articles)

We must now consider cursing. Under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether one may lawfully curse another?

(2) Whether one may lawfully curse an irrational creature?

(3) Whether cursing is a mortal sin?

(4) Of its comparison with other sins.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 76, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Lawful to Curse Anyone?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to curse anyone. For it is unlawful to disregard the command
of the Apostle in whom Christ spoke, according to 2 Cor. 13:3. Now he commanded (Rom. 12:14),
"Bless and curse not." Therefore it is not lawful to curse anyone.

Obj. 2: Further, all are bound to bless God, according to Dan. 3:82, "O ye sons of men, bless
the Lord." Now the same mouth cannot both bless God and curse man, as proved in the third chapter
of James. Therefore no man may lawfully curse another man.

Obj. 3: Further, he that curses another would seem to wish him some evil either of fault or
of punishment, since a curse appears to be a kind of imprecation. But it is not lawful to wish
ill to anyone, indeed we are bound to pray that all may be delivered from evil. Therefore it
is unlawful for any man to curse.

Obj. 4: Further, the devil exceeds all in malice on account of his obstinacy. But it is not
lawful to curse the devil, as neither is it lawful to curse oneself; for it is written (Ecclus.
21:30): "While the ungodly curseth the devil, he curseth his own soul." Much less therefore
is it lawful to curse a man.

Obj. 5: Further, a gloss on Num. 23:8, "How shall I curse whom God hath not cursed?" says:
"There cannot be a just cause for cursing a sinner if one be ignorant of his sentiments." Now
one man cannot know another man's sentiments, nor whether he is cursed by God. Therefore no
man may lawfully curse another.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 27:26): "Cursed be he that abideth not in the words of
this law." Moreover Eliseus cursed the little boys who mocked him (4 Kings 2:24).

I answer that, To curse (maledicere) is the same as to speak ill (malum dicere). Now "speaking"
has a threefold relation to the thing spoken. First, by way of assertion, as when a thing is
expressed in the indicative mood: in this way maledicere signifies simply to tell someone of
another's evil, and this pertains to backbiting, wherefore tellers of evil (maledici) are sometimes
called backbiters. Secondly, speaking is related to the thing spoken, by way of cause, and
this belongs to God first and foremost, since He made all things by His word, according to
Ps. 32:9, "He spoke and they were made"; while secondarily it belongs to man, who, by his word,
commands others and thus moves them to do something: it is for this purpose that we employ
verbs in the imperative mood. Thirdly, "speaking" is related to the thing spoken by expressing
the sentiments of one who desires that which is expressed in words; and for this purpose we
employ the verb in the optative mood.

Accordingly we may omit the first kind of evil speaking which is by way of simple assertion
of evil, and consider the other two kinds. And here we must observe that to do something and
to will it are consequent on one another in the matter of goodness and wickedness, as shown
above (I-II, Q. 20, A. 3). Hence in these two ways of evil speaking, by way of command and
by way of desire, there is the same aspect of lawfulness and unlawfulness, for if a man commands
or desires another's evil, as evil, being intent on the evil itself, then evil speaking will
be unlawful in both ways, and this is what is meant by cursing. On the other hand if a man
commands or desires another's evil under the aspect of good, it is lawful; and it may be called
cursing, not strictly speaking, but accidentally, because the chief intention of the speaker
is directed not to evil but to good.

Now evil may be spoken, by commanding or desiring it, under the aspect of a twofold good. Sometimes
under the aspect of just, and thus a judge lawfully curses a man whom he condemns to a just
penalty: thus too the Church curses by pronouncing anathema. In the same way the prophets in
the Scriptures sometimes call down evils on sinners, as though conforming their will to Divine
justice, although such like imprecation may be taken by way of foretelling. Sometimes evil
is spoken under the aspect of useful, as when one wishes a sinner to suffer sickness or hindrance
of some kind, either that he may himself reform, or at least that he may cease from harming others.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle forbids cursing strictly so called with an evil intent: and the same
answer applies to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: To wish another man evil under the aspect of good, is not opposed to the sentiment
whereby one wishes him good simply, in fact rather is it in conformity therewith.

Reply Obj. 4: In the devil both nature and guilt must be considered. His nature indeed is good
and is from God nor is it lawful to curse it. On the other hand his guilt is deserving of being
cursed, according to Job 3:8, "Let them curse it who curse the day." Yet when a sinner curses
the devil on account of his guilt, for the same reason he judges himself worthy of being cursed;
and in this sense he is said to curse his own soul.

Reply Obj. 5: Although the sinner's sentiments cannot be perceived in themselves, they can
be perceived through some manifest sin, which has to be punished. Likewise although it is not
possible to know whom God curses in respect of final reprobation, it is possible to know who
is accursed of God in respect of being guilty of present sin.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 76, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful to Curse an Irrational Creature?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is unlawful to curse an irrational creature. Cursing would
seem to be lawful chiefly in its relation to punishment. Now irrational creatures are not competent
subjects either of guilt or of punishment. Therefore it is unlawful to curse them.

Obj. 2: Further, in an irrational creature there is nothing but the nature which God made.
But it is unlawful to curse this even in the devil, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore it is
nowise lawful to curse an irrational creature.

Obj. 3: Further, irrational creatures are either stable, as bodies, or transient, as the seasons.
Now, according to Gregory (Moral. iv, 2), "it is useless to curse what does not exist, and
wicked to curse what exists." Therefore it is nowise lawful to curse an irrational creature.

On the contrary, our Lord cursed the fig tree, as related in Matt. 21:19; and Job cursed his
day, according to Job 3:1.

I answer that, Benediction and malediction, properly speaking, regard things to which good
or evil may happen, viz. rational creatures: while good and evil are said to happen to irrational
creatures in relation to the rational creature for whose sake they are. Now they are related
to the rational creature in several ways. First by way of ministration, in so far as irrational
creatures minister to the needs of man. In this sense the Lord said to man (Gen. 3:17): "Cursed
is the earth in thy work," so that its barrenness would be a punishment to man. Thus also David
cursed the mountains of Gelboe, according to Gregory's expounding (Moral. iv, 3). Again the
irrational creature is related to the rational creature by way of signification: and thus our
Lord cursed the fig tree in signification of Judea. Thirdly, the irrational creature is related
to rational creatures as something containing them, namely by way of time or place: and thus
Job cursed the day of his birth, on account of the original sin which he contracted in birth,
and on account of the consequent penalties. In this sense also we may understand David to have
cursed the mountains of Gelboe, as we read in 2 Kings 1:21, namely on account of the people
slaughtered there.

But to curse irrational beings, considered as creatures of God, is a sin of blasphemy; while
to curse them considered in themselves is idle and vain and consequently unlawful.

From this the Replies to the objections may easily be gathered.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 76, Art. 3]

Whether Cursing Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that cursing is not a mortal sin. But such sins are venial. Therefore
cursing is not a mortal but a venial Sin.

Obj. 2: Further, that which proceeds from a slight movement of the mind does not seem to be
generically a mortal sin. But cursing sometimes arises from a slight movement. Therefore cursing
is not a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, evil deeds are worse than evil words. But evil deeds are not always mortal
sins. Much less therefore is cursing a mortal sin.

On the contrary, Nothing save mortal sin excludes one from the kingdom of God. But cursing
excludes from the kingdom of God, according to 1 Cor. 6:10, "Nor cursers [Douay: 'railers'],
nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of God." Therefore cursing is a mortal sin.

I answer that, The evil words of which we are speaking now are those whereby evil is uttered
against someone by way of command or desire. Now to wish evil to another man, or to conduce
to that evil by commanding it, is, of its very nature, contrary to charity whereby we love
our neighbor by desiring his good. Consequently it is a mortal sin, according to its genus,
and so much the graver, as the person whom we curse has a greater claim on our love and respect.
Hence it is written (Lev. 20:9): "He that curseth his father, or mother, dying let him die."

It may happen however that the word uttered in cursing is a venial sin either through the slightness
of the evil invoked on another in cursing him, or on account of the sentiments of the person
who utters the curse; because he may say such words through some slight movement, or in jest,
or without deliberation, and sins of word should be weighed chiefly with regard to the speaker's
intention, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 2).

From this the Replies to the Objections may be easily gathered.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 76, Art. 4]

Whether Cursing Is a Graver Sin Than Backbiting?

Objection 1: It would seem that cursing is a graver sin than backbiting. Cursing would seem
to be a kind of blasphemy, as implied in the canonical epistle of Jude (verse 9) where it is
said that "when Michael the archangel, disputing with the devil, contended about the body of
Moses, he durst not bring against him the judgment of blasphemy [Douay: 'railing speech'],"
where blasphemy stands for cursing, according to a gloss. Now blasphemy is a graver sin than
backbiting. Therefore cursing is a graver sin than backbiting.

Obj. 2: Further, murder is more grievous than backbiting, as stated above (Q. 73, A. 3). But
cursing is on a par with the sin of murder; for Chrysostom says (Hom. xix, super Matth.): "When
thou sayest: 'Curse him down with his house, away with everything,' you are no better than
a murderer." Therefore cursing is graver than backbiting.

Obj. 3: Further, to cause a thing is more than to signify it. But the curser causes evil by
commanding it, whereas the backbiter merely signifies an evil already existing. Therefore the
curser sins more grievously than the backbiter.

On the contrary, It is impossible to do well in backbiting, whereas cursing may be either a
good or an evil deed, as appears from what has been said (A. 1). Therefore backbiting is graver
than cursing.

I answer that, As stated in the First Part (Q. 48, A. 5), evil is twofold, evil of fault, and
evil of punishment; and of the two, evil of fault is the worse (I, Q. 48, A. 6). Hence to speak
evil of fault is worse than to speak evil of punishment, provided the mode of speaking be the
same. Accordingly it belongs to the reviler, the tale-bearer, the backbiter and the derider
to speak evil of fault, whereas it belongs to the evil-speaker, as we understand it here, to
speak evil of punishment, and not evil of fault except under the aspect of punishment. But
the mode of speaking is not the same, for in the case of the four vices mentioned above, evil
of fault is spoken by way of assertion, whereas in the case of cursing evil of punishment is
spoken, either by causing it in the form of a command, or by wishing it. Now the utterance
itself of a person's fault is a sin, in as much as it inflicts an injury on one's neighbor,
and it is more grievous to inflict an injury, than to wish to inflict it, other things being equal.

Hence backbiting considered in its generic aspect is a graver sin than the cursing which expresses
a mere desire; while the cursing which is expressed by way of command, since it has the aspect
of a cause, will be more or less grievous than backbiting, according as it inflicts an injury
more or less grave than the blackening of a man's good name. Moreover this must be taken as
applying to these vices considered in their essential aspects: for other accidental points
might be taken into consideration, which would aggravate or extenuate the aforesaid vices.

Reply Obj. 1: To curse a creature, as such, reflects on God, and thus accidentally it has the
character of blasphemy; not so if one curse a creature on account of its fault: and the same
applies to backbiting.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (A. 3), cursing, in one way, includes the desire for evil, where
if the curser desire the evil of another's violent death, he does not differ, in desire, from
a murderer, but he differs from him in so far as the external act adds something to the act
of the will.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers cursing by way of command.

QUESTION 77

OF CHEATING, WHICH IS COMMITTED IN BUYING AND SELLING (In Four Articles)

We must now consider those sins which relate to voluntary commutations. First, we shall consider
cheating, which is committed in buying and selling: secondly, we shall consider usury, which
occurs in loans. In connection with the other voluntary commutations no special kind of sin
is to be found distinct from rapine and theft.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Of unjust sales as regards the price; namely, whether it is lawful to sell a thing for
more than its worth?

(2) Of unjust sales on the part of the thing sold;

(3) Whether the seller is bound to reveal a fault in the thing sold?

(4) Whether it is lawful in trading to sell a thing at a higher price than was paid for it?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 77, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Lawful to Sell a Thing for More Than Its Worth?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is lawful to sell a thing for more than its worth. In the
commutations of human life, civil laws determine that which is just. Now according to these
laws it is just for buyer and seller to deceive one another (Cod. IV, xliv, De Rescind. Vend.
8, 15): and this occurs by the seller selling a thing for more than its worth, and the buyer
buying a thing for less than its worth. Therefore it is lawful to sell a thing for more than
its worth.

Obj. 2: Further, that which is common to all would seem to be natural and not sinful. Now Augustine
relates that the saying of a certain jester was accepted by all, "You wish to buy for a song
and to sell at a premium," which agrees with the saying of Prov. 20:14, "It is naught, it is
naught, saith every buyer: and when he is gone away, then he will boast." Therefore it is lawful
to sell a thing for more than its worth.

Obj. 3: Further, it does not seem unlawful if that which honesty demands be done by mutual
agreement. Now, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 13), in the friendship which is
based on utility, the amount of the recompense for a favor received should depend on the utility
accruing to the receiver: and this utility sometimes is worth more than the thing given, for
instance if the receiver be in great need of that thing, whether for the purpose of avoiding
a danger, or of deriving some particular benefit. Therefore, in contracts of buying and selling,
it is lawful to give a thing in return for more than its worth.

On the contrary, It is written (Matt. 7:12): "All things . . . whatsoever you would that men
should do to you, do you also to them." But no man wishes to buy a thing for more than its
worth. Therefore no man should sell a thing to another man for more than its worth.

I answer that, It is altogether sinful to have recourse to deceit in order to sell a thing
for more than its just price, because this is to deceive one's neighbor so as to injure him.
Hence Tully says (De Offic. iii, 15): "Contracts should be entirely free from double-dealing:
the seller must not impose upon the bidder, nor the buyer upon one that bids against him."

But, apart from fraud, we may speak of buying and selling in two ways. First, as considered
in themselves, and from this point of view, buying and selling seem to be established for the
common advantage of both parties, one of whom requires that which belongs to the other, and
vice versa, as the Philosopher states (Polit. i, 3). Now whatever is established for the common
advantage, should not be more of a burden to one party than to another, and consequently all
contracts between them should observe equality of thing and thing. Again, the quality of a
thing that comes into human use is measured by the price given for it, for which purpose money
was invented, as stated in Ethic. v, 5. Therefore if either the price exceed the quantity of
the thing's worth, or, conversely, the thing exceed the price, there is no longer the equality
of justice: and consequently, to sell a thing for more than its worth, or to buy it for less
than its worth, is in itself unjust and unlawful.

Secondly we may speak of buying and selling, considered as accidentally tending to the advantage
of one party, and to the disadvantage of the other: for instance, when a man has great need
of a certain thing, while another man will suffer if he be without it. In such a case the just
price will depend not only on the thing sold, but on the loss which the sale brings on the
seller. And thus it will be lawful to sell a thing for more than it is worth in itself, though
the price paid be not more than it is worth to the owner. Yet if the one man derive a great
advantage by becoming possessed of the other man's property, and the seller be not at a loss
through being without that thing, the latter ought not to raise the price, because the advantage
accruing to the buyer, is not due to the seller, but to a circumstance affecting the buyer.
Now no man should sell what is not his, though he may charge for the loss he suffers.

On the other hand if a man find that he derives great advantage from something he has bought,
he may, of his own accord, pay the seller something over and above: and this pertains to his
honesty.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (I-II, Q. 96, A. 2) human law is given to the people among whom
there are many lacking virtue, and it is not given to the virtuous alone. Hence human law was
unable to forbid all that is contrary to virtue; and it suffices for it to prohibit whatever
is destructive of human intercourse, while it treats other matters as though they were lawful,
not by approving of them, but by not punishing them. Accordingly, if without employing deceit
the seller disposes of his goods for more than their worth, or the buyer obtain them for less
than their worth, the law looks upon this as licit, and provides no punishment for so doing,
unless the excess be too great, because then even human law demands restitution to be made,
for instance if a man be deceived in regard to more than half the amount of the just price
of a thing [*Cod. IV, xliv, De Rescind. Vend. 2, 8].

On the other hand the Divine law leaves nothing unpunished that is contrary to virtue. Hence,
according to the Divine law, it is reckoned unlawful if the equality of justice be not observed
in buying and selling: and he who has received more than he ought must make compensation to
him that has suffered loss, if the loss be considerable. I add this condition, because the
just price of things is not fixed with mathematical precision, but depends on a kind of estimate,
so that a slight addition or subtraction would not seem to destroy the equality of justice.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says "this jester, either by looking into himself or by his experience
of others, thought that all men are inclined to wish to buy for a song and sell at a premium.
But since in reality this is wicked, it is in every man's power to acquire that justice whereby
he may resist and overcome this inclination." And then he gives the example of a man who gave
the just price for a book to a man who through ignorance asked a low price for it. Hence it
is evident that this common desire is not from nature but from vice, wherefore it is common
to many who walk along the broad road of sin.

Reply Obj. 3: In commutative justice we consider chiefly real equality. On the other hand,
in friendship based on utility we consider equality of usefulness, so that the recompense should
depend on the usefulness accruing, whereas in buying it should be equal to the thing bought.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 77, Art. 2]

Whether a Sale Is Rendered Unlawful Through a Fault in the Thing Sold?

Objection 1: It would seem that a sale is not rendered unjust and unlawful through a fault
in the thing sold. For less account should be taken of the other parts of a thing than of what
belongs to its substance. Yet the sale of a thing does not seem to be rendered unlawful through
a fault in its substance: for instance, if a man sell instead of the real metal, silver or
gold produced by some chemical process, which is adapted to all the human uses for which silver
and gold are necessary, for instance in the making of vessels and the like. Much less therefore
will it be an unlawful sale if the thing be defective in other ways.

Obj. 2: Further, any fault in the thing, affecting the quantity, would seem chiefly to be opposed
to justice which consists in equality. Now quantity is known by being measured: and the measures
of things that come into human use are not fixed, but in some places are greater, in others
less, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. v, 7). Therefore just as it is impossible to avoid
defects on the part of the thing sold, it seems that a sale is not rendered unlawful through
the thing sold being defective.

Obj. 3: Further, the thing sold is rendered defective by lacking a fitting quality. But in
order to know the quality of a thing, much knowledge is required that is lacking in most buyers.
Therefore a sale is not rendered unlawful by a fault (in the thing sold).

On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Offic. iii, 11): "It is manifestly a rule of justice that
a good man should not depart from the truth, nor inflict an unjust injury on anyone, nor have
any connection with fraud."

I answer that, A threefold fault may be found pertaining to the thing which is sold. One, in
respect of the thing's substance: and if the seller be aware of a fault in the thing he is
selling, he is guilty of a fraudulent sale, so that the sale is rendered unlawful. Hence we
find it written against certain people (Isa. 1:22), "Thy silver is turned into dross, thy wine
is mingled with water": because that which is mixed is defective in its substance.

Another defect is in respect of quantity which is known by being measured: wherefore if anyone
knowingly make use of a faulty measure in selling, he is guilty of fraud, and the sale is illicit.
Hence it is written (Deut. 25:13, 14): "Thou shalt not have divers weights in thy bag, a greater
and a less: neither shall there be in thy house a greater bushel and a less," and further on
(Deut. 25:16): "For the Lord . . . abhorreth him that doth these things, and He hateth all
injustice."

A third defect is on the part of the quality, for instance, if a man sell an unhealthy animal
as being a healthy one: and if anyone do this knowingly he is guilty of a fraudulent sale,
and the sale, in consequence, is illicit.

In all these cases not only is the man guilty of a fraudulent sale, but he is also bound to
restitution. But if any of the foregoing defects be in the thing sold, and he knows nothing
about this, the seller does not sin, because he does that which is unjust materially, nor is
his deed unjust, as shown above (Q. 59, A. 2). Nevertheless he is bound to compensate the buyer,
when the defect comes to his knowledge. Moreover what has been said of the seller applies equally
to the buyer. For sometimes it happens that the seller thinks his goods to be specifically
of lower value, as when a man sells gold instead of copper, and then if the buyer be aware
of this, he buys it unjustly and is bound to restitution: and the same applies to a defect
in quantity as to a defect in quality.

Reply Obj. 1: Gold and silver are costly not only on account of the usefulness of the vessels
and other like things made from them, but also on account of the excellence and purity of their
substance. Hence if the gold or silver produced by alchemists has not the true specific nature
of gold and silver, the sale thereof is fraudulent and unjust, especially as real gold and
silver can produce certain results by their natural action, which the counterfeit gold and
silver of alchemists cannot produce. Thus the true metal has the property of making people
joyful, and is helpful medicinally against certain maladies. Moreover real gold can be employed
more frequently, and lasts longer in its condition of purity than counterfeit gold. If however
real gold were to be produced by alchemy, it would not be unlawful to sell it for the genuine
article, for nothing prevents art from employing certain natural causes for the production
of natural and true effects, as Augustine says (De Trin. iii, 8) of things produced by the
art of the demons.

Reply Obj. 2: The measures of salable commodities must needs be different in different places,
on account of the difference of supply: because where there is greater abundance, the measures
are wont to be larger. However in each place those who govern the state must determine the
just measures of things salable, with due consideration for the conditions of place and time.
Hence it is not lawful to disregard such measures as are established by public authority or custom.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xi, 16) the price of things salable does not depend
on their degree of nature, since at times a horse fetches a higher price than a slave; but
it depends on their usefulness to man. Hence it is not necessary for the seller or buyer to
be cognizant of the hidden qualities of the thing sold, but only of such as render the thing
adapted to man's use, for instance, that the horse be strong, run well and so forth. Such qualities
the seller and buyer can easily discover.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 77, Art. 3]

Whether the Seller Is Bound to State the Defects of the Thing Sold?

Objection 1: It would seem that the seller is not bound to state the defects of the thing sold.
Since the seller does not bind the buyer to buy, he would seem to leave it to him to judge
of the goods offered for sale. Now judgment about a thing and knowledge of that thing belong
to the same person. Therefore it does not seem imputable to the seller if the buyer be deceived
in his judgment, and be hurried into buying a thing without carefully inquiring into its condition.

Obj. 2: Further, it seems foolish for anyone to do what prevents him carrying out his work.
But if a man states the defects of the goods he has for sale, he prevents their sale: wherefore
Tully (De Offic. iii, 13) pictures a man as saying: "Could anything be more absurd than for
a public crier, instructed by the owner, to cry: 'I offer this unhealthy horse for sale?'"
Therefore the seller is not bound to state the defects of the thing sold.

Obj. 3: Further, man needs more to know the road of virtue than to know the faults of things
offered for sale. Now one is not bound to offer advice to all or to tell them the truth about
matters pertaining to virtue, though one should not tell anyone what is false. Much less therefore
is a seller bound to tell the faults of what he offers for sale, as though he were counseling
the buyer.

Obj. 4: Further, if one were bound to tell the faults of what one offers for sale, this would
only be in order to lower the price. Now sometimes the price would be lowered for some other
reason, without any defect in the thing sold: for instance, if the seller carry wheat to a
place where wheat fetches a high price, knowing that many will come after him carrying wheat;
because if the buyers knew this they would give a lower price. But apparently the seller need
not give the buyer this information. Therefore, in like manner, neither need he tell him the
faults of the goods he is selling.

On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Offic. iii, 10): "In all contracts the defects of the salable
commodity must be stated; and unless the seller make them known, although the buyer has already
acquired a right to them, the contract is voided on account of the fraudulent action."

I answer that, It is always unlawful to give anyone an occasion of danger or loss, although
a man need not always give another the help or counsel which would be for his advantage in
any way; but only in certain fixed cases, for instance when someone is subject to him, or when
he is the only one who can assist him. Now the seller who offers goods for sale, gives the
buyer an occasion of loss or danger, by the very fact that he offers him defective goods, if
such defect may occasion loss or danger to the buyer--loss, if, by reason of this defect, the
goods are of less value, and he takes nothing off the price on that account--danger, if this
defect either hinder the use of the goods or render it hurtful, for instance, if a man sells
a lame for a fleet horse, a tottering house for a safe one, rotten or poisonous food for wholesome.
Wherefore if such like defects be hidden, and the seller does not make them known, the sale
will be illicit and fraudulent, and the seller will be bound to compensation for the loss incurred.

On the other hand, if the defect be manifest, for instance if a horse have but one eye, or
if the goods though useless to the buyer, be useful to someone else, provided the seller take
as much as he ought from the price, he is not bound to state the defect of the goods, since
perhaps on account of that defect the buyer might want him to allow a greater rebate than he
need. Wherefore the seller may look to his own indemnity, by withholding the defect of the goods.

Reply Obj. 1: Judgment cannot be pronounced save on what is manifest: for "a man judges of
what he knows" (Ethic. i, 3). Hence if the defects of the goods offered for sale be hidden,
judgment of them is not sufficiently left with the buyer unless such defects be made known
to him. The case would be different if the defects were manifest.

Reply Obj. 2: There is no need to publish beforehand by the public crier the defects of the
goods one is offering for sale, because if he were to begin by announcing its defects, the
bidders would be frightened to buy, through ignorance of other qualities that might render
the thing good and serviceable. Such defect ought to be stated to each individual that offers
to buy: and then he will be able to compare the various points one with the other, the good
with the bad: for nothing prevents that which is defective in one respect being useful in many
others.

Reply Obj. 3: Although a man is not bound strictly speaking to tell everyone the truth about
matters pertaining to virtue, yet he is so bound in a case when, unless he tells the truth,
his conduct would endanger another man in detriment to virtue: and so it is in this case.

Reply Obj. 4: The defect in a thing makes it of less value now than it seems to be: but in
the case cited, the goods are expected to be of less value at a future time, on account of
the arrival of other merchants, which was not foreseen by the buyers. Wherefore the seller,
since he sells his goods at the price actually offered him, does not seem to act contrary to
justice through not stating what is going to happen. If however he were to do so, or if he
lowered his price, it would be exceedingly virtuous on his part: although he does not seem
to be bound to do this as a debt of justice.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 77, Art. 4]

Whether, in Trading, It Is Lawful to Sell a Thing at a Higher Price Than What Was Paid for It?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful, in trading, to sell a thing for a higher
price than we paid for it. For Chrysostom [*Hom. xxxviii in the Opus Imperfectum, falsely ascribed
to St. John Chrysostom] says on Matt. 21:12: "He that buys a thing in order that he may sell
it, entire and unchanged, at a profit, is the trader who is cast out of God's temple." Cassiodorus
speaks in the same sense in his commentary on Ps. 70:15, "Because I have not known learning,
or trading" according to another version [*The Septuagint]: "What is trade," says he, "but
buying at a cheap price with the purpose of retailing at a higher price?" and he adds: "Such
were the tradesmen whom Our Lord cast out of the temple." Now no man is cast out of the temple
except for a sin. Therefore such like trading is sinful.

Obj. 2: Further, it is contrary to justice to sell goods at a higher price than their worth,
or to buy them for less than their value, as shown above (A. 1). Now if you sell a thing for
a higher price than you paid for it, you must either have bought it for less than its value,
or sell it for more than its value. Therefore this cannot be done without sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Jerome says (Ep. ad Nepot. lii): "Shun, as you would the plague, a cleric
who from being poor has become wealthy, or who, from being a nobody has become a celebrity."
Now trading would net seem to be forbidden to clerics except on account of its sinfulness.
Therefore it is a sin in trading, to buy at a low price and to sell at a higher price.

On the contrary, Augustine commenting on Ps. 70:15, "Because I have not known learning," [*Cf.
Obj. 1] says: "The greedy tradesman blasphemes over his losses; he lies and perjures himself
over the price of his wares. But these are vices of the man, not of the craft, which can be
exercised without these vices." Therefore trading is not in itself unlawful.

I answer that, A tradesman is one whose business consists in the exchange of things. According
to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 3), exchange of things is twofold; one, natural as it were, and
necessary, whereby one commodity is exchanged for another, or money taken in exchange for a
commodity, in order to satisfy the needs of life. Such like trading, properly speaking, does
not belong to tradesmen, but rather to housekeepers or civil servants who have to provide the
household or the state with the necessaries of life. The other kind of exchange is either that
of money for money, or of any commodity for money, not on account of the necessities of life,
but for profit, and this kind of exchange, properly speaking, regards tradesmen, according
to the Philosopher (Polit. i, 3). The former kind of exchange is commendable because it supplies
a natural need: but the latter is justly deserving of blame, because, considered in itself,
it satisfies the greed for gain, which knows no limit and tends to infinity. Hence trading,
considered in itself, has a certain debasement attaching thereto, in so far as, by its very
nature, it does not imply a virtuous or necessary end. Nevertheless gain which is the end of
trading, though not implying, by its nature, anything virtuous or necessary, does not, in itself,
connote anything sinful or contrary to virtue: wherefore nothing prevents gain from being directed
to some necessary or even virtuous end, and thus trading becomes lawful. Thus, for instance,
a man may intend the moderate gain which he seeks to acquire by trading for the upkeep of his
household, or for the assistance of the needy: or again, a man may take to trade for some public
advantage, for instance, lest his country lack the necessaries of life, and seek gain, not
as an end, but as payment for his labor.

Reply Obj. 1: The saying of Chrysostom refers to the trading which seeks gain as a last end.
This is especially the case where a man sells something at a higher price without its undergoing
any change. For if he sells at a higher price something that has changed for the better, he
would seem to receive the reward of his labor. Nevertheless the gain itself may be lawfully
intended, not as a last end, but for the sake of some other end which is necessary or virtuous,
as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Not everyone that sells at a higher price than he bought is a tradesman, but
only he who buys that he may sell at a profit. If, on the contrary, he buys not for sale but
for possession, and afterwards, for some reason wishes to sell, it is not a trade transaction
even if he sell at a profit. For he may lawfully do this, either because he has bettered the
thing, or because the value of the thing has changed with the change of place or time, or on
account of the danger he incurs in transferring the thing from one place to another, or again
in having it carried by another. In this sense neither buying nor selling is unjust.

Reply Obj. 3: Clerics should abstain not only from things that are evil in themselves, but
even from those that have an appearance of evil. This happens in trading, both because it is
directed to worldly gain, which clerics should despise, and because trading is open to so many
vices, since "a merchant is hardly free from sins of the lips" [*'A merchant is hardly free
from negligence, and a huckster shall not be justified from the sins of the lips'] (Ecclus.
26:28). Nevertheless it is lawful for clerics to engage in the first mentioned kind of exchange,
which is directed to supply the necessaries of life, either by buying or by selling.

QUESTION 78

OF THE SIN OF USURY (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the sin of usury, which is committed in loans: and under this head there
are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is a sin to take money as a price for money lent, which is to receive usury?

(2) Whether it is lawful to lend money for any other kind of consideration, by way of payment
for the loan?

(3) Whether a man is bound to restore just gains derived from money taken in usury?

(4) Whether it is lawful to borrow money under a condition of usury?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 78, Art. 1]

Whether It Is a Sin to Take Usury for Money Lent?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not a sin to take usury for money lent. For no man sins
through following the example of Christ. But Our Lord said of Himself (Luke 19:23): "At My
coming I might have exacted it," i.e. the money lent, "with usury." Therefore it is not a sin
to take usury for lending money.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Ps. 18:8, "The law of the Lord is unspotted," because, to wit,
it forbids sin. Now usury of a kind is allowed in the Divine law, according to Deut. 23:19,
20: "Thou shalt not fenerate to thy brother money, nor corn, nor any other thing, but to the
stranger": nay more, it is even promised as a reward for the observance of the Law, according
to Deut. 28:12: "Thou shalt fenerate* to many nations, and shalt not borrow of any one." [*Faeneraberis--'Thou
shalt lend upon usury.' The Douay version has simply 'lend.' The objection lays stress on the
word faeneraberis: hence the necessity of rendering it by 'fenerate.'] Therefore it is not
a sin to take usury.

Obj. 3: Further, in human affairs justice is determined by civil laws. Now civil law allows
usury to be taken. Therefore it seems to be lawful.

Obj. 4: Further, the counsels are not binding under sin. But, among other counsels we find
(Luke 6:35): "Lend, hoping for nothing thereby." Therefore it is not a sin to take usury.

Obj. 5: Further, it does not seem to be in itself sinful to accept a price for doing what one
is not bound to do. But one who has money is not bound in every case to lend it to his neighbor.
Therefore it is lawful for him sometimes to accept a price for lending it.

Obj. 6: Further, silver made into coins does not differ specifically from silver made into
a vessel. But it is lawful to accept a price for the loan of a silver vessel. Therefore it
is also lawful to accept a price for the loan of a silver coin. Therefore usury is not in itself
a sin.

Obj. 7: Further, anyone may lawfully accept a thing which its owner freely gives him. Now he
who accepts the loan, freely gives the usury. Therefore he who lends may lawfully take the usury.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 22:25): "If thou lend money to any of thy people that is
poor, that dwelleth with thee, thou shalt not be hard upon them as an extortioner, nor oppress
them with usuries."

I answer that, To take usury for money lent is unjust in itself, because this is to sell what
does not exist, and this evidently leads to inequality which is contrary to justice. In order
to make this evident, we must observe that there are certain things the use of which consists
in their consumption: thus we consume wine when we use it for drink and we consume wheat when
we use it for food. Wherefore in such like things the use of the thing must not be reckoned
apart from the thing itself, and whoever is granted the use of the thing, is granted the thing
itself and for this reason, to lend things of this kind is to transfer the ownership. Accordingly
if a man wanted to sell wine separately from the use of the wine, he would be selling the same
thing twice, or he would be selling what does not exist, wherefore he would evidently commit
a sin of injustice. In like manner he commits an injustice who lends wine or wheat, and asks
for double payment, viz. one, the return of the thing in equal measure, the other, the price
of the use, which is called usury.

On the other hand, there are things the use of which does not consist in their consumption:
thus to use a house is to dwell in it, not to destroy it. Wherefore in such things both may
be granted: for instance, one man may hand over to another the ownership of his house while
reserving to himself the use of it for a time, or vice versa, he may grant the use of the house,
while retaining the ownership. For this reason a man may lawfully make a charge for the use
of his house, and, besides this, revendicate the house from the person to whom he has granted
its use, as happens in renting and letting a house.

Now money, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 5; Polit. i, 3) was invented chiefly for
the purpose of exchange: and consequently the proper and principal use of money is its consumption
or alienation whereby it is sunk in exchange. Hence it is by its very nature unlawful to take
payment for the use of money lent, which payment is known as usury: and just as a man is bound
to restore other ill-gotten goods, so is he bound to restore the money which he has taken in usury.

Reply Obj. 1: In this passage usury must be taken figuratively for the increase of spiritual
goods which God exacts from us, for He wishes us ever to advance in the goods which we receive
from Him: and this is for our own profit not for His.

Reply Obj. 2: The Jews were forbidden to take usury from their brethren, i.e. from other Jews.
By this we are given to understand that to take usury from any man is evil simply, because
we ought to treat every man as our neighbor and brother, especially in the state of the Gospel,
whereto all are called. Hence it is said without any distinction in Ps. 14:5: "He that hath
not put out his money to usury," and (Ezech. 18:8): "Who hath not taken usury [*Vulg.: 'If
a man . . . hath not lent upon money, nor taken any increase . . . he is just.']." They were
permitted, however, to take usury from foreigners, not as though it were lawful, but in order
to avoid a greater evil, lest, to wit, through avarice to which they were prone according to
Isa. 56:11, they should take usury from the Jews who were worshippers of God.

Where we find it promised to them as a reward, "Thou shalt fenerate to many nations," etc.,
fenerating is to be taken in a broad sense for lending, as in Ecclus. 29:10, where we read:
"Many have refused to fenerate, not out of wickedness," i.e. they would not lend. Accordingly
the Jews are promised in reward an abundance of wealth, so that they would be able to lend
to others.

Reply Obj. 3: Human laws leave certain things unpunished, on account of the condition of those
who are imperfect, and who would be deprived of many advantages, if all sins were strictly
forbidden and punishments appointed for them. Wherefore human law has permitted usury, not
that it looks upon usury as harmonizing with justice, but lest the advantage of many should
be hindered. Hence it is that in civil law [*Inst. II, iv, de Usufructu] it is stated that
"those things according to natural reason and civil law which are consumed by being used, do
not admit of usufruct," and that "the senate did not (nor could it) appoint a usufruct to such
things, but established a quasi-usufruct," namely by permitting usury. Moreover the Philosopher,
led by natural reason, says (Polit. i, 3) that "to make money by usury is exceedingly unnatural."

Reply Obj. 4: A man is not always bound to lend, and for this reason it is placed among the
counsels. Yet it is a matter of precept not to seek profit by lending: although it may be called
a matter of counsel in comparison with the maxims of the Pharisees, who deemed some kinds of
usury to be lawful, just as love of one's enemies is a matter of counsel. Or again, He speaks
here not of the hope of usurious gain, but of the hope which is put in man. For we ought not
to lend or do any good deed through hope in man, but only through hope in God.

Reply Obj. 5: He that is not bound to lend, may accept repayment for what he has done, but
he must not exact more. Now he is repaid according to equality of justice if he is repaid as
much as he lent. Wherefore if he exacts more for the usufruct of a thing which has no other
use but the consumption of its substance, he exacts a price of something non-existent: and
so his exaction is unjust.

Reply Obj. 6: The principal use of a silver vessel is not its consumption, and so one may lawfully
sell its use while retaining one's ownership of it. On the other hand the principal use of
silver money is sinking it in exchange, so that it is not lawful to sell its use and at the
same time expect the restitution of the amount lent. It must be observed, however, that the
secondary use of silver vessels may be an exchange, and such use may not be lawfully sold.
In like manner there may be some secondary use of silver money; for instance, a man might lend
coins for show, or to be used as security.

Reply Obj. 7: He who gives usury does not give it voluntarily simply, but under a certain necessity,
in so far as he needs to borrow money which the owner is unwilling to lend without usury.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 78, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful to Ask for Any Other Kind of Consideration for Money Lent?

Objection 1: It would seem that one may ask for some other kind of consideration for money
lent. For everyone may lawfully seek to indemnify himself. Now sometimes a man suffers loss
through lending money. Therefore he may lawfully ask for or even exact something else besides
the money lent.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated in Ethic. v, 5, one is in duty bound by a point of honor, to repay
anyone who has done us a favor. Now to lend money to one who is in straits is to do him a favor
for which he should be grateful. Therefore the recipient of a loan, is bound by a natural debt
to repay something. Now it does not seem unlawful to bind oneself to an obligation of the natural
law. Therefore it is not unlawful, in lending money to anyone, to demand some sort of compensation
as condition of the loan.

Obj. 3: Further, just as there is real remuneration, so is there verbal remuneration, and remuneration
by service, as a gloss says on Isa. 33:15, "Blessed is he that shaketh his hands from all bribes
[*Vulg.: 'Which of you shall dwell with everlasting burnings? . . . He that shaketh his hands
from all bribes.']." Now it is lawful to accept service or praise from one to whom one has
lent money. Therefore in like manner it is lawful to accept any other kind of remuneration.

Obj. 4: Further, seemingly the relation of gift to gift is the same as of loan to loan. But
it is lawful to accept money for money given. Therefore it is lawful to accept repayment by
loan in return for a loan granted.

Obj. 5: Further, the lender, by transferring his ownership of a sum of money removes the money
further from himself than he who entrusts it to a merchant or craftsman. Now it is lawful to
receive interest for money entrusted to a merchant or craftsman. Therefore it is also lawful
to receive interest for money lent.

Obj. 6: Further, a man may accept a pledge for money lent, the use of which pledge he might
sell for a price: as when a man mortgages his land or the house wherein he dwells. Therefore
it is lawful to receive interest for money lent.

Obj. 7: Further, it sometimes happens that a man raises the price of his goods under guise
of loan, or buys another's goods at a low figure; or raises his price through delay in being
paid, and lowers his price that he may be paid the sooner. Now in all these cases there seems
to be payment for a loan of money: nor does it appear to be manifestly illicit. Therefore it
seems to be lawful to expect or exact some consideration for money lent.

On the contrary, Among other conditions requisite in a just man it is stated (Ezech. 18:17)
that he "hath not taken usury and increase."

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 1), a thing is reckoned as money "if
its value can be measured by money." Consequently, just as it is a sin against justice, to
take money, by tacit or express agreement, in return for lending money or anything else that
is consumed by being used, so also is it a like sin, by tacit or express agreement to receive
anything whose price can be measured by money. Yet there would be no sin in receiving something
of the kind, not as exacting it, nor yet as though it were due on account of some agreement
tacit or expressed, but as a gratuity: since, even before lending the money, one could accept
a gratuity, nor is one in a worse condition through lending.

On the other hand it is lawful to exact compensation for a loan, in respect of such things
as are not appreciated by a measure of money, for instance, benevolence, and love for the lender,
and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: A lender may without sin enter an agreement with the borrower for compensation
for the loss he incurs of something he ought to have, for this is not to sell the use of money
but to avoid a loss. It may also happen that the borrower avoids a greater loss than the lender
incurs, wherefore the borrower may repay the lender with what he has gained. But the lender
cannot enter an agreement for compensation, through the fact that he makes no profit out of
his money: because he must not sell that which he has not yet and may be prevented in many
ways from having.

Reply Obj. 2: Repayment for a favor may be made in two ways. In one way, as a debt of justice;
and to such a debt a man may be bound by a fixed contract; and its amount is measured according
to the favor received. Wherefore the borrower of money or any such thing the use of which is
its consumption is not bound to repay more than he received in loan: and consequently it is
against justice if he be obliged to pay back more. In another way a man's obligation to repayment
for favor received is based on a debt of friendship, and the nature of this debt depends more
on the feeling with which the favor was conferred than on the greatness of the favor itself.
This debt does not carry with it a civil obligation, involving a kind of necessity that would
exclude the spontaneous nature of such a repayment.

Reply Obj. 3: If a man were, in return for money lent, as though there had been an agreement
tacit or expressed, to expect or exact repayment in the shape of some remuneration of service
or words, it would be the same as if he expected or exacted some real remuneration, because
both can be priced at a money value, as may be seen in the case of those who offer for hire
the labor which they exercise by work or by tongue. If on the other hand the remuneration by
service or words be given not as an obligation, but as a favor, which is not to be appreciated
at a money value, it is lawful to take, exact, and expect it.

Reply Obj. 4: Money cannot be sold for a greater sum than the amount lent, which has to be
paid back: nor should the loan be made with a demand or expectation of aught else but of a
feeling of benevolence which cannot be priced at a pecuniary value, and which can be the basis
of a spontaneous loan. Now the obligation to lend in return at some future time is repugnant
to such a feeling, because again an obligation of this kind has its pecuniary value. Consequently
it is lawful for the lender to borrow something else at the same time, but it is unlawful for
him to bind the borrower to grant him a loan at some future time.

Reply Obj. 5: He who lends money transfers the ownership of the money to the borrower. Hence
the borrower holds the money at his own risk and is bound to pay it all back: wherefore the
lender must not exact more. On the other hand he that entrusts his money to a merchant or craftsman
so as to form a kind of society, does not transfer the ownership of his money to them, for
it remains his, so that at his risk the merchant speculates with it, or the craftsman uses
it for his craft, and consequently he may lawfully demand as something belonging to him, part
of the profits derived from his money.

Reply Obj. 6: If a man in return for money lent to him pledges something that can be valued
at a price, the lender must allow for the use of that thing towards the repayment of the loan.
Else if he wishes the gratuitous use of that thing in addition to repayment, it is the same
as if he took money for lending, and that is usury, unless perhaps it were such a thing as
friends are wont to lend to one another gratis, as in the case of the loan of a book.

Reply Obj. 7: If a man wish to sell his goods at a higher price than that which is just, so
that he may wait for the buyer to pay, it is manifestly a case of usury: because this waiting
for the payment of the price has the character of a loan, so that whatever he demands beyond
the just price in consideration of this delay, is like a price for a loan, which pertains to
usury. In like manner if a buyer wishes to buy goods at a lower price than what is just, for
the reason that he pays for the goods before they can be delivered, it is a sin of usury; because
again this anticipated payment of money has the character of a loan, the price of which is
the rebate on the just price of the goods sold. On the other hand if a man wishes to allow
a rebate on the just price in order that he may have his money sooner, he is not guilty of
the sin of usury.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 78, Art. 3]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Restore Whatever Profits He Has Made Out of Money Gotten by Usury?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man is bound to restore whatever profits he has made out
of money gotten by usury. For the Apostle says (Rom. 11:16): "If the root be holy, so are the
branches." Therefore likewise if the root be rotten so are the branches. But the root was infected
with usury. Therefore whatever profit is made therefrom is infected with usury. Therefore he
is bound to restore it.

Obj. 2: Further, it is laid down (Extra, De Usuris, in the Decretal: 'Cum tu sicut asseris'):
"Property accruing from usury must be sold, and the price repaid to the persons from whom the
usury was extorted." Therefore, likewise, whatever else is acquired from usurious money must
be restored.

Obj. 3: Further, that which a man buys with the proceeds of usury is due to him by reason of
the money he paid for it. Therefore he has no more right to the thing purchased than to the
money he paid. But he was bound to restore the money gained through usury. Therefore he is
also bound to restore what he acquired with it.

On the contrary, A man may lawfully hold what he has lawfully acquired. Now that which is acquired
by the proceeds of usury is sometimes lawfully acquired. Therefore it may be lawfully retained.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), there are certain things whose use is their consumption,
and which do not admit of usufruct, according to law (ibid., ad 3). Wherefore if such like
things be extorted by means of usury, for instance money, wheat, wine and so forth, the lender
is not bound to restore more than he received (since what is acquired by such things is the
fruit not of the thing but of human industry), unless indeed the other party by losing some
of his own goods be injured through the lender retaining them: for then he is bound to make
good the loss.

On the other hand, there are certain things whose use is not their consumption: such things
admit of usufruct, for instance house or land property and so forth. Wherefore if a man has
by usury extorted from another his house or land, he is bound to restore not only the house
or land but also the fruits accruing to him therefrom, since they are the fruits of things
owned by another man and consequently are due to him.

Reply Obj. 1: The root has not only the character of matter, as money made by usury has; but
has also somewhat the character of an active cause, in so far as it administers nourishment.
Hence the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 2: Further, Property acquired from usury does not belong to the person who paid
usury, but to the person who bought it. Yet he that paid usury has a certain claim on that
property just as he has on the other goods of the usurer. Hence it is not prescribed that such
property should be assigned to the persons who paid usury, since the property is perhaps worth
more than what they paid in usury, but it is commanded that the property be sold, and the price
be restored, of course according to the amount taken in usury.

Reply Obj. 3: The proceeds of money taken in usury are due to the person who acquired them
not by reason of the usurious money as instrumental cause, but on account of his own industry
as principal cause. Wherefore he has more right to the goods acquired with usurious money than
to the usurious money itself.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 78, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Lawful to Borrow Money Under a Condition of Usury?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to borrow money under a condition of usury.
For the Apostle says (Rom. 1:32) that they "are worthy of death . . . not only they that do"
these sins, "but they also that consent to them that do them." Now he that borrows money under
a condition of usury consents in the sin of the usurer, and gives him an occasion of sin. Therefore
he sins also.

Obj. 2: Further, for no temporal advantage ought one to give another an occasion of committing
a sin: for this pertains to active scandal, which is always sinful, as stated above (Q. 43,
A. 2). Now he that seeks to borrow from a usurer gives him an occasion of sin. Therefore he
is not to be excused on account of any temporal advantage.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems no less necessary sometimes to deposit one's money with a usurer
than to borrow from him. Now it seems altogether unlawful to deposit one's money with a usurer,
even as it would be unlawful to deposit one's sword with a madman, a maiden with a libertine,
or food with a glutton. Neither therefore is it lawful to borrow from a usurer.

On the contrary, He that suffers injury does not sin, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
v, 11), wherefore justice is not a mean between two vices, as stated in the same book (ch.
5). Now a usurer sins by doing an injury to the person who borrows from him under a condition
of usury. Therefore he that accepts a loan under a condition of usury does not sin.

I answer that, It is by no means lawful to induce a man to sin, yet it is lawful to make use
of another's sin for a good end, since even God uses all sin for some good, since He draws
some good from every evil as stated in the Enchiridion (xi). Hence when Publicola asked whether
it were lawful to make use of an oath taken by a man swearing by false gods (which is a manifest
sin, for he gives Divine honor to them) Augustine (Ep. xlvii) answered that he who uses, not
for a bad but for a good purpose, the oath of a man that swears by false gods, is a party,
not to his sin of swearing by demons, but to his good compact whereby he kept his word. If
however he were to induce him to swear by false gods, he would sin.

Accordingly we must also answer to the question in point that it is by no means lawful to induce
a man to lend under a condition of usury: yet it is lawful to borrow for usury from a man who
is ready to do so and is a usurer by profession; provided the borrower have a good end in view,
such as the relief of his own or another's need. Thus too it is lawful for a man who has fallen
among thieves to point out his property to them (which they sin in taking) in order to save
his life, after the example of the ten men who said to Ismahel (Jer. 41:8): "Kill us not: for
we have stores in the field."

Reply Obj. 1: He who borrows for usury does not consent to the usurer's sin but makes use of
it. Nor is it the usurer's acceptance of usury that pleases him, but his lending, which is good.

Reply Obj. 2: He who borrows for usury gives the usurer an occasion, not for taking usury,
but for lending; it is the usurer who finds an occasion of sin in the malice of his heart.
Hence there is passive scandal on his part, while there is no active scandal on the part of
the person who seeks to borrow. Nor is this passive scandal a reason why the other person should
desist from borrowing if he is in need, since this passive scandal arises not from weakness
or ignorance but from malice.

Reply Obj. 3: If one were to entrust one's money to a usurer lacking other means of practising
usury; or with the intention of making a greater profit from his money by reason of the usury,
one would be giving a sinner matter for sin, so that one would be a participator in his guilt.
If, on the other hand, the usurer to whom one entrusts one's money has other means of practising
usury, there is no sin in entrusting it to him that it may be in safer keeping, since this
is to use a sinner for a good purpose.

QUESTION 79

OF THE QUASI-INTEGRAL PARTS OF JUSTICE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the quasi-integral parts of justice, which are to do good, and to decline
from evil, and the opposite vices. Under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether these two are parts of justice?

(2) Whether transgression is a special sin?

(3) Whether omission is a special sin?

(4) Of the comparison between omission and transgression.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 79, Art. 1]

Whether to Decline from Evil and to Do Good Are Parts of Justice?

Objection 1: It would seem that to decline from evil and to do good are not parts of justice.
For it belongs to every virtue to perform a good deed and to avoid an evil one. But parts do
not exceed the whole. Therefore to decline from evil and to do good should not be reckoned
parts of justice, which is a special kind of virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss on Ps. 33:15, "Turn away from evil and do good," says: "The former,"
i.e. to turn away from evil, "avoids sin, the latter," i.e. to do good, "deserves the life
and the palm." But any part of a virtue deserves the life and the palm. Therefore to decline
from evil is not a part of justice.

Obj. 3: Further, things that are so related that one implies the other, are not mutually distinct
as parts of a whole. Now declining from evil is implied in doing good: since no one does evil
and good at the same time. Therefore declining from evil and doing good are not parts of justice.

On the contrary, Augustine (De Correp. et Grat. i) declares that "declining from evil and doing
good" belong to the justice of the law.

I answer that, If we speak of good and evil in general, it belongs to every virtue to do good
and to avoid evil: and in this sense they cannot be reckoned parts of justice, except justice
be taken in the sense of "all virtue" [*Cf. Q. 58, A. 5]. And yet even if justice be taken
in this sense it regards a certain special aspect of good; namely, the good as due in respect
of Divine or human law.

On the other hand justice considered as a special virtue regards good as due to one's neighbor.
And in this sense it belongs to special justice to do good considered as due to one's neighbor,
and to avoid the opposite evil, that, namely, which is hurtful to one's neighbor; while it
belongs to general justice to do good in relation to the community or in relation to God, and
to avoid the opposite evil.

Now these two are said to be quasi-integral parts of general or of special justice, because
each is required for the perfect act of justice. For it belongs to justice to establish equality
in our relations with others, as shown above (Q. 58, A. 2): and it pertains to the same cause
to establish and to preserve that which it has established. Now a person establishes the equality
of justice by doing good, i.e. by rendering to another his due: and he preserves the already
established equality of justice by declining from evil, that is by inflicting no injury on
his neighbor.

Reply Obj. 1: Good and evil are here considered under a special aspect, by which they are appropriated
to justice. The reason why these two are reckoned parts of justice under a special aspect of
good and evil, while they are not reckoned parts of any other moral virtue, is that the other
moral virtues are concerned with the passions wherein to do good is to observe the mean, which
is the same as to avoid the extremes as evils: so that doing good and avoiding evil come to
the same, with regard to the other virtues. On the other hand justice is concerned with operations
and external things, wherein to establish equality is one thing, and not to disturb the equality
established is another.

Reply Obj. 2: To decline from evil, considered as a part of justice, does not denote a pure
negation, viz. "not to do evil"; for this does not deserve the palm, but only avoids the punishment.
But it implies a movement of the will in repudiating evil, as the very term "decline" shows.
This is meritorious; especially when a person resists against an instigation to do evil.

Reply Obj. 3: Doing good is the completive act of justice, and the principal part, so to speak,
thereof. Declining from evil is a more imperfect act, and a secondary part of that virtue.
Hence it is a material part, so to speak, thereof, and a necessary condition of the formal
and completive part.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 79, Art. 2]

Whether Transgression Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that transgression is not a special sin. For no species is included
in the definition of its genus. Therefore transgression is not a species of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no species is more comprehensive than its genus. But transgression is more
comprehensive than sin, because sin is a "word, deed or desire against the law of God," according
to Augustine (Contra Faust. xxii, 27), while transgression is also against nature, or custom.
Therefore transgression is not a species of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, no species contains all the parts into which its genus is divided. Now the
sin of transgression extends to all the capital vices, as well as to sins of thought, word
and deed. Therefore transgression is not a special sin.

On the contrary, It is opposed to a special virtue, namely justice.

I answer that, The term transgression is derived from bodily movement and applied to moral
actions. Now a person is said to transgress in bodily movement, when he steps (graditur) beyond
(trans) a fixed boundary--and it is a negative precept that fixes the boundary that man must
not exceed in his moral actions. Wherefore to transgress, properly speaking, is to act against
a negative precept.

Now materially considered this may be common to all the species of sin, because man transgresses
a Divine precept by any species of mortal sin. But if we consider it formally, namely under
its special aspect of an act against a negative precept, it is a special sin in two ways. First,
in so far as it is opposed to those kinds of sin that are opposed to the other virtues: for
just as it belongs properly to legal justice to consider a precept as binding, so it belongs
properly to a transgression to consider a precept as an object of contempt. Secondly, in so
far as it is distinct from omission which is opposed to an affirmative precept.

Reply Obj. 1: Even as legal justice is "all virtue" (Q. 58, A. 5) as regards its subject and
matter, so legal injustice is materially "all sin." It is in this way that Ambrose defined
sin, considering it from the point of view of legal injustice.

Reply Obj. 2: The natural inclination concerns the precepts of the natural law. Again, a laudable
custom has the force of a precept; since as Augustine says in an epistle on the Fast of the
Sabbath (Ep. xxxvi), "a custom of God's people should be looked upon as law." Hence both sin
and transgression may be against a laudable custom and against a natural inclination.

Reply Obj. 3: All these species of sin may include transgression, if we consider them not under
their proper aspects, but under a special aspect, as stated above. The sin of omission, however,
is altogether distinct from the sin of transgression.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 79, Art. 3]

Whether Omission Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that omission is not a special sin. For every sin is either original
or actual. Now omission is not original sin, for it is not contracted through origin; nor is
it actual sin, for it may be altogether without act, as stated above (I-II, Q. 71, A. 5) when
we were treating of sins in general. Therefore omission is not a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, every sin is voluntary. Now omission sometimes is not voluntary but necessary,
as when a woman is violated after taking a vow of virginity, or when one lose that which one
is under an obligation to restore, or when a priest is bound to say Mass, and is prevented
from doing so. Therefore omission is not always a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, it is possible to fix the time when any special sin begins. But this is not
possible in the case of omission, since one is not altered by not doing a thing, no matter
when the omission occurs, and yet the omission is not always sinful. Therefore omission is
not a special sin.

Obj. 4: Further, every special sin is opposed to a special virtue. But it is not possible to
assign any special virtue to which omission is opposed, both because the good of any virtue
can be omitted, and because justice to which it would seem more particularly opposed, always
requires an act, even in declining from evil, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2), while omission
may be altogether without act. Therefore omission is not a special sin.

On the contrary, It is written (James 4:17): "To him . . . who knoweth to do good and doth
it not, to him it is sin."

I answer that, omission signifies the non-fulfilment of a good, not indeed of any good, but
of a good that is due. Now good under the aspect of due belongs properly to justice; to legal
justice, if the thing due depends on Divine or human law; to special justice, if the due is
something in relation to one's neighbor. Wherefore, in the same way as justice is a special
virtue, as stated above (Q. 58, AA. 6, 7), omission is a special sin distinct from the sins
which are opposed to the other virtues; and just as doing good, which is the opposite of omitting
it, is a special part of justice, distinct from avoiding evil, to which transgression is opposed,
so too is omission distinct from transgression.

Reply Obj. 2: Omission is not original but actual sin, not as though it had some act essential
to it, but for as much as the negation of an act is reduced to the genus of act, and in this
sense non-action is a kind of action, as stated above (I-II, Q. 71, A. 6, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 2: Omission, as stated above, is only of such good as is due and to which one is
bound. Now no man is bound to the impossible: wherefore no man sins by omission, if he does
not do what he cannot. Accordingly she who is violated after vowing virginity, is guilty of
an omission, not through not having virginity, but through not repenting of her past sin, or
through not doing what she can to fulfil her vow by observing continence. Again a priest is
not bound to say Mass, except he have a suitable opportunity, and if this be lacking, there
is no omission. And in like manner, a person is bound to restitution, supposing he has the
wherewithal; if he has not and cannot have it, he is not guilty of an omission, provided he
does what he can. The same applies to other similar cases.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as the sin of transgression is opposed to negative precepts which regard
the avoidance of evil, so the sin of omission is opposed to affirmative precepts, which regard
the doing of good. Now affirmative precepts bind not for always, but for a fixed time, and
at that time the sin of omission begins. But it may happen that then one is unable to do what
one ought, and if this inability is without any fault on his part, he does not omit his duty,
as stated above (ad 2; I-II, Q. 71, A. 5). On the other hand if this inability is due to some
previous fault of his (for instance, if a man gets drunk at night, and cannot get up for matins,
as he ought to), some say that the sin of omission begins when he engages in an action that
is illicit and incompatible with the act to which he is bound. But this does not seem to be
true, for supposing one were to rouse him by violence and that he went to matins, he would
not omit to go, so that, evidently, the previous drunkenness was not an omission, but the cause
of an omission. Consequently, we must say that the omission begins to be imputed to him as
a sin, when the time comes for the action; and yet this is on account of a preceding cause
by reason of which the subsequent omission becomes voluntary.

Reply Obj. 4: Omission is directly opposed to justice, as stated above; because it is a non-fulfilment
of a good of virtue, but only under the aspect of due, which pertains to justice. Now more
is required for an act to be virtuous and meritorious than for it to be sinful and demeritorious,
because "good results from an entire cause, whereas evil arises from each single defect" [*Dionysius,
De Div. Nom. iv]. Wherefore the merit of justice requires an act, whereas an omission does not.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 79, Art. 4]

Whether a Sin of Omission Is More Grievous Than a Sin of Transgression?

Objection 1: It would seem that a sin of omission is more grievous than a sin of transgression.
For delictum would seem to signify the same as derelictum [*Augustine, QQ. in Levit., qu. xx],
and therefore is seemingly the same as an omission. But delictum denotes a more grievous offence
than transgression, because it deserves more expiation as appears from Lev. 5. Therefore the
sin of omission is more grievous than the sin of transgression. Now to do good is a more excellent
part of justice, than to decline from evil, to which transgression is opposed, as stated above
(A. 1, ad 3). Therefore omission is a graver sin than transgression.

Obj. 3: Further, sins of transgression may be either venial or mortal. But sins of omission
seem to be always mortal, since they are opposed to an affirmative precept. Therefore omission
would seem to be a graver sin than transgression.

Obj. 4: Further, the pain of loss which consists in being deprived of seeing God and is inflicted
for the sin of omission, is a greater punishment than the pain of sense, which is inflicted
for the sin of transgression, as Chrysostom states (Hom. xxiii super Matth.). Now punishment
is proportionate to fault. Therefore the sin of omission is graver than the sin of transgression.

On the contrary, It is easier to refrain from evil deeds than to accomplish good deeds. Therefore
it is a graver sin not to refrain from an evil deed, i.e. to transgress, than not to accomplish
a good deed, which is to omit.

I answer that, The gravity of a sin depends on its remoteness from virtue. Now contrariety
is the greatest remoteness, according to Metaph. x [*Didot. ed. ix, 4]. Wherefore a thing is
further removed from its contrary than from its simple negation; thus black is further removed
from white than not-white is, since every black is not-white, but not conversely. Now it is
evident that transgression is contrary to an act of virtue, while omission denotes the negation
thereof: for instance it is a sin of omission, if one fail to give one's parents due reverence,
while it is a sin of transgression to revile them or injure them in any way. Hence it is evident
that, simply and absolutely speaking, transgression is a graver sin than omission, although
a particular omission may be graver than a particular transgression.

Reply Obj. 1: Delictum in its widest sense denotes any kind of omission; but sometimes it is
taken strictly for the omission of something concerning God, or for a man's intentional and
as it were contemptuous dereliction of duty: and then it has a certain gravity, for which reason
it demands a greater expiation.

Reply Obj. 2: The opposite of doing good is both not doing good, which is an omission, and
doing evil, which is a transgression: but the first is opposed by contradiction, the second
by contrariety, which implies greater remoteness: wherefore transgression is the more grievous sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as omission is opposed to affirmative precepts, so is transgression opposed
to negative precepts: wherefore both, strictly speaking, have the character of mortal sin.
Transgression and omission, however, may be taken broadly for any infringement of an affirmative
or negative precept, disposing to the opposite of such precept: and so taking both in a broad
sense they may be venial sins.

Reply Obj. 4: To the sin of transgression there correspond both the pain of loss on account
of the aversion from God, and the pain of sense, on account of the inordinate conversion to
a mutable good. In like manner omission deserves not only the pain of loss, but also the pain
of sense, according to Matt. 7:19, "Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be
cut down, and shall be cast into the fire"; and this on account of the root from which it grows,
although it does not necessarily imply conversion to any mutable good.

QUESTION 80

OF THE POTENTIAL PARTS OF JUSTICE (In One Article)

We must now consider the potential parts of justice, namely the virtues annexed thereto; under
which head there are two points of consideration:

(1) What virtues are annexed to justice?

(2) The individual virtues annexed to justice.

ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 80, Art.]

Whether the Virtues Annexed to Justice Are Suitably Enumerated?

Objection 1: It would seem that the virtues annexed to justice are unsuitably enumerated. Tully
[*De Invent. ii, 53] reckons six, viz. "religion, piety, gratitude, revenge, observance, truth."
Now revenge is seemingly a species of commutative justice whereby revenge is taken for injuries
inflicted, as stated above (Q. 61, A. 4). Therefore it should not be reckoned among the virtues
annexed to justice.

Obj. 2: Further, Macrobius (Super Somn. Scip. i, 8) reckons seven, viz. "innocence, friendship,
concord, piety, religion, affection, humanity," several of which are omitted by Tully. Therefore
the virtues annexed to justice would seem to be insufficiently enumerated.

Obj. 3: Further, others reckon five parts of justice, viz. "obedience" in respect of one's
superiors, "discipline" with regard to inferiors, "equity" as regards equals, "fidelity" and
"truthfulness" towards all; and of these "truthfulness" alone is mentioned by Tully. Therefore
he would seem to have enumerated insufficiently the virtues annexed to justice.

Obj. 4: Further, the peripatetic Andronicus [*De Affectibus] reckons nine parts annexed to
justice viz. "liberality, kindliness, revenge, commonsense, [*eugnomosyne] piety, gratitude,
holiness, just exchange" and "just lawgiving"; and of all these it is evident that Tully mentions
none but "revenge." Therefore he would appear to have made an incomplete enumeration.

Obj. 5: Further, Aristotle (Ethic. v, 10) mentions epieikeia as being annexed to justice: and
yet seemingly it is not included in any of the foregoing enumerations. Therefore the virtues
annexed to justice are insufficiently enumerated.

I answer that, Two points must be observed about the virtues annexed to a principal virtue.
The first is that these virtues have something in common with the principal virtue; and the
second is that in some respect they fall short of the perfection of that virtue. Accordingly
since justice is of one man to another as stated above (Q. 58, A. 2), all the virtues that
are directed to another person may by reason of this common aspect be annexed to justice. Now
the essential character of justice consists in rendering to another his due according to equality,
as stated above (Q. 58, A. 11). Wherefore in two ways may a virtue directed to another person
fall short of the perfection of justice: first, by falling short of the aspect of equality;
secondly, by falling short of the aspect of due. For certain virtues there are which render
another his due, but are unable to render the equal due. In the first place, whatever man renders
to God is due, yet it cannot be equal, as though man rendered to God as much as he owes Him,
according to Ps. 115:12, "What shall I render to the Lord for all the things that He hath rendered
to me?" In this respect religion is annexed to justice since, according to Tully (De invent.
ii, 53), it consists in offering service and ceremonial rites or worship to "some superior
nature that men call divine." Secondly, it is not possible to make to one's parents an equal
return of what one owes to them, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. viii, 14); and thus piety
is annexed to justice, for thereby, as Tully says (De invent. ii, 53), a man "renders service
and constant deference to his kindred and the well-wishers of his country." Thirdly, according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3), man is unable to offer an equal meed for virtue, and thus
observance is annexed to justice, consisting according to Tully (De invent. ii, 53) in the
"deference and honor rendered to those who excel in worth."

A falling short of the just due may be considered in respect of a twofold due, moral or legal:
wherefore the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 13) assigns a corresponding twofold just. The legal
due is that which one is bound to render by reason of a legal obligation; and this due is chiefly
the concern of justice, which is the principal virtue. On the other hand, the moral due is
that to which one is bound in respect of the rectitude of virtue: and since a due implies necessity,
this kind of due has two degrees. For one due is so necessary that without it moral rectitude
cannot be ensured: and this has more of the character of due. Moreover this due may be considered
from the point of view of the debtor, and in this way it pertains to this kind of due that
a man represent himself to others just as he is, both in word and deed. Wherefore to justice
is annexed truth, whereby, as Tully says (De invent. ii, 53), present, past and future things
are told without perversion. It may also be considered from the point of view of the person
to whom it is due, by comparing the reward he receives with what he has done--sometimes in
good things; and then annexed to justice we have gratitude which "consists in recollecting
the friendship and kindliness shown by others, and in desiring to pay them back," as Tully
states (De invent. ii, 53)--and sometimes in evil things, and then to justice is annexed revenge,
whereby, as Tully states (De invent. ii, 53), "we resist force, injury or anything obscure*
by taking vengeance or by self-defense." [*St. Thomas read obscurum, and explains it as meaning
derogatory, infra Q. 108, A. 2. Cicero, however, wrote obfuturum, i.e. hurtful.]

There is another due that is necessary in the sense that it conduces to greater rectitude,
although without it rectitude may be ensured. This due is the concern of liberality, affability
or friendship, or the like, all of which Tully omits in the aforesaid enumeration because there
is little of the nature of anything due in them.

Reply Obj. 1: The revenge taken by authority of a public power, in accordance with a judge's
sentence, belongs to commutative justice: whereas the revenge which a man takes on his own
initiative, though not against the law, or which a man seeks to obtain from a judge, belongs
to the virtue annexed to justice.

Reply Obj. 2: Macrobius appears to have considered the two integral parts of justice, namely,
declining from evil, to which innocence belongs, and doing good, to which the six others belong.
Of these, two would seem to regard relations between equals, namely, friendship in the external
conduct and concord internally; two regard our relations toward superiors, namely, piety to
parents, and religion to God; while two regard our relations towards inferiors, namely, condescension,
in so far as their good pleases us, and humanity, whereby we help them in their needs. For
Isidore says (Etym. x) that a man is said to be "humane, through having a feeling of love and
pity towards men: this gives its name to humanity whereby we uphold one another." In this sense
friendship is understood as directing our external conduct towards others, from which point
of view the Philosopher treats of it in Ethic. iv, 6. Friendship may also be taken as regarding
properly the affections, and as the Philosopher describes it in Ethic. viii and ix. This is no
isolated, casual mistake, but only a good chance to see what is really universal, though not
often so obvious.

In this and other pictures the water is like a bit of looking-glass stuck up in front,--without perspective,
without connection with the ground,--the mere assertion of a reflection. The conception embraced
only the main figure; the rest was added like a label, for explanation only. These men did
not see the landscape as we see it, because the interest was wanting that combines it into
a picture for our eyes. Our "love of Nature" would have been incomprehensible and disgusting to
a Greek; he would have called our artists "dirt-painters." And from his point of view he would
be right. Dirt it is, if we abide by the mere facts. The interest of Art lies not in the facts,
but in the truth,--that is, in the facts organized, shown in their place. It is not that we
care more about stocks and stones than they did, but that we hold
the key to an arrangement that gives these things a significance they
have not of themselves.

* * * * *

SNOW.

Lo, what wonders the day hath brought, Born of the soft and slumberous snow! Gradual, silent, slowly
wrought,-- Even as an artist, thought by thought, Writes expression on lip and brow.

Hanging garlands the eaves o'erbrim,-- Deep drifts smother the paths below; The elms are shrouded,
trunk and limb, And all the air is dizzy and dim With a whirl of dancing, dazzling snow.

Dimly out of the baffled sight Houses and church-spires stretch away; The trees, all spectral
and still and white, Stand up like ghosts in the failing light, And fade and faint with the blinded
day.

Down from the roofs in gusts are hurled The eddying drifts to the
waste below; And still is the banner of storm unfurled, Till all the
drowned and desolate world Lies dumb and white in a trance of snow.

Slowly the shadows gather and fall,-- Still the whispering snow-flakes
beat; Night and darkness are over all: Rest, pale city, beneath their
pall!

Sleep, white world, in thy winding-sheet!

Clouds may thicken, and storm-winds breathe; On my wall is a glimpse of Rome,-- Land of my longing!--and
underneath Swings and trembles my olive-wreath; Peace and I are at home, at home!

* * * * *

HOUSE AND HOME PAPERS.

BY CHRISTOPHER CROWFIELD.

II.

* * * * *

THE CONVULSIONISTS OF ST. MÉDARD

Of all the mental epidemics that have visited Europe, beyond question
the most remarkable, and in some of its features the most inexplicable,
is that which prevailed in Paris some hundred and thirty years ago,
among what were called the Convulsionists of St. Médard.

The celebrated Jansenius, Bishop of Ypres, during his life the opponent and enemy of the Jesuits,
whom he caused to be excluded from the theological schools of Louvain, left behind him, at
his death, a treatise, posthumously published in 1640, entitled,
"Augustinus," in which he professed to set forth the true opinions
of St. Augustine on those century-long disputed questions of Grace,
Free-Will, and Predestination.

Taking ground against the Molinists, he contended for the doctrine of Predestination antecedent and
absolute, a gift purely gratuitous, of God's free grace, independent of any virtue or merit in
the recipient soul. This doctrine, set forth in five propositions, was condemned, in the middle
of the seventeenth century, by Popes Innocent X. and Alexander VII.; and against it, when revived
by Father Quesnel in the beginning of the eighteenth century, there was fulminated, in 1713,
by Pope Clement XI., the famous Bull Unigenitus.

From this Bull, accepted in France after long opposition, the Jansenist party appealed to a future Papal
Council, thence deriving their name of Appellants. Among these, one of the most noted and zealous
was the Diacre Pâris, who refused a curacy, to avoid signing his
adhesion to what he regarded as heresy, consumed his fortune in works
of charity, and his health in austerities of a character so excessive
that they abridged his life.

Dying, as his partisans have it, in the odor of sanctity, and protesting with his last breath
against the doctrines of the obnoxious Bull, his remains were deposited, on the second of May, 1727,
in the small church-yard of St. Médard, situated in the twelfth arrondissement
of Paris, on the Rue Mouffetard, not far from the Jardin des Plantes.

To the tomb of one whom they regarded as a martyr to their cause the Jansenist Appellants habitually
resorted, in all the fervor of religious zeal, heated to enthusiasm
by the persecution of the dominant party.

And there, after a time, phenomena presented themselves, which caused for years, throughout
the French capital and among the theologians of that age, a fever
of excitement; and which, though they have been noticed by medical
and other writers of our own century, have not yet, in my judgment,
attracted, either from the medical profession or from the pneumatological
inquirer, the attention they deserve.

Of these phenomena a portion were physical, and a portion were mental or psychological. The former,
first appearing in the early part of the year 1731, consisted (as alleged) partly of extraordinary
cures, the apparent result of violent convulsive movements which overtook the patients soon
after their bodies touched the marble of the tomb, sometimes even without approaching it, by swallowing,
in wine or water, a small portion of the earth gathered from around it, the effect being heightened
by strict fasting and prayer,--partly of what were called the "Grands Secours," literally "Great
Succors," consisting of the most desperate, one might say murderous, remedies, applied, at their
urgent request, to relieve the sufferings of the Convulsionists. These measures, called of relief,
and carried to an incredible excess, were of such a character, that, during any normal state
of the human system, they would have destroyed, not one, but a hundred lives, if the patient, or
victim, had been endowed with so many. Those who regarded this marvellous immunity from what
seemed certain immolation as a miraculous interposition of God were called Succorists; their
opponents, ascribing such effects to the interference of the Devil
in protection of his own, or (a somewhat rare opinion in those days)
to natural agency, went by the name of Anti-Succorists.

(Secouristes and Anti-Secouristes.)

Some of these alleged cures, but more especially some of these so-called succors, were of a
nature so far passing belief, that one would be tempted to cast them aside as sheer impostures,
were not the main facts vouched for by evidence, not from the Jansenists alone, but from their
bitterest opponents, so direct, so overwhelmingly multiplied, so minutely circumstantial, that
to reject it would amount to a virtual declaration, that, in proof of the extraordinary and
the improbable, we will accept no testimony whatever, let its weight
or character be what it may.

Accordingly, we find dispassionate modern writers, medical and others, while reminding us,
as well they may, that enlightened observers of these strange phenomena were lacking,[3] and
while properly suggesting that we ought to make allowance for exaggeration in some of the details,
yet admitting as incontestable realities the substantial facts related
by the historians of St. Médard.

Among these historians the chief is Carré de Montgéron, a magistrate of rank and high character,
Counsellor of the Parliament of Paris. An enthusiast, and a weak logician, as hot enthusiasts
generally are, Montgéron's honesty is admitted to be beyond question.

Converted to Jansenism on the seventh of September, 1731, in the church-yard of St. Médard, by
the strange scenes there passing, he expended his fortune, sacrificed his liberty, and devoted
years of his life, in the preparation and publication of one of the most extraordinary works that
ever issued from the press.[4] It consists of three quarto volumes, of some nine hundred closely
printed pages each. Crowded with repetitions, and teeming with false reasoning, these volumes
nevertheless contain, backed by certificates without number, such an elaborate aggregation of
concurrent testimony as I think human industry never before brought
together to prove any contested class of phenomena.

Not less zealous, if less voluminous, were the writers opposed to what was called "the work of
the convulsions." Of these one of the chief was Dom La Taste, Bishop of Bethléem, author of the
"Lettres Théologiques," and of the "Mémoire Théologique," in both of which the extravagances of
the Convulsionists are severely handled; a second was the Abbé d'Asfeld,
who, in 1738, published his "Vains Efforts des Discernans," in the
same strain; and another, M. Poncet, who put forth an elaborate reply
to the Succorists, entitled "Réponse des Anti-Secouristes à la Réclamation."

The

convulsions, commencing in the year 1731, almost immediately assumed
an epidemical character, spreading so rapidly that in a few months
the affected reached the number of eight hundred.

These were to be found not only on the tomb and in the cemetery itself,
but in the streets, lanes, and houses adjoining.

Many, after returning from the exciting scenes of St. Médard, were seized with convulsions
in their own dwellings.

The numbers and the excitement went on increasing, and conversions to Jansenism were counted
by thousands; the scenes became daily more extravagant, and the phenomena more extraordinary,
until the King, moved either by the representations of physicians
or by the remonstrances of Jesuit theologians, caused the cemetery
to be closed on the twenty-ninth of January, 1732.[5]

Not for such
interdiction, however, did the phenomena, once in progress, intermit.

For fifteen years, or longer,[6] the symptoms continued, with more or less violence. Indeed,
the number of Convulsionists greatly increased after the cemetery was closed, extending to those
who had no ailment or bodily infirmity.[7]

The symptoms, though varying in different individuals, were of one
general character, partaking, especially as to the muscular phenomena,
of the nature of hysteria, or hystero-catalepsy.

The patient, soon after being placed on the revered tomb, or on the ground near it, was commonly
attacked by a tumultuous movement of all his members.

Contractions exhibited themselves in the neck, shoulders, and principal muscles all over the
body. The nervous system became dreadfully excited. The heart beat violently, and the patient,
sometimes retaining partial consciousness and suffering extreme pain, could not restrain violent
cries. He usually experienced, also, a tingling or pricking sensation in any diseased member. Those
who from birth had been afflicted with paralysis, or partial paralysis, of a limb, or one side
of the body, felt the convulsions chiefly in that limb or side. The convulsions were often so
violent that numerous assistants could scarcely restrain the patient
from seriously injuring himself by dashing his body or limbs against
the marble.[8]

The Demoiselle Fourcroy, alleged to have been suddenly
cured, on the fourteenth of April, 1732, by means of these convulsions,
of a confirmed anchylosis, which had deformed her left foot, and which
the physicians had pronounced incurable,[9] thus describes, in her
deposition, her sensations:--"They caused me to take wine in which
was some earth from the tomb of M. de Pâris, and I immediately engaged
in prayer, as the commencement of a neuvaine"

(that is, a nine-days' act of devotion). "Almost at the same moment I was seized with a great shuddering,
and soon after with a violent agitation of the members, which caused my whole body to jerk
into the air, and gave me a force I had never before possessed,--so that the united strength
of several persons present could scarcely restrain me. After a time, in the course of these violent
convulsive movements, I lost all consciousness.

As soon as they passed off, I recovered my senses, and felt a sensation of tranquillity and internal
peace, such as I had never experienced before."[10]

It was usually at the moment of recovery from these convulsions, as Montgéron alleges and the certificates
published by him declare, that the cures deemed by him miraculous were effected. Sometimes,
however, these cures were gradual only, extending through several
days or weeks.

In Montgéron's work fourteen distinct cures are minutely reported, all of persons declared
by the attendant physicians to be incurable. Each of these cures, with the documentary evidence
in support of it, occupies from fifty to one hundred pages of his book. The greater number
are cases of paralysis, usually of one entire side of the body, in
some instances complicated with general dropsy, in others with cancer,
in others again with attacks of apoplexy.

There are four cases where the eyesight was restored,--one of them of a lachrymal fistula; one
of a young Spanish nobleman, who suddenly recovered the use of his right eye, the left, however,
remaining uncured; and there is a case in which a young woman, deaf
and dumb from birth, is reported to have been suddenly and completely
cured on the tomb of M. de Pâris, at the moment the convulsions ceased,
immediately repeating, though not understanding, any word that was
spoken to her by the bystanders.

My limits do not permit me to follow Montgéron through the details
and the documentary proof of these cures.

That the patient, in each case, previously examined by some physician of reputation, was pronounced
incurable, does not prove that he was so.

Yet, unless Montgéron lie, some of the cures are inexplicable, upon any received principles of
medical science. One man, (Philippe Sergent,) whose right knee had shrunk to such a degree that
the right leg was, and had been for more than a year, three finger-breadths shorter than the
left, was, according to the certificates, cured on the spot, threw away his crutches, and walked
home, unaided, followed by a wondering crowd.

Another patient, (Marguerite Thibault,) affected by general dropsy, and whose feet and legs
were swollen to three times their natural size, is reported to have been cured so suddenly that
before she left the tomb her servant could put on her feet the same slippers she had worn previously
to her malady.

This woman had also been afflicted, for three years, with paralysis of the left side, so complete
as to deprive it of all power of motion. Yet she is stated to have raised herself, unaided, on
the tomb, to have walked from the spot, and even to have ascended the stairs of her house on
her return. The symptom immediately preceding her cure is said to have been "a beneficent heat,
which diffused itself over the entire left side, so long deadly cold." This was followed by a consciousness
of power to move it; and her first effort was to stretch out her
paralytic arm.[11]

But these cures, wonderful as they appear, are
far less marvellous than another class of phenomena already referred
to.

The convulsions were often accompanied by an urgent instinctive desire for certain extreme remedies,
sometimes of a frightful character,--as stretching the limbs with a violence similar to that
of the rack,--administering on the breast, stomach, or other parts
of the body, hundreds of terrible blows with heavy weapons of wood,
iron, or stone,--pressing with main force against various parts of
the body with sharp-pointed swords,--pressure under enormous weights,--exposure
to excessive heat, etc. Montgéron, viewing the whole as miraculous,
says,--"God frequently causes the convulsionists the most acute pains,
and at the same time intimates to them, by a supernatural instinct,
that the formidable succors which He desires that they should demand
will cause all their sufferings to cease; and these sufferings usually
have a sort of relation to the succors which are to prove a remedy
for them.

 Dei x, 6): "Any action whereby we are united to God in holy fellowship,
is a true sacrifice." But sacrifice belongs to religion. Therefore every virtuous deed belongs
to religion; and consequently religion is not a special virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:31): "Do all to the glory of God." Now it belongs
to religion to do anything in reverence of God, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2; A. 2). Therefore
religion is not a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the charity whereby we love God is not distinct from
the charity whereby we love our neighbor. But according to Ethic.
 viii, 8 "to be honored is almost to be loved." Therefore the
religion whereby we honor God is not a special virtue distinct from
observance, or dulia, or piety whereby we honor our neighbor.
Therefore religion is not a special virtue.

On the contrary, It is reckoned a part of justice, distinct from the other parts.

I answer that, Since virtue is directed to the good, wherever there is a special aspect of
good, there must be a special virtue. Now the good to which religion is directed, is to give
due honor to God. Again, honor is due to someone under the aspect of excellence: and to God
a singular excellence is competent, since He infinitely surpasses all things and exceeds them
in every way. Wherefore to Him is special honor due: even as in human affairs we see that different
honor is due to different personal excellences, one kind of honor to a father, another to the
king, and so on. Hence it is evident that religion is a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Every virtuous deed is said to be a sacrifice, in so far as it is done out of
reverence of God. Hence this does not prove that religion is a general virtue, but that it
commands all other virtues, as stated above (A. 1, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 2: Every deed, in so far as it is done in God's honor, belongs to religion, not
as eliciting but as commanding: those belong to religion as eliciting which pertain to the
reverence of God by reason of their specific character.

Reply Obj. 3: The object of love is the good, but the object of honor and reverence is something
excellent. Now God's goodness is communicated to the creature, but the excellence of His goodness
is not. Hence the charity whereby God is loved is not distinct from the charity whereby our
neighbor is loved; whereas the religion whereby God is honored, is distinct from the virtues
whereby we honor our neighbor.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 81, Art. 5]

Whether Religion Is a Theological Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that religion is a theological virtue. Augustine says (Enchiridion
iii) that "God is worshiped by faith, hope and charity," which are theological virtues. Now
it belongs to religion to pay worship to God. Therefore religion is a theological virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, a theological virtue is one that has God for its object. Now religion has
God for its object, since it directs us to God alone, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore religion
is a theological virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, every virtue is either theological, or intellectual, or moral, as is clear
from what has been said (I-II, QQ. 57, 58, 62). Now it is evident that religion is not an intellectual
virtue, because its perfection does not depend on the consideration of truth: nor is it a moral
virtue, which consists properly in observing the mean between too much and too little, for
one cannot worship God too much, according to Ecclus. 43:33, "Blessing the Lord, exalt Him
as much as you can; for He is above all praise." Therefore it remains that it is a theological
virtue.

On the contrary, It is reckoned a part of justice which is a moral virtue.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 4) religion pays due worship to God. Hence two things are
to be considered in religion: first that which it offers to God, viz. worship, and this is
by way of matter and object in religion; secondly, that to which something is offered, viz.
God, to Whom worship is paid. And yet the acts whereby God is worshiped do not reach out to
God himself, as when we believe God we reach out to Him by believing; for which reason it was
stated (Q. 1, AA. 1, 2, 4) that God is the object of faith, not only because we believe in
a God, but because we believe God.

Now due worship is paid to God, in so far as certain acts whereby God is worshiped, such as
the offering of sacrifices and so forth, are done out of reverence for God. Hence it is evident
that God is related to religion not as matter or object, but as end: and consequently religion
is not a theological virtue whose object is the last end, but a moral virtue which is properly
about things referred to the end.

Reply Obj. 1: The power or virtue whose action deals with an end, moves by its command the
power or virtue whose action deals with matters directed to that end. Now the theological virtues,
faith, hope and charity have an act in reference to God as their proper object: wherefore,
by their command, they cause the act of religion, which performs certain deeds directed to
God: and so Augustine says that God is worshiped by faith, hope and charity.

Reply Obj. 2: Religion directs man to God not as its object but as its end.

Reply Obj. 3: Religion is neither a theological nor an intellectual, but a moral virtue, since
it is a part of justice, and observes a mean, not in the passions, but in actions directed
to God, by establishing a kind of equality in them. And when I say "equality," I do not mean
absolute equality, because it is not possible to pay God as much as we owe Him, but equality
in consideration of man's ability and God's acceptance.

And it is possible to have too much in matters pertaining to the Divine worship, not as regards
the circumstance of quantity, but as regards other circumstances, as when Divine worship is
paid to whom it is not due, or when it is not due, or unduly in respect of some other circumstance.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 81, Art. 6]

Whether Religion Should Be Preferred to the Other Moral Virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that religion should not be preferred to the other moral virtues.
The perfection of a moral virtue consists in its observing the mean, as stated in Ethic. ii,
6. But religion fails to observe the mean of justice, since it does not render an absolute
equal to God. Therefore religion is not more excellent than the other moral virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, what is offered by one man to another is the more praiseworthy, according
as the person it is offered to is in greater need: wherefore it is written (Isa. 57:7): "Deal
thy bread to the hungry." But God needs nothing that we can offer Him, according to Ps. 15:2,
"I have said: Thou art my God, for Thou hast no need of my goods." Therefore religion would
seem less praiseworthy than the other virtues whereby man's needs are relieved.

Obj. Now the more a thing is due, the greater the obligation of paying it. Since, then, what
is paid to God by man is in the highest degree due to Him, it would seem that religion is less
praiseworthy than the other human virtues.

On the contrary, The precepts pertaining to religion are given precedence (Ex. 20) as being
of greatest importance. Now the order of precepts is proportionate to the order of virtues,
since the precepts of the Law prescribe acts of virtue. Therefore religion is the chief of
the moral virtues.

I answer that, Whatever is directed to an end takes its goodness from being ordered to that
end; so that the nearer it is to the end the better it is. Now moral virtues, as stated above
(A. 5; Q. 4, A. 7), are about matters that are ordered to God as their end. And religion approaches
nearer to God than the other moral virtues, in so far as its actions are directly and immediately
ordered to the honor of God. Hence religion excels among the moral virtues.

Reply Obj. 1: Virtue is praised because of the will, not because of the ability: and therefore
if a man fall short of equality which is the mean of justice, through lack of ability, his
virtue deserves no less praise, provided there be no failing on the part of his will.

Reply Obj. 2: In offering a thing to a man on account of its usefulness to him, the more needy
the man the more praiseworthy the offering, because it is more useful: whereas we offer a thing
to God not on account of its usefulness to Him, but for the sake of His glory, and on account
of its usefulness to us.

Reply Obj. 3: Where there is an obligation to do a thing it loses the luster of supererogation,
but not the merit of virtue, provided it be done voluntarily. Hence the argument proves nothing.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 81, Art. 7]

Whether Religion Has an External Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that religion has not an external act. It is written (John 4:24):
"God is a spirit, and they that adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth." Now external
acts pertain, not to the spirit but to the body. Therefore religion, to which adoration belongs,
has acts that are not external but internal.

Obj. 2: Further, the end of religion is to pay God reverence and honor. Now it would savor
of irreverence towards a superior, if one were to offer him that which properly belongs to
his inferior. Since then whatever man offers by bodily actions, seems to be directed properly
to the relief of human needs, or to the reverence of inferior creatures, it would seem unbecoming
to employ them in showing reverence to God.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine (De Civ. Dei vi, 10) commends Seneca for finding fault with those
who offered to idols those things that are wont to be offered to men, because, to wit, that
which befits mortals is unbecoming to immortals. But such things are much less becoming to
the true God, Who is "exalted above all gods" [*Ps. 94:3]. Therefore it would seem wrong to
worship God with bodily actions. Therefore religion has no bodily actions.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 83:3): "My heart and my flesh have rejoiced in the living
God." Now just as internal actions belong to the heart, so do external actions belong to the
members of the flesh. Therefore it seems that God ought to be worshiped not only by internal
but also by external actions.

I answer that, We pay God honor and reverence, not for His sake (because He is of Himself full
of glory to which no creature can add anything), but for our own sake, because by the very
fact that we revere and honor God, our mind is subjected to Him; wherein its perfection consists,
since a thing is perfected by being subjected to its superior, for instance the body is perfected
by being quickened by the soul, and the air by being enlightened by the sun. Now the human
mind, in order to be united to God, needs to be guided by the sensible world, since "invisible
things . . . are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made," as the Apostle
says (Rom. 1:20). Wherefore in the Divine worship it is necessary to make use of corporeal
things, that man's mind may be aroused thereby, as by signs, to the spiritual acts by means
of which he is united to God. Therefore the internal acts of religion take precedence of the
others and belong to religion essentially, while its external acts are secondary, and subordinate
to the internal acts.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord is speaking of that which is most important and directly intended in
the worship of God.

Reply Obj. 2: These external things are offered to God, not as though He stood in need of them,
according to Ps. 49:13, "Shall I eat the flesh of bullocks? or shall I drink the blood of goats?"
but as signs of the internal and spiritual works, which are of themselves acceptable to God.
Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 5): "The visible sacrifice is the sacrament or sacred
sign of the invisible sacrifice."

Reply Obj. 3: Idolaters are ridiculed for offering to idols things pertaining to men, not as
signs arousing them to certain spiritual things, but as though they were of themselves acceptable
to the idols; and still more because they were foolish and wicked.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 81, Art. 8]

Whether Religion Is the Same As Sanctity?

Objection 1: It would seem that religion is not the same as sanctity. Religion is a special
virtue, as stated above (A. 4): whereas sanctity is a general virtue, because it makes us faithful,
and fulfil our just obligations to God, according to Andronicus [*De Affectibus]. Therefore
sanctity is not the same as religion.

Obj. 2: Further, sanctity seems to denote a kind of purity. For Dionysius says (Div. Nom. xii)
that "sanctity is free from all uncleanness, and is perfect and altogether unspotted purity."
Now purity would seem above all to pertain to temperance which repels bodily uncleanness. Since
then religion belongs to justice, it would seem that sanctity is not the same as religion.

Obj. 3: Further, things that are opposite members of a division are not identified with one
another. But in an enumeration given above (Q. 80, ad 4) of the parts of justice, sanctity
is reckoned as distinct from religion. Therefore sanctity is not the same as religion.

On the contrary, It is written (Luke 1:74, 75): "That . . . we may serve Him . . . in holiness
and justice." Now, "to serve God" belongs to religion, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3; A. 3, ad
2). Therefore religion is the same as sanctity.

I answer that, The word "sanctity" seems to have two significations. In one way it denotes
purity; and this signification fits in with the Greek, for hagios means "unsoiled." In another
way it denotes firmness, wherefore in olden times the term "sancta" was applied to such things
as were upheld by law and were not to be violated. Hence a thing is said to be sacred (sancitum)
when it is ratified by law. Again, in Latin, this word sanctus may be connected with purity,
if it be resolved into sanguine tinctus, "since, in olden times, those who wished to be purified
were sprinkled with the victim's blood," according to Isidore (Etym. x). In either case the
signification requires sanctity to be ascribed to those things that are applied to the Divine
worship; so that not only men, but also the temple, vessels and such like things are said to
be sanctified through being applied to the worship of God. For purity is necessary in order
that the mind be applied to God, since the human mind is soiled by contact with inferior things,
even as all things depreciate by admixture with baser things, for instance, silver by being
mixed with lead. Now in order for the mind to be united to the Supreme Being it must be withdrawn
from inferior things: and hence it is that without purity the mind cannot be applied to God.
Wherefore it is written (Heb. 12:14): "Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which
no man shall see God." Again, firmness is required for the mind to be applied to God, for it
is applied to Him as its last end and first beginning, and such things must needs be most immovable.
Hence the Apostle said (Rom. 8:38, 39): "I am sure that neither death, nor life . . . shall
separate me [*Vulg.: 'shall be able to separate us'] from the love of God."

Accordingly, it is by sanctity that the human mind applies itself and its acts to God: so that
it differs from religion not essentially but only logically. For it takes the name of religion
according as it gives God due service in matters pertaining specially to the Divine worship,
such as sacrifices, oblations, and so forth; while it is called sanctity, according as man
refers to God not only these but also the works of the other virtues, or according as man by
means of certain good works disposes himself to the worship of God.

Reply Obj. 1: Sanctity is a special virtue according to its essence; and in this respect it
is in a way identified with religion. But it has a certain generality, in so far as by its
command it directs the acts of all the virtues to the Divine good, even as legal justice is
said to be a general virtue, in so far as it directs the acts of all the virtues to the common
good.

Reply Obj. 2: Temperance practices purity, yet not so as to have the character of sanctity
unless it be referred to God. Hence of virginity itself Augustine says (De Virgin. viii) that
"it is honored not for what it is, but for being consecrated to God."

Reply Obj. 3: Sanctity differs from religion as explained above, not really but logically.

QUESTION 82

OF DEVOTION (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the acts of religion. First, we shall consider the interior acts, which,
as stated above, are its principal acts; secondly, we shall consider its exterior acts, which
are secondary. The interior acts of religion are seemingly devotion and prayer. Accordingly
we shall treat first of devotion, and afterwards of prayer.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether devotion is a special act?

(2) Whether it is an act of religion?

(3) Of the cause of devotion?

(4) Of its effect?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 82, Art. 1]

Whether Devotion Is a Special Act?

Objection 1: It would seem that devotion is not a special act. That which qualifies other acts
is seemingly not a special act. Now devotion seems to qualify other acts, for it is written
(2 Paralip. 29:31): "All the multitude offered victims, and praises, and holocausts with a
devout mind." Therefore devotion is not a special act.

Obj. 2: Further, no special kind of act is common to various genera of acts. But devotion is
common to various genera of acts, namely, corporal and spiritual acts: for a person is said
to meditate devoutly and to genuflect devoutly. Therefore devotion is not a special act.

Obj. 3: Further, every special act belongs either to an appetitive or to a cognitive virtue
or power. But devotion belongs to neither, as may be seen by going through the various species
of acts of either faculty, as enumerated above (I, QQ. 78, seqq.; I-II, Q. 23, A. 4). Therefore
devotion is not a special act.

On the contrary, Merits are acquired by acts as stated above (I-II, Q. 21, AA. 34). But devotion
has a special reason for merit. Therefore devotion is a special act.

I answer that, Devotion is derived from "devote" [*The Latin devovere means "to vow"]; wherefore
those persons are said to be "devout" who, in a way, devote themselves to God, so as to subject
themselves wholly to Him. Hence in olden times among the heathens a devotee was one who vowed
to his idols to suffer death for the safety of his army, as Livy relates of the two Decii (Decad.
I, viii, 9; x, 28). Hence devotion is apparently nothing else but the will to give oneself
readily to things concerning the service of God. Wherefore it is written (Ex. 35:20, 21) that
"the multitude of the children of Israel . . . offered first-fruits to the Lord with a most
ready and devout mind." Now it is evident that the will to do readily what concerns the service
of God is a special kind of act. Therefore devotion is a special act of the will.

Reply Obj. 1: The mover prescribes the mode of the movement of the thing moved. Now the will
moves the other powers of the soul to their acts, and the will, in so far as it regards the
end, moves both itself and whatever is directed to the end, as stated above (I-II, Q. 9, A.
3). Wherefore, since devotion is an act of the will whereby a man offers himself for the service
of God Who is the last end, it follows that devotion prescribes the mode to human acts, whether
they be acts of the will itself about things directed to the end, or acts of the other powers
that are moved by the will.

Reply Obj. 2: Devotion is to be found in various genera of acts, not as a species of those
genera, but as the motion of the mover is found virtually in the movements of the things moved.

Reply Obj. 3: Devotion is an act of the appetitive part of the soul, and is a movement of the
will, as stated above.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 82, Art. 2]

Whether Devotion Is an Act of Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that devotion is not an act of religion. Devotion, as stated above
(A. 1), consists in giving oneself up to God. But this is done chiefly by charity, since according
to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv) "the Divine love produces ecstasy, for it takes the lover away
from himself and gives him to the beloved." Therefore devotion is an act of charity rather
than of religion.

Obj. 2: Further, charity precedes religion; and devotion seems to precede charity; since, in
the Scriptures, charity is represented by fire, while devotion is signified by fatness which
is the material of fire [*Cant. 8:6; Ps. 52:6]. Therefore devotion is not an act of religion.

Obj. 3: Further, by religion man is directed to God alone, as stated above (Q. 81, A. 1). But
devotion is directed also to men; for we speak of people being devout to certain holy men,
and subjects are said to be devoted to their masters; thus Pope Leo says [*Serm. viii, De Pass.
Dom.] that the Jews "out of devotion to the Roman laws," said: "We have no king but Caesar."
Therefore devotion is not an act of religion.

On the contrary, Devotion is derived from devovere, as stated (A. 1). But a vow is an act of
religion. Therefore devotion is also an act of religion.

I answer that, It belongs to the same virtue, to will to do something, and to have the will
ready to do it, because both acts have the same object. For this reason the Philosopher says
(Ethic. v, 1): "It is justice whereby men both will end do just actions." Now it is evident
that to do what pertains to the worship or service of God, belongs properly to religion, as
stated above (Q. 81). Wherefore it belongs to that virtue to have the will ready to do such
things, and this is to be devout. Hence it is evident that devotion is an act of religion.

Reply Obj. 1: It belongs immediately to charity that man should give himself to God, adhering
to Him by a union of the spirit; but it belongs immediately to religion, and, through the medium
of religion, to charity which is the principle of religion, that man should give himself to
God for certain works of Divine worship.

Reply Obj. 2: Bodily fatness is produced by the natural heat in the process of digestion, and
at the same time the natural heat thrives, as it were, on this fatness. In like manner charity
both causes devotion (inasmuch as love makes one ready to serve one's friend) and feeds on
devotion. Even so all friendship is safeguarded and increased by the practice and consideration
of friendly deeds.

Reply Obj. 3: Devotion to God's holy ones, dead or living, does not terminate in them, but
passes on to God, in so far as we honor God in His servants. But the devotion of subjects to
their temporal masters is of another kind, just as service of a temporal master differs from
the service of God.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 82, Art. 3]

Whether Contemplation or Meditation Is the Cause of Devotion?

Objection 1: It would seem that contemplation or meditation is not the cause of devotion. No
cause hinders its effect. But subtle considerations about abstract matters are often a hindrance
to devotion. Therefore contemplation or meditation is not the cause of devotion.

Obj. 2: Further, if contemplation were the proper and essential cause of devotion, the higher
objects of contemplation would arouse greater devotion. But the contrary is the case: since
frequently we are urged to greater devotion by considering Christ's Passion and other mysteries
of His humanity than by considering the greatness of His Godhead. Therefore contemplation is
not the proper cause of devotion.

Obj. 3: Further, if contemplation were the proper cause of devotion, it would follow that those
who are most apt for contemplation, are also most apt for devotion. Yet the contrary is to
be noticed, for devotion is frequently found in men of simplicity and members of the female
sex, who are defective in contemplation. Therefore contemplation is not the proper cause of
devotion.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 38:4): "In my meditation a fire shall flame out." But spiritual
fire causes devotion. Therefore meditation is the cause of devotion.

I answer that, The extrinsic and chief cause of devotion is God, of Whom Ambrose, commenting
on Luke 9:55, says that "God calls whom He deigns to call, and whom He wills He makes religious:
the profane Samaritans, had He so willed, He would have made devout." But the intrinsic cause
on our part must needs be meditation or contemplation. For it was stated above (A. 1) that
devotion is an act of the will to the effect that man surrenders himself readily to the service
of God. Now every act of the will proceeds from some consideration, since the object of the
will is a good understood. Wherefore Augustine says (De Trin. ix, 12; xv, 23) that "the will
arises from the intelligence." Consequently meditation must needs be the cause of devotion,
in so far as through meditation man conceives the thought of surrendering himself to God's
service. Indeed a twofold consideration leads him thereto. The one is the consideration of
God's goodness and loving kindness, according to Ps. 72:28, "It is good for me to adhere to
my God, to put my hope in the Lord God": and this consideration wakens love [*Dilectio, the
interior act of charity; cf. Q. 27] which is the proximate cause of devotion. The other consideration
is that of man's own shortcomings, on account of which he needs to lean on God, according to
Ps. 120:1, 2, "I have lifted up my eyes to the mountains, from whence help shall come to me:
my help is from the Lord, Who made heaven and earth"; and this consideration shuts out presumption
whereby man is hindered from submitting to God, because he leans on His strength.

Reply Obj. 1: The consideration of such things as are of a nature to awaken our love [*Ibid.]
of God, causes devotion; whereas the consideration of foreign matters that distract the mind
from such things is a hindrance to devotion.

Reply Obj. 2: Matters concerning the Godhead are, in themselves, the strongest incentive to
love [*Ibid.] and consequently to devotion, because God is supremely lovable. Yet such is the
weakness of the human mind that it needs a guiding hand, not only to the knowledge, but also
to the love of Divine things by means of certain sensible objects known to us. Chief among
these is the humanity of Christ, according to the words of the Preface [*Preface for Christmastide],
"that through knowing God visibly, we may be caught up to the love of things invisible." Wherefore
matters relating to Christ's humanity are the chief incentive to devotion, leading us thither
as a guiding hand, although devotion itself has for its object matters concerning the Godhead.

Reply Obj. 3: Science and anything else conducive to greatness, is to man an occasion of self-confidence,
so that he does not wholly surrender himself to God. The result is that such like things sometimes
occasion a hindrance to devotion; while in simple souls and women devotion abounds by repressing
pride. If, however, a man perfectly submits to God his science or any other perfection, by
this very fact his devotion is increased.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 82, Art. 4]

Whether Joy Is an Effect of Devotion?

Objection 1: It would seem that joy is not an effect of devotion. As stated above (A. 3, ad
2), Christ's Passion is the chief incentive to devotion. But the consideration thereof causes
an affliction of the soul, according to Lam. 3:19, "Remember my poverty . . . the wormwood
and the gall," which refers to the Passion, and afterwards (Lam. 3:20) it is said: "I will
be mindful and remember, and my soul shall languish within me." Therefore delight or joy is
not the effect of devotion.

Obj. 2: Further, devotion consists chiefly in an interior sacrifice of the spirit. But it is
written (Ps. 50:19): "A sacrifice to God is an afflicted spirit." Therefore affliction is the
effect of devotion rather than gladness or joy.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory of Nyssa says (De Homine xii) [*Orat. funebr. de Placilla Imp.] that
"just as laughter proceeds from joy, so tears and groans are signs of sorrow." But devotion
makes some people shed tears. Therefore gladness or joy is not the effect of devotion.

On the contrary, We say in the Collect [*Thursday after fourth Sunday of Lent]: "That we who
are punished by fasting may be comforted by a holy devotion."

I answer that, The direct and principal effect of devotion is the spiritual joy of the mind,
though sorrow is its secondary and indirect effect. For it has been stated (A. 3) that devotion
is caused by a twofold consideration: chiefly by the consideration of God's goodness, because
this consideration belongs to the term, as it were, of the movement of the will in surrendering
itself to God, and the direct result of this consideration is joy, according to Ps. 76:4, "I
remembered God, and was delighted"; but accidentally this consideration causes a certain sorrow
in those who do not yet enjoy God fully, according to Ps. 41:3, "My soul hath thirsted after
the strong living God," and afterwards it is said (Ps. 41:4): "My tears have been my bread,"
etc. Secondarily devotion is caused as stated (A. 3), by the consideration of one's own failings;
for this consideration regards the term from which man withdraws by the movement of his devout
will, in that he trusts not in himself, but subjects himself to God. This consideration has
an opposite tendency to the first: for it is of a nature to cause sorrow directly (when one
thinks over one's own failings), and joy accidentally, namely, through hope of the Divine assistance.
It is accordingly evident that the first and direct effect of devotion is joy, while the secondary
and accidental effect is that "sorrow which is according to God" [*2 Cor. 7:10].

Reply Obj. 1: In the consideration of Christ's Passion there is something that causes sorrow,
namely, the human defect, the removal of which made it necessary for Christ to suffer [*Luke
24:25]; and there is something that causes joy, namely, God's loving-kindness to us in giving
us such a deliverance.

Reply Obj. 2: The spirit which on the one hand is afflicted on account of the defects of the
present life, on the other hand is rejoiced, by the consideration of God's goodness, and by
the hope of the Divine help.

Reply Obj. 3: Tears are caused not only through sorrow, but also through a certain tenderness
of the affections, especially when one considers something that gives joy mixed with pain.
Thus men are wont to shed tears through a sentiment of piety, when they recover their children
or dear friends, whom they thought to have lost. In this way tears arise from devotion.

QUESTION 83

OF PRAYER (In Seventeen Articles)

We must now consider prayer, under which head there are seventeen points of inquiry:

(1) Whether prayer is an act of the appetitive or of the cognitive power?

(2) Whether it is fitting to pray to God?

(3) Whether prayer is an act of religion?

(4) Whether we ought to pray to God alone?

(5) Whether we ought to ask for something definite when we pray?

(6) Whether we ought to ask for temporal things when we pray?

(7) Whether we ought to pray for others?

(8) Whether we ought to pray for our enemies?

(9) Of the seven petitions of the Lord's Prayer;

(10) Whether prayer is proper to the rational creature?

(11) Whether the saints in heaven pray for us?

(12) Whether prayer should be vocal?

(13) Whether attention is requisite in prayer?

(14) Whether prayer should last a long time?

(15) Whether prayer is meritorious? [*Art. 16]

(16) Whether sinners impetrate anything from God by praying? [*Art. 15]

(17) of the different kinds of prayer.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 1]

Whether Prayer Is an Act of the Appetitive Power?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer is an act of the appetitive power. It belongs to prayer
to be heard. Now it is the desire that is heard by God, according to Ps. 9:38, "The Lord hath
heard the desire of the poor." Therefore prayer is desire. But desire is an act of the appetitive
power: and therefore prayer is also.

Obj. 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iii): "It is useful to begin everything with prayer,
because thereby we surrender ourselves to God and unite ourselves to Him." Now union with God
is effected by love which belongs to the appetitive power. Therefore prayer belongs to the
appetitive power.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher states (De Anima iii, 6) that there are two operations of
the intellective part. Of these the first is "the understanding of indivisibles," by which
operation we apprehend what a thing is: while the second is "synthesis" and "analysis," whereby
we apprehend that a thing is or is not. To these a third may be added, namely, "reasoning,"
whereby we proceed from the known to the unknown. Now prayer is not reducible to any of these
operations. Therefore it is an operation, not of the intellective, but of the appetitive power.

On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. x) that "to pray is to speak." Now speech belongs to the
intellect. Therefore prayer is an act, not of the appetitive, but of the intellective power.

I answer that, According to Cassiodorus [*Comment. in Ps. 38:13] "prayer (oratio) is spoken
reason (oris ratio)." Now the speculative and practical reason differ in this, that the speculative
merely apprehends its object, whereas the practical reason not only apprehends but causes.
Now one thing is the cause of another in two ways: first perfectly, when it necessitates its
effect, and this happens when the effect is wholly subject to the power of the cause; secondly
imperfectly, by merely disposing to the effect, for the reason that the effect is not wholly
subject to the power of the cause. Accordingly in this way the reason is cause of certain things
in two ways: first, by imposing necessity; and in this way it belongs to reason, to command
not only the lower powers and the members of the body, but also human subjects, which indeed
is done by commanding; secondly, by leading up to the effect, and, in a way, disposing to it,
and in this sense the reason asks for something to be done by things not subject to it, whether
they be its equals or its superiors. Now both of these, namely, to command and to ask or beseech,
imply a certain ordering, seeing that man proposes something to be effected by something else,
wherefore they pertain to the reason to which it belongs to set in order. For this reason the
Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 13) that the "reason exhorts us to do what is best."

Now in the present instance we are speaking of prayer [*This last paragraph refers to the Latin
word oratio (prayer) which originally signified a speech, being derived in the first instance
from os, oris (the mouth).] as signifying a beseeching or petition, in which sense Augustine
[*Rabanus, De Univ. vi, 14]: says (De Verb. Dom.) that "prayer is a petition," and Damascene
states (De Fide Orth. iii, 24) that "to pray is to ask becoming things of God." Accordingly
it is evident that prayer, as we speak of it now, is an act of reason.

Reply Obj. 1: The Lord is said to hear the desire of the poor, either because desire is the
cause of their petition, since a petition is like the interpreter of a desire, or in order
to show how speedily they are heard, since no sooner do the poor desire something than God
hears them before they put up a prayer, according to the saying of Isa. 65:24, "And it shall
come to pass, that before they call, I will hear."

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (I, Q. 82, A. 4; I-II, Q. 9, A. 1, ad 3), the will moves the
reason to its end: wherefore nothing hinders the act of reason, under the motion of the will,
from tending to an end such as charity which is union with God. Now prayer tends to God through
being moved by the will of charity, as it were, and this in two ways. First, on the part of
the object of our petition, because when we pray we ought principally to ask to be united to
God, according to Ps. 26:4, "One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I seek after, that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life." Secondly, on the part of the
petitioner, who ought to approach the person whom he petitions, either locally, as when he
petitions a man, or mentally, as when he petitions God. Hence Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iii)
that "when we call upon God in our prayers, we unveil our mind in His presence": and in the
same sense Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 24) that "prayer is the raising up of the mind
to God."

Reply Obj. 3: These three acts belong to the speculative reason, but to the practical reason
it belongs in addition to cause something by way of command or of petition, as stated above.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Becoming to Pray?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is unbecoming to pray. Prayer seems to be necessary in order
that we may make our needs known to the person to whom we pray. But according to Matt. 6:32,
"Your Father knoweth that you have need of all these things." Therefore it is not becoming
to pray to God.

Obj. 2: Further, by prayer we bend the mind of the person to whom we pray, so that he may do
what is asked of him. But God's mind is unchangeable and inflexible, according to 1 Kings 15:29,
"But the Triumpher in Israel will not spare, and will not be moved to repentance." Therefore
it is not fitting that we should pray to God.

Obj. 3: Further, it is more liberal to give to one that asks not, than to one who asks because,
according to Seneca (De Benefic. ii, 1), "nothing is bought more dearly than what is bought
with prayers." But God is supremely liberal. Therefore it would seem unbecoming to pray to God.

On the contrary, It is written (Luke 18:1): "We ought always to pray, and not to faint."

I answer that, Among the ancients there was a threefold error concerning prayer. Some held
that human affairs are not ruled by Divine providence; whence it would follow that it is useless
to pray and to worship God at all: of these it is written (Malach. 3:14): "You have said: He
laboreth in vain that serveth God." Another opinion held that all things, even in human affairs,
happen of necessity, whether by reason of the unchangeableness of Divine providence, or through
the compelling influence of the stars, or on account of the connection of causes: and this
opinion also excluded the utility of prayer. There was a third opinion of those who held that
human affairs are indeed ruled by Divine providence, and that they do not happen of necessity;
yet they deemed the disposition of Divine providence to be changeable, and that it is changed
by prayers and other things pertaining to the worship of God. All these opinions were disproved
in the First Part (Q. 19, AA. 7, 8; Q. 22, AA. 2, 4; Q. 115, A. 6; Q. 116). Wherefore it behooves
us so to account for the utility of prayer as neither to impose necessity on human affairs
subject to Divine providence, nor to imply changeableness on the part of the Divine disposition.

In order to throw light on this question we must consider that Divine providence disposes not
only what effects shall take place, but also from what causes and in what order these effects
shall proceed. Now among other causes human acts are the causes of certain effects. Wherefore
it must be that men do certain actions, not that thereby they may change the Divine disposition,
but that by those actions they may achieve certain effects according to the order of the Divine
disposition: and the same is to be said of natural causes. And so is it with regard to prayer.
For we pray not that we may change the Divine disposition, but that we may impetrate that which
God has disposed to be fulfilled by our prayers, in other words "that by asking, men may deserve
to receive what Almighty God from eternity has disposed to give," as Gregory says (Dial. i, 8).

Reply Obj. 1: We need to pray to God, not in order to make known to Him our needs or desires
but that we ourselves may be reminded of the necessity of having recourse to God's help in
these matters.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above, our motive in praying is, not that we may change the Divine
disposition, but that, by our prayers, we may obtain what God has appointed.

Reply Obj. 3: God bestows many things on us out of His liberality, even without our asking
for them: but that He wishes to bestow certain things on us at our asking, is for the sake
of our good, namely, that we may acquire confidence in having recourse to God, and that we
may recognize in Him the Author of our goods. Hence Chrysostom says [*Implicitly (Hom. ii,
de Orat.; Hom. xxx in Genes.; Cf. Caten. Aur. on Luke 18)]: "Think what happiness is granted
thee, what honor bestowed on thee, when thou conversest with God in prayer, when thou talkest
with Christ, when thou askest what thou wilt, whatever thou desirest."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 3]

Whether Prayer Is an Act of Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer is not an act of religion. Since religion is a part
of justice, it resides in the will as in its subject. But prayer belongs to the intellective
part, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore prayer seems to be an act, not of religion, but of
the gift of understanding whereby the mind ascends to God.

Obj. 2: Further, the act of latria falls under a necessity of precept. But prayer does not
seem to come under a necessity of precept, but to come from the mere will, since it is nothing
else than a petition for what we will. Therefore prayer seemingly is not an act of religion.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems to belong to religion that one "offers worship and ceremonial rites
to the Godhead" [*Cicero, Rhet. ii, 53]. But prayer seems not to offer anything to God, but
to ask to obtain something from Him. Therefore prayer is not an act of religion.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 140:2): "Let my prayer be directed as incense in Thy sight":
and a gloss on the passage says that "it was to signify this that under the Old Law incense
was said to be offered for a sweet smell to the Lord." Now this belongs to religion. Therefore
prayer is an act of religion.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 81, AA. 2, 4), it belongs properly to religion to show honor
to God, wherefore all those things through which reverence is shown to God, belong to religion.
Now man shows reverence to God by means of prayer, in so far as he subjects himself to Him,
and by praying confesses that he needs Him as the Author of his goods. Hence it is evident
that prayer is properly an act of religion.

Reply Obj. 1: The will moves the other powers of the soul to its end, as stated above (Q. 82,
A. 1, ad 1), and therefore religion, which is in the will, directs the acts of the other powers
to the reverence of God. Now among the other powers of the soul the intellect is the highest,
and the nearest to the will; and consequently after devotion which belongs to the will, prayer
which belongs to the intellective part is the chief of the acts of religion, since by it religion
directs man's intellect to God.

Reply Obj. 2: It is a matter of precept not only that we should ask for what we desire, but
also that we should desire aright. But to desire comes under a precept of charity, whereas
to ask comes under a precept of religion, which precept is expressed in Matt. 7:7, where it
is said: "Ask and ye shall receive" [*Vulg.: 'Ask and it shall be given you.'].

Reply Obj. 3: By praying man surrenders his mind to God, since he subjects it to Him with reverence
and, so to speak, presents it to Him, as appears from the words of Dionysius quoted above (A.
1, Obj. 2). Wherefore just as the human mind excels exterior things, whether bodily members,
or those external things that are employed for God's service, so too, prayer surpasses other
acts of religion.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 4]

Whether We Ought to Pray to God Alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought to pray to God alone. Prayer is an act of religion,
as stated above (A. 3). But God alone is to be worshiped by religion. Therefore we should pray
to God alone.

Obj. 2: Further, it is useless to pray to one who is ignorant of the prayer. But it belongs
to God alone to know one's prayer, both because frequently prayer is uttered by an interior
act which God alone knows, rather than by words, according to the saying of the Apostle (1
Cor. 14:15), "I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also with the understanding": and again
because, as Augustine says (De Cura pro mortuis xiii) the "dead, even the saints, know not
what the living, even their own children, are doing." Therefore we ought to pray to God alone.

Obj. 3: Further, if we pray to any of the saints, this is only because they are united to God.
Now some yet living in this world, or even some who are in Purgatory, are closely united to
God by grace, and yet we do not pray to them. Therefore neither should we pray to the saints
who are in Paradise.

On the contrary, It is written (Job 5:1), "Call . . . if there be any that will answer thee,
and turn to some of the saints."

I answer that, Prayer is offered to a person in two ways: first, as to be fulfilled by him,
secondly, as to be obtained through him. In the first way we offer prayer to God alone, since
all our prayers ought to be directed to the acquisition of grace and glory, which God alone
gives, according to Ps. 83:12, "The Lord will give grace and glory." But in the second way
we pray to the saints, whether angels or men, not that God may through them know our petitions,
but that our prayers may be effective through their prayers and merits. Hence it is written
(Apoc. 8:4) that "the smoke of the incense," namely "the prayers of the saints ascended up
before God." This is also clear from the very style employed by the Church in praying: since
we beseech the Blessed Trinity "to have mercy on us," while we ask any of the saints "to pray
for us."

Reply Obj. 1: To Him alone do we offer religious worship when praying, from Whom we seek to
obtain what we pray for, because by so doing we confess that He is the Author of our goods:
but not to those whom we call upon as our advocates in God's presence.

Reply Obj. 2: The dead, if we consider their natural condition, do not know what takes place
in this world, especially the interior movements of the heart. Nevertheless, according to Gregory
(Moral. xii, 21), whatever it is fitting the blessed should know about what happens to us,
even as regards the interior movements of the heart, is made known to them in the Word: and
it is most becoming to their exalted position that they should know the petitions we make to
them by word or thought; and consequently the petitions which we raise to them are known to
them through Divine manifestation.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who are in this world or in Purgatory, do not yet enjoy the vision of the
Word, so as to be able to know what we think or say. Wherefore we do not seek their assistance
by praying to them, but ask it of the living by speaking to them.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 5]

Whether We Ought to Ask for Something Definite When We Pray?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to ask for anything definite when we pray to God.
Now according to Rom. 8:26, "we know not what we should pray for as we ought." Therefore we
ought not to ask for anything definite when we pray.

Obj. 2: Further, those who ask another person for something definite strive to incline his
will to do what they wish themselves. But we ought not to endeavor to make God will what we
will; on the contrary, we ought to strive to will what He wills, according to a gloss on Ps.
32:1, "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye just." Therefore we ought not to ask God for anything definite
when we pray.

Obj. 3: Further, evil things are not to be sought from God; and as to good things, God Himself
invites us to take them. Now it is useless to ask a person to give you what he invites you
to take. Therefore we ought not to ask God for anything definite in our prayers.

On the contrary, our Lord (Matt. 6 and Luke 11) taught His disciples to ask definitely for
those things which are contained in the petitions of the Lord's Prayer.

I answer that, According to Valerius Maximus [*Fact. et Dict. Memor. vii, 2], "Socrates deemed
that we should ask the immortal gods for nothing else but that they should grant us good things,
because they at any rate know what is good for each one whereas when we pray we frequently
ask for what it had been better for us not to obtain." This opinion is true to a certain extent,
as to those things which may have an evil result, and which man may use ill or well, such as
"riches, by which," as stated by the same authority (Fact. et Dict. Memor. vii, 2), "many have
come to an evil end; honors, which have ruined many; power, of which we frequently witness
the unhappy results; splendid marriages, which sometimes bring about the total wreck of a family."
Nevertheless there are certain goods which man cannot ill use, because they cannot have an
evil result. Such are those which are the object of beatitude and whereby we merit it: and
these the saints seek absolutely when they pray, as in Ps. 79:4, "Show us Thy face, and we
shall be saved," and again in Ps. 118:35, "Lead me into the path of Thy commandments."

Reply Obj. 1: Although man cannot by himself know what he ought to pray for, "the Spirit,"
as stated in the same passage, "helpeth our infirmity," since by inspiring us with holy desires,
He makes us ask for what is right. Hence our Lord said (John 4:24) that true adorers "must
adore . . . in spirit and in truth."

Reply Obj. 2: When in our prayers we ask for things concerning our salvation, we conform our
will to God's, of Whom it is written (1 Tim. 2:4) that "He will have all men to be saved."

Reply Obj. 3: God so invites us to take good things, that we may approach to them not by the
steps of the body, but by pious desires and devout prayers.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 6]

Whether Man Ought to Ask God for Temporal Things When He Prays?

Objection 1: It would seem that man ought not to ask God for temporal things when he prays.
We seek what we ask for in prayer. But we should not seek for temporal things, for it is written
(Matt. 6:33): "Seek ye . . . first the kingdom of God, and His justice: and all these things
shall be added unto you," that is to say, temporal things, which, says He, we are not to seek,
but they will be added to what we seek. Therefore temporal things are not to be asked of God
in prayer.

Obj. 2: Further, no one asks save for that which he is solicitous about. Now we ought not to
have solicitude for temporal things, according to the saying of Matt. 6:25, "Be not solicitous
for your life, what you shall eat." Therefore we ought not to ask for temporal things when we pray.

Obj. 3: Further, by prayer our mind should be raised up to God. Therefore man ought not to
ask God for temporal things when he prays.

Obj. 4: Further, man ought not to ask of God other than good and useful things. But sometimes
temporal things, when we have them, are harmful, not only in a spiritual sense, but also in
a material sense. Therefore we should not ask God for them in our prayers.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 30:8): "Give me only the necessaries of life."

I answer that, As Augustine says (ad Probam, de orando Deum, Ep. cxxx, 12): "It is lawful to
pray for what it is lawful to desire." Now it is lawful to desire temporal things, not indeed
principally, by placing our end therein, but as helps whereby we are assisted in tending towards
beatitude, in so far, to wit, as they are the means of supporting the life of the body, and
are of service to us as instruments in performing acts of virtue, as also the Philosopher states
(Ethic. i, 8). Augustine too says the same to Proba (ad Probam, de orando Deum, Ep. cxxx, 6,
7) when he states that "it is not unbecoming for anyone to desire enough for a livelihood,
and no more; for this sufficiency is desired, not for its own sake, but for the welfare of
the body, or that we should desire to be clothed in a way befitting one's station, so as not
to be out of keeping with those among whom we have to live. Accordingly we ought to pray that
we may keep these things if we have them, and if we have them not, that we may gain possession
of them."

Reply Obj. 1: We should seek temporal things not in the first but in the second place. Hence
Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 16): "When He says that this" (i.e. the kingdom
of God) "is to be sought first, He implies that the other" (i.e. temporal goods) "is to be
sought afterwards, not in time but in importance, this as being our good, the other as our need."

Reply Obj. 2: Not all solicitude about temporal things is forbidden, but that which is superfluous
and inordinate, as stated above (Q. 55, A. 6).

Reply Obj. 3: When our mind is intent on temporal things in order that it may rest in them,
it remains immersed therein; but when it is intent on them in relation to the acquisition of
beatitude, it is not lowered by them, but raises them to a higher level.

Reply Obj. 4: From the very fact that we ask for temporal things not as the principal object
of our petition, but as subordinate to something else, we ask God for them in the sense that
they may be granted to us in so far as they are expedient for salvation.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 7]

Whether We Ought to Pray for Others?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to pray for others. In praying we ought to conform
to the pattern given by our Lord. Now in the Lord's Prayer we make petitions for ourselves,
not for others; thus we say: "Give us this day our daily bread," etc. Therefore we should not
pray for others.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer is offered that it may be heard. Now one of the conditions required
for prayer that it may be heard is that one pray for oneself, wherefore Augustine in commenting
on John 16:23, "If you ask the Father anything in My name He will give it you," says (Tract.
cii): "Everyone is heard when he prays for himself, not when he prays for all; wherefore He
does not say simply 'He will give it,' but 'He will give it you.'" Therefore it would seem
that we ought not to pray for others, but only for ourselves.

Obj. 3: Further, we are forbidden to pray for others, if they are wicked, according to Jer.
7:16, "Therefore do not then pray for this people . . . and do not withstand Me, for I will
not hear thee." On the other hand we are not bound to pray for the good, since they are heard
when they pray for themselves. Therefore it would seem that we ought not to pray for others.

On the contrary, It is written (James 5:16): "Pray one for another, that you may be saved."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 6), when we pray we ought to ask for what we ought to desire.
Now we ought to desire good things not only for ourselves, but also for others: for this is
essential to the love which we owe to our neighbor, as stated above (Q. 25, AA. 1, 12; Q. 27,
A. 2; Q. 31, A. 1). Therefore charity requires us to pray for others.

Reply Obj. 1: As Cyprian says (De orat. Dom.), "We say 'Our Father' and not 'My Father,' 'Give
us' and not 'Give me,' because the Master of unity did not wish us to pray privately, that
is for ourselves alone, for He wished each one to pray for all, even as He Himself bore all
in one."

Reply Obj. 2: It is a condition of prayer that one pray for oneself: not as though it were
necessary in order that prayer be meritorious, but as being necessary in order that prayer
may not fail in its effect of impetration. For it sometimes happens that we pray for another
with piety and perseverance, and ask for things relating to his salvation, and yet it is not
granted on account of some obstacle on the part of the person we are praying for, according
to Jer. 15:1, "If Moses and Samuel shall stand before Me, My soul is not towards this people."
And yet the prayer will be meritorious for the person who prays thus out of charity, according
to Ps. 34:13, "My prayer shall be turned into my bosom, i.e. though it profit them not, I am
not deprived of my reward," as the gloss expounds it.

Reply Obj. 3: We ought to pray even for sinners, that they may be converted, and for the just
that they may persevere and advance in holiness. Yet those who pray are heard not for all sinners
but for some: since they are heard for the predestined, but not for those who are foreknown
to death; even as the correction whereby we correct the brethren, has an effect in the predestined
but not in the reprobate, according to Eccles. 7:14, "No man can correct whom God hath despised."
Hence it is written (1 John 5:16): "He that knoweth his brother to sin a sin which is not to
death, let him ask, and life shall be given to him, who sinneth not to death." Now just as
the benefit of correction must not be refused to any man so long as he lives here below, because
we cannot distinguish the predestined from the reprobate, as Augustine says (De Correp. et
Grat. xv), so too no man should be denied the help of prayer.

We ought also to pray for the just for three reasons: First, because the prayers of a multitude
are more easily heard, wherefore a gloss on Rom. 15:30, "Help me in your prayers," says: "The
Apostle rightly tells the lesser brethren to pray for him, for many lesser ones, if they be
united together in one mind, become great, and it is impossible for the prayers of a multitude
not to obtain" that which is possible to be obtained by prayer. Secondly, that many may thank
God for the graces conferred on the just, which graces conduce to the profit of many, according
to the Apostle (2 Cor. 1:11). Thirdly, that the more perfect may not wax proud, seeing that
they find that they need the prayers of the less perfect.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 8]

Whether We Ought to Pray for Our Enemies?

Objection 1: It would seem that we ought not to pray for our enemies. According to Rom. 15:4,
"what things soever were written, were written for our learning." Now Holy Writ contains many
imprecations against enemies; thus it is written (Ps. 6:11): "Let all my enemies be ashamed
and be . . . troubled, let them be ashamed and be troubled very speedily [*Vulg.: 'Let them
be turned back and be ashamed.']." Therefore we too should pray against rather than for our
enemies.

Obj. 2: Further, to be revenged on one's enemies is harmful to them. But holy men seek vengeance
of their enemies according to Apoc. 6:10, "How long . . . dost Thou not . . . revenge our blood
on them that dwell on earth?" Wherefore they rejoice in being revenged on their enemies, according
to Ps. 57:11, "The just shall rejoice when he shall see the revenge." Therefore we should not
pray for our enemies, but against them.

Obj. 3: Further, man's deed should not be contrary to his prayer. Now sometimes men lawfully
attack their enemies, else all wars would be unlawful, which is opposed to what we have said
above (Q. 40, A. 1). Therefore we should not pray for our enemies.

On the contrary, It is written (Matt. 5:44): "Pray for them that persecute and calumniate you."

I answer that, To pray for another is an act of charity, as stated above (A. 7). Wherefore
we are bound to pray for our enemies in the same manner as we are bound to love them. Now it
was explained above in the treatise on charity (Q. 25, AA. 8, 9), how we are bound to love
our enemies, namely, that we must love in them their nature, not their sin, and that to love
our enemies in general is a matter of precept, while to love them in the individual is not
a matter of precept, except in the preparedness of the mind, so that a man must be prepared
to love his enemy even in the individual and to help him in a case of necessity, or if his
enemy should beg his forgiveness. But to love one's enemies absolutely in the individual, and
to assist them, is an act of perfection.

In like manner it is a matter of obligation that we should not exclude our enemies from the
general prayers which we offer up for others: but it is a matter of perfection, and not of
obligation, to pray for them individually, except in certain special cases.

Reply Obj. 1: The imprecations contained in Holy Writ may be understood in four ways. First,
according to the custom of the prophets "to foretell the future under the veil of an imprecation,"
as Augustine states [*De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 21]. Secondly, in the sense that certain temporal
evils are sometimes inflicted by God on the wicked for their correction. Thirdly, because they
are understood to be pronounced, not against the men themselves, but against the kingdom of
sin, with the purpose, to wit, of destroying sin by the correction of men. Fourthly, by way
of conformity of our will to the Divine justice with regard to the damnation of those who are
obstinate in sin.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine states in the same book (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 22), "the martyrs'
vengeance is the overthrow of the kingdom of sin, because they suffered so much while it reigned":
or as he says again (QQ. Vet. et Nov. Test. lxviii), "their prayer for vengeance is expressed
not in words but in their minds, even as the blood of Abel cried from the earth." They rejoice
in vengeance not for its own sake, but for the sake of Divine justice.

Reply Obj. 3: It is lawful to attack one's enemies, that they may be restrained from sin: and
this is for their own good and for the good of others. Consequently it is even lawful in praying
to ask that temporal evils be inflicted on our enemies in order that they may mend their ways.
Thus prayer and deed will not be contrary to one another.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 9]

Whether the Seven Petitions of the Lord's Prayer Are Fittingly Assigned?

Objection 1: It would seem that the seven petitions of the Lord's Prayer are not fittingly
assigned. It is useless to ask for that to be hallowed which is always holy. But the name of
God is always holy, according to Luke 1:49, "Holy is His name." Again, His kingdom is everlasting,
according to Ps. 144:13, "Thy kingdom is a kingdom of all ages." Again, God's will is always
fulfilled, according to Isa 46:10, "All My will shall be done." Therefore it is useless to
ask for "the name of God to be hallowed," for "His kingdom to come," and for "His will to be done."

Obj. 2: Further, one must withdraw from evil before attaining good. Therefore it seems unfitting
for the petitions relating to the attainment of good to be set forth before those relating
to the removal of evil.

Obj. 3: Further, one asks for a thing that it may be given to one. Now the chief gift of God
is the Holy Ghost, and those gifts that we receive through Him. Therefore the petitions seem
to be unfittingly assigned, since they do not correspond to the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 4: Further, according to Luke, only five petitions are mentioned in the Lord's Prayer,
as appears from the eleventh chapter. Therefore it was superfluous for Matthew to mention seven.

Obj. 5: Further, it seems useless to seek to win the benevolence of one who forestalls us by
his benevolence. Now God forestalls us by His benevolence, since "He first hath loved us" (
1 John 4:19). Therefore it is useless to preface the petitions with the words our "Father Who
art in heaven," which seem to indicate a desire to win God's benevolence.

On the contrary, The authority of Christ, who composed this prayer, suffices.

I answer that, The Lord's Prayer is most perfect, because, as Augustine says (ad Probam Ep.
cxxx, 12), "if we pray rightly and fittingly, we can say nothing else but what is contained
in this prayer of our Lord." For since prayer interprets our desires, as it were, before God,
then alone is it right to ask for something in our prayers when it is right that we should
desire it. Now in the Lord's Prayer not only do we ask for all that we may rightly desire,
but also in the order wherein we ought to desire them, so that this prayer not only teaches
us to ask, but also directs all our affections. Thus it is evident that the first thing to
be the object of our desire is the end, and afterwards whatever is directed to the end. Now
our end is God towards Whom our affections tend in two ways: first, by our willing the glory
of God, secondly, by willing to enjoy His glory. The first belongs to the love whereby we love
God in Himself, while the second belongs to the love whereby we love ourselves in God. Wherefore
the first petition is expressed thus: "Hallowed be Thy name," and the second thus: "Thy kingdom
come," by which we ask to come to the glory of His kingdom.

To this same end a thing directs us in two ways: in one way, by its very nature, in another
way, accidentally. Of its very nature the good which is useful for an end directs us to that
end. Now a thing is useful in two ways to that end which is beatitude: in one way, directly
and principally, according to the merit whereby we merit beatitude by obeying God, and in this
respect we ask: "Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven"; in another way instrumentally,
and as it were helping us to merit, and in this respect we say: "Give us this day our daily
bread," whether we understand this of the sacramental Bread, the daily use of which is profitable
to man, and in which all the other sacraments are contained, or of the bread of the body, so
that it denotes all sufficiency of food, as Augustine says (ad Probam, Ep. cxxx, 11), since
the Eucharist is the chief sacrament, and bread is the chief food: thus in the Gospel of Matthew
we read, "supersubstantial," i.e. "principal," as Jerome expounds it.

We are directed to beatitude accidentally by the removal of obstacles. Now there are three
obstacles to our attainment of beatitude. First, there is sin, which directly excludes a man
from the kingdom, according to 1 Cor. 6:9, 10, "Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, etc., shall
possess the kingdom of God"; and to this refer the words, "Forgive us our trespasses." Secondly,
there is temptation which hinders us from keeping God's will, and to this we refer when we
say: "And lead us not into temptation," whereby we do not ask not to be tempted, but not to
be conquered by temptation, which is to be led into temptation. Thirdly, there is the present
penal state which is a kind of obstacle to a sufficiency of life, and to this we refer in the
words, "Deliver us from evil."

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 5), when we say, "Hallowed be Thy
name, we do not mean that God's name is not holy, but we ask that men may treat it as a holy
thing," and this pertains to the diffusion of God's glory among men. When we say, "Thy kingdom
come, we do not imply that God is not reigning now," but "we excite in ourselves the desire
for that kingdom, that it may come to us, and that we may reign therein," as Augustine says
(ad Probam, Ep. cxxx, 11). The words, "Thy will be done" rightly signify, "'May Thy commandments
be obeyed' on earth as in heaven, i.e. by men as well as by angels" (De Serm. Dom. in Monte
ii, 6). Hence these three petitions will be perfectly fulfilled in the life to come; while
the other four, according to Augustine (Enchiridion cxv), belong to the needs of the present life.

Reply Obj. 2: Since prayer is the interpreter of desire, the order of the petitions corresponds
with the order, not of execution, but of desire or intention, where the end precedes the things
that are directed to the end, and attainment of good precedes removal of evil. He says: "If
it is fear of God whereby blessed are the poor in spirit, let us ask that God's name be hallowed
among men with a chaste fear. If it is piety whereby blessed are the meek, let us ask that
His kingdom may come, so that we become meek and no longer resist Him. If it is knowledge whereby
blessed are they that mourn, let us pray that His will be done, for thus we shall mourn no
more. If it is fortitude whereby blessed ere they that hunger, let us pray that our daily bread
be given to us. If it is counsel whereby blessed are the merciful, let us forgive the trespasses
of others that our own may be forgiven. If it is understanding whereby blessed are the pure
in heart, let us pray lest we have a double heart by seeking after worldly things which ere
the occasion of our temptations. If it is wisdom whereby blessed are the peacemakers for they
shall be called the children of God, let us pray to be delivered from evil: for if we be delivered
we shall by that very fact become the free children of God."

Reply Obj. 4: According to Augustine (Enchiridion cxvi), "Luke included not seven but five
petitions in the Lord's Prayer, for by omitting it, he shows that the third petition is a kind
of repetition of the two that precede, and thus helps us to understand it"; because, to wit,
the will of God tends chiefly to this--that we come to the knowledge of His holiness and to
reign together with Him. Again the last petition mentioned by Matthew, "Deliver us from evil,"
is omitted by Luke, so that each one may know himself to be delivered from evil if he be not
led into temptation.

Reply Obj. 5: Prayer is offered up to God, not that we may bend Him, but that we may excite
in ourselves the confidence to ask: which confidence is excited in us chiefly by the consideration
of His charity in our regard, whereby he wills our good--wherefore we say: "Our Father"; and
of His excellence, whereby He is able to fulfil it--wherefore we say: "Who art in heaven."

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 10]

Whether Prayer Is Proper to the Rational Creature?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer is not proper to the rational creature. Asking and receiving
apparently belong to the same subject. But receiving is becoming also to uncreated Persons,
viz. the Son and Holy Ghost. Therefore it is competent to them to pray: for the Son said (John
14:16): "I will ask My [Vulg.: 'the'] Father," and the Apostle says of the Holy Ghost (Rom.
8:26): "The Spirit . . . asketh for us."

Obj. 2: Angels are above rational creatures, since they are intellectual substances. Now prayer
is becoming to the angels, wherefore we read in the Ps. 96:7: "Adore Him, all you His angels."
Therefore prayer is not proper to the rational creature.

Obj. 3: Further, the same subject is fitted to pray as is fitted to call upon God, since this
consists chiefly in prayer. But dumb animals are fitted to call upon God, according to Ps.
146:9, "Who giveth to beasts their food and to the young ravens that call upon Him." Therefore
prayer is not proper to the rational creatures.

On the contrary, Prayer is an act of reason, as stated above (A. 1). But the rational creature
is so called from his reason. Therefore prayer is proper to the rational creature.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1) prayer is an act of reason, and consists in beseeching
a superior; just as command is an act of reason, whereby an inferior is directed to something.
Accordingly prayer is properly competent to one to whom it is competent to have reason, and
a superior whom he may beseech. Now nothing is above the Divine Persons; and dumb animals are
devoid of reason. Therefore prayer is unbecoming both the Divine Persons and dumb animals,
and it is proper to the rational creature.

Reply Obj. 1: Receiving belongs to the Divine Persons in respect of their nature, whereas prayer
belongs to one who receives through grace. The Son is said to ask or pray in respect of His
assumed, i.e. His human, nature and not in respect of His Godhead: and the Holy Ghost is said
to ask, because He makes us ask.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated in the First Part (Q. 79, A. 8), intellect and reason are not distinct
powers in us: but they differ as the perfect from the imperfect. Hence intellectual creatures
which are the angels are distinct from rational creatures, and sometimes are included under
them. In this sense prayer is said to be proper to the rational creature.

Reply Obj. 3: The young ravens are said to call upon God, on account of the natural desire
whereby all things, each in its own way, desire to attain the Divine goodness. Thus too dumb
animals are said to obey God, on account of the natural instinct whereby they are moved by God.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 11]

Whether the Saints in Heaven Pray for Us?

Objection 1: It would seem that the saints in heaven do not pray for us. A man's action is
more meritorious for himself than for others. But the saints in heaven do not merit for themselves,
neither do they pray for themselves, since they are already established in the term. Neither
therefore do they pray for us.

Obj. 2: Further, the saints conform their will to God perfectly, so that they will only what
God wills. Now what God wills is always fulfilled. Therefore it would be useless for the saints
to pray for us.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the saints in heaven are above, so are those in Purgatory, for they
can no longer sin. Now those in Purgatory do not pray for us, on the contrary we pray for them.
Therefore neither do the saints in heaven pray for us.

Obj. 4: Further, if the saints in heaven pray for us, the prayers of the higher saints would
be more efficacious; and so we ought not to implore the help of the lower saints' prayers but
only of those of the higher saints.

Obj. 5: Further, the soul of Peter is not Peter. If therefore the souls of the saints pray
for us, so long as they are separated from their bodies, we ought not to call upon Saint Peter,
but on his soul, to pray for us: yet the Church does the contrary. The saints therefore do
not pray for us, at least before the resurrection.

On the contrary, It is written (2 Macc. 15:14): "This is . . . he that prayeth much for the
people, and for all the holy city, Jeremias the prophet of God."

I answer that, As Jerome says (Cont. Vigilant. 6), the error of Vigilantius consisted in saying
that "while we live, we can pray one for another; but that after we are dead, none of our prayers
for others can be heard, seeing that not even the martyrs' prayers are granted when they pray
for their blood to be avenged." But this is absolutely false, because, since prayers offered
for others proceed from charity, as stated above (AA. 7, 8), the greater the charity of the
saints in heaven, the more they pray for wayfarers, since the latter can be helped by prayers:
and the more closely they are united to God, the more are their prayers efficacious: for the
Divine order is such that lower beings receive an overflow of the excellence of the higher,
even as the air receives the brightness of the sun. Wherefore it is said of Christ (Heb. 7:25):
"Going to God by His own power . . . to make intercession for us" [*Vulg.: 'He is able to save
for ever them that come to God by Him, always living to make intercession for us.']. Hence
Jerome says (Cont. Vigilant. 6): "If the apostles and martyrs while yet in the body and having
to be solicitous for themselves, can pray for others, how much more now that they have the
crown of victory and triumph."

Reply Obj. 1: The saints in heaven, since they are blessed, have no lack of bliss, save that
of the body's glory, and for this they pray. But they pray for us who lack the ultimate perfection
of bliss: and their prayers are efficacious in impetrating through their previous merits and
through God's acceptance.

Reply Obj. 2: The saints impetrate what ever God wishes to take place through their prayers:
and they pray for that which they deem will be granted through their prayers according to God's
will.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who are in Purgatory though they are above us on account of their impeccability,
yet they are below us as to the pains which they suffer: and in this respect they are not in
a condition to pray, but rather in a condition that requires us to pray for them.

Reply Obj. 4: It is God's will that inferior beings should be helped by all those that are
above them, wherefore we ought to pray not only to the higher but also to the lower saints;
else we should have to implore the mercy of God alone. Nevertheless it happens sometime that
prayers addressed to a saint of lower degree are more efficacious, either because he is implored
with greater devotion, or because God wishes to make known his sanctity.

Reply Obj. 5: It is because the saints while living merited to pray for us, that we invoke
them under the names by which they were known in this life, and by which they are better known
to us: and also in order to indicate our belief in the resurrection, according to the saying
of Ex. 3:6, "I am the God of Abraham," etc.

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 12]

Whether Prayer Should Be Vocal?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer ought not to be vocal. As stated above (A. 4), prayer
is addressed chiefly to God. Now God knows the language of the heart. Therefore it is useless
to employ vocal prayer.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer should lift man's mind to God, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2). But words,
like other sensible objects, prevent man from ascending to God by contemplation. Therefore
we should not use words in our prayers.

Obj. 3: Further, prayer should be offered to God in secret, according to Matt. 6:6, "But thou,
when thou shalt pray, enter into thy chamber, and having shut the door, pray to thy Father
in secret." But prayer loses its secrecy by being expressed vocally. Therefore prayer should
not be vocal.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 141:2): "I cried to the Lord with my voice, with my voice
I made supplication to the Lord."

I answer that, Prayer is twofold, common and individual. Common prayer is that which is offered
to God by the ministers of the Church representing the body of the faithful: wherefore such
like prayer should come to the knowledge of the whole people for whom it is offered: and this
would not be possible unless it were vocal prayer. Therefore it is reasonably ordained that
the ministers of the Church should say these prayers even in a loud voice, so that they may
come to the knowledge of all.

On the other hand individual prayer is that which is offered by any single person, whether
he pray for himself or for others; and it is not essential to such a prayer as this that it
be vocal. And yet the voice is employed in such like prayers for three reasons. First, in order
to excite interior devotion, whereby the mind of the person praying is raised to God, because
by means of external signs, whether of words or of deeds, the human mind is moved as regards
apprehension, and consequently also as regards the affections. Hence Augustine says (ad Probam.
Ep. cxxx, 9) that "by means of words and other signs we arouse ourselves more effectively to
an increase of holy desires." Hence then alone should we use words and such like signs when
they help to excite the mind internally. But if they distract or in any way impede the mind
we should abstain from them; and this happens chiefly to those whose mind is sufficiently prepared
for devotion without having recourse to those signs. Wherefore the Psalmist (Ps. 26:8) said:
"My heart hath said to Thee: 'My face hath sought Thee,'" and we read of Anna (1 Kings 1:13)
that "she spoke in her heart." Secondly, the voice is used in praying as though to pay a debt,
so that man may serve God with all that he has from God, that is to say, not only with his
mind, but also with his body: and this applies to prayer considered especially as satisfactory.
Hence it is written (Osee 14:3): "Take away all iniquity, and receive the good: and we will
render the calves of our lips." Thirdly, we have recourse to vocal prayer, through a certain
overflow from the soul into the body, through excess of feeling, according to Ps. 15:9, "My
heart hath been glad, and my tongue hath rejoiced."

Reply Obj. 1: Vocal prayer is employed, not in order to tell God something He does not know,
but in order to lift up the mind of the person praying or of other persons to God.

Reply Obj. 2: Words about other matters distract the mind and hinder the devotion of those
who pray: but words signifying some object of devotion lift up the mind, especially one that
is less devout.

Reply Obj. 3: As Chrysostom says [*Hom. xiii in the Opus Imperfectum falsely ascribed to St.
John Chrysostom], "Our Lord forbids one to pray in presence of others in order that one may
be seen by others. Hence when you pray, do nothing strange to draw men's attention, either
by shouting so as to be heard by others, or by openly striking the heart, or extending the
hands, so as to be seen by many. And yet, according to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii,
3), "it is not wrong to be seen by men, but to do this or that in order to be seen by men."

THIRTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 13]

Whether Attention Is a Necessary Condition of Prayer?

Objection 1: It would seem that attention is a necessary condition of prayer. But prayer is
not in spirit unless it be attentive. Therefore attention is a necessary condition of prayer.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer is "the ascent of the mind to God" [*Damascene, De Fide Orth. iii,
24]. But the mind does not ascend to God if the prayer is inattentive. Therefore attention
is a necessary condition of prayer.

Obj. 3: Further, it is a necessary condition of prayer that it should be altogether sinless.
Now if a man allows his mind to wander while praying he is not free of sin, for he seems to
make light of God; even as if he were to speak to another man without attending to what he
was saying. Hence Basil says [*De Constit. Monach. i] that the "Divine assistance is to be
implored, not lightly, nor with a mind wandering hither and thither: because he that prays
thus not only will not obtain what he asks, nay rather will he provoke God to anger." Therefore
it would seem a necessary condition of prayer that it should be attentive.

On the contrary, Even holy men sometimes suffer from a wandering of the mind when they pray,
according to Ps. 39:13, "My heart hath forsaken me."

I answer that, This question applies chiefly to vocal prayer. Accordingly we must observe that
a thing is necessary in two ways. First, a thing is necessary because thereby the end is better
obtained: and thus attention is absolutely necessary for prayer. Secondly, a thing is said
to be necessary when without it something cannot obtain its effect. Now the effect of prayer
is threefold. The first is an effect which is common to all acts quickened by charity, and
this is merit. In order to realize this effect, it is not necessary that prayer should be attentive
throughout; because the force of the original intention with which one sets about praying renders
the whole prayer meritorious, as is the case with other meritorious acts. The second effect
of prayer is proper thereto, and consists in impetration: and again the original intention,
to which God looks chiefly, suffices to obtain this effect. But if the original intention is
lacking, prayer lacks both merit and impetration: because, as Gregory [*Hugh St. Victor, Expos.
in Reg. S. Aug. iii] says, "God hears not the prayer of those who pay no attention to their
prayer." The third effect of prayer is that which it produces at once; this is the spiritual
refreshment of the mind, and for this effect attention is a necessary condition: wherefore
it is written (1 Cor. 14:14): "If I pray in a tongue . . . my understanding is without fruit."

It must be observed, however, that there are three kinds of attention that can be brought to
vocal prayer: one which attends to the words, lest we say them wrong, another which attends
to the sense of the words, and a third, which attends to the end of prayer, namely, God, and
to the thing we are praying for. That last kind of attention is most necessary, and even idiots
are capable of it. Moreover this attention, whereby the mind is fixed on God, is sometimes
so strong that the mind forgets all other things, as Hugh of St. Victor states [*De Modo Orandi
ii].

Reply Obj. 1: To pray in spirit and in truth is to set about praying through the instigation
of the Spirit, even though afterwards the mind wander through weakness.

Reply Obj. 2: The human mind is unable to remain aloft for long on account of the weakness
of nature, because human weakness weighs down the soul to the level of inferior things: and
hence it is that when, while praying, the mind ascends to God by contemplation, of a sudden
it wanders off through weakness.

Reply Obj. 3: Purposely to allow one's mind to wander in prayer is sinful and hinders the prayer
from having fruit. It is against this that Augustine says in his Rule (Ep. ccxi): "When you
pray God with psalms and hymns, let your mind attend to that which your lips pronounce." But
to wander in mind unintentionally does not deprive prayer of its fruit. Hence Basil says (De
Constit. Monach. i): "If you are so truly weakened by sin that you are unable to pray attentively,
strive as much as you can to curb yourself, and God will pardon you, seeing that you are unable
to stand in His presence in a becoming manner, not through negligence but through frailty."

FOURTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 14]

Whether Prayer Should Last a Long Time?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer should not be continual. It is written (Matt. 6:7):
"When you are praying, speak not much." Now one who prays a long time needs to speak much,
especially if his be vocal prayer. Therefore prayer should not last a long time.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer expresses the desire. Now a desire is all the holier according as it
is centered on one thing, according to Ps. 26:4, "One thing I have asked of the Lord, this
will I seek after." Therefore the shorter prayer is, the more is it acceptable to God.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems to be wrong to transgress the limits fixed by God, especially in
matters concerning Divine worship, according to Ex. 19:21: "Charge the people, lest they should
have a mind to pass the limits to see the Lord, and a very great multitude of them should perish."
But God has fixed for us the limits of prayer by instituting the Lord's Prayer (Matt. 6). Therefore
it is not right to prolong our prayer beyond its limits.

Obj. 4: On the contrary, It would seem that we ought to pray continually. For our Lord said
(Luke 18:1): "We ought always to pray, and not to faint": and it is written (1 Thess. 5:17):
"Pray without ceasing."

I answer that, We may speak about prayer in two ways: first, by considering it in itself; secondly,
by considering it in its cause. The cause of prayer is the desire of charity, from which prayer
ought to arise: and this desire ought to be in us continually, either actually or virtually,
for the virtue of this desire remains in whatever we do out of charity; and we ought to "do
all things to the glory of God" (1 Cor. 10:31). From this point of view prayer ought to be
continual: wherefore Augustine says (ad Probam, Ep. cxxx, 9): "Faith, hope and charity are
by themselves a prayer of continual longing." But prayer, considered in itself, cannot be continual,
because we have to be busy about other works, and, as Augustine says (ad Probam. Ep. cxxx,
9), "we pray to God with our lips at certain intervals and seasons, in order to admonish ourselves
by means of such like signs, to take note of the amount of our progress in that desire, and
to arouse ourselves more eagerly to an increase thereof." Now the quantity of a thing should
be commensurate with its end, for instance the quantity of the dose should be commensurate
with health. And so it is becoming that prayer should last long enough to arouse the fervor
of the interior desire: and when it exceeds this measure, so that it cannot be continued any
longer without causing weariness, it should be discontinued. Wherefore Augustine says (ad Probam.
Ep. cxxx): "It is said that the brethren in Egypt make frequent but very short prayers, rapid
ejaculations, as it were, lest that vigilant and erect attention which is so necessary in prayer
slacken and languish, through the strain being prolonged. By so doing they make it sufficiently
clear not only that this attention must not be forced if we are unable to keep it up, but also
that if we are able to continue, it should not be broken off too soon." And just as we must
judge of this in private prayers by considering the attention of the person praying, so too,
in public prayers we must judge of it by considering the devotion of the people.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (ad Probam. Ep. cxxx), "to pray with many words is not the
same as to pray long; to speak long is one thing, to be devout long is another. For it is written
that our Lord passed the whole night in prayer, and that He 'prayed the longer' in order to
set us an example." Further on he says: "When praying say little, yet pray much so long as
your attention is fervent. For to say much in prayer is to discuss your need in too many words:
whereas to pray much is to knock at the door of Him we pray, by the continuous and devout clamor
of the heart. Indeed this business is frequently done with groans rather than with words, with
tears rather than with speech."

Reply Obj. 2: Length of prayer consists, not in praying for many things, but in the affections
persisting in the desire of one thing.

Reply Obj. 3: Our Lord instituted this prayer, not that we might use no other words when we
pray, but that in our prayers we might have none but these things in view, no matter how we
express them or think of them.

Reply Obj. 4: One may pray continually, either through having a continual desire, as stated
above; or through praying at certain fixed times, though interruptedly; or by reason of the
effect, whether in the person who prays--because he remains more devout even after praying,
or in some other person--as when by his kindness a man incites another to pray for him, even
after he himself has ceased praying.

FIFTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 15]

Whether Prayer Is Meritorious?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer is not meritorious. All merit proceeds from grace. But
prayer precedes grace, since even grace is obtained by means of prayer according to Luke 11:13,
"(How much more) will your Father from heaven give the good Spirit to them that ask Him!" Therefore
prayer is not a meritorious act.

Obj. 2: Further, if prayer merits anything, this would seem to be chiefly that which is besought
in prayer. Yet it does not always merit this, because even the saints' prayers are frequently
not heard; thus Paul was not heard when he besought the sting of the flesh to be removed from
him. Therefore prayer is not a meritorious act.

Obj. 3: Further, prayer is based chiefly on faith, according to James 1:6, "But let him ask
in faith, nothing wavering." Now faith is not sufficient for merit, as instanced in those who
have lifeless faith. Therefore prayer is not a meritorious act.

On the contrary, A gloss on the words of Ps. 34:13, "My prayer shall be turned into my bosom,"
explains them as meaning, "if my prayer does not profit them, yet shall not I be deprived of
my reward." Now reward is not due save to merit. Therefore prayer is meritorious.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 13) prayer, besides causing spiritual consolation at the
time of praying, has a twofold efficacy in respect of a future effect, namely, efficacy in
meriting and efficacy in impetrating. Now prayer, like any other virtuous act, is efficacious
in meriting, because it proceeds from charity as its root, the proper object of which is the
eternal good that we merit to enjoy. Yet prayer proceeds from charity through the medium of
religion, of which prayer is an act, as stated above (A. 3), and with the concurrence of other
virtues requisite for the goodness of prayer, viz. humility and faith. For the offering of
prayer itself to God belongs to religion, while the desire for the thing that we pray to be
accomplished belongs to charity. Faith is necessary in reference to God to Whom we pray; that
is, we need to believe that we can obtain from Him what we seek. Humility is necessary on the
part of the person praying, because he recognizes his neediness. Devotion too is necessary:
but this belongs to religion, for it is its first act and a necessary condition of all its
secondary acts, as stated above (Q. 82, AA. 1, 2).

As to its efficacy in impetrating, prayer derives this from the grace of God to Whom we pray,
and Who instigates us to pray. Wherefore Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. cv, 1): "He would
not urge us to ask, unless He were willing to give"; and Chrysostom [*Cf. Catena Aurea of St.
Thomas on Luke 18. The words as quoted are not to be found in the words of Chrysostom] says:
"He never refuses to grant our prayers, since in His loving-kindness He urged us not to faint
in praying."

Reply Obj. 1: Neither prayer nor any other virtuous act is meritorious without sanctifying
grace. And yet even that prayer which impetrates sanctifying grace proceeds from some grace,
as from a gratuitous gift, since the very act of praying is "a gift of God," as Augustine states
(De Persever. xxiii).

Reply Obj. 2: Sometimes the merit of prayer regards chiefly something distinct from the object
of one's petition. For the chief object of merit is beatitude, whereas the direct object of
the petition of prayer extends sometimes to certain other things, as stated above (AA. 6, 7).
Accordingly if this other thing that we ask for ourselves be not useful for our beatitude,
we do not merit it; and sometimes by asking for and desiring such things we lose merit for
instance if we ask of God the accomplishment of some sin, which would be an impious prayer.
And sometimes it is not necessary for salvation, nor yet manifestly contrary thereto; and then
although he who prays may merit eternal life by praying, yet he does not merit to obtain what
he asks for. Hence Augustine says (Liber. Sentent. Prosperi sent. ccxii): "He who faithfully
prays God for the necessaries of this life, is both mercifully heard, and mercifully not heard.
For the physician knows better than the sick man what is good for the disease." For this reason,
too, Paul was not heard when he prayed for the removal of the sting in his flesh, because this
was not expedient. If, however, we pray for something that is useful for our beatitude, through
being conducive to salvation, we merit it not only by praying, but also by doing other good
deeds: therefore without any doubt we receive what we ask for, yet when we ought to receive
it: "since certain things are not denied us, but are deferred that they may be granted at a
suitable time," according to Augustine (Tract. cii in Joan.): and again this may be hindered
if we persevere not in asking for it. Wherefore Basil says (De Constit. Monast. i): "The reason
why sometimes thou hast asked and not received, is because thou hast asked amiss, either inconsistently,
or lightly, or because thou hast asked for what was not good for thee, or because thou hast
ceased asking." Since, however, a man cannot condignly merit eternal life for another, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 114, A. 6), it follows that sometimes one cannot condignly merit for another
things that pertain to eternal life. For this reason we are not always heard when we pray for
others, as stated above (A. 7, ad 2, 3). Hence it is that four conditions are laid down; namely,
to ask--"for ourselves--things necessary for salvation--piously--perseveringly"; when all these
four concur, we always obtain what we ask for.

Reply Obj. 3: Prayer depends chiefly on faith, not for its efficacy in meriting, because thus
it depends chiefly on charity, but for its efficacy in impetrating, because it is through faith
that man comes to know of God's omnipotence and mercy, which are the source whence prayer impetrates
what it asks for.

SIXTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 16]

Whether Sinners Impetrate Anything from God by Their Prayers?

Objection 1: It would seem that sinners impetrate nothing from God by their prayers. It is
written (John 9:31): "We know that God doth not hear sinners"; and this agrees with the saying
of Prov. 28:9, "He that turneth away his ears from hearing the law, his prayer shall be an
abomination." Now an abominable prayer impetrates nothing from God. Therefore sinners impetrate
nothing from God.

Obj. 2: Further, the just impetrate from God what they merit, as stated above (A. 15, ad 2).
But sinners cannot merit anything since they lack grace and charity which is the "power of
godliness," according to a gloss on 2 Tim. 3:5, "Having an appearance indeed of godliness,
but denying the power thereof." and so their prayer is impious, and yet piety is required in
order that prayer may be impetrative, as stated above (A. 15, ad 2). Therefore sinners impetrate
nothing by their prayers.

Obj. 3: Further, Chrysostom [*Hom. xiv in the Opus Imperfectum falsely ascribed to St. John
Chrysostom] says: "The Father is unwilling to hear the prayer which the Son has not inspired."
Now in the prayer inspired by Christ we say: "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them
that trespass against us": and sinners do not fulfil this. Therefore either they lie in saying
this, and so are unworthy to be heard, or, if they do not say it, they are not heard, because
they do not observe the form of prayer instituted by Christ.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. xliv, super Joan.): "If God were not to hear sinners,
the publican would have vainly said: Lord, be merciful to me a sinner"; and Chrysostom [*Hom.
xviii of the same Opus Imperfectum] says: "Everyone that asketh shall receive, that is to say
whether he be righteous or sinful."

I answer that, In the sinner, two things are to be considered: his nature which God loves,
and the sin which He hates. Accordingly when a sinner prays for something as sinner, i.e. in
accordance with a sinful desire, God hears him not through mercy but sometimes through vengeance
when He allows the sinner to fall yet deeper into sin. For "God refuses in mercy what He grants
in anger," as Augustine declares (Tract. lxxiii in Joan.). On the other hand God hears the
sinner's prayer if it proceed from a good natural desire, not out of justice, because the sinner
does not merit to be heard, but out of pure mercy [*Cf. A. 15, ad 1], provided however he fulfil
the four conditions given above, namely, that he beseech for himself things necessary for salvation,
piously and perseveringly.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine states (Tract. xliv super Joan.), these words were spoken by the
blind man before being anointed, i.e. perfectly enlightened, and consequently lack authority.
And yet there is truth in the saying if it refers to a sinner as such, in which sense also
the sinner's prayer is said to be an abomination.

Reply Obj. 2: There can be no godliness in the sinner's prayer as though his prayer were quickened
by a habit of virtue: and yet his prayer may be godly in so far as he asks for something pertaining
to godliness. Even so a man who has not the habit of justice is able to will something just,
as stated above (Q. 59, A. 2). And though his prayer is not meritorious, it can be impetrative,
because merit depends on justice, whereas impetration rests on grace.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (A. 7, ad 1) the Lord's Prayer is pronounced in the common person
of the whole Church: and so if anyone say the Lord's Prayer while unwilling to forgive his
neighbor's trespasses, he lies not, although his words do not apply to him personally: for
they are true as referred to the person of the Church, from which he is excluded by merit,
and consequently he is deprived of the fruit of his prayer. Sometimes, however, a sinner is
prepared to forgive those who have trespassed against him, wherefore his prayers are heard,
according to Ecclus. 28:2, "Forgive thy neighbor if he hath hurt thee, and then shall thy sins
be forgiven to thee when thou prayest."

SEVENTEENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 83, Art. 17]

Whether the Parts of Prayer Are Fittingly Described As Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
and Thanksgivings?

Objection 1: It would seem that the parts of prayer are unfittingly described as supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings. Supplication would seem to be a kind of adjuration.
Yet, according to Origen (Super Matth. Tract. xxxv), "a man who wishes to live according to
the gospel need not adjure another, for if it be unlawful to swear, it is also unlawful to
adjure." Therefore supplication is unfittingly reckoned a part of prayer.

Obj. Therefore it is unfitting to distinguish "prayers" from "intercessions."

Obj. 3: Further, thanksgivings regard the past, while the others regard the future. But the
past precedes the future. Therefore thanksgivings are unfittingly placed after the others.

On the contrary, suffices the authority of the Apostle (1 Tim. 2:1).

I answer that, Three conditions are requisite for prayer. First, that the person who prays
should approach God Whom he prays: this is signified in the word "prayer," because prayer is
"the raising up of one's mind to God." The second is that there should be a petition, and this
is signified in the word "intercession." In this case sometimes one asks for something definite,
and then some say it is "intercession" properly so called, or we may ask for some thing indefinitely,
for instance to be helped by God, or we may simply indicate a fact, as in John 11:3, "Behold,
he whom Thou lovest is sick," and then they call it "insinuation." The third condition is the
reason for impetrating what we ask for: and this either on the part of God, or on the part
of the person who asks. The reason of impetration on the part of God is His sanctity, on account
of which we ask to be heard, according to Dan. 9:17, 18, "For Thy own sake, incline, O God,
Thy ear"; and to this pertains "supplication" (obsecratio) which means a pleading through sacred
things, as when we say, "Through Thy nativity, deliver us, O Lord." The reason for impetration
on the part of the person who asks is "thanksgiving"; since "through giving thanks for benefits
received we merit to receive yet greater benefits," as we say in the collect [*Ember Friday
in September and Postcommunion of the common of a Confessor Bishop]. Hence a gloss on 1 Tim.
2:1 says that "in the Mass, the consecration is preceded by supplication," in which certain
sacred things are called to mind; that "prayers are in the consecration itself," in which especially
the mind should be raised up to God; and that "intercessions are in the petitions that follow,
and thanksgivings at the end."

We may notice these four things in several of the Church's collects. Thus in the collect of
Trinity Sunday the words, "Almighty eternal God" belong to the offering up of prayer to God;
the words, "Who hast given to Thy servants," etc. belong to thanksgiving; the words, "grant,
we beseech Thee," belong to intercession; and the words at the end, "Through Our Lord," etc.
belong to supplication.

In the Conferences of the Fathers (ix, cap. 11, seqq.) we read: "Supplication is bewailing
one's sins; prayer is vowing something to God; intercession is praying for others; thanksgiving
is offered by the mind to God in ineffable ecstasy." The first explanation, however, is the better.

Reply Obj. 1: "Supplication" is an adjuration not for the purpose of compelling, for this is
forbidden, but in order to implore mercy.

Reply Obj. 2: "Prayer" in the general sense includes all the things mentioned here; but when
distinguished from the others it denotes properly the ascent to God.

Reply Obj. 3: Among things that are diverse the past precedes the future; but the one and same
thing is future before it is past. Hence thanksgiving for other benefits precedes intercession:
but one and the same benefit is first sought, and finally, when it has been received, we give
thanks for it. Intercession is preceded by prayer whereby we approach Him of Whom we ask: and
prayer is preceded by supplication, whereby through the consideration of God's goodness we
dare approach Him.

QUESTION 84

OF ADORATION (In Three Articles)

In due sequence we must consider the external acts of latria, and in the first place, adoration
whereby one uses one's body to reverence God; secondly, those acts whereby some external thing
is offered to God; thirdly, those acts whereby something belonging to God is assumed.

Under the first head there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether adoration is an act of latria?

(2) Whether adoration denotes an internal or an external act?

(3) Whether adoration requires a definite place?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 84, Art. 1]

Whether Adoration Is an Act of Latria or Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that adoration is not an act of latria or religion. The worship
of religion is due to God alone. But adoration is not due to God alone: since we read (Gen.
18:2) that Abraham adored the angels; and (3 Kings 1:23) that the prophet Nathan, when he was
come in to king David, "worshiped him bowing down to the ground." Therefore adoration is not
an act of religion.

Obj. 2: Further, the worship of religion is due to God as the object of beatitude, according
to Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 3): whereas adoration is due to Him by reason of His majesty,
since a gloss on Ps. 28:2, "Adore ye the Lord in His holy court," says: "We pass from these
courts into the court where we adore His majesty." Therefore adoration is not an act of latria.

Obj. 3: Further, the worship of one same religion is due to the three Persons. But we do not
adore the three Persons with one adoration, for we genuflect at each separate invocation of
Them [*At the adoration of the Cross, on Good Friday]. Therefore adoration is nol an act of latria.

On the contrary, are the words quoted Matt. 4:10: "The Lord thy God shalt thou adore and Him
only shalt thou serve."

I answer that, Adoration is directed to the reverence of the person adored. Now it is evident
from what we have said (Q. 81, AA. 2, 4) that it is proper to religion to show reverence to
God. Hence the adoration whereby we adore God is an act of religion.

Reply Obj. 1: Reverence is due to God on account of His excellence, which is communicated to
certain creatures not in equal measure, but according to a measure of proportion; and so the
reverence which we pay to God, and which belongs to latria, differs from the reverence which
we pay to certain excellent creatures; this belongs to dulia, and we shall speak of it further
on (Q. 103). And since external actions are signs of internal reverence, certain external tokens
significative of reverence are offered to creatures of excellence, and among these tokens the
chief is adoration: yet there is one thing which is offered to God alone, and that is sacrifice.
Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 4): "Many tokens of Divine worship are employed in doing
honor to men, either through excessive humility, or through pernicious flattery; yet so that
those to whom these honors are given are recognized as being men to whom we owe esteem and
reverence and even adoration if they be far above us. But who ever thought it his duty to sacrifice
to any other than one whom he either knew or deemed or pretended to be a God?" Accordingly
it was with the reverence due to an excellent creature that Nathan adored David; while it was
the reverence due to God with which Mardochai refused to adore Aman fearing "lest he should
transfer the honor of his God to a man" (Esther 13:14).

Again with the reverence due to an excellent creature Abraham adored the angels, as did also
Josue (Jos. 5:15): though we may understand them to have adored, with the adoration of latria,
God Who appeared and spoke to them in the guise of an angel. It was with the reverence due
to God that John was forbidden to adore the angel (Apoc. 22:9), both to indicate the dignity
which he had acquired through Christ, whereby man is made equal to an angel: wherefore the
same text goes on: "I am thy fellow-servant and of thy brethren"; as also to exclude any occasion
of idolatry, wherefore the text continues: "Adore God."

Reply Obj. 2: Every Divine excellency is included in His majesty: to which it pertains that
we should be made happy in Him as in the sovereign good.

Reply Obj. 3: Since there is one excellence of the three Divine Persons, one honor and reverence
is due to them and consequently one adoration. It is to represent this that where it is related
(Gen. 18:2) that three men appeared to Abraham, we are told that he addressed one, saying:
"Lord, if I have found favor in thy sight," etc. The triple genuflection represents the Trinity
of Persons, not a difference of adoration.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 84, Art. 2]

Whether Adoration Denotes an Action of the Body?

Objection 1: It would seem that adoration does not denote an act of the body. It is written
(John 4:23): "The true adorers shall adore the Father in spirit and in truth." Now what is
done in spirit has nothing to do with an act of the body. Therefore adoration does not denote
an act of the body.

Obj. 2: Further, the word adoration is taken from oratio (prayer). Therefore adoration denotes
chiefly a spiritual act.

Obj. 3: Further, acts of the body pertain to sensible knowledge: whereas we approach God not
by bodily but by spiritual sense. Therefore adoration does not denote an act of the body.

On the contrary, A gloss on Ex. 20:5, "Thou shalt not adore them, nor serve them," says: "Thou
shalt neither worship them in mind, nor adore them outwardly."

I answer that, As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv, 12), since we are composed of a twofold
nature, intellectual and sensible, we offer God a twofold adoration; namely, a spiritual adoration,
consisting in the internal devotion of the mind; and a bodily adoration, which consists in
an exterior humbling of the body. And since in all acts of latria that which is without is
referred to that which is within as being of greater import, it follows that exterior adoration
is offered on account of interior adoration, in other words we exhibit signs of humility in
our bodies in order to incite our affections to submit to God, since it is connatural to us
to proceed from the sensible to the intelligible.

Reply Obj. 1: Even bodily adoration is done in spirit, in so far as it proceeds from and is
directed to spiritual devotion.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as prayer is primarily in the mind, and secondarily expressed in words,
as stated above (Q. 83, A. 12), so too adoration consists chiefly in an interior reverence
of God, but secondarily in certain bodily signs of humility; thus when we genuflect we signify
our weakness in comparison with God, and when we prostrate ourselves we profess that we are
nothing of ourselves.

Reply Obj. 3: Though we cannot reach God with the senses, our mind is urged by sensible signs
to approach God.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 84, Art. 3]

Whether Adoration Requires a Definite Place?

Objection 1: It would seem that adoration does not require a definite place. It is written
(John 4:21): "The hour cometh, when you shall neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, adore
the Father"; and the same reason seems to apply to other places. Therefore a definite place
is not necessary for adoration.

Obj. 2: Further, exterior adoration is directed to interior adoration. But interior adoration
is shown to God as existing everywhere. Therefore exterior adoration does not require a definite
place.

Obj. 3: Further, the same God is adored in the New as in the Old Testament. Now in the Old
Testament they adored towards the west, because the door of the Tabernacle looked to the east
(Ex. 26:18 seqq.). Therefore for the same reason we ought now to adore towards the west, if
any definite place be requisite for adoration.

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. 56:7): "My house shall be called the house of prayer,"
which words are also quoted (John 2:16).

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), the chief part of adoration is the internal devotion
of the mind, while the secondary part is something external pertaining to bodily signs. Now
the mind internally apprehends God as not comprised in a place; while bodily signs must of
necessity be in some definite place and position. Hence a definite place is required for adoration,
not chiefly, as though it were essential thereto, but by reason of a certain fittingness, like
other bodily signs.

Reply Obj. 1: By these words our Lord foretold the cessation of adoration, both according to
the rite of the Jews who adored in Jerusalem, and according to the rite of the Samaritans who
adored on Mount Garizim. For both these rites ceased with the advent of the spiritual truth
of the Gospel, according to which "a sacrifice is offered to God in every place," as stated
in Malach. 1:11.

Reply Obj. 2: A definite place is chosen for adoration, not on account of God Who is adored,
as though He were enclosed in a place, but on account of the adorers; and this for three reasons.
First, because the place is consecrated, so that those who pray there conceive a greater devotion
and are more likely to be heard, as may be seen in the prayer of Solomon (3 Kings 8). Secondly,
on account of the sacred mysteries and other signs of holiness contained therein. Thirdly,
on account of the concourse of many adorers, by reason of which their prayer is more likely
to be heard, according to Matt. 18:20, "Where there are two or three gathered together in My
name, there am I in the midst of them."

Reply Obj. 3: There is a certain fittingness in adoring towards the east. First, because the
Divine majesty is indicated in the movement of the heavens which is from the east. Secondly,
because Paradise was situated in the east according to the Septuagint version of Gen. 2:8,
and so we signify our desire to return to Paradise. Thirdly, on account of Christ Who is "the
light of the world" [*John 8:12; 9:5], and is called "the Orient" (Zech. 6:12); "Who mounteth
above the heaven of heavens to the east" (Ps. 67:34), and is expected to come from the east,
according to Matt. 24:27, "As lightning cometh out of the east, and appeareth even into the
west; so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be."

QUESTION 85

OF SACRIFICE (In Four Articles)

In due sequence we must consider those acts whereby external things are offered to God. These
give rise to a twofold consideration: (1) Of things given to God by the faithful; (2) Of vows,
whereby something is promised to Him.

Under the first head we shall consider sacrifices, oblations, first-fruits, and tithes. About
sacrifices there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether offering a sacrifice to God is of the law of nature?

(2) Whether sacrifice should be offered to God alone?

(3) Whether the offering of a sacrifice is a special act of virtue?

(4) Whether all are bound to offer sacrifice?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 85, Art. 1]

Whether Offering a Sacrifice to God Is of the Law of Nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that offering a sacrifice to God is not of the natural law. Things
that are of the natural law are common among all men. Yet this is not the case with sacrifices:
for we read of some, e.g. Melchisedech (Gen. 14:18), offering bread and wine in sacrifice,
and of certain animals being offered by some, and others by others. Therefore the offering
of sacrifices is not of the natural law.

Obj. 2: Further, things that are of the natural law were observed by all just men. Yet we do
not read that Isaac offered sacrifice; nor that Adam did so, of whom nevertheless it is written
(Wis. 10:2) that wisdom "brought him out of his sin." Therefore the offering of sacrifice is
not of the natural law.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 5, 19) that sacrifices are offered in signification
of something. Now words which are chief among signs, as he again says (De Doctr. Christ. ii,
3), "signify, not by nature but by convention," according to the Philosopher (Peri Herm. i,
2). Therefore sacrifices are not of the natural law.

On the contrary, At all times and among all nations there has always been the offering of sacrifices.
Now that which is observed by all is seemingly natural. Therefore the offering of sacrifices
is of the natural law.

I answer that, Natural reason tells man that he is subject to a higher being, on account of
the defects which he perceives in himself, and in which he needs help and direction from someone
above him: and whatever this superior being may be, it is known to all under the name of God.
Now just as in natural things the lower are naturally subject to the higher, so too it is a
dictate of natural reason in accordance with man's natural inclination that he should tender
submission and honor, according to his mode, to that which is above man. Now the mode befitting
to man is that he should employ sensible signs in order to signify anything, because he derives
his knowledge from sensibles. Hence it is a dictate of natural reason that man should use certain
sensibles, by offering them to God in sign of the subjection and honor due to Him, like those
who make certain offerings to their lord in recognition of his authority. Now this is what
we mean by a sacrifice, and consequently the offering of sacrifice is of the natural law.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (I-II, Q. 95, A. 2), certain things belong generically to the
natural law, while their determination belongs to the positive law; thus the natural law requires
that evildoers should be punished; but that this or that punishment should be inflicted on
them is a matter determined by God or by man. In like manner the offering of sacrifice belongs
generically to the natural law, and consequently all are agreed on this point, but the determination
of sacrifices is established by God or by man, and this is the reason for their difference.

Reply Obj. 2: Adam, Isaac and other just men offered sacrifice to God in a manner befitting
the times in which they lived, according to Gregory, who says (Moral. iv, 3) that in olden
times original sin was remitted through the offering of sacrifices. Nor does Scripture mention
all the sacrifices of the just, but only those that have something special connected with them.
Perhaps the reason why we read of no sacrifice being offered by Adam may be that, as the origin
of sin is ascribed to him, the origin of sanctification ought not to be represented as typified
in him. Isaac was a type of Christ, being himself offered in sacrifice; and so there was no
need that he should be represented as offering a sacrifice.

Reply Obj. 3: It is natural to man to express his ideas by signs, but the determination of
those signs depends on man's pleasure.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 85, Art. 2]

Whether Sacrifice Should Be Offered to God Alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that sacrifice should not be offered to the most high God alone.
Since sacrifice ought to be offered to God, it would seem that it ought to be offered to all
such as are partakers of the Godhead. Now holy men are made "partakers of the Divine nature,"
according to 2 Pet. 1:4; wherefore of them is it written (Ps. 81:6): "I have said, You are
gods": and angels too are called "sons of God,"    according to Job 1:6. Thus sacrifice should
be offered to all these.

Obj. 2: Further, the greater a person is the greater the honor due to him from man. Now the
angels and saints are far greater than any earthly princes: and yet the subjects of the latter
pay them much greater honor, by prostrating before them, and offering them gifts, than is implied
by offering an animal or any other thing in sacrifice. Much more therefore may one offer sacrifice
to the angels and saints.

Obj. 3: Further, temples and altars are raised for the offering of sacrifices. Yet temples
and altars are raised to angels and saints. Therefore sacrifices also may be offered to them.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 22:20): "He that sacrificeth to gods shall be put to death,
save only to the Lord."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), a sacrifice is offered in order that something may be
represented. Now the sacrifice that is offered outwardly represents the inward spiritual sacrifice,
whereby the soul offers itself to God according to Ps. 50:19, "A sacrifice to God is an afflicted
spirit," since, as stated above (Q. 81, A. 7; Q. 84, A. 2), the outward acts of religion are
directed to the inward acts. Again the soul offers itself in sacrifice to God as its beginning
by creation, and its end by beatification: and according to the true faith God alone is the
creator of our souls, as stated in the First Part (QQ. 90, A. 3; 118, A. 2), while in Him alone
the beatitude of our soul consists, as stated above (I-II, Q. 1, A. 8; Q. 2, A. 8; Q. 3, AA.
1, 7, 8). Wherefore just as to God alone ought we to offer spiritual sacrifice, so too ought
we to offer outward sacrifices to Him alone: even so "in our prayers and praises we proffer
significant words to Him to Whom in our hearts we offer the things which we designate thereby,"
as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei x, 19). Moreover we find that in every country the people
are wont to show the sovereign ruler some special sign of honor, and that if this be shown
to anyone else, it is a crime of high-treason. Therefore, in the Divine law, the death punishment
is assigned to those who offer Divine honor to another than God.

Reply Obj. 1: The name of the Godhead is communicated to certain ones, not equally with God,
but by participation; hence neither is equal honor due to them.

Reply Obj. 2: The offering of a sacrifice is measured not by the value of the animal killed,
but by its signification, for it is done in honor of the sovereign Ruler of the whole universe.
Wherefore, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 19), "the demons rejoice, not in the stench of
corpses, but in receiving divine honors."

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei viii, 19), "we do not raise temples and priesthoods
to the martyrs, because not they but their God is our God. Wherefore the priest says not: I
offer sacrifice to thee, Peter or Paul. But we give thanks to God for their triumphs, and urge
ourselves to imitate them."

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 85, Art. 3]

Whether the Offering of Sacrifice Is a Special Act of Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that the offering of sacrifice is not a special act of virtue. Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei x, 6): "A true sacrifice is any work done that we may cleave to God in holy
fellowship." But not every good work is a special act of some definite virtue. Therefore the
offering of sacrifice is not a special act of a definite virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the mortification of the body by fasting belongs to abstinence, by continence
belongs to chastity, by martyrdom belongs to fortitude. Now all these things seem to be comprised
in the offering of sacrifice, according to Rom. 12:1, "Present your bodies a living sacrifice."
Now it belongs to charity, mercy and liberality to do good and to impart. Therefore the offering
of sacrifice is not a special act of a definite virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, a sacrifice is apparently anything offered to God. Now many things are offered
to God, such as devotion, prayer, tithes, first-fruits, oblations, and holocausts. Therefore
sacrifice does not appear to be a special act of a definite virtue.

On the contrary, The law contains special precepts about sacrifices, as appears from the beginning
of Leviticus.

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 18, AA. 6, 7), where an act of one virtue is directed
to the end of another virtue it partakes somewhat of its species; thus when a man thieves in
order to commit fornication, his theft assumes, in a sense, the deformity of fornication, so
that even though it were not a sin otherwise, it would be a sin from the very fact that it
was directed to fornication. Accordingly, sacrifice is a special act deserving of praise in
that it is done out of reverence for God; and for this reason it belongs to a definite virtue,
viz. religion. But it happens that the acts of the other virtues are directed to the reverence
of God, as when a man gives alms of his own things for God's sake, or when a man subjects his
own body to some affliction out of reverence for God; and in this way the acts also of other
virtues may be called sacrifices. On the other hand there are acts that are not deserving of
praise save through being done out of reverence for God: such acts are properly called sacrifices,
and belong to the virtue of religion.

Reply Obj. 1: The very fact that we wish to cling to God in a spiritual fellowship pertains
to reverence for God: and consequently the act of any virtue assumes the character of a sacrifice
through being done in order that we may cling to God in holy fellowship.

Reply Obj. 2: Man's good is threefold. There is first his soul's good which is offered to God
in a certain inward sacrifice by devotion, prayer and other like interior acts: and this is
the principal sacrifice. The second is his body's good, which is, so to speak, offered to God
in martyrdom, and abstinence or continency. The third is the good which consists of external
things: and of these we offer a sacrifice to God, directly when we offer our possession to
God immediately, and indirectly when we share them with our neighbor for God's sake.

Reply Obj. 3: A "sacrifice," properly speaking, requires that something be done to the thing
which is offered to God, for instance animals were slain and burnt, the bread is broken, eaten,
blessed. The very word signifies this, since "sacrifice" is so called because a man does something
sacred (facit sacrum). On the other hand an "oblation" is properly the offering of something
to God even if nothing be done thereto, thus we speak of offering money or bread at the altar,
and yet nothing is done to them. Hence every sacrifice is an oblation, but not conversely.
"First-fruits" are oblations, because they were offered to God, according to Deut. 26, but
they are not a sacrifice, because nothing sacred was done to them. "Tithes," however, are neither
a sacrifice nor an oblation, properly speaking, because they are not offered immediately to
God, but to the ministers of Divine worship.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 85, Art. 4]

Whether All Are Bound to Offer Sacrifices?

Objection 1: It would seem that all are not bound to offer sacrifices. The Apostle says (Rom.
3:19): "What things soever the Law speaketh, it speaketh to them that are in the Law." Now
the law of sacrifices was not given to all, but only to the Hebrew people. Therefore all are
not bound to offer sacrifices.

Obj. 2: Further, sacrifices are offered to God in order to signify something. But not everyone
is capable of understanding these significations. Therefore not all are bound to offer sacrifices.

Obj. 3: Further, priests [*Sacerdotes: Those who give or administer sacred things (sacra dantes):
cf. 1 Cor. 4:1] are so called because they offer sacrifice to God. But all are not priests.
Therefore not all are bound to offer sacrifices.

On the contrary, The offering of sacrifices of is of the natural law, as stated above (A. 1).
Now all are bound to do that which is of the natural law. Therefore all are bound to offer
sacrifice to God.

I answer that, Sacrifice is twofold, as stated above (A. 2). The first and principal is the
inward sacrifice, which all are bound to offer, since all are obliged to offer to God a devout
mind. The other is the outward sacrifice, and this again is twofold. There is a sacrifice which
is deserving of praise merely through being offered to God in protestation of our subjection
to God: and the obligation of offering this sacrifice was not the same for those under the
New or the Old Law, as for those who were not under the Law. For those who are under the Law
are bound to offer certain definite sacrifices according to the precepts of the Law, whereas
those who were not under the Law were bound to perform certain outward actions in God's honor,
as became those among whom they dwelt, but not definitely to this or that action. The other
outward sacrifice is when the outward actions of the other virtues are performed out of reverence
for God; some of which are a matter of precept; and to these all are bound, while others are
works of supererogation, and to these all are not bound.

Reply Obj. 1: All were not bound to offer those particular sacrifices which were prescribed
in the Law: but they were bound to some sacrifices inward or outward, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Though all do not know explicitly the power of the sacrifices, they know it implicitly,
even as they have implicit faith, as stated above (Q. 2, AA. 6, 7).

Reply Obj. 3: The priests offer those sacrifices which are specially directed to the Divine
worship, not only for themselves but also for others. But there are other sacrifices, which
anyone can offer to God for himself as explained above (AA. 2, 3).

QUESTION 86

OF OBLATIONS AND FIRST-FRUITS (In Four Articles)

We must next consider oblations and first-fruits. Under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether any oblations are necessary as a matter of precept?

(2) To whom are oblations due?

(3) of what things they should be made?

(4) In particular, as to first-fruits, whether men are bound to offer them?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 86, Art. 1]

Whether Men Are Under a Necessity of Precept to Make Oblations?

Objection 1: It would seem that men are not bound by precept to make oblations. Men are not
bound, at the time of the Gospel, to observe the ceremonial precepts of the Old Law, as stated
above (I-II, Q. 103, AA. 3, 4). Now the offering of oblations is one of the ceremonial precepts
of the Old Law, since it is written (Ex. 23:14): "Three times every year you shall celebrate
feasts with Me," and further on (Ex. 23:15): "Thou shalt not appear empty before Me." Therefore
men are not now under a necessity of precept to make oblations.

Obj. 2: Further, before they are made, oblations depend on man's will, as appears from our
Lord's saying (Matt. 5:23), "If . . . thou offer thy gift at the altar," as though this were
left to the choice of the offerer: and when once oblations have been made, there is no way
of offering them again. Therefore in no way is a man under a necessity of precept to make oblations.

Obj. 3: Further, if anyone is bound to give a certain thing to the Church, and fails to give
it, he can be compelled to do so by being deprived of the Church's sacraments. But it would
seem unlawful to refuse the sacraments of the Church to those who refuse to make oblations
according to a decree of the sixth council [*Can. Trullan, xxiii, quoted I, qu. i, can. Nullus]:
"Let none who dispense Holy Communion exact anything of the recipient, and if they exact anything
let them be deposed." Therefore it is not necessary that men should make oblations.

On the contrary, Gregory says [*Gregory VII; Concil. Roman. v, can. xii]: "Let every Christian
take care that he offer something to God at the celebration of Mass."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 85, A. 3, ad 3), the term "oblation" is common to all things
offered for the Divine worship, so that if a thing be offered to be destroyed in worship of
God, as though it were being made into something holy, it is both an oblation and a sacrifice.
Wherefore it is written (Ex. 29:18): "Thou shalt offer the whole ram for a burnt-offering upon
the altar; it is an oblation to the Lord, a most sweet savor of the victim of the Lord"; and
(Lev. 2:1): "When anyone shall offer an oblation of sacrifice to the Lord, his offering shall
be of fine flour." If, on the other hand, it be offered with a view to its remaining entire
and being deputed to the worship of God or to the use of His ministers, it will be an oblation
and not a sacrifice. Accordingly it is essential to oblations of this kind that they be offered
voluntarily, according to Ex. 25:2, of "every man that offereth of his own accord you shall
take them." Nevertheless it may happen in four ways that one is bound to make oblations. First,
on account of a previous agreement: as when a person is granted a portion of Church land, that
he may make certain oblations at fixed times, although this has the character of rent. Secondly,
by reason of a previous assignment or promise; as when a man offers a gift among the living,
or by will bequeaths to the Church something whether movable or immovable to be delivered at
some future time. Thirdly, on account of the need of the Church, for instance if her ministers
were without means of support. Fourthly, on account of custom; for the faithful are bound at
certain solemn feasts to make certain customary oblations. In the last two cases, however,
the oblation remains voluntary, as regards, to wit, the quantity or kind of the thing offered.

Reply Obj. 1: Under the New Law men are not bound to make oblations on account of legal solemnities,
as stated in Exodus, but on account of certain other reasons, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Some are bound to make oblations, both before making them, as in the first, third,
and fourth cases, and after they have made them by assignment or promise: for they are bound
to offer in reality that which has been already offered to the Church by way of assignment.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who do not make the oblations they are bound to make may be punished by
being deprived of the sacraments, not by the priest himself to whom the oblations should be
made, lest he seem to exact, something for bestowing the sacraments, but by someone superior
to him.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 86, Art. 2]

Whether Oblations Are Due to Priests Alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that oblations are not due to priests alone. For chief among oblations
would seem to be those that are deputed to the sacrifices of victims. Now whatever is given
to the poor is called a "victim" in Scripture according to Heb. 13:16, "Do not forget to do
good and to impart, for by such victims [Douay: 'sacrifices'] God's favor is obtained." Much
more therefore are oblations due to the poor.

Obj. 2: Further, in many parishes monks have a share in the oblations. Now "the case of clerics
is distinct from the case of monks," as Jerome states [*Ep. xiv, ad Heliod.]. Therefore oblations
art not due to priests alone.

Obj. 3: Further, lay people with the consent of the Church buy oblations such as loaves and
so forth, and they do so for no other reason than that they may make use thereof themselves.
Therefore oblations may have reference to the laity.

On the contrary, A canon of Pope Damasus [*Damasus I] quoted X, qu. i [*Can. Hanc consuetudinem],
says: "None but the priests whom day by day we see serving the Lord may eat and drink of the
oblations which are offered within the precincts of the Holy Church: because in the Old Testament
the Lord forbade the children of Israel to eat the sacred loaves, with the exception of Aaron
and his sons" (Lev. 24:8, 9).

I answer that, The priest is appointed mediator and stands, so to speak, between the people
and God, as we read of Moses (Deut. 5:5), wherefore it belongs to him to set forth the Divine
teachings and sacraments before the people; and besides to offer to the Lord things appertaining
to the people, their prayers, for instance, their sacrifices and oblations. Thus the Apostle
says (Heb. 5:1): "Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in the things
that appertain to God, that he may offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins." Hence the oblations
which the people offer to God concern the priests, not only as regards their turning them to
their own use, but also as regards the faithful dispensation thereof, by spending them partly
on things appertaining to the Divine worship, partly on things touching their own livelihood
(since they that serve the altar partake with the altar, according to 1 Cor. 9:13), and partly
for the good of the poor, who, as far as possible, should be supported from the possessions
of the Church: for our Lord had a purse for the use of the poor, as Jerome observes on Matt.
17:26, "That we may not scandalize them."

Reply Obj. 1: Whatever is given to the poor is not a sacrifice properly speaking; yet it is
called a sacrifice in so far as it is given to them for God's sake. In like manner, and for
the same reason, it can be called an oblation, though not properly speaking, since it is not
given immediately to God. Oblations properly so called fall to the use of the poor, not by
the dispensation of the offerers, but by the dispensation of the priests.

Reply Obj. 2: Monks or other religious may receive oblations under three counts. First, as
poor, either by the dispensation of the priests, or by ordination of the Church; secondly,
through being ministers of the altar, and then they can accept oblations that are freely offered;
thirdly, if the parishes belong to them, and they can accept oblations, having a right to them
as rectors of the Church.

Reply Obj. 3: Oblations when once they are consecrated, such as sacred vessels and vestments,
cannot be granted to the use of the laity: and this is the meaning of the words of Pope Damasus.
But those which are unconsecrated may be allowed to the use of layfolk by permission of the
priests, whether by way of gift or by way of sale.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 86, Art. 3]

Whether a Man May Make Oblations of Whatever He Lawfully Possesses?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man may not make oblations of whatever he lawfully possesses.
According to human law [*Dig. xii, v, de Condict. ob. turp. vel iniust. caus. 4] "the whore's
is a shameful trade in what she does but not in what she takes," and consequently what she
takes she possesses lawfully. Yet it is not lawful for her to make an oblation with her gains,
according to Deut. 23:18, "Thou shalt not offer the hire of a strumpet . . . in the house of
the Lord thy God." Therefore it is not lawful to make an oblation of whatever one possesses
lawfully.

Obj. 2: Further, in the same passage it is forbidden to offer "the price of a dog" in the house
of God. But it is evident that a man possesses lawfully the price of a dog he has lawfully
sold. Therefore it is not lawful to make an oblation of whatever we possess lawfully.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Malachi 1:8): "If you offer the lame and the sick, is it not
evil?" Yet an animal though lame or sick is a lawful possession. Therefore it would seem that
not of every lawful possession may one make an oblation.

On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 3:9): "Honor the Lord with thy substance." Now whatever
a man possesses lawfully belongs to his substance. Therefore he may make oblations of whatever
he possesses lawfully.

I answer that, As Augustine says (De Verb. Dom. Serm. cxiii), "shouldst thou plunder one weaker
than thyself and give some of the spoil to the judge, if he should pronounce in thy favor,
such is the force of justice that even thou wouldst not be pleased with him: and if this should
not please thee, neither does it please thy God." Hence it is written (Ecclus. 34:21): "The
offering of him that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully gotten is stained." Therefore it is
evident that an oblation must not be made of things unjustly acquired or possessed. In the
Old Law, however, wherein the figure was predominant, certain things were reckoned unclean
on account of their signification, and it was forbidden to offer them. But in the New Law all
God's creatures are looked upon as clean, as stated in Titus 1:15: and consequently anything
that is lawfully possessed, considered in itself, may be offered in oblation. But it may happen
accidentally that one may not make an oblation of what one possesses lawfully; for instance
if it be detrimental to another person, as in the case of a son who offers to God the means
of supporting his father (which our Lord condemns, Matt. 15:5), or if it give rise to scandal
or contempt, or the like.

Reply Obj. 1: In the Old Law it was forbidden to make an offering of the hire of a strumpet
on account of its uncleanness, and in the New Law, on account of scandal, lest the Church seem
to favor sin if she accept oblations from the profits of sin.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Law, a dog was deemed an unclean animal. Yet other unclean animals
were redeemed and their price could be offered, according to Lev. 27:27, "If it be an unclean
animal, he that offereth it shall redeem it." But a dog was neither offered nor redeemed, both
because idolaters used dogs in sacrifices to their idols, and because they signify robbery,
the proceeds of which cannot be offered in oblation. However, this prohibition ceased under
the New Law.

Reply Obj. 3: The oblation of a blind or lame animal was declared unlawful for three reasons.
First, on account of the purpose for which it was offered, wherefore it is written (Malach.
1:8): "If you offer the blind in sacrifice, is it not evil?" and it behooved sacrifices to
be without blemish. Secondly, on account of contempt, wherefore the same text goes on (Malach.
1:12): "You have profaned" My name, "in that you say: The table of the Lord is defiled and
that which is laid thereupon is contemptible." Thirdly, on account of a previous vow, whereby
a man has bound himself to offer without blemish whatever he has vowed: hence the same text
says further on (Malach. 1:14): "Cursed is the deceitful man that hath in his flock a male,
and making a vow offereth in sacrifice that which is feeble to the Lord." The same reasons
avail still in the New Law, but when they do not apply the unlawfulness ceases.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 86, Art. 4]

Whether Men Are Bound to Pay First-fruits?

Objection 1: It would seem that men are not bound to pay first-fruits. After giving the law
of the first-born the text continues (Ex. 13:9): "It shall be as a sign in thy hand," so that,
apparently, it is a ceremonial precept. But ceremonial precepts are not to be observed in the
New Law. Neither therefore ought first-fruits to be paid.

Obj. 2: Further, first-fruits were offered to the Lord for a special favor conferred on that
people, wherefore it is written (Deut. 26:2, 3): "Thou shalt take the first of all thy fruits
. . . and thou shalt go to the priest that shall be in those days, and say to him: I profess
this day before the Lord thy God, that I am come into the land, for which He swore to our fathers,
that He would give it us." Therefore other nations are not bound to pay first-fruits.

Obj. 3: That which one is bound to do should be something definite. But neither in the New
Law nor in the Old do we find mention of a definite amount of first-fruits. Therefore one is
not bound of necessity to pay them.

On the contrary, It is laid down (16, qu. vii, can. Decimas): "We confirm the right of priests
to tithes and first-fruits, and everybody must pay them."

I answer that, First-fruits are a kind of oblation, because they are offered to God with a
certain profession (Deut. 26); where the same passage continues: "The priest taking the basket
containing the first-fruits from the hand of him that bringeth the first-fruits, shall set
it before the altar of the Lord thy God," and further on (Deut. 26:10) he is commanded to say:
"Therefore now I offer the first-fruits of the land, which the Lord hath given me." Now the
first-fruits were offered for a special reason, namely, in recognition of the divine favor,
as though man acknowledged that he had received the fruits of the earth from God, and that
he ought to offer something to God in return, according to 1 Paral 29:14, "We have given Thee
what we received of Thy hand." And since what we offer God ought to be something special, hence
it is that man was commanded to offer God his first-fruits, as being a special part of the
fruits of the earth: and since a priest is "ordained for the people in the things that appertain
to God" (Heb. 5:1), the first-fruits offered by the people were granted to the priest's use.
Wherefore it is written (Num. 18:8): "The Lord said to Aaron: Behold I have given thee the
charge of My first-fruits." Now it is a point of natural law that man should make an offering
in God's honor out of the things he has received from God, but that the offering should be
made to any particular person, or out of his first-fruits, or in such or such a quantity, was
indeed determined in the Old Law by divine command; but in the New Law it is fixed by the declaration
of the Church, in virtue of which men are bound to pay first-fruits according to the custom
of their country and the needs of the Church's ministers.

Reply Obj. 1: The ceremonial observances were properly speaking signs of the future, and consequently
they ceased when the foreshadowed truth was actually present. But the offering of first-fruits
was for a sign of a past favor, whence arises the duty of acknowledgment in accordance with
the dictate of natural reason. Hence taken in a general sense this obligation remains.

Reply Obj. 2: First-fruits were offered in the Old Law, not only on account of the favor of
the promised land given by God, but also on account of the favor of the fruits of the earth,
which were given by God. Hence it is written (Deut. 26:10): "I offer the first-fruits of the
land which the Lord hath given me," which second motive is common among all people. We may
also reply that just as God granted the land of promise to the Jews by a special favor, so
by a general favor He bestowed the lordship of the earth on the whole of mankind, according
to Ps. 113:24, "The earth He has given to the children of men."

Reply Obj. 3: As Jerome says [*Comment. in Ezech. 45:13, 14; cf. Cap. Decimam, de Decim. Primit.
et Oblat.]: "According to the tradition of the ancients the custom arose for those who had
most to give the priests a fortieth part, and those who had least, one sixtieth, in lieu of
first-fruits." Hence it would seem that first-fruits should vary between these limits according
to the custom of one's country. And it was reasonable that the amount of first-fruits should
not be fixed by law, since, as stated above, first-fruits are offered by way of oblation, a
condition of which is that it should be voluntary.

QUESTION 87

OF TITHES (In Four Articles)

Next we must consider tithes, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether men are bound by precept to pay tithes?

(2) Of what things ought tithes to be paid?

(3) To whom ought they to be paid?

(4) Who ought to pay tithes?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 87, Art. 1]

Whether Men Are Bound to Pay Tithes Under a Necessity of Precept?

Objection 1: It would seem that men are not bound by precept to pay tithes. The commandment
to pay tithes is contained in the Old Law (Lev. 27:30), "All tithes of the land, whether of
corn or of the fruits of trees, are the Lord's," and further on (Lev. 27:32): "Of all the tithes
of oxen and sheep and goats, that pass under the shepherd's rod, every tenth that cometh shall
be sanctified to the Lord." This cannot be reckoned among the moral precepts, because natural
reason does not dictate that one ought to give a tenth part, rather than a ninth or eleventh.
Therefore it is either a judicial or a ceremonial precept. Now, as stated above (I-II, Q. 103,
A. 3; Q. 104, A. 3), during the time of grace men are hound neither to the ceremonial nor to
the judicial precepts of the Old Law. Therefore men are not bound now to pay tithes.

Obj. 2: Further, during the time of grace men are bound only to those things which were commanded
by Christ through the Apostles, according to Matt. 28:20, "Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you"; and Paul says (Acts 20:27): "I have not spared to declare
unto you all the counsel of God." Now neither in the teaching of Christ nor in that of the
apostles is there any mention of the paying of tithes: for the saying of our Lord about tithes
(Matt. 23:23), "These things you ought to have done" seems to refer to the past time of legal
observance: thus Hilary says (Super Matth. can. xxiv): "The tithing of herbs, which was useful
in foreshadowing the future, was not to be omitted." Therefore during the time of grace men
are not bound to pay tithes.

Obj. 3: Further, during the time of grace, men are not more bound to the legal observances
than before the Law. But before the Law tithes were given, by reason not of a precept but of
a vow. For we read (Gen. 28:20, 22) that Jacob "made a vow" saying: "If God shall be with me,
and shall keep me in the way by which I walk . . . of all the things that Thou shalt give to
me, I will offer tithes to Thee." Neither, therefore, during the time of grace are men bound
to pay tithes.

Obj. 4: Further, in the Old Law men were bound to pay three kinds of tithe. For it is written
(Num. 18:23, 24): "The sons of Levi . . . shall . . . be content with the oblation of tithes,
which I have separated for their uses and necessities." Again, there were other tithes of which
we read (Deut. 14:22, 23): "Every year thou shalt set aside the tithes of all thy fruits, that
the earth bringeth forth year by year; and thou shalt eat before the Lord thy God in the place
which He shall choose." And there were yet other tithes, of which it is written (Deut. 14:28):
"The third year thou shalt separate another tithe of all things that grow to thee at that time,
and shalt lay it up within thy gates. And the Levite that hath no other part nor possession
with thee, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are within thy gates,
shall . . . eat and be filled." Now during the time of grace men are not bound to pay the second
and third tithes. Neither therefore are they bound to pay the first.

Obj. 5: Further, a debt that is due without any time being fixed for its payment, must be paid
at once under pain of sin. Accordingly if during the time of grace men are bound, under necessity
of precept, to pay tithes in those countries where tithes are not paid, they would all be in
a state of mortal sin, and so would also be the ministers of the Church for dissembling. But
this seems unreasonable.

On the contrary, Augustine [*Append. Serm. cclxxcii], whose words are quoted 16, qu. i [*Can.
Decimae], says: "It is a duty to pay tithes, and whoever refuses to pay them takes what belongs
to another."

I answer that, In the Old Law tithes were paid for the sustenance of the ministers of God.
Hence it is written (Malach. 3:10): "Bring all the tithes into My [Vulg.: 'the'] store-house
that there may be meat in My house." Hence the precept about the paying of tithes was partly
moral and instilled in the natural reason; and partly judicial, deriving its force from its
divine institution. Because natural reason dictates that the people should administer the necessaries
of life to those who minister the divine worship for the welfare of the whole people even as
it is the people's duty to provide a livelihood for their rulers and soldiers and so forth.
Hence the Apostle proves this from human custom, saying (1 Cor. 9:7): "Who serveth as a soldier
at any time at his own charge? Who planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof?"
But the fixing of the proportion to be offered to the ministers of divine worship does not
belong to the natural law, but was determined by divine institution, in accordance with the
condition of that people to whom the law was being given. For they were divided into twelve
tribes, and the twelfth tribe, namely that of Levi, was engaged exclusively in the divine ministry
and had no possessions whence to derive a livelihood: and so it was becomingly ordained that
the remaining eleven tribes should give one-tenth part of their revenues to the Levites [*Num.
18:21] that the latter might live respectably; and also because some, through negligence, would
disregard this precept. Hence, so far as the tenth part was fixed, the precept was judicial,
since all institutions established among this people for the special purpose of preserving
equality among men, in accordance with this people's condition, are called "judicial precepts."
Nevertheless by way of consequence these institutions foreshadowed something in the future,
even as everything else connected with them, according to 1 Cor. 12, "All these things happened
to them in figure." In this respect they had something in common with the ceremonial precepts,
which were instituted chiefly that they might be signs of the future. Hence the precept about
paying tithes foreshadowed something in the future. For ten is, in a way, the perfect number
(being the first numerical limit, since the figures do not go beyond ten but begin over again
from one), and therefore he that gave a tenth, which is the sign of perfection, reserving the
nine other parts for himself, acknowledged by a sign that imperfection was his part, and that
the perfection which was to come through Christ was to be hoped for from God. Yet this proves
it to be, not a ceremonial but a judicial precept, as stated above.

There is this difference between the ceremonial and judicial precepts of the Law, as we stated
above (I-II, Q. 104, A. 3), that it is unlawful to observe the ceremonial precepts at the time
of the New Law, whereas there is no sin in keeping the judicial precepts during the time of
grace although they are not binding. Indeed they are bound to be observed by some, if they
be ordained by the authority of those who have power to make laws. Thus it was a judicial precept
of the Old Law that he who stole a sheep should restore four sheep (Ex. 22:1), and if any king
were to order this to be done his subjects would be bound to obey. In like manner during the
time of the New Law the authority of the Church has established the payment of tithe; thus
showing a certain kindliness, lest the people of the New Law should give less to the ministers
of the New Testament than did the people of the Old Law to the ministers of the Old Testament;
for the people of the New Law are under greater obligations, according to Matt. 5:20, "Unless
your justice abound more than that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven," and, moreover, the ministers of the New Testament are of greater dignity
than the ministers of the Old Testament, as the Apostle shows (2 Cor. 3:7, 8).

Accordingly it is evident that man's obligation to pay tithes arises partly from natural law,
partly from the institution of the Church; who, nevertheless, in consideration of the requirements
of time and persons might ordain the payment of some other proportion.

This suffices for the Reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: The precept about paying tithes, in so far as it was a moral precept, was given
in the Gospel by our Lord when He said (Matt. 10:10) [*The words as quoted are from Luke 10:7:
Matthew has 'meat' instead of 'hire']: "The workman is worthy of his hire," and the Apostle
says the same (1 Cor. 9:4 seqq.). But the fixing of the particular proportion is left to the
ordinance of the Church.

Reply Obj. 3: Before the time of the Old Law the ministry of the divine worship was not entrusted
to any particular person; although it is stated that the first-born were priests, and that
they received a double portion. For this very reason no particular portion was directed to
be given to the ministers of the divine worship: but when they met with one, each man of his
own accord gave him what he deemed right. Thus Abraham by a kind of prophetic instinct gave
tithes to Melchisedech, the priest of the Most High God, according to Gen. 14:20, and again
Jacob made a vow to give tithes [*Gen. 28:20], although he appears to have vowed to do so,
not by paying them to ministers, but for the purpose of the divine worship, for instance for
the fulfilling of sacrifices, hence he said significantly: "I will offer tithes to Thee."

Reply Obj. 4: The second kind of tithe, which was reserved for the offering of sacrifices,
has no place in the New Law, since the legal victims had ceased. But the third kind of tithe
which they had to eat with the poor, is increased in the New Law, for our Lord commanded us
to give to the poor not merely the tenth part, but all our surplus, according to Luke 11:41:
"That which remaineth, give alms." Moreover the tithes that are given to the ministers of the
Church should be dispensed by them for the use of the poor.

Reply Obj. 5: The ministers of the Church ought to be more solicitous for the increase of spiritual
goods in the people, than for the amassing of temporal goods: and hence the Apostle was unwilling
to make use of the right given him by the Lord of receiving his livelihood from those to whom
he preached the Gospel, lest he should occasion a hindrance to the Gospel of Christ [*1 Cor.
9:12]. Nor did they sin who did not contribute to his upkeep, else the Apostle would not have
omitted to reprove them. In like manner the ministers of the Church rightly refrain from demanding
the Church's tithes, when they could not demand them without scandal, on account of their having
fallen into desuetude, or for some other reason. Nevertheless those who do not give tithes
in places where the Church does not demand them are not in a state of damnation, unless they
be obstinate, and unwilling to pay even if tithes were demanded of them.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 87, Art. 2]

Whether Men Are Bound to Pay Tithes of All Things?

Objection 1: It would seem that men are not bound to give tithes of all things. The paying
of tithes seems to be an institution of the Old Law. Now the Old Law contains no precept about
personal tithes, viz. those that are payable on property acquired by one's own act, for instance
by commerce or soldiering. Therefore no man is bound to pay tithes on such things.

Obj. 2: Further, it is not right to make oblations of that which is ill-gotten, as stated above
(Q. 86, A. 3). Now oblations, being offered to God immediately, seem to be more closely connected
with the divine worship than tithes which are offered to the ministers. Therefore neither should
tithes be paid on ill-gotten goods.

Obj. 3: Further, in the last chapter of Leviticus (30, 32) the precept of paying tithes refers
only to "corn, fruits of trees" and animals "that pass under the shepherd's rod." But man derives
a revenue from other smaller things, such as the herbs that grow in his garden and so forth.
Therefore neither on these things is a man bound to pay tithes.

Obj. 4: Further, man cannot pay except what is in his power. Now a man does not always remain
in possession of all his profit from land and stock, since sometimes he loses them by theft
or robbery; sometimes they are transferred to another person by sale; sometimes they are due
to some other person, thus taxes are due to princes, and wages due to workmen. Therefore one
ought not to pay tithes on such like things.

On the contrary, It is written (Gen. 28:22): "Of all things that Thou shalt give to me, I will
offer tithes to Thee."

I answer that, In judging about a thing we should look to its principle. Now the principle
of the payment of tithes is the debt whereby carnal things are due to those who sow spiritual
things, according to the saying of the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:11), "If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we reap your carnal things?" [thus implying that on the contrary
"it is no great matter if we reap your carnal things"] [*The phrase in the brackets is omitted
in the Leonine edition]. For this debt is the principle on which is based the commandment of
the Church about the payment of tithes. Now whatever man possesses comes under the designation
of carnal things. Therefore tithes must be paid on whatever one possesses.

Reply Obj. 1: In accordance with the condition of that people there was a special reason why
the Old Law did not include a precept about personal tithes; because, to wit, all the other
tribes had certain possessions wherewith they were able to provide a sufficient livelihood
for the Levites who had no possessions, but were not forbidden to make a profit out of other
lawful occupations as the other Jews did. On the other hand the people of the New Law are spread
abroad throughout the world, and many of them have no possessions, but live by trade, and these
would contribute nothing to the support of God's ministers if they did not pay tithes on their
trade profits. Wherefore in the New Law men are bound to pay personal tithes, according to
the custom of their country and the needs of the ministers: hence Augustine, whose words are
quoted 16, qu. 1, cap. Decimae, says [*Append. Serm. cclxxvii]: "Tithes must be paid on the
profits of soldiering, trade or craft."

Reply Obj. 2: Things are ill-gotten in two ways. First, because the getting itself was unjust:
such, for instance, are things gotten by robbery, theft or usury: and these a man is bound
to restore, and not to pay tithes on them. If, however, a field be bought with the profits
of usury, the usurer is bound to pay tithes on the produce, because the latter is not gotten
usuriously but given by God. On the other hand certain things are said to be ill-gotten, because
they are gotten of a shameful cause, for instance of whoredom or stage-playing, and the like.
Such things a man is not bound to restore, and consequently he is bound to pay tithes on them
in the same way as other personal tithes. Nevertheless the Church must not accept the tithe
so long as those persons remain in sin, lest she appear to have a share in their sins: but
when they have done penance, tithes may be accepted from them on these things.

Reply Obj. 3: Things directed to an end must be judged according to their fittingness to the
end. Now the payment of tithes is due not for its own sake, but for the sake of the ministers,
to whose dignity it is unbecoming that they should demand minute things with careful exactitude,
for this is reckoned sinful according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 2). Hence the Old Law
did not order the payment of tithes on such like minute things, but left it to the judgment
of those who are willing to pay, because minute things are counted as nothing. Wherefore the
Pharisees who claimed for themselves the perfect justice of the Law, paid tithes even on these
minute things: nor are they reproved by our Lord on that account, but only because they despised
greater, i.e. spiritual, precepts; and rather did He show them to be deserving of praise in
this particular, when He said (Matt. 23:23): "These things you ought to have done," i.e. during
the time of the Law, according to Chrysostom's [*Hom. xliv in the Opus Imperfectum falsely
ascribed to St. John Chrysostom] commentary. This also seems to denote fittingness rather than
obligation. Therefore now too men are not bound to pay tithes on such minute things, except
perhaps by reason of the custom of one's country.

Reply Obj. 4: A man is not bound to pay tithes on what he has lost by theft or robbery, before
he recovers his property: unless he has incurred the loss through his own fault or neglect,
because the Church ought not to be the loser on that account. If he sell wheat that has not
been tithed, the Church can command the tithes due to her, both from the buyer who has a thing
due to the Church, and from the seller, because so far as he is concerned he has defrauded
the Church: yet if one pays, the other is not bound. Tithes are due on the fruits of the earth,
in so far as these fruits are the gift of God. Wherefore tithes do not come under a tax, nor
are they subject to workmen's wages. Hence it is not right to deduct one's taxes and the wages
paid to workmen, before paying tithes: but tithes must be paid before anything else on one's
entire produce.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 87, Art. 4]

Whether Tithes Should Be Paid to the Clergy?

Objection 1: It would seem that tithes should not be paid to the clergy. Tithes were paid to
the Levites in the Old Testament, because they had no portion in the people's possessions,
according to Num. 18:23, 24. But in the New Testament the clergy have possessions not only
ecclesiastical, but sometimes also patrimonial: moreover they receive first-fruits, and oblations
for the living and the dead. Therefore it is unnecessary to pay tithes to them.

Obj. 2: Further, it sometimes happens that a man dwells in one parish, and farms in another;
or a shepherd may take his flock within the bounds of one parish during one part of the year,
and within the bounds of another parish during the other part of the year; or he may have his
sheepfold in one parish, and graze the sheep in another. Now in all these and similar cases
it seems impossible to decide to which clergy the tithes ought to be paid. Therefore it would
seem that no fixed tithe ought to be paid to the clergy.

Obj. 3: Further, it is the general custom in certain countries for the soldiers to hold the
tithes from the Church in fee; and certain religious receive tithes. Therefore seemingly tithes
are not due only to those of the clergy who have care of souls.

On the contrary, It is written (Num. 18:21): "I have given to the sons of Levi all the tithes
of Israel for a possession, for the ministry wherewith they serve Me in the Tabernacle." Now
the clergy are the successors of the sons of Levi in the New Testament. Therefore tithes are
due to the clergy alone.

I answer that, Two things have to be considered with regard to tithes: namely, the right to
receive tithes, and the things given in the name of tithes. The right to receive tithes is
a spiritual thing, for it arises from the debt in virtue of which the ministers of the altar
have a right to the expenses of their ministry, and temporal things are due to those who sow
spiritual things. This debt concerns none but the clergy who have care of souls, and so they
alone are competent to have this right.

On the other hand the things given in the name of tithes are material, wherefore they may come
to be used by anyone, and thus it is that they fall into the hands of the laity.

Reply Obj. 1: In the Old Law, as stated above (A. 1, ad 4), special tithes were earmarked for
the assistance of the poor. But in the New Law the tithes are given to the clergy, not only
for their own support, but also that the clergy may use them in assisting the poor. Hence they
are not unnecessary; indeed Church property, oblations and first-fruits as well as tithes are
all necessary for this same purpose.

Reply Obj. 2: Personal tithes are due to the church in whose parish a man dwells, while predial
tithes seem more reasonably to belong to the church within whose bounds the land is situated.
The law, however, prescribes that in this matter a custom that has obtained for a long time
must be observed [*Cap. Cum sint, and Cap. Ad apostolicae, de Decimis, etc.]. The shepherd
who grazes his flock at different seasons in two parishes, should pay tithe proportionately
to both churches. And since the fruit of the flock is derived from the pasture, the tithe of
the flock is due to the church in whose lands the flock grazes, rather than to the church on
whose land the fold is situated.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as the Church can hand over to a layman the things she receives under the
title of tithe, so too can she allow him to receive tithes that are yet to be paid, the right
of receiving being reserved to the ministers of the Church. The motive may be either the need
of the Church, as when tithes are due to certain soldiers through being granted to them in
fee by the Church, or it may be the succoring of the poor; thus certain tithes have been granted
by way of alms to certain lay religious, or to those that have no care of souls. Some religious,
however, are competent to receive tithes, because they have care of souls.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 87, Art. 4]

Whether the Clergy Also Are Bound to Pay Tithes?

Objection 1: It would seem that clerics also are bound to pay tithes. By common law [*Cap.
Cum homines, de Decimis, etc.] the parish church should receive the tithes on the lands which
are in its territory. Now it happens sometimes that the clergy have certain lands of their
own on the territory of some parish church, or that one church has ecclesiastical property
on the territory of another. Therefore it would seem that the clergy are bound to pay predial
tithes.

Obj. 2: Further, some religious are clerics; and yet they are bound to pay tithes to churches
on account of the lands which they cultivate even with their own hands [*Cap. Ex parte, and
Cap. Nuper.]. Therefore it would seem that the clergy are not immune from the payment of tithes.

Obj. 3: Further, in the eighteenth chapter of Numbers (26, 28), it is prescribed not only that
the Levites should receive tithes from the people, but also that they should themselves pay
tithes to the high-priest. Therefore the clergy are bound to pay tithes to the Sovereign Pontiff,
no less than the laity are bound to pay tithes to the clergy.

Obj. 4: Further, tithes should serve not only for the support of the clergy, but also for the
assistance of the poor. Therefore, if the clergy are exempt from paying tithes, so too are
the poor. Yet the latter is not true. Therefore the former is false.

On the contrary, A decretal of Pope Paschal [*Paschal II] says: "It is a new form of exaction
when the clergy demand tithes from the clergy" [*Cap. Novum genus, de Decimis, etc.].

I answer that, The cause of giving cannot be the cause of receiving, as neither can the cause
of action be the cause of passion; yet it happens that one and the same person is giver and
receiver, even as agent and patient, on account of different causes and from different points
of view. Now tithes are due to the clergy as being ministers of the altar and sowers of spiritual
things among the people. Wherefore those members of the clergy as such, i.e. as having ecclesiastical
property, are not bound to pay tithes; whereas from some other cause through holding property
in their own right, either by inheriting it from their kindred, or by purchase, or in any other
similar manner, they are bound to the payment of tithes.

Hence the Reply to the First Objection is clear, because the clergy like anyone else are bound
to pay tithes on their own lands to the parish church, even though they be the clergy of that
same church, because to possess a thing as one's private property is not the same as possessing
it in common. But church lands are not tithable, even though they be within the boundaries
of another parish.

Reply Obj. 2: Religious who are clerics, if they have care of souls, and dispense spiritual
things to the people, are not bound to pay tithes, but they may receive them. Another reason
applies to other religious, who though clerics do not dispense spiritual things to the people;
for according to the ordinary law they are bound to pay tithes, but they are somewhat exempt
by reason of various concessions granted by the Apostolic See [*Cap. Ex multiplici, Ex parte,
and Ad audientiam, de Decimis, etc.].

Reply Obj. 3: In the Old Law first-fruits were due to the priests, and tithes to the Levites;
and since the Levites were below the priests, the Lord commanded that the former should pay
the high-priest "the tenth part of the tenth" [*Num. 18:26] instead of first-fruits: wherefore
for the same reason the clergy are bound now to pay tithes to the Sovereign Pontiff, if he
demanded them. For natural reason dictates that he who has charge of the common estate of a
multitude should be provided with all goods, so that he may be able to carry out whatever is
necessary for the common welfare.

Reply Obj. 4: Tithes should be employed for the assistance of the poor, through the dispensation
of the clergy. Hence the poor have no reason for accepting tithes, but they are bound to pay them.

QUESTION 88

OF VOWS (In Twelve Articles)

We must now consider vows, whereby something is promised to God. Under this head there are
twelve points of inquiry:

(1) What is a vow?

(2) What is the matter of a vow?

(3) Of the obligation of vows;

(4) Of the use of taking vows;

(5) Of what virtue is it an act?

(6) Whether it is more meritorious to do a thing from a vow, than without a vow?

(7) Of the solemnizing of a vow;

(8) Whether those who are under another's power can take vows?

(9) Whether children may be bound by vow to enter religion?

(10) Whether a vow is subject to dispensation or commutation?

(11) Whether a dispensation can be granted in a solemn vow of continence?

(12) Whether the authority of a superior is required in a dispensation from a vow?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 1]

Whether a Vow Consists in a Mere Purpose of the Will?

Objection 1: It would seem that a vow consists in nothing but a purpose of the will. According
to some [*William of Auxerre, Sum. Aur. III, xxviii, qu. 1; Albertus Magnus, Sent. iv, D, 38],
"a vow is a conception of a good purpose after a firm deliberation of the mind, whereby a man
binds himself before God to do or not to do a certain thing." But the conception of a good
purpose and so forth, may consist in a mere movement of the will. Therefore a vow consists
in a mere purpose of the will.

Obj. 2: Further, the very word vow seems to be derived from voluntas (will), for one is said
to do a thing proprio voto (by one's own vow) when one does it voluntarily. Now to purpose
is an act of the will, while to promise is an act of the reason. Therefore a vow consists in
a mere act of the will.

Obj. 3: Further, our Lord said (Luke 9:62): "No man putting his hand to the plough, and looking
back, is fit for the kingdom of God." Now from the very fact that a man has a purpose of doing
good, he puts his hand to the plough. Consequently, if he look back by desisting from his good
purpose, he is not fit for the kingdom of God. Therefore by a mere good purpose a man is bound
before God, even without making a promise; and consequently it would seem that a vow consists
in a mere purpose of the will.

On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 5:3): "If thou hast vowed anything to God, defer not
to pay it, for an unfaithful and foolish promise displeaseth Him." Therefore to vow is to promise,
and a vow is a promise.

I answer that, A vow denotes a binding to do or omit some particular thing. Now one man binds
himself to another by means of a promise, which is an act of the reason to which faculty it
belongs to direct. For just as a man by commanding or praying, directs, in a fashion, what
others are to do for him, so by promising he directs what he himself is to do for another.
Now a promise between man and man can only be expressed in words or any other outward signs;
whereas a promise can be made to God by the mere inward thought, since according to 1 Kings
16:7, "Man seeth those things that appear, but the Lord beholdeth the heart." Yet we express
words outwardly sometimes, either to arouse ourselves, as was stated above with regard to prayer
(Q. 83, A. 12), or to call others to witness, so that one may refrain from breaking the vow,
not only through fear of God, but also through respect of men. Now a promise is the outcome
from a purpose of doing something: and a purpose presupposes deliberation, since it is the
act of a deliberate will. Accordingly three things are essential to a vow: the first is deliberation;
the second is a purpose of the will; and the third is a promise, wherein is completed the nature
of a vow. Sometimes, however, two other things are added as a sort of confirmation of the vow,
namely, pronouncement by word of mouth, according to Ps. 65:13, "I will pay Thee my vows which
my lips have uttered"; and the witnessing of others. Hence the Master says (Sent. iv, D, 38)
that a vow is "the witnessing of a spontaneous promise and ought to be made to God and about
things relating to God": although the "witnessing" may strictly refer to the inward protestation.

Reply Obj. 1: The conceiving of a good purpose is not confirmed by the deliberation of the
mind, unless the deliberation lead to a promise.

Reply Obj. 2: Man's will moves the reason to promise something relating to things subject to
his will, and a vow takes its name from the will forasmuch as it proceeds from the will as
first mover.

Reply Obj. 3: He that puts his hand to the plough does something already; while he that merely
purposes to do something does nothing so far. When, however, he promises, he already sets about
doing, although he does not yet fulfil his promise: even so, he that puts his hand to the plough
does not plough yet, nevertheless he stretches out his hand for the purpose of ploughing.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 2]

Whether a Vow Should Always Be About a Better Good?

Objection 1: It would seem that a vow need not be always about a better good. A greater good
is one that pertains to supererogation. But vows are not only about matters of supererogation,
but also about matters of salvation: thus in Baptism men vow to renounce the devil and his
pomps, and to keep the faith, as a gloss observes on Ps. 75:12, "Vow ye, and pay to the Lord
your God"; and Jacob vowed (Gen. 28:21) that the Lord should be his God. Now this above all
is necessary for salvation. Therefore vows are not only about a better good.

Obj. 2: Further, Jephte is included among the saints (Heb. 11:32). Yet he killed his innocent
daughter on account of his vow (Judges 11). Since, then, the slaying of an innocent person
is not a better good, but is in itself unlawful, it seems that a vow may be made not only about
a better good, but also about something unlawful.

Obj. 3: Further, things that tend to be harmful to the person, or that are quite useless, do
not come under the head of a better good. Yet sometimes vows are made about immoderate vigils
or fasts which tend to injure the person: and sometimes vows are about indifferent matters
and such as are useful to no purpose. Therefore a vow is not always about a better good.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 23:22): "If thou wilt not promise thou shalt be without sin."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), a vow is a promise made to God. Now a promise is about
something that one does voluntarily for someone else: since it would be not a promise but a
threat to say that one would do something against someone. In like manner it would be futile
to promise anyone something unacceptable to him. Wherefore, as every sin is against God, and
since no work is acceptable to God unless it be virtuous, it follows that nothing unlawful
or indifferent, but only some act of virtue, should be the matter of a vow. But as a vow denotes
a voluntary promise, while necessity excludes voluntariness, whatever is absolutely necessary,
whether to be or not to be, can nowise be the matter of a vow. For it would be foolish to vow
that one would die or that one would not fly.

On the other hand, if a thing be necessary, not absolutely but on the supposition of an end--for
instance if salvation be unattainable without it--it may be the matter of a vow in so far as
it is done voluntarily, but not in so far as there is a necessity for doing it. But that which
is not necessary, neither absolutely, nor on the supposition of an end, is altogether voluntary,
and therefore is most properly the matter of a vow. And this is said to be a greater good in
comparison with that which is universally necessary for salvation. Therefore, properly speaking,
a vow is said to be about a better good.

Reply Obj. 1: Renouncing the devil's pomps and keeping the faith of Christ are the matter of
baptismal vows, in so far as these things are done voluntarily, although they are necessary
for salvation. The same answer applies to Jacob's vow: although it may also be explained that
Jacob vowed that he would have the Lord for his God, by giving Him a special form of worship
to which he was not bound, for instance by offering tithes and so forth as mentioned further
on in the same passage.

Reply Obj. 2: Certain things are good, whatever be their result; such are acts of virtue, and
these can be, absolutely speaking, the matter of a vow: some are evil, whatever their result
may be; as those things which are sins in themselves, and these can nowise be the matter of
a vow: while some, considered in themselves, are good, and as such may be the matter of a vow,
yet they may have an evil result, in which case the vow must not be kept. It was thus with
the vow of Jephte, who as related in Judges 11:30, 31, "made a vow to the Lord, saying: If
Thou wilt deliver the children of Ammon into my hands, whosoever shall first come forth out
of the doors of my house, and shall meet me when I return in peace . . . the same will I offer
a holocaust to the Lord." For this could have an evil result if, as indeed happened, he were
to be met by some animal which it would be unlawful to sacrifice, such as an ass or a human
being. Hence Jerome says [*Implicitly 1 Contra Jovin.: Comment. in Micheam vi, viii: Comment.
in Jerem. vii. The quotation is from Peter Comestor, Hist. Scholast.]: "In vowing he was foolish,
through lack of discretion, and in keeping his vow he was wicked." Yet it is premised (Judges
11:29) that "the Spirit of the Lord came upon him," because his faith and devotion, which moved
him to make that vow, were from the Holy Ghost; and for this reason he is reckoned among the
saints, as also by reason of the victory which he obtained, and because it is probable that
he repented of his sinful deed, which nevertheless foreshadowed something good.

Reply Obj. 3: The mortification of one's own body, for instance by vigils and fasting, is not
acceptable to God except in so far as it is an act of virtue; and this depends on its being
done with due discretion, namely, that concupiscence be curbed without overburdening nature.
On this condition such things may be the matter of a vow. Hence the Apostle after saying (Rom.
12:1), "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing to God," adds, "your reasonable
service." Since, however, man is easily mistaken in judging of matters concerning himself,
such vows as these are more fittingly kept or disregarded according to the judgment of a superior,
yet so that, should a man find that without doubt he is seriously burdened by keeping such
a vow, and should he be unable to appeal to his superior, he ought not to keep it. As to vows
about vain and useless things they should be ridiculed rather than kept.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 3]

Whether All Vows Are Binding?

Objection 1: It would seem that vows are not all binding. For man needs things that are done
by another, more than God does, since He has no need for our goods (Ps. 15:2). Now according
to the prescription of human laws [*Dig. L. xii, de pollicitat., i] a simple promise made to
a man is not binding; and this seems to be prescribed on account of the changeableness of the
human will. Much less binding therefore is a simple promise made to God, which we call a vow.

Obj. 2: Further, no one is bound to do what is impossible. Now sometimes that which a man has
vowed becomes impossible to him, either because it depends on another's decision, as when,
for instance, a man vows to enter a monastery, the monks of which refuse to receive him: or
on account of some defect arising, for instance when a woman vows virginity, and afterwards
is deflowered; or when a man vows to give a sum of money, and afterwards loses it. Therefore
a vow is not always binding.

Obj. 3: Further, if a man is bound to pay something, he must do so at once. But a man is not
bound to pay his vow at once, especially if it be taken under a condition to be fulfilled in
the future. Therefore a vow is not always binding.

On the contrary, It is written (Eccles. 5:3, 4): "Whatsoever thou hast vowed, pay it; and it
is much better not to vow, than after a vow not to perform the things promised."

I answer that, For one to be accounted faithful one must keep one's promises. Wherefore, according
to Augustine [*Ep. xxxii, 2: De Mendac. xx] faith takes its name "from a man's deed agreeing
with his word" [*Fides . . . fiunt dicta. Cicero gives the same etymology (De Offic. i, 7)].
Now man ought to be faithful to God above all, both on account of God's sovereignty, and on
account of the favors he has received from God. Hence man is obliged before all to fulfill
the vows he has made to God, since this is part of the fidelity he owes to God. On the other
hand, the breaking of a vow is a kind of infidelity. Wherefore Solomon gives the reason why
vows should be paid to God, because "an unfaithful . . . promise displeaseth Him" [*Eccles. 5:3].

Reply Obj. 1: Honesty demands that a man should keep any promise he makes to another man, and
this obligation is based on the natural law. But for a man to be under a civil obligation through
a promise he has made, other conditions are requisite. And although God needs not our goods,
we are under a very great obligation to Him: so that a vow made to Him is most binding.

Reply Obj. 2: If that which a man has vowed becomes impossible to him through any cause whatsoever,
he must do what he can, so that he have at least a will ready to do what he can. Hence if a
man has vowed to enter a monastery, he must endeavor to the best of his power to be received
there. And if his intention was chiefly to bind himself to enter the religious life, so that,
in consequence, he chose this particular form of religious life, or this place, as being most
agreeable to him, he is bound, should he be unable to be received there, to enter the religious
life elsewhere. But if his principal intention is to bind himself to this particular kind of
religious life, or to this particular place, because the one or the other pleases him in some
special way, he is not bound to enter another religious house, if they are unwilling to receive
him into this particular one. On the other hand, if he be rendered incapable of fulfilling
his vow through his own fault, he is bound over and above to do penance for his past fault:
thus if a woman has vowed virginity and is afterwards violated, she is bound not only to observe
what is in her power, namely, perpetual continency, but also to repent of what she has lost
by sinning.

Reply Obj. 3: The obligation of a vow is caused by our own will and intention, wherefore it
is written (Deut. 23:23): "That which is once gone out of thy lips, thou shalt observe, and
shalt do as thou hast promised to the Lord thy God, and hast spoken with thy own will and with
thy own mouth." Wherefore if in taking a vow, it is one's intention and will to bind oneself
to fulfil it at once, one is bound to fulfil it immediately. But if one intend to fulfil it
at a certain time, or under a certain condition, one is not bound to immediate fulfilment.
And yet one ought not to delay longer than one intended to bind oneself, for it is written
(Deut. 23:21): "When thou hast made a vow to the Lord thy God thou shalt not delay to pay it:
because the Lord thy God will require it; and if thou delay, it shall be imputed to thee for
a sin."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Expedient to Take Vows?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not expedient to take vows. It is not expedient to anyone
to deprive himself of the good that God has given him. Now one of the greatest goods that God
has given man is liberty whereof he seems to be deprived by the necessity implicated in a vow.
Therefore it would seem inexpedient for man to take vows.

Obj. 2: Further, no one should expose himself to danger. But whoever takes a vow exposes himself
to danger, since that which, before taking a vow, he could omit without danger, becomes a source
of danger to him if he should not fulfil it after taking the vow. Hence Augustine says (Ep.
cxxvii, ad Arment. et Paulin.): "Since thou hast vowed, thou hast bound thyself, thou canst
not do otherwise. If thou dost not what thou hast vowed thou wilt not be as thou wouldst have
been hadst thou not vowed. For then thou wouldst have been less great, not less good: whereas
now if thou breakest faith with God (which God forbid) thou art the more unhappy, as thou wouldst
have been happier, hadst thou kept thy vow." Therefore it is not expedient to take vows.

Obj. But we do not read that either Christ or the Apostles took any vows. Therefore it would
seem inexpedient to take vows.

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 1, 2), a vow is a promise made to God. Now one makes a
promise to a man under one aspect, and to God under another. Because we promise something to
a man for his own profit; since it profits him that we should be of service to him, and that
we should at first assure him of the future fulfilment of that service: whereas we make promises
to God not for His but for our own profit. Hence Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et
Paulin.): "He is a kind and not a needy exactor, for he does not grow rich on our payments,
but makes those who pay Him grow rich in Him." And just as what we give God is useful not to
Him but to us, since "what is given Him is added to the giver," as Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii,
ad Arment. et Paulin.), so also a promise whereby we vow something to God, does not conduce
to His profit, nor does He need to be assured by us, but it conduces to our profit, in so far
as by vowing we fix our wills immovably on that which it is expedient to do. Hence it is expedient
to take vows.

Reply Obj. 1: Even as one's liberty is not lessened by one being unable to sin, so, too, the
necessity resulting from a will firmly fixed to good does not lessen the liberty, as instanced
in God and the blessed. Such is the necessity implied by a vow, bearing a certain resemblance
to the confirmation of the blessed. Hence, Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et Paulin.)
that "happy is the necessity that compels us to do the better things."

Reply Obj. 2: When danger arises from the deed itself, this deed is not expedient, for instance
that one cross a river by a tottering bridge: but if the danger arise through man's failure
in the deed, the latter does not cease to be expedient: thus it is expedient to mount on horseback,
though there be the danger of a fall from the horse: else it would behoove one to desist from
all good things, that may become dangerous accidentally. Wherefore it is written (Eccles. 11:4):
"He that observeth the wind shall not sow, and he that considereth the clouds shall never reap."
Now a man incurs danger, not from the vow itself, but from his fault, when he changes his mind
by breaking his vow. Hence, Augustine says (Ep. cxxvii, ad Arment. et Paulin.): "Repent not
of thy vow: thou shouldst rather rejoice that thou canst no longer do what thou mightest lawfully
have done to thy detriment."

Reply Obj. 3: It was incompetent for Christ, by His very nature, to take a vow, both because
He was God, and because, as man, His will was firmly fixed on the good, since He was a comprehensor.
By a kind of similitude, however, He is represented as saying (Ps. 21:26): "I will pay my vows
in the sight of them that fear Him," when He is speaking of His body, which is the Church.

The apostles are understood to have vowed things pertaining to the state of perfection when
"they left all things and followed Christ."

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 5]

Whether a Vow Is an Act of Latria or Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that a vow is not an act of latria or religion. Every act of virtue
is matter for a vow. Now it would seem to pertain to the same virtue to promise a thing and
to do it. Therefore a vow pertains to any virtue and not to religion especially.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Tully (De Invent. ii, 53) it belongs to religion to offer God
worship and ceremonial rites. But he who takes a vow does not yet offer something to God, but
only promises it. Therefore, a vow is not an act of religion.

Obj. 3: Further, religious worship should be offered to none but God. But a vow is made not
only to God, but also to the saints and to one's superiors, to whom religious vow obedience
when they make their profession. Therefore, a vow is not an act of religion.

On the contrary, It is written (Isa. 19:21): "(The Egyptians) shall worship Him with sacrifices
and offerings and they shall make vows to the Lord, and perform them." Now, the worship of
God is properly the act of religion or latria. Therefore, a vow is an act of latria or religion.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 81, A. 1, ad 1), every act of virtue belongs to religion
or latria by way of command, in so far as it is directed to the reverence of God which is the
proper end of latria. Now the direction of other actions to their end belongs to the commanding
virtue, not to those which are commanded. Therefore the direction of the acts of any virtue
to the service of God is the proper act of latria.

Now, it is evident from what has been said above (AA. 1, 2) that a vow is a promise made to
God, and that a promise is nothing else than a directing of the thing promised to the person
to whom the promise is made. Hence a vow is a directing of the thing vowed to the worship or
service of God. And thus it is clear that to take a vow is properly an act of latria or religion.

Reply Obj. 1: The matter of a vow is sometimes the act of another virtue, as, for instance,
keeping the fast or observing continency; while sometimes it is an act of religion, as offering
a sacrifice or praying. But promising either of them to God belongs to religion, for the reason
given above. Hence it is evident that some vows belong to religion by reason only of the promise
made to God, which is the essence of a vow, while others belong thereto by reason also of the
thing promised, which is the matter of the vow.

Reply Obj. 2: He who promises something gives it already in as far as he binds himself to give
it: even as a thing is said to be made when its cause is made, because the effect is contained
virtually in its cause. This is why we thank not only a giver, but also one who promises to give.

Reply Obj. 3: A vow is made to God alone, whereas a promise may be made to a man also: and
this very promise of good, which is made to a man, may be the matter of a vow, and in so far
as it is a virtuous act. This is how we are to understand vows whereby we vow something to
the saints or to one's superiors: so that the promise made to the saints or to one's superiors
is the matter of the vow, in so far as one vows to God to fulfil what one has promised to the
saints or one's superiors.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 6]

Whether It Is More Praiseworthy and Meritorious to Do Something in Fulfilment of a Vow, Than
Without a Vow?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is more praiseworthy and meritorious to do a thing without
a vow than in fulfilment of a vow. Prosper says (De Vita Contempl. ii): "We should abstain
or fast without putting ourselves under the necessity of fasting, lest that which we are free
to do be done without devotion and unwillingly." Now he who vows to fast puts himself under
the necessity of fasting. Therefore it would be better for him to fast without taking the vow.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (2 Cor. 9:7): "Everyone as he hath determined in his heart,
not with sadness, or of necessity: for God loveth a cheerful giver." Now some fulfil sorrowfully
what they have vowed: and this seems to be due to the necessity arising from the vow, for necessity
is a cause of sorrow according to Metaph. v [*Ed. Did. iv, 5]. Therefore, it is better to do
something without a vow, than in fulfilment of a vow.

Obj. 3: Further, a vow is necessary for the purpose of fixing the will on that which is vowed,
as stated above (A. 4). But the will cannot be more fixed on a thing than when it actually
does that thing. Therefore it is no better to do a thing in fulfilment of a vow than without a vow.

On the contrary, A gloss on the words of Ps. 75:12, "Vow ye and pay,"    says: "Vows are counseled
to the will." But a counsel is about none but a better good. Therefore it is better to do a
deed in fulfilment of a vow than without a vow: since he that does it without a vow fulfils
only one counsel, viz. the counsel to do it, whereas he that does it with a vow, fulfils two
counsels, viz. the counsel to vow and the counsel to do it.

I answer that, For three reasons it is better and more meritorious to do one and the same deed
with a vow than without. First, because to vow, as stated above (A. 5) is an act of religion
which is the chief of the moral virtues. Now the more excellent the virtue the better and more
meritorious the deed. Wherefore the act of an inferior virtue is the better and more meritorious
for being commanded by a superior virtue, whose act it becomes through being commanded by it,
just as the act of faith or hope is better if it be commanded by charity. Hence the works of
the other moral virtues (for instance, fasting, which is an act of abstinence; and being continent,
which is an act of chastity) are better and more meritorious, if they be done in fulfilment
of a vow, since thus they belong to the divine worship, being like sacrifices to God. Wherefore
Augustine says (De Virg. viii) that "not even is virginity honorable as such, but only when
it is consecrated to God, and cherished by godly continence."

Secondly, because he that vows something and does it, subjects himself to God more than he
that only does it; for he subjects himself to God not only as to the act, but also as to the
power, since in future he cannot do something else. Even so he gives more who gives the tree
with its fruit, than he that gives the fruit only, as Anselm [*Eadmer] observes (De Simil.
viii). For this reason, we thank even those who promise, as stated above (A. 5, ad 2).

Thirdly, because a vow fixes the will on the good immovably and to do anything of a will that
is fixed on the good belongs to the perfection of virtue, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
ii, 4), just as to sin with an obstinate mind aggravates the sin, and is called a sin against
the Holy Ghost, as stated above (Q. 14, A. 2).

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted should be understood as referring to necessity of coercion
which causes an act to be involuntary and excludes devotion. Hence he says pointedly: "Lest
that which we are free to do be done without devotion and unwillingly." On the other hand the
necessity resulting from a vow is caused by the immobility of the will, wherefore it strengthens
the will and increases devotion. Hence the argument does not conclude.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher, necessity of coercion, in so far as it is opposed
to the will, causes sorrow. But the necessity resulting from a vow, in those who are well disposed,
in so far as it strengthens the will, causes not sorrow but joy. If, however, the very deed,
considered in itself, were to become disagreeable and involuntary after one has taken the vow,
the will to fulfil it remaining withal, it is still more meritorious than if it were done without
the vow, since the fulfilment of a vow is an act of religion which is a greater virtue than
abstinence, of which fasting is an act.

Reply Obj. 3: He who does something without having vowed it has an immovable will as regards
the individual deed which he does and at the time when he does it; but his will does not remain
altogether fixed for the time to come, as does the will of one who makes a vow: for the latter
has bound his will to do something, both before he did that particular deed, and perchance
to do it many times.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 7]

Whether a Vow Is Solemnized by the Reception of Holy Orders, and by the Profession of a Certain
Rule?

Objection 1: It would seem that a vow is not solemnized by the reception of holy orders and
by the profession of a certain rule. As stated above (A. 1), a vow is a promise made to God.
Now external actions pertaining to solemnity seem to be directed, not to God, but to men. Therefore
they are related to vows accidentally: and consequently a solemnization of this kind is not
a proper circumstance of a vow.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever belongs to the condition of a thing, would seem to be applicable
to all in which that thing is found. Now many things may be the subject of a vow, which have
no connection either with holy orders, or to any particular rule: as when a man vows a pilgrimage,
or something of the kind. Therefore the solemnization that takes place in the reception of
holy orders or in the profession of a certain rule does not belong to the condition of a vow.

Obj. 3: Further, a solemn vow seems to be the same as a public vow. Now many other vows may
be made in public besides that which is pronounced in receiving holy orders or in professing
a certain rule; which latter, moreover, may be made in private. Therefore not only these vows
are solemn.

On the contrary, These vows alone are an impediment to the contract of marriage, and annul
marriage if it be contracted, which is the effect of a solemn vow, as we shall state further
on in the Third Part of this work [*Suppl., Q. 53, A. 2].

I answer that, The manner in which a thing is solemnized depends on its nature (conditio):
thus when a man takes up arms he solemnizes the fact in one way, namely, with a certain display
of horses and arms and a concourse of soldiers, while a marriage is solemnized in another way,
namely, the array of the bridegroom and bride and the gathering of their kindred. Now a vow
is a promise made to God: wherefore, the solemnization of a vow consists in something spiritual
pertaining to God; i.e. in some spiritual blessing or consecration which, in accordance with
the institution of the apostles, is given when a man makes profession of observing a certain
rule, in the second degree after the reception of holy orders, as Dionysius states (Eccl. Hier.
vi). The reason of this is that solemnization is not wont to be employed, save when a man gives
himself up entirely to some particular thing. For the nuptial solemnization takes place only
when the marriage is celebrated, and when the bride and bridegroom mutually deliver the power
over their bodies to one another. In like manner a vow is solemnized when a man devotes himself
to the divine ministry by receiving holy orders, or embraces the state of perfection by renouncing
the world and his own will by the profession of a certain rule.

Reply Obj. 1: This kind of solemnization regards not only men but also God in so far as it
is accompanied by a spiritual consecration or blessing, of which God is the author, though
man is the minister, according to Num. 6:27, "They shall invoke My name upon the children of
Israel, and I will bless them." Hence a solemn vow is more binding with God than a simple vow,
and he who breaks a solemn vow sins more grievously. When it is said that a simple vow is no
less binding than a solemn vow, this refers to the fact that the transgressor of either commits
a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not customary to solemnize particular acts, but the embracing of a new
state, as we have said above. Hence when a man vows particular deeds, such as a pilgrimage,
or some special fast, such a vow is not competent to be solemnized, but only such as the vow
whereby a man entirely devotes himself to the divine ministry or service: and yet many particular
works are included under this vow as under a universal.

Reply Obj. 3: Through being pronounced in public vows may have a certain human solemnity, but
not a spiritual and divine solemnity, as the aforesaid vows have, even when they are pronounced
before a few persons. Hence the publicity of a vow differs from its solemnization.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 8]

Whether Those Who Are Subject to Another's Power Are Hindered from Taking Vows?

Objection 1: It would seem that those who are subject to another's power are not hindered from
taking vows. The lesser bond is surpassed by the greater. Now the obligation of one man subject
to another is a lesser bond than a vow whereby one is under an obligation to God. Therefore
those who are subject to another's power are not hindered from taking vows.

Obj. 2: Further, children are under their parents' power. Yet children may make religious profession
even without the consent of their parents. Therefore one is not hindered from taking vows,
through being subject to another's power.

Obj. 3: Further, to do is more than to promise. But religious who are under the power of their
superiors can do certain things such as to say some psalms, or abstain from certain things.
Much more therefore seemingly can they promise such things to God by means of vows.

Obj. 4: Further, whoever does what he cannot do lawfully sins. But subjects do not sin by taking
vows, since nowhere do we find this forbidden. Therefore it would seem that they can lawfully
take vows.

On the contrary, It is commanded (Num. 30:4-6) that "if a woman vow any thing . . . being in
her father's house, and yet but a girl in age," she is not bound by the vow, unless her father
consent: and the same is said there (Num. 30:7-9) of the woman that has a husband. Therefore
in like manner other persons that are subject to another's power cannot bind themselves by vow.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), a vow is a promise made to God. Now no man can firmly
bind himself by a promise to do what is in another's power, but only to that which is entirely
in his own power. Now whoever is subject to another, as to the matter wherein he is subject
to him, it does not lie in his power to do as he will, but it depends on the will of the other.
And therefore without the consent of his superior he cannot bind himself firmly by a vow in
those matters wherein he is subject to another.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing but what is virtuous can be the subject of a promise made to God, as
stated above (A. 2). Now it is contrary to virtue for a man to offer to God that which belongs
to another, as stated above (Q. 86, A. 3). Hence the conditions necessary for a vow are not
altogether ensured, when a man who is under another's power vows that which is in that other's
power, except under the condition that he whose power it concerns does not gainsay it.

Reply Obj. 2: As soon as a man comes of age, if he be a freeman he is in his own power in all
matters concerning his person, for instance with regard to binding himself by vow to enter
religion, or with regard to contracting marriage. But he is not in his own power as regards
the arrangements of the household, so that in these matters he cannot vow anything that shall
be valid without the consent of his father.

A slave, through being in his master's power, even as regards his personal deeds, cannot bind
himself by vow to enter religion, since this would withdraw him from his master's service.

Reply Obj. 3: A religious is subject to his superior as to his actions connected with his profession
of his rule. Wherefore even though one may be able to do something now and then, when one is
not being occupied with other things by one's superior, yet since there is no time when his
superior cannot occupy him with something, no vow of a religious stands without the consent
of his superior, as neither does the vow of a girl while in (her father's) house without his
consent; nor of a wife, without the consent of her husband.

Reply Obj. 4: Although the vow of one who is subject to another's power does not stand without
the consent of the one to whom he is subject, he does not sin by vowing; because his vow is
understood to contain the requisite condition, providing, namely, that his superior approve
or do not gainsay it.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 9]

Whether Children Can Bind Themselves by Vow to Enter Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that children cannot bind themselves by vow to enter religion. Since
a vow requires deliberation of the mind, it is fitting that those alone should vow who have
the use of reason. But this is lacking in children just as in imbeciles and madmen. Therefore
just as imbeciles and madmen cannot bind themselves to anything by vow, so neither, seemingly,
can children bind themselves by vow to enter religion.

Obj. 2: Further, that which can be validly done by one cannot be annulled by another. Now a
vow to enter religion made by a boy or girl before the age of puberty can be revoked by the
parents or guardian (20, qu. ii, cap. Puella). Therefore it seems that a boy or girl cannot
validly make a vow before the age of fourteen.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the rule of Blessed Benedict [*Ch. 58] and a statute of Innocent
IV, a year's probation is granted to those who enter religion, so that probation may precede
the obligation of the vow. Therefore it seems unlawful, before the year of probation, for children
to be bound by vow to enter religion.

On the contrary, That which is not done aright is invalid without being annulled by anyone.
But the vow pronounced by a maiden, even before attaining the age of puberty, is valid, unless
it be annulled by her parents within a year (20, qu. ii, cap. Puella). Therefore even before
attaining to puberty children can lawfully and validly be bound by a vow to enter religion.

I answer that, As may be gathered from what has been said above (A. 7), vows are of two kinds,
simple and solemn. And since, as stated in the same article, the solemnization of a vow consists
in a spiritual blessing and consecration bestowed through the ministry of the Church, it follows
that it comes under the Church's dispensation. Now a simple vow takes its efficacy from the
deliberation of the mind, whereby one intends to put oneself under an obligation. That such
an obligation be of no force may happen in two ways. First, through defect of reason, as in
madmen and imbeciles, who cannot bind themselves by vow so long as they remain in a state of
madness or imbecility. Secondly, through the maker of a vow being subject to another's power,
as stated above (A. 8). Now these two circumstances concur in children before the age of puberty,
because in most instances they are lacking in reason, and besides are naturally under the care
of their parents, or guardians in place of their parents: wherefore in both events their vows
are without force. It happens, however, through a natural disposition which is not subject
to human laws, that the use of reason is accelerated in some, albeit few, who on this account
are said to be capable of guile: and yet they are not, for this reason, exempt in any way from
the care of their parents; for this care is subject to human law, which takes into account
that which is of most frequent occurrence.

Accordingly we must say that boys or girls who have not reached the years of puberty and have
not attained the use of reason can nowise bind themselves to anything by vow. If, however,
they attain the use of reason, before reaching the years of puberty, they can for their own
part, bind themselves by vow; but their vows can be annulled by their parents, under whose
care they are still subject.

Yet no matter how much they be capable of guile before the years of puberty, they cannot be
bound by a solemn religious vow, on account of the Church's decree [*Sext. Decret. cap. Is
qui, de Reg. et transeunt. ad Relig.] which considers the majority of cases. But after the
years of puberty have been reached, they can bind themselves by religious vows, simple or solemn,
without the consent of their parents.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument avails in the case of children who have not yet reached the use
of reason: for their vows then are invalid, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: The vows of persons subject to another's power contain an implied condition,
namely, that they be not annulled by the superior. This condition renders them licit and valid
if it be fulfilled, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument avails in the case of solemn vows which are taken in profession.

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 10]

Whether Vows Admit of Dispensation?

Objection 1: It would seem that vows are not subject to dispensation. It is less to have a
vow commuted than to be dispensed from keeping it. But a vow cannot be commuted, according
to Lev. 27:9, 10, "A beast that may be sacrificed to the Lord, if anyone shall vow, shall be
holy, and cannot be changed, neither a better for a worse, nor a worse for a better." Much
less, therefore, do vows admit of dispensation.

Obj. 2: Further, no man can grant a dispensation in matters concerning the natural law and
in the Divine precepts, especially those of the First Table, since these aim directly at the
love of God, which is the last end of the precepts. Now the fulfilment of a vow is a matter
of the natural law, and is commanded by the Divine law, as shown above (A. 3), and belongs
to the precepts of the First Table since it is an act of religion. Therefore vows do not admit
of dispensation.

Obj. 3: Further, the obligation of a vow is based on the fidelity which a man owes to God,
as stated above (A. 3). But no man can dispense in such a matter as this. Neither, therefore,
can any one grant a dispensation from a vow.

On the contrary, That which proceeds from the common will of many has apparently greater stability
than that which proceeds from the individual will of some one person. Now the law which derives
its force from the common will admits of dispensation by a man. Therefore it seems that vows
also admit of dispensation by a man.

I answer that, The dispensation from a vow is to be taken in the same sense as a dispensation
given in the observance of a law because, as stated above (I-II, Q. 96, A. 6; Q. 97, A. 4),
a law is made with an eye to that which is good in the majority of instances. But since in
certain cases this is not good, there is need for someone to decide that in that particular
case the law is not to be observed. This is properly speaking to dispense in the law: for a
dispensation would seem to denote a commensurate distribution or application of some common
thing to those that are contained under it, in the same way as a person is said to dispense
food to a household.

In like manner a person who takes a vow makes a law for himself as it were, and binds himself
to do something which in itself and in the majority of cases is a good. But it may happen that
in some particular case this is simply evil, or useless, or a hindrance to a greater good:
and this is essentially contrary to that which is the matter of a vow, as is clear from what
has been said above (A. 2). Therefore it is necessary, in such a case, to decide that the vow
is not to be observed. And if it be decided absolutely that a particular vow is not to be observed,
this is called a "dispensation" from that vow; but if some other obligation be imposed in lieu
of that which was to have been observed, the vow is said to be "commuted." Hence it is less
to commute a vow than to dispense from a vow: both, however, are in the power of the Church.

Reply Obj. 1: An animal that could be lawfully sacrificed was deemed holy from the very moment
that it was the subject of a vow, being, as it were, dedicated to the worship of God: and for
this reason it could not be changed: even so neither may one now exchange for something better,
or worse, that which one has vowed, if it be already consecrated, e.g. a chalice or a house.
On the other hand, an animal that could not be sacrificed, through not being the lawful matter
of a sacrifice, could and had to be bought back, as the law requires. Even so, vows can be
commuted now, if no consecration has intervened.

Reply Obj. 2: Even as man is bound by natural law and Divine precept to fulfil his vow, so,
too, is he bound under the same heads to obey the law or commands of his superiors. And yet
when he is dispensed from keeping a human law, this does not involve disobedience to that human
law, for this would be contrary to the natural law and the Divine command; but it amounts to
this--that what was law is not law in this particular case. Even so, when a superior grants
a dispensation, that which was contained under a vow is by his authority no longer so contained,
in so far as he decides that in this case such and such a thing is not fitting matter for a
vow. Consequently when an ecclesiastical superior dispenses someone from a vow, he does not
dispense him from keeping a precept of the natural or of the Divine law, but he pronounces
a decision on a matter to which a man had bound himself of his own accord, and of which he
was unable to consider every circumstance.

Reply Obj. 3: The fidelity we owe to God does not require that we fulfil that which it would
be wrong or useless to vow, or which would be an obstacle to the greater good whereunto the
dispensation from that vow would conduce. Hence the dispensation from a vow is not contrary
to the fidelity due to God.

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 11]

Whether It Is Possible to Be Dispensed from a Solemn Vow of Continency?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is possible to be dispensed from a solemn vow of continency.
As stated above, one reason for granting a dispensation from a vow is if it be an obstacle
to a greater good. But a vow of continency, even though it be solemn, may be an obstacle to
a greater good, since the common good is more God-like than the good of an individual. Now
one man's continency may be an obstacle to the good of the whole community, for instance, in
the case where, if certain persons who have vowed continency were to marry, the peace of their
country might be procured. Therefore it seems that it is possible to be dispensed even from
a solemn vow of continency.

Obj. 2: Further, religion is a more excellent virtue than chastity. Now if a man vows an act
of religion, e.g. to offer sacrifice to God he can be dispensed from that vow. Much more, therefore,
can he be dispensed from the vow of continency which is about an act of chastity.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the observance of a vow of abstinence may be a source of danger to
the person, so too may be the observance of a vow of continency. Now one who takes a vow of
abstinence can be dispensed from that vow if it prove a source of danger to his body. Therefore
for the same reason one may be dispensed from a vow of continency.

Obj. 4: Further, just as the vow of continency is part of the religious profession, whereby
the vow is solemnized, so also are the vows of poverty and obedience. But it is possible to
be dispensed from the vows of poverty and obedience, as in the case of those who are appointed
bishops after making profession. Therefore it seems that it is possible to be dispensed from
a solemn vow of continency.

On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 26:20): "No price is worthy of a continent soul."

Further, (Extra, De Statu Monach.) at the end of the Decretal, Cum ad Monasterium, it is stated
that the "renouncing of property, like the keeping of chastity, is so bound up with the monastic
rule, that not even the Sovereign Pontiff can disperse from its observance."

I answer that, Three things may be considered in a solemn vow of continency: first, the matter
of the vow, namely, continency; secondly, the perpetuity of the vow, namely, when a person
binds himself by vow to the perpetual observance of chastity: thirdly, the solemnity of the
vow. Accordingly, some [*William of Auxerre, Sum. Aur. III. vii. 1, qu. 5] say that the solemn
vow cannot be a matter of dispensation, on account of the continency itself for which no worthy
price can be found, as is stated by the authority quoted above. The reason for this is assigned
by some to the fact that by continency man overcomes a foe within himself, or to the fact that
by continency man is perfectly conformed to Christ in respect of purity of both body and soul.
But this reason does not seem to be cogent since the goods of the soul, such as contemplation
and prayer, far surpass the goods of the body and still more conform us to God, and yet one
may be dispensed from a vow of prayer or contemplation. Therefore, continency itself absolutely
considered seems no reason why the solemn vow thereof cannot be a matter of dispensation; especially
seeing that the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:34) exhorts us to be continent on account of contemplation,
when he says that the unmarried woman . . . "thinketh on the things of God [Vulg.: 'the Lord'],"
and since the end is of more account than the means.

Consequently others [*Albertus Magnus, Sent. iv, D, 38] find the reason for this in the perpetuity
and universality of this vow. For they assert that the vow of continency cannot be canceled,
save by something altogether contrary thereto, which is never lawful in any vow. But this is
evidently false, because just as the practice of carnal intercourse is contrary to continency,
so is eating flesh or drinking wine contrary to abstinence from such things, and yet these
latter vows may be a matter for dispensation.

For this reason others [*Innocent IV, on the above decretal] maintain that one may be dispensed
even from a solemn vow of continency, for the sake of some common good or common need, as in
the case of the example given above (Obj. 1), of a country being restored to peace through
a certain marriage to be contracted. Yet since the Decretal quoted says explicitly that "not
even the Sovereign Pontiff can dispense a monk from keeping chastity," it follows seemingly,
that we must maintain that, as stated above (A. 10, ad 1; cf. Lev. 27:9, 10, 28), whatsoever
has once been sanctified to the Lord cannot be put to any other use. For no ecclesiastical
prelate can make that which is sanctified to lose its consecration, not even though it be something
inanimate, for instance a consecrated chalice to be not consecrated, so long as it remains
entire. Much less, therefore, can a prelate make a man that is consecrated to God cease to
be consecrated, so long as he lives. Now the solemnity of a vow consists in a kind of consecration
or blessing of the person who takes the vow, as stated above (A. 7). Hence no prelate of the
Church can make a man, who has pronounced a solemn vow, to be quit of that to which he was
consecrated, e.g. one who is a priest, to be a priest no more, although a prelate may, for
some particular reason, inhibit him from exercising his order. In like manner the Pope cannot
make a man who has made his religious profession cease to be a religious, although certain
jurists have ignorantly held the contrary.

We must therefore consider whether continency is essentially bound up with the purpose for
which the vow is solemnized. Because if not, the solemnity of the consecration can remain without
the obligation of continency, but not if continency is essentially bound up with that for which
the vow is solemnized. Now the obligation of observing continency is connected with Holy Orders,
not essentially but by the institution of the Church; wherefore it seems that the Church can
grant a dispensation from the vow of continency solemnized by the reception of Holy Orders.
On the other hand the obligation of observing continency is an essential condition of the religious
state, whereby a man renounces the world and binds himself wholly to God's service, for this
is incompatible with matrimony, in which state a man is under the obligation of taking to himself
a wife, of begetting children, of looking after his household, and of procuring whatever is
necessary for these purposes. Wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor. 7:33) that "he that is with
a wife, is solicitous for the things of the world, how he may please his wife; and he is divided."
Hence the "monk" takes his name from "unity" [*The Greek monos] in contrast with this division.
For this reason the Church cannot dispense from a vow solemnized by the religious profession;
and the reason assigned by the Decretal is because "chastity is bound up with the monastic rule."

Reply Obj. 1: Perils occasioned by human affairs should be obviated by human means, not by
turning divine things to a human use. Now a professed religious is dead to the world and lives
to God, and so he must not be called back to the human life on the pretext of any human contingency.

Reply Obj. 2: A vow of temporal continency can be a matter of dispensation, as also a vow of
temporal prayer or of temporal abstinence. But the fact that no dispensation can be granted
from a vow of continency solemnized by profession is due, not to its being an act of chastity,
but because through the religious profession it is already an act of religion.

Reply Obj. 3: Food is directly ordered to the upkeep of the person, therefore abstinence from
food may be a direct source of danger to the person: and so on this count a vow of abstinence
is a matter of dispensation. On the other hand sexual intercourse is directly ordered to the
upkeep not of the person but of the species, wherefore to abstain from such intercourse by
continency does not endanger the person. And if indeed accidentally it prove a source of danger
to the person, this danger may be obviated by some other means, for instance by abstinence,
or other corporal remedies.

Reply Obj. 4: A religious who is made a bishop is no more absolved from his vow of poverty
than from his vow of continency, since he must have nothing of his own and must hold himself
as being the dispenser of the common goods of the Church. In like manner neither is he dispensed
from his vow of obedience; it is an accident that he is not bound to obey if he have no superior;
just as the abbot of a monastery, who nevertheless is not dispensed from his vow of obedience.

The passage of Ecclesiasticus, which is put forward in the contrary sense, should be taken
as meaning that neither fruitfulness of the of the flesh nor any bodily good is to be compared
with continency, which is reckoned one of the goods of the soul, as Augustine declares (De
Sanct. Virg. viii). Wherefore it is said pointedly "of a continent soul," not "of a continent
body."

TWELFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 88, Art. 12]

Whether the Authority of a Prelate Is Required for the Commutation or the Dispensation of a Vow?

Objection 1: It would seem that the authority of a prelate is not required for the commutation
or dispensation of a vow. A person may enter religion without the authority of a superior prelate.
Now by entering religion one is absolved from the vows he made in the world, even from the
vow of making a pilgrimage to the Holy Land [*Cap. Scripturae, de Voto et Voti redempt.]. Therefore
the commutation or dispensation of a vow is possible without the authority of a superior prelate.

Obj. 2: Further, to dispense anyone from a vow seems to consist in deciding in what circumstances
he need not keep that vow. But if the prelate is at fault in his decision, the person who took
the vow does not seem to be absolved from his vow, since no prelate can grant a dispensation
contrary to the divine precept about keeping one's vows, as stated above (A. 10, ad 2; A. 11).
Likewise, when anyone rightly determines of his own authority that in his case a vow is not
to be kept, he would seem not to be bound; since a vow need not be kept if it have an evil
result (A. 2, ad 2). Therefore the Authority of a prelate is not required that one may be dispensed
from a vow.

Obj. 3: Further, if it belongs to a prelate's power to grant dispensations from vows, on the
same count it is competent to all prelates, but it does not belong to all to dispense from
every vow. Therefore it does not belong to the power of a prelate to dispense from vows.

On the contrary, A vow binds one to do something, even as a law does. Now the superior's authority
is requisite for a dispensation from a precept of the law, as stated above (I-II, Q. 96, A.
6; Q. 97, A. 4). Therefore it is likewise required in a dispensation from a vow. Now if you
promise something to anyone it depends on his decision whether he accept what you promise.
Again in the Church a prelate stands in God's place. Therefore a commutation or dispensation
of vows requires the authority of a prelate who in God's stead declares what is acceptable
to God, according to 2 Cor. 2:10: "For [I] . . . have pardoned . . . for your sakes . . . in
the person of Christ." And he says significantly "for your sakes," since whenever we ask a
prelate for a dispensation we should do so to honor Christ in Whose person he dispenses, or
to promote the interests of the Church which is His Body.

Reply Obj. 1: All other vows are about some particular works, whereas by the religious life
a man consecrates his whole life to God's service. Now the particular is included in the universal,
wherefore a Decretal [*Cap. Scripturae, de Voto et Voti redempt.] says that "a man is not deemed
a vow-breaker if he exchange a temporal service for the perpetual service of religion." And
yet a man who enters religion is not bound to fulfil the vows, whether of fasting or of praying
or the like, which he made when in the world, because by entering religion he dies to his former
life, and it is unsuitable to the religious life that each one should have his own observances,
and because the burden of religion is onerous enough without requiring the addition of other
burdens.

Reply Obj. 2: Some have held that prelates can dispense from vows at their will, for the reason
that every vow supposes as a condition that the superior prelate be willing; thus it was stated
above (A. 8) that the vow of a subject, e.g. of a slave or a son, supposes this condition,
if "the father or master consent," or "does not dissent." And thus a subject might break his
vow without any remorse of conscience, whenever his superior tells him to.

But this opinion is based on a false supposition: because a spiritual prelate being, not a
master, but a dispenser, his power is given "unto edification, not for destruction" (2 Cor.
10:8), and consequently, just as he cannot command that which is in itself displeasing to God,
namely, sin, so neither can he forbid what is in itself pleasing to God, namely, works of virtue.
Therefore absolutely speaking man can vow them. But it does belong to a prelate to decide what
is the more virtuous and the more acceptable to God. Consequently in matters presenting no
difficulty, the prelate's dispensation would not excuse one from sin: for instance, if a prelate
were to dispense a person from a vow to enter the religious life, without any apparent cause
to prevent him from fulfilling his vow. But if some cause were to appear, giving rise, at least,
to doubt, he could hold to the prelate's decision whether of commutation or of dispensation.
He could not, however, follow his own judgment in the matter, because he does not stand in
the place of God; except perhaps in the case when the thing he has vowed is clearly unlawful,
and he is unable to have recourse to the prelate.

Reply Obj. 3: Since the Sovereign Pontiff holds the place of Christ throughout the whole Church,
he exercises absolute power of dispensing from all vows that admit of dispensation. To other
and inferior prelates is the power committed of dispensing from those vows that are commonly
made and frequently require dispensation, in order that men may easily have recourse to someone;
such are the vows of pilgrimage (Cap. de Peregin., de Voto et Voti redempt.), fasting and the
like, and of pilgrimage to the Holy Land, are reserved to the Sovereign Pontiff [*Cap. Ex multa].

QUESTION 89

OF OATHS (TEN ARTICLES)

We must now consider those external acts of religion, whereby something Divine is taken by
man: and this is either a sacrament or the Name of God. The place for treating of the taking
of a sacrament will be in the Third Part of this work: of the taking of God's Name we shall
treat now. The Name of God is taken by man in three ways. First, by way oath in order to confirm
one's own assertion: secondly, by way of adjuration as an inducement to others: thirdly, by
way of invocation for the purpose of prayer or praise. Accordingly we must first treat of oaths:
and under this head there are ten points of inquiry:

(1) What is an oath?

(2) Whether it is lawful?

(3) What are the accompanying conditions of an oath?

(4) Of what virtue is it an act?

(5) Whether oaths are desirable, and to be employed frequently as something useful and good?

(6) Whether it is lawful to swear by a creature?

(7) Whether an oath is binding?

(8) Which is more binding, an oath or a vow?

(9) Whether an oath is subject to dispensation?

(10) Who may lawfully swear, and when?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 1]

Whether to Swear Is to Call God to Witness?

Objection 1: It would seem that to swear is not to call God to witness. Whoever invokes the
authority of Holy Writ calls God to witness, since it is His word that Holy Writ contains.
Therefore, if to swear is to call God to witness, whoever invoked the authority of Holy Writ
would swear. But this is false. Therefore the antecedent is false also.

Obj. 2: Further, one does not pay anything to a person by calling him to witness. But he who
swears by God pays something to Him for it is written (Matt. 5:33): "Thou shall pay [Douay:
'perform'] thy oaths to the Lord"; and Augustine says [*Serm. clxxx] that to swear (jurare)
is "to pay the right (jus reddere) of truth to God." Therefore to swear is not to call God
to witness.

Obj. 3: Further, the duties of a judge differ from the duties of a witness, as shown above
(QQ. 67, 70). Now sometimes a man, by swearing, implores the Divine judgment, according to
Ps. 7:5, "If I have rendered to them that repaid me evils, let me deservedly fall empty before
my enemies." Therefore to swear is not to call God to witness.

On the contrary, Augustine says in a sermon on perjury (Serm. clxxx): "When a man says: 'By
God,' what else does he mean but that God is his witness?"

I answer that, As the Apostle says (Heb. 6:16), oaths are taken for the purpose of confirmation.
Now speculative propositions receive confirmation from reason, which proceeds from principles
known naturally and infallibly true. But particular contingent facts regarding man cannot be
confirmed by a necessary reason, wherefore propositions regarding such things are wont to be
confirmed by witnesses. Now a human witness does not suffice to confirm such matters for two
reasons. First, on account of man's lack of truth, for many give way to lying, according to
Ps. 16:10, "Their mouth hath spoken lies [Vulg.: 'proudly']." Secondly, on account of [his]
lack of knowledge, since he can know neither the future, nor secret thoughts, nor distant things:
and yet men speak about such things, and our everyday life requires that we should have some
certitude about them. Hence the need to have recourse to a Divine witness, for neither can
God lie, nor is anything hidden from Him. Now to call God to witness is named jurare (to swear)
because it is established as though it were a principle of law (jure) that what a man asserts
under the invocation of God as His witness should be accepted as true. Now sometimes God is
called to witness when we assert present or past events, and this is termed a "declaratory
oath"; while sometimes God is called to witness in confirmation of something future, and this
is termed a "promissory oath." But oaths are not employed in order to substantiate necessary
matters, and such as come under the investigation of reason; for it would seem absurd in a
scientific discussion to wish to prove one's point by an oath.

Reply Obj. 1: It is one thing to employ a Divine witness already given, as when one adduces
the authority of Holy Scripture; and another to implore God to bear witness, as in an oath.

Reply Obj. 2: A man is said to pay his oaths to God because he performs what he swears to do,
or because, from the very fact that he calls upon God to witness, he recognizes Him as possessing
universal knowledge and unerring truth.

Reply Obj. 3: A person is called to give witness, in order that he may make known the truth
about what is alleged. Now there are two ways in which God makes known whether the alleged
facts are true or not. In one way He reveals the truth simply, either by inward inspiration,
or by unveiling the facts, namely, by making public what was hitherto secret: in another way
by punishing the lying witness, and then He is at once judge and witness, since by punishing
the liar He makes known his lie. Hence oaths are of two kinds: one is a simple contestation
of God, as when a man says "God is my witness," or, "I speak before God," or, "By God," which
has the same meaning, as Augustine states [*See argument On the contrary]; the other is by
cursing, and consists in a man binding himself or something of his to punishment if what is
alleged be not true.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful to Swear?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to swear. Nothing forbidden in the Divine
Law is lawful. Now swearing is forbidden (Matt. 5:34), "But I say to you not to swear at all";
and (James 5:12), "Above all things, my brethren, swear not." Therefore swearing is unlawful.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever comes from an evil seems to be unlawful, because according to Matt.
7:18, "neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit." Now swearing comes from an evil, for
it is written (Matt. 5:37): "But let your speech be: Yea, yea: No, no. And that which is over
and above these is of evil." Therefore swearing is apparently unlawful.

Obj. 3: Further, to seek a sign of Divine Providence is to tempt God, and this is altogether
unlawful, according to Deut. 6:16, "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God." Now he that swears
seems to seek a sign of Divine Providence, since he asks God to bear witness, and this must
be by some evident effect. Therefore it seems that swearing is altogether unlawful.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 6:13): "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God . . . and shalt
swear by His name."

I answer that, Nothing prevents a thing being good in itself, and yet becoming a source of
evil to one who makes use thereof unbecomingly: thus to receive the Eucharist is good, and
yet he that receives it "unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself" (1 Cor. 11:29).
Accordingly in answer to the question in point it must be stated that an oath is in itself
lawful and commendable. This is proved from its origin and from its end. From its origin, because
swearing owes its introduction to the faith whereby man believes that God possesses unerring
truth and universal knowledge and foresight of all things: and from its end, since oaths are
employed in order to justify men, and to put an end to controversy (Heb. 6:16).

Yet an oath becomes a source of evil to him that makes evil use of it, that is who employs
it without necessity and due caution. For if a man calls God as witness, for some trifling
reason, it would seemingly prove him to have but little reverence for God, since he would not
treat even a good man in this manner. Wherefore it is written (Ecclus. 23:9): "Let not thy
mouth be accustomed to swearing, for in it there are many falls."

Reply Obj. 1: Jerome, commenting on Matt. 5:34, says: "Observe that our Saviour forbade us
to swear, not by God, but by heaven and earth. For it is known that the Jews have this most
evil custom of swearing by the elements." Yet this answer does not suffice, because James adds,
"nor by any other oath." Wherefore we must reply that, as Augustine states (De Mendacio xv),
"when the Apostle employs an oath in his epistles, he shows how we are to understand the saying,
'I say to you, not to swear at all'; lest, to wit, swearing lead us to swear easily and from
swearing easily, we contract the habit, and, from swearing habitually, we fall into perjury.
Hence we find that he swore only when writing, because thought brings caution and avoids hasty
words."

Reply Obj. 2: According to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i. 17): "If you have to swear,
note that the necessity arises from the infirmity of those whom you convince, which infirmity
is indeed an evil. Accordingly He did not say: 'That which is over and above is evil,' but
'is of evil.' For you do no evil; since you make good use of swearing, by persuading another
to a useful purpose: yet it 'comes of the evil' of the person by whose infirmity you are forced
to swear."

Reply Obj. 3: He who swears tempts not God, because it is not without usefulness and necessity
that he implores the Divine assistance. (1 Cor. 4:5). And this witness will be lacking to none
who swears, neither for nor against him.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 3]

Whether Three Accompanying Conditions of an Oath Are Suitably Assigned, Namely, Justice, Judgment,
and Truth?

Objection 1: It would seem that justice, judgment and truth are unsuitably assigned as the
conditions accompanying an oath. Things should not be enumerated as diverse, if one of them
includes the other. Now of these three, one includes another, since truth is a part of justice,
according to Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii, 53): and judgment is an act of justice, as stated
above (Q. 60, A. 1). Therefore the three accompanying conditions of an oath are unsuitably
assigned.

Obj. 2: Further, many other things are required for an oath, namely, devotion, and faith whereby
we believe that God knows all things and cannot lie. Therefore the accompanying conditions
of an oath are insufficiently enumerated.

Obj. 3: Further, these three are requisite in man's every deed: since he ought to do nothing
contrary to justice and truth, or without judgment, according to 1 Tim. 5:21, "Do nothing without
prejudice," i.e. without previous judgment [*Vulg.: 'Observe these things without prejudice,
doing nothing by declining to either side.']. Therefore these three should not be associated
with an oath any more than with other human actions.

On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 4:2): "Thou shalt swear: As the Lord liveth, in truth,
and in judgment, and in justice": which words Jerome expounds, saying: "Observe that an oath
must be accompanied by these conditions, truth, judgment and justice."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), an oath is not good except for one who makes good use
of it. Now two conditions are required for the good use of an oath. First, that one swear,
not for frivolous, but for urgent reasons, and with discretion; and this requires judgment
or discretion on the part of the person who swears. Secondly, as regards the point to be confirmed
by oath, that it be neither false, nor unlawful, and this requires both truth, so that one
employ an oath in order to confirm what is true, and justice, so that one confirm what is lawful.
A rash oath lacks judgment, a false oath lacks truth, and a wicked or unlawful oath lacks justice.

Reply Obj. 1: Judgment does not signify here the execution of justice, but the judgment of
discretion, as stated above. Nor is truth here to be taken for the part of justice, but for
a condition of speech.

Reply Obj. 2: Devotion, faith and like conditions requisite for the right manner of swearing
are implied by judgment: for the other two regard the things sworn to as stated above. We might
also reply that justice regards the reason for swearing.

Reply Obj. 3: There is great danger in swearing, both on account of the greatness of God Who
is called upon to bear witness, and on account of the frailty of the human tongue, the words
of which are confirmed by oath. Hence these conditions are more requisite for an oath than
for other human actions.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 4]

Whether an Oath Is an Act of Religion, or Latria?

Objection 1: It would seem that an oath is not an act of religion, or latria. Acts of religion
are about holy and divine things. But oaths are employed in connection with human disputes,
as the Apostle declares (Heb. 6:16). Therefore swearing is not an act of religion or latria.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to religion to give worship to God, as Tully says (De Invent. Rhet.
ii, 53). But he who swears offers nothing to God, but calls God to be his witness. Therefore
swearing is not an act of religion or latria.

Obj. 3: Further, the end of religion or latria is to show reverence to God. But the end of
an oath is not this, but rather the confirmation of some assertion. Therefore swearing is not
an act of religion. Now he speaks there of the servitude of religion. Therefore swearing is
an act of religion.

I answer that, As appears from what has been said above (A. 1), he that swears calls God to
witness in confirmation of what he says. Now nothing is confirmed save by what is more certain
and more powerful. Therefore in the very fact that a man swears by God, he acknowledges God
to be more powerful, by reason of His unfailing truth and His universal knowledge; and thus
in a way he shows reverence to God. For this reason the Apostle says (Heb. 6:16) that "men
swear by one greater than themselves," and Jerome commenting on Matt. 5:34, says that "he who
swears either reveres or loves the person by whom he swears." The Philosopher, too, states
(Metaph. i, 3) that "to swear is to give very great honor." Now to show reverence to God belongs
to religion or latria. Wherefore it is evident that an oath is an act of religion or latria.

Reply Obj. 1: Two things may be observed in an oath. The witness adduced, and this is Divine:
and the thing witnessed to, or that which makes it necessary to call the witness, and this
is human. Accordingly an oath belongs to religion by reason of the former, and not of the latter.

Reply Obj. 2: In the very fact that a man takes God as witness by way of an oath, he acknowledges
Him to be greater: and this pertains to the reverence and honor of God, so that he offers something
to God, namely, reverence and honor.

Reply Obj. 3: Whatsoever we do, we should do it in honor of God: wherefore there is no hindrance,
if by intending to assure a man, we show reverence to God. For we ought so to perform our actions
in God's honor that they may conduce to our neighbor's good, since God also works for His own
glory and for our good.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 5]

Whether Oaths Are Desirable and to Be Used Frequently As Something Useful and Good?

Objection 1: It would seem that oaths are desirable and to be used frequently as something
useful and good. Just as a vow is an act of religion, so is an oath. Now it is commendable
and more meritorious to do a thing by vow, because a vow is an act of religion, as stated above
(Q. 88, A. 5). Therefore for the same reason, to do or say a thing with an oath is more commendable,
and consequently oaths are desirable as being good essentially.

Obj. Now reverence and love of God are desirable as something good essentially. Therefore swearing
is also.

Obj. 3: Further, swearing is directed to the purpose of confirming or assuring. But it is a
good thing for a man to confirm his assertion. Therefore an oath is desirable as a good thing.

On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 23:12): "A man that sweareth much shall be filled with
iniquity": and Augustine says (De Mendacio xv) that "the Lord forbade swearing, in order that
for your own part you might not be fond of it, and take pleasure in seeking occasions of swearing,
as though it were a good thing."

I answer that, Whatever is required merely as a remedy for an infirmity or a defect, is not
reckoned among those things that are desirable for their own sake, but among those that are
necessary: this is clear in the case of medicine which is required as a remedy for sickness.
Now an oath is required as a remedy to a defect, namely, some man's lack of belief in another
man. Wherefore an oath is not to be reckoned among those things that are desirable for their
own sake, but among those that are necessary for this life; and such things are used unduly
whenever they are used outside the bounds of necessity. For this reason Augustine says (De
Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 17): "He who understands that swearing is not to be held as a good thing,"
i.e. desirable for its own sake, "restrains himself as far as he can from uttering oaths, unless
there be urgent need."

Reply Obj. 1: There is no parity between a vow and an oath: because by a vow we direct something
to the honor of God, so that for this very reason a vow is an act of religion. On the other
hand, in an oath reverence for the name of God is taken in confirmation of a promise. Hence
what is confirmed by oath does not, for this reason, become an act of religion, since moral
acts take their species from the end.

Reply Obj. 2: He who swears does indeed make use of his reverence or love for the person by
whom he swears: he does not, however, direct his oath to the reverence or love of that person,
but to something else that is necessary for the present life.

Reply Obj. 3: Even as a medicine is useful for healing, and yet, the stronger it is, the greater
harm it does if it be taken unduly, so too an oath is useful indeed as a means of confirmation,
yet the greater the reverence it demands the more dangerous it is, unless it be employed aright;
for, as it is written (Ecclus. 23:13), "if he make it void," i.e. if he deceive his brother,
"his sin shall be upon him: and if he dissemble it," by swearing falsely, and with dissimulation,
"he offendeth double," (because, to wit, "pretended equity is a twofold iniquity," as Augustine
[*Enarr. in Ps. lxiii, 7] declares): "and if he swear in vain," i.e. without due cause and
necessity, "he shall not be justified."

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 6]

Whether It Is Lawful to Swear by Creatures?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to swear by creatures. It is written (Matt.
5:34-36): "I say to you not to swear at all, neither by heaven . . . nor by the earth . . .
nor by Jerusalem . . . nor by thy head": and Jerome, expounding these words, says: "Observe
that the Saviour does not forbid swearing by God, but by heaven and earth," etc.

Obj. 2: Further, punishment is not due save for a fault. Now a punishment is appointed for
one who swears by creatures: for it is written (22, qu. i, can. Clericum): "If a cleric swears
by creatures he must be very severely rebuked: and if he shall persist in this vicious habit
we wish that he be excommunicated." Therefore it is unlawful to swear by creatures.

Obj. 3: Further, an oath is an act of religion, as stated above (A. 4). But religious worship
is not due to any creature, according to Rom. 1:23, 25. Therefore it is not lawful to swear
by a creature.

On the contrary, Joseph swore "by the health of Pharaoh" (Gen. 42:16). Moreover it is customary
to swear by the Gospel, by relics, and by the saints.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1, ad 3), there are two kinds of oath. One is uttered as
a simple contestation or calling God as witness: and this kind of oath, like faith, is based
on God's truth. Now faith is essentially and chiefly about God Who is the very truth, and secondarily
about creatures in which God's truth is reflected, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 1). In like manner
an oath is chiefly referred to God Whose testimony is invoked; and secondarily an appeal by
oath is made to certain creatures considered, not in themselves, but as reflecting the Divine
truth. Thus we swear by the Gospel, i.e. by God Whose truth is made known in the Gospel; and
by the saints who believed this truth and kept it.

The other way of swearing is by cursing and in this kind of oath a creature is adduced that
the judgment of God may be wrought therein. Thus a man is wont to swear by his head, or by
his son, or by some other thing that he loves, even as the Apostle swore (2 Cor. 1:23), saying:
"I call God to witness upon my soul."

As to Joseph's oath by the health of Pharaoh this may be understood in both ways: either by
way of a curse, as though he pledged Pharao's health to God; or by way of contestation, as
though he appealed to the truth of God's justice which the princes of the earth are appointed
to execute.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord forbade us to swear by creatures so as to give them the reverence due
to God. Hence Jerome adds that "the Jews, through swearing by the angels and the like, worshipped
creatures with a Divine honor."

In the same sense a cleric is punished, according to the canons (22, qu. i, can. Clericum,
Obj. 2), for swearing by a creature, for this savors of the blasphemy of unbelief. Hence in
the next chapter, it is said: "If any one swears by God's hair or head, or otherwise utter
blasphemy against God, and he be in ecclesiastical orders, let him be degraded."

This suffices for the Reply to the Second Objection.

Reply Obj. 3: Religious worship is shown to one whose testimony is invoked by oath: hence the
prohibition (Ex. 23:13): "By the name of strange gods you shall not swear." But religious worship
is not given to creatures employed in an oath in the ways mentioned above.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 7]

Whether an Oath Has a Binding Force?

Objection 1: It would seem that an oath has no binding force. An oath is employed in order
to confirm the truth of an assertion. But when a person makes an assertion about the future
his assertion is true, though it may not be verified. Thus Paul lied not (2 Cor. 1:15, seqq.)
though he went not to Corinth, as he had said he would (1 Cor. 16:5). Therefore it seems that
an oath is not binding.

Obj. 2: Further, virtue is not contrary to virtue (Categ. viii, 22). Now an oath is an act
of virtue, as stated above (A. 4). But it would sometimes be contrary to virtue, or an obstacle
thereto, if one were to fulfil what one has sworn to do: for instance, if one were to swear
to commit a sin, or to desist from some virtuous action. Therefore an oath is not always binding.

Obj. 3: Further, sometimes a man is compelled against his will to promise something under oath.
Now, "such a person is loosed by the Roman Pontiffs from the bond of his oath" (Extra, De Jurejur.,
cap. Verum in ea quaest., etc.). Therefore an oath is not always binding.

Obj. 4: Further, no person can be under two opposite obligations. Yet sometimes the person
who swears and the person to whom he swears have opposite intentions. Therefore an oath cannot
always be binding.

On the contrary, It is written (Matt. 5:33): "Thou shalt perform thy oaths to the Lord."

I answer that, An obligation implies something to be done or omitted; so that apparently it
regards neither the declaratory oath (which is about something present or past), nor such oaths
as are about something to be effected by some other cause (as, for example, if one were to
swear that it would rain tomorrow), but only such as are about things to be done by the person
who swears.

Now just as a declaratory oath, which is about the future or the present, should contain the
truth, so too ought the oath which is about something to be done by us in the future. Yet there
is a difference: since, in the oath that is about the past or present, this obligation affects,
not the thing that already has been or is, but the action of the swearer, in the point of his
swearing to what is or was already true; whereas, on the contrary, in the oath that is made
about something to be done by us, the obligation falls on the thing guaranteed by oath. For
a man is bound to make true what he has sworn, else his oath lacks truth.

Now if this thing be such as not to be in his power, his oath is lacking in judgment of discretion:
unless perchance what was possible when he swore become impossible to him through some mishap,
as when a man swore to pay a sum of money, which is subsequently taken from him by force or
theft. For then he would seem to be excused from fulfilling his oath, although he is bound
to do what he can, as, in fact, we have already stated with regard to the obligation of a vow
(Q. 88, A. 3, ad 2). If, on the other hand, it be something that he can do, but ought not to,
either because it is essentially evil, or because it is a hindrance to a good, then his oath
is lacking in justice: wherefore an oath must not be kept when it involves a sin or a hindrance
to good. For in either case "its result is evil" [*Cf. Bede, Homil. xix, in Decoll. S. Joan. Bapt.]

Accordingly we must conclude that whoever swears to do something is bound to do what he can
for the fulfilment of truth; provided always that the other two accompanying conditions be
present, namely, judgment and justice.

Reply Obj. 1: It is not the same with a simple assertion, and with an oath wherein God is called
to witness: because it suffices for the truth of an assertion, that a person say what he proposes
to do, since it is already true in its cause, namely, the purpose of the doer. But an oath
should not be employed, save in a matter about which one is firmly certain: and, consequently,
if a man employ an oath, he is bound, as far as he can, to make true what he has sworn, through
reverence of the Divine witness invoked, unless it leads to an evil result, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: An oath may lead to an evil result in two ways. First, because from the very
outset it has an evil result, either through being evil of its very nature (as, if a man were
to swear to commit adultery), or through being a hindrance to a greater good, as if a man were
to swear not to enter religion, or not to become a cleric, or that he would not accept a prelacy,
supposing it would be expedient for him to accept, or in similar cases. For oaths of this kind
are unlawful from the outset: yet with a difference: because if a man swear to commit a sin,
he sinned in swearing, and sins in keeping his oath: whereas if a man swear not to perform
a greater good, which he is not bound to do withal, he sins indeed in swearing (through placing
an obstacle to the Holy Ghost, Who is the inspirer of good purposes), yet he does not sin in
keeping his oath, though he does much better if he does not keep it.

Secondly, an oath leads to an evil result through some new and unforeseen emergency. An instance
is the oath of Herod, who swore to the damsel, who danced before him, that he would give her
what she would ask of him. For this oath could be lawful from the outset, supposing it to have
the requisite conditions, namely, that the damsel asked what it was right to grant, but the
fulfilment of the oath was unlawful. Hence Ambrose says (De Officiis i, 50): "Sometimes it
is wrong to fulfil a promise, and to keep an oath; as Herod, who granted the slaying of John,
rather than refuse what he had promised."

Reply Obj. 3: There is a twofold obligation in the oath which a man takes under compulsion:
one, whereby he is beholden to the person to whom he promises something; and this obligation
is cancelled by the compulsion, because he that used force deserves that the promise made to
him should not be kept. The other is an obligation whereby a man is beholden to God, in virtue
of which he is bound to fulfil what he has promised in His name. This obligation is not removed
in the tribunal of conscience, because that man ought rather to suffer temporal loss, than
violate his oath. He can, however, seek in a court of justice to recover what he has paid,
or denounce the matter to his superior even if he has sworn to the contrary, because such an
oath would lead to evil results since it would be contrary to public justice. The Roman Pontiffs,
in absolving men from oaths of this kind, did not pronounce such oaths to be unbinding, but
relaxed the obligation for some just cause.

Reply Obj. 4: When the intention of the swearer is not the same as the intention of the person
to whom he swears, if this be due to the swearer's guile, he must keep his oath in accordance
with the sound understanding of the person to whom the oath is made. Hence Isidore says (De
Summo Bono ii, 31): "However artful a man may be in wording his oath, God Who witnesses his
conscience accepts his oath as understood by the person to whom it is made." And that this
refers to the deceitful oath is clear from what follows: "He is doubly guilty who both takes
God's name in vain, and tricks his neighbor by guile." If, however, the swearer uses no guile,
he is bound in accordance with his own intention. Wherefore Gregory says (Moral. xxvi, 7):
"The human ear takes such like words in their natural outward sense, but the Divine judgment
interprets them according to our inward intention."

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 8]

Whether an Oath Is More Binding Than a Vow?

Objection 1: It would seem that an oath is more binding than a vow. A vow is a simple promise:
whereas an oath includes, besides a promise, an appeal to God as witness. Therefore an oath
is more binding than a vow.

Obj. 2: Further, the weaker is wont to be confirmed by the stronger. Now a vow is sometimes
confirmed by an oath. Therefore an oath is stronger than a vow.

Obj. 3: Further, the obligation of a vow arises from the deliberation of the mind, a stated
above (Q. 88, A. 1); while the obligation of an oath results from the truth of God Whose testimony
is invoked. Since therefore God's truth is something greater than human deliberation, it seems
that the obligation of an oath is greater than that of a vow.

On the contrary, A vow binds one to God while an oath sometimes binds one to man. Now one is
more bound to God than to man. Therefore a vow is more binding than an oath.

I answer that, The obligation both of vow and of an oath arises from something Divine; but
in different ways. For the obligation of a vow arises from the fidelity we owe God, which binds
us to fulfil our promises to Him. On the other hand, the obligation of an oath arises from
the reverence we owe Him which binds us to make true what we promise in His name. Now every
act of infidelity includes an irreverence, but not conversely, because the infidelity of a
subject to his lord would seem to be the greatest irreverence. Hence a vow by its very nature
is more binding than an oath.

Reply Obj. 1: A vow is not any kind of promise, but a promise made to God; and to be unfaithful
to God is most grievous.

Reply Obj. 2: An oath is added to a vow not because it is more stable, but because greater
stability results from "two immutable things" [*Heb. 6:18].

Reply Obj. 3: Deliberation of the mind gives a vow its stability, on the part of the person
who takes the vow: but it has a greater cause of stability on the part of God, to Whom the
vow is offered.

NINTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 9]

Whether Anyone Can Dispense from an Oath?

Objection 1: It would seem that no one can dispense from an oath. Just as truth is required
for a declaratory oath, which is about the past or the present, so too is it required for a
promissory oath, which is about the future. Now no one can dispense a man from swearing to
the truth about present or past things. Therefore neither can anyone dispense a man from making
truth that which he has promised by oath to do in the future.

Obj. 2: Further, a promissory oath is used for the benefit of the person to whom the promise
is made. But, apparently, he cannot release the other from his oath, since it would be contrary
to the reverence of God. Much less therefore can a dispensation from this oath be granted by
anyone.

Obj. 3: Further, any bishop can grant a dispensation from a vow, except certain vows reserved
to the Pope alone, as stated above (Q. 88, A. 12, ad 3). Therefore in like manner, if an oath
admits of dispensation, any bishop can dispense from an oath. And yet seemingly this is to
be against the law [*Caus. XV, qu. 6, can. Auctoritatem, seqq.: Cap. Si vero, de Jurejurando].
Therefore it would seem that an oath does not admit of dispensation.

On the contrary, A vow is more binding than an oath, as stated above (A. 8). But a vow admits
of dispensation and therefore an oath does also.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 88, A. 10), the necessity of a dispensation both from the
law and from a vow arises from the fact that something which is useful and morally good in
itself and considered in general, may be morally evil and hurtful in respect of some particular
emergency: and such a case comes under neither law nor vow. Now anything morally evil or hurtful
is incompatible with the matter of an oath: for if it be morally evil it is opposed to justice,
and if it be hurtful it is contrary to judgment. Therefore an oath likewise admits of dispensation.

Reply Obj. 1: A dispensation from an oath does not imply a permission to do anything against
the oath: for this is impossible, since the keeping of an oath comes under a Divine precept,
which does not admit of dispensation: but it implies that what hitherto came under an oath
no longer comes under it, as not being due matter for an oath, just as we have said with regard
to vows (Q. 88, A. 10, ad 2). Now the matter of a declaratory oath, which is about something
past or present, has already acquired a certain necessity, and has become unchangeable, wherefore
the dispensation will regard not the matter but the act itself of the oath: so that such a
dispensation would be directly contrary to the Divine precept. On the other hand, the matter
of a promissory oath is something future, which admits of change, so that, to wit, in certain
emergencies, it may be unlawful or hurtful, and consequently undue matter for an oath. Therefore
a promissory oath admits of dispensation, since such dispensation regards the matter of an
oath, and is not contrary to the Divine precept about the keeping of oaths.

Reply Obj. 2: One man may promise something under oath to another in two ways. First, when
he promises something for his benefit: for instance, if he promise to serve him, or to give
him money: and from such a promise he can be released by the person to whom he made it: for
he is understood to have already kept his promise to him when he acts towards him according
to his will. Secondly, one man promises another something pertaining to God's honor or to the
benefit of others: for instance, if a man promise another under oath that he will enter religion,
or perform some act of kindness. In this case the person to whom the promise is made cannot
release him that made the promise, because it was made principally not to him but to God: unless
perchance it included some condition, for instance, "provided he give his consent" or some
such like condition.

Reply Obj. 3: Sometimes that which is made the matter of a promissory oath is manifestly opposed
to justice, either because it is a sin, as when a man swears to commit a murder, or because
it is an obstacle to a greater good, as when a man swears not to enter religion: and such an
oath requires no dispensation. But in the former case a man is bound not to keep such an oath,
while in the latter it is lawful for him to keep or not to keep the oath, as stated above (A.
7, ad 2). Sometimes what is promised on oath is doubtfully right or wrong, useful or harmful,
either in itself or under the circumstance. In this case any bishop can dispense. Sometimes,
however, that which is promised under oath is manifestly lawful and beneficial. An oath of
this kind seemingly admits not of dispensation but of commutation, when there occurs something
better to be done for the common good, in which case the matter would seem to belong chiefly
to the power of the Pope, who has charge over the whole Church; and even of absolute relaxation,
for this too belongs in general to the Pope in all matters regarding the administration of
things ecclesiastical. Thus it is competent to any man to cancel an oath made by one of his
subjects in matters that come under his authority: for instance, a father may annul his daughter's
oath, and a husband his wife's (Num. 30:6, seqq.), as stated above with regard to vows (Q.
88, AA. 8, 9).

TENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 89, Art. 10]

Whether an Oath Is Voided by a Condition of Person or Time?

Objection 1: It would seem that an oath is not voided by a condition of person or time. An
oath, according to the Apostle (Heb. 6:16), is employed for the purpose of confirmation. Now
it is competent to anyone to confirm his assertion, and at any time. Therefore it would seem
that an oath is not voided by a condition of person or time.

Obj. To those who think thus, it must be said: Nonsense! the Scriptures were made for God's
sake, not God for the sake of the Scriptures." Now men of all conditions and at all times are
wont to swear by God. Much more, therefore, is it lawful to swear by the Gospels.

Obj. 3: Further, the same effect does not proceed from contrary causes, since contrary causes
produce contrary effects. Now some are debarred from swearing on account of some personal defect;
children, for instance, before the age of fourteen, and persons who have already committed
perjury. Therefore it would seem that a person ought not to be debarred from swearing either
on account of his dignity, as clerics, or on account of the solemnity of the time.

Obj. 4: Further, in this world no living man is equal in dignity to an angel: for it is written
(Matt. 11:11) that "he that is the lesser in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he," namely
than John the Baptist, while yet living. Now an angel is competent to swear, for it is written
(Apoc. 10:6) that the angel "swore by Him that liveth for ever and ever." Therefore no man
ought to be excused from swearing, on account of his dignity.

On the contrary, It is stated (II, qu. v, can. Si quis presbyter): "Let a priest be examined
'by his sacred consecration,' instead of being put on his oath": and (22, qu. v, can. Nullus):
"Let no one in ecclesiastical orders dare to swear on the Holy Gospels to a layman."

I answer that, Two things are to be considered in an oath. One is on the part of God, whose
testimony is invoked, and in this respect we should hold an oath in the greatest reverence.
For this reason children before the age of puberty are debarred from taking oaths [*Caus. XXII,
qu. 5, can. Parvuli], and are not called upon to swear, because they have not yet attained
the perfect use of reason, so as to be able to take a oath with due reverence. Perjurers also
are debarred from taking an oath, because it is presumed from their antecedents that they will
not treat an oath with the reverence due to it. For this same reason, in order that oaths might
be treated with due reverence the law says (22, qu. v, can. Honestum): "It is becoming that
he who ventures to swear on holy things should do so fasting, with all propriety and fear of God."

The other thing to be considered is on the part of the man, whose assertion is confirmed by
oath. For a man's assertion needs no confirmation save because there is a doubt about it. Now
it derogates from a person's dignity that one should doubt about the truth of what he says,
wherefore "it becomes not persons of great dignity to swear." For this reason the law says
(II, qu. v, can. Si quis presbyter) that "priests should not swear for trifling reasons." Nevertheless
it is lawful for them to swear if there be need for it, or if great good may result therefrom.
Especially is this the case in spiritual affairs, when moreover it is becoming that they should
take oath on days of solemnity, since they ought then to devote themselves to spiritual matters.
Nor should they on such occasions take oaths temporal matters, except perhaps in cases grave
necessity.

Reply Obj. 1: Some are unable to confirm their own assertions on account of their own defect:
and some there are whose words should be so certain that they need no confirmation.

Reply Obj. 2: The greater the thing sworn by, the holier and the more binding is the oath,
considered in itself, as Augustine states (Ad Public., Ep. xlvii): and accordingly it is a
graver matter to swear by God than the Gospels. Yet the contrary may be the case on account
of the manner of swearing for instance, an oath by the Gospels might be taken with deliberation
and solemnity, and an oath by God frivolously and without deliberation.

Reply Obj. 3: Nothing prevents the same thing from arising out of contrary causes, by way of
superabundance and defect. It is in this way that some are debarred from swearing, through
being of so great authority that it is unbecoming for them to swear; while others are of such
little authority that their oaths have no standing.

Reply Obj. 4: The angel's oath is adduced not on account of any defect in the angel, as though
one ought not to credit his mere word, but in order to show that the statement made issues
from God's infallible disposition. Thus too God is sometimes spoken of by Scripture as swearing,
in order to express the immutability of His word, as the Apostle declares (Heb. 6:17).

QUESTION 90

OF THE TAKING OF GOD'S NAME BY WAY OF ADJURATION (In Three Articles)

We must now consider the taking of God's name by way of adjuration: under which head there
are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is lawful to adjure a man?

(2) Whether it is lawful to adjure the demons?

(3) Whether it is lawful to adjure irrational creatures?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 90, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Lawful to Adjure a Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not lawful to adjure a man. Origen says (Tract. xxxv
super Matth.): "I deem that a man who wishes to live according to the Gospel should not adjure
another man. For if, according to the Gospel mandate of Christ, it be unlawful to swear, it
is evident that neither is it lawful to adjure: and consequently it is manifest that the high-priest
unlawfully adjured Jesus by the living God."

Obj. 2: Further, whoever adjures a man, compels him after a fashion. But it is unlawful to
compel a man against his will. Therefore seemingly it is also unlawful to adjure a man.

Obj. 3: Further, to adjure is to induce a person to swear. Now it belongs to man's superior
to induce him to swear, for the superior imposes an oath on his subject. Therefore subjects
cannot adjure their superiors.

On the contrary, Even when we pray God we implore Him by certain holy things: and the Apostle
too besought the faithful "by the mercy of God" (Rom. 12:1): and this seems to be a kind of
adjuration. Therefore it is lawful to adjure.

I answer that, A man who utters a promissory oath, swearing by his reverence for the Divine
name, which he invokes in confirmation of his promise, binds himself to do what he has undertaken,
and so orders himself unchangeably to do a certain thing. Now just as a man can order himself
to do a certain thing, so too can he order others, by beseeching his superiors, or by commanding
his inferiors, as stated above (Q. 83, A. 1). Accordingly when either of these orderings is
confirmed by something Divine it is an adjuration. Yet there is this difference between them,
that man is master of his own actions but not of those of others; wherefore he can put himself
under an obligation by invoking the Divine name, whereas he cannot put others under such an
obligation unless they be his subjects, whom he can compel on the strength of the oath they
have taken.

Therefore, if a man by invoking the name of God, or any holy thing, intends by this adjuration
to put one who is not his subject under an obligation to do a certain thing, in the same way
as he would bind himself by oath, such an adjuration is unlawful, because he usurps over another
a power which he has not. But superiors may bind their inferiors by this kind of adjuration,
if there be need for it.

If, however, he merely intend, through reverence of the Divine name or of some holy thing,
to obtain something from the other man without putting him under any obligation, such an adjuration
may be lawfully employed in respect of anyone.

Reply Obj. 1: Origen is speaking of an adjuration whereby a man intends to put another under
an obligation, in the same way as he would bind himself by oath: for thus did the high-priest
presume to adjure our Lord Jesus Christ [*Matt. 26:63].

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers the adjuration which imposes an obligation.

Reply Obj. 3: To adjure is not to induce a man to swear, but to employ terms resembling an
oath in order to provoke another to do a certain thing.

Moreover, we adjure God in one way and man in another; because when we adjure a man we intend
to alter his will by appealing to his reverence for a holy thing: and we cannot have such an
intention in respect of God Whose will is immutable. If we obtain something from God through
His eternal will, it is due, not to our merits, but to His goodness.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 90, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Lawful to Adjure the Demons?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to adjure the demons. Origen says (Tract. xxxv, super Matth.):
"To adjure the demons is not accordance with the power given by our Saviour: for this is a
Jewish practice." Now rather than imitate the rites of the Jews, we should use the power given
by Christ. Therefore it is not lawful to adjure the demons.

Obj. 2: Further, many make use of necromantic incantations when invoking the demons by something
Divine: and this is an adjuration. Therefore, if it be lawful to adjure the demons, it is lawful
to make use of necromantic incantations, which is evidently false. Therefore the antecedent
is false also.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever adjures a person, by that very fact associates himself with him. Now
it is not lawful to have fellowship with the demons, according to 1 Cor. 10:20, "I would not
that you should be made partakers with devils." Therefore it is not lawful to adjure the demons.

On the contrary, It is written (Mk. 16:17): "In My name they shall cast out devils." Now to
induce anyone to do a certain thing for the sake of God's name is to adjure. Therefore it is
lawful to adjure the demons.

I answer that, As stated in the preceding article, there are two ways of adjuring: one by way
of prayer or inducement through reverence of some holy thing: the other by way of compulsion.
In the first way it is not lawful to adjure the demons because such a way seems to savor of
benevolence or friendship, which it is unlawful to bear towards the demons. As to the second
kind of adjuration, which is by compulsion, we may lawfully use it for some purposes, and not
for others. For during the course of this life the demons are our adversaries: and their actions
are not subject to our disposal but to that of God and the holy angels, because, as Augustine
says (De Trin. iii, 4), "the rebel spirit is ruled by the just spirit."

It is not, however, lawful to adjure them for the purpose of learning something from them,
or of obtaining something through them, for this would amount to holding fellowship with them:
except perhaps when certain holy men, by special instinct or Divine revelation, make use of
the demons' actions in order to obtain certain results: thus we read of the Blessed James [*the
Greater; cf. Apocrypha, N.T., Hist. Certam. Apost. vi, 19] that he caused Hermogenes to be
brought to him, by the instrumentality of the demons.

Reply Obj. 1: Origen is speaking of adjuration made, not authoritatively by way of compulsion,
but rather by way of a friendly appeal.

Reply Obj. 2: Necromancers adjure and invoke the demons in order to obtain or learn something
from them: and this is unlawful, as stated above. Wherefore Chrysostom, commenting on our Lord's
words to the unclean spirit (Mk. 1:25), "Speak no more, and go out of the man," says: "A salutary
teaching is given us here, lest we believe the demons, however much they speak the truth."

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers the adjuration whereby the demon's help is besought in
doing or learning something: for this savors of fellowship with them. On the other hand, to
repulse the demons by adjuring them, is to sever oneself from their fellowship.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 90, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Lawful to Adjure an Irrational Creature?

Objection 1: It would seem unlawful to adjure an irrational creature. An adjuration consists
of spoken words. But it is useless to speak to one that understands not, such as an irrational
creature. Therefore it is vain and unlawful to adjure an irrational creature.

Obj. 2: Further, seemingly wherever adjuration is admissible, swearing is also admissible.
But swearing is not consistent with an irrational creature. Therefore it would seem unlawful
to employ adjuration towards one.

Obj. 3: Further, there are two ways of adjuring, as explained above (AA. 1, 2). One is by way
of appeal; and this cannot be employed towards irrational creatures, since they are not masters
of their own actions. The other kind of adjuration is by way of compulsion: and, seemingly,
neither is it lawful to use this towards them, because we have not the power to command irrational
creatures, but only He of Whom it was said (Matt. 8:27): "For the winds and the sea obey Him."
Therefore in no way, apparently, is it lawful to adjure irrational creatures.

On the contrary, Simon and Jude are related to have adjured dragons and to have commanded them
to withdraw into the desert. [*From the apocryphal Historiae Certam. Apost. vi. 19.]

I answer that, Irrational creatures are directed to their own actions by some other agent.
Now the action of what is directed and moved is also the action of the director and mover:
thus the movement of the arrow is an operation of the archer. Wherefore the operation of the
irrational creature is ascribed not only to it, but also and chiefly to God, Who disposes the
movements of all things. It is also ascribed to the devil, who, by God's permission, makes
use of irrational creatures in order to inflict harm on man.

Accordingly the adjuration of an irrational creature may be of two kinds. First, so that the
adjuration is referred to the irrational creature in itself: and in this way it would be vain
to adjure an irrational creature. Secondly, so that it be referred to the director and mover
of the irrational creature, and in this sense a creature of this kind may be adjured in two
ways. First, by way of appeal made to God, and this relates to those who work miracles by calling
on God: secondly, by way of compulsion, which relates to the devil, who uses the irrational
creature for our harm. This is the kind of adjuration used in the exorcisms of the Church,
whereby the power of the demons is expelled from an irrational creature. But it is not lawful
to adjure the demons by beseeching them to help us.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

QUESTION 91

OF TAKING THE DIVINE NAME FOR THE PURPOSE OF INVOKING IT BY MEANS OF PRAISE (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the taking of the Divine name for the purpose of invoking it by prayer
or praise. Of prayer we have already spoken (Q. 83). Wherefore we must speak now of praise.
Under this head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether God should be praised with the lips?

(2) Whether God should be praised with song?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 91, Art. 1]

Whether God Should Be Praised with the Lips?

Objection 1: It would seem that God should not be praised with the lips. The Philosopher says
(Ethic. 1, 12): "The best of men ere accorded not praise, but something greater." But God transcends
the very best of all things. Therefore God ought to be given, not praise, but something greater
than praise: wherefore He is said (Ecclus. 43:33) to be "above all praise."

Obj. 2: Further, divine praise is part of divine worship, for it is an act of religion. Now
God is worshiped with the mind rather than with the lips: wherefore our Lord quoted against
certain ones the words of Isa. 29:13, "This people . . . honors [Vulg.: 'glorifies'] Me with
their lips, but their heart is far from Me." Therefore the praise of God lies in the heart
rather than on the lips.

Obj. 3: Further, men are praised with the lips that they may be encouraged to do better: since
just as being praised makes the wicked proud, so does it incite the good to better things.
Wherefore it is written (Prov. 27:21): "As silver is tried in the fining-pot . . . so a man
is tried by the mouth of him that praiseth." But God is not incited to better things by man's
words, both because He is unchangeable, and because He is supremely good, and it is not possible
for Him to grow better. Therefore God should not be praised with the lips.

On the contrary, It is written (Ps. 62:6): "My mouth shall praise Thee with joyful lips."

I answer that, We use words, in speaking to God, for one reason, and in speaking to man, for
another reason. For when speaking to man we use words in order to tell him our thoughts which
are unknown to him. Wherefore we praise a man with our lips, in order that he or others may
learn that we have a good opinion of him: so that in consequence we may incite him to yet better
things; and that we may induce others, who hear him praised, to think well of him, to reverence
him, and to imitate him. On the other hand we employ words, in speaking to God, not indeed
to make known our thoughts to Him Who is the searcher of hearts, but that we may bring ourselves
and our hearers to reverence Him.

Consequently we need to praise God with our lips, not indeed for His sake, but for our own
sake; since by praising Him our devotion is aroused towards Him, according to Ps. 49:23: "The
sacrifice of praise shall glorify Me, and there is the way by which I will show him the salvation
of God." And forasmuch as man, by praising God, ascends in his affections to God, by so much
is he withdrawn from things opposed to God, according to Isa. 48:9, "For My praise I will bridle
thee lest thou shouldst perish." The praise of the lips is also profitable to others by inciting
their affections towards God, wherefore it is written (Ps. 33:2): "His praise shall always
be in my mouth," and farther on: "Let the meek hear and rejoice. O magnify the Lord with me."

Reply Obj. 1: We may speak of God in two ways. First, with regard to His essence; and thus,
since He is incomprehensible and ineffable, He is above all praise. In this respect we owe
Him reverence and the honor of latria; wherefore Ps. 64:2 is rendered by Jerome in his Psalter
[*Translated from the Hebrew]: "Praise to Thee is speechless, O God," as regards the first,
and as to the second, "A vow shall be paid to Thee." Secondly, we may speak of God as to His
effects which are ordained for our good. In this respect we owe Him praise; wherefore it is
written (Isa. 63:7): "I will remember the tender mercies of the Lord, the praise of the Lord
for all the things that the Lord hath bestowed upon us." Again, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. 1):
"Thou wilt find that all the sacred hymns," i.e. divine praises "of the sacred writers, are
directed respectively to the Blessed Processions of the Thearchy," i.e. of the Godhead, "showing
forth and praising the names of God."

Reply Obj. 2: It profits one nothing to praise with the lips if one praise not with the heart.
For the heart speaks God's praises when it fervently recalls "the glorious things of His works"
[*Cf. Ecclus. 17:7, 8]. Yet the outward praise of the lips avails to arouse the inward fervor
of those who praise, and to incite others to praise God, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: We praise God, not for His benefit, but for ours as stated.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 91, Art. 2]

Whether God Should Be Praised with Song?

Objection 1: It would seem that God should not be praised with song. For the Apostle says (Col.
3:16): "Teaching and admonishing one another in psalms, hymns and spiritual canticles." Now
we should employ nothing in the divine worship, save what is delivered to us on the authority
of Scripture. Therefore it would seem that, in praising God, we should employ, not corporal
but spiritual canticles.

Obj. 2: Further, Jerome in his commentary on Eph. 5:19, "Singing and making melody in your
hearts to the Lord," says: "Listen, young men whose duty it is to recite the office in church:
God is to be sung not with the voice but with the heart. Nor should you, like play-actors,
ease your throat and jaws with medicaments, and make the church resound with theatrical measures
and airs." Therefore God should not be praised with song.

Obj. 3: Further, the praise of God is competent to little and great, according to Apoc. 14,
"Give praise to our God, all ye His servants; and you that fear Him, little and great." But
the great, who are in the church, ought not to sing: for Gregory says (Regist. iv, ep. 44):
"I hereby ordain that in this See the ministers of the sacred altar must not sing" (Cf. Decret.,
dist. xcii., cap. In sancta Romana Ecclesia). Therefore singing is unsuitable to the divine
praises.

Obj. 4: Further, in the Old Law God was praised with musical instruments and human song, according
to Ps. 32:2, 3: "Give praise to the Lord on the harp, sing to Him with the psaltery, the instrument
of ten strings. Sing to Him a new canticle." But the Church does not make use of musical instruments
such as harps and psalteries, in the divine praises, for fear of seeming to imitate the Jews.
Therefore in like manner neither should song be used in the divine praises.

Obj. 5: Further, the praise of the heart is more important than the praise of the lips. But
the praise of the heart is hindered by singing, both because the attention of the singers is
distracted from the consideration of what they are singing, so long as they give all their
attention to the chant, and because others are less able to understand the things that are
sung than if they were recited without chant. Therefore chants should not be employed in the
divine praises.

On the contrary, Blessed Ambrose established singing in the Church of Milan, as Augustine relates
(Confess. ix).

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), the praise of the voice is necessary in order to arouse
man's devotion towards God. Wherefore whatever is useful in conducing to this result is becomingly
adopted in the divine praises. Now it is evident that the human soul is moved in various ways
according to various melodies of sound, as the Philosopher state (Polit. viii, 5), and also
Boethius (De Musica, prologue). Hence the use of music in the divine praises is a salutary
institution, that the souls of the faint-hearted may be the more incited to devotion. Wherefore
Augustine say (Confess. x, 33): "I am inclined to approve of the usage of singing in the church,
that so by the delight of the ears the faint-hearted may rise to the feeling of devotion":
and he says of himself (Confess. ix, 6): "I wept in Thy hymns and canticles, touched to the
quick by the voices of Thy sweet-attuned Church."

Reply Obj. 1: The name of spiritual canticle may be given not only to those that are sung inwardly
in spirit, but also to those that are sung outwardly with the lips, inasmuch as such like canticles
arouse spiritual devotion.

Reply Obj. 2: Jerome does not absolutely condemn singing, but reproves those who sing theatrically
in church not in order to arouse devotion, but in order to show off, or to provoke pleasure.
Hence Augustine says (Confess. x, 33): "When it befalls me to be more moved by the voice than
by the words sung, I confess to have sinned penally, and then had rather not hear the singer."

Reply Obj. 3: To arouse men to devotion by teaching and preaching is a more excellent way than
by singing. Wherefore deacons and prelates, whom it becomes to incite men's minds towards God
by means of preaching and teaching, ought not to be instant in singing, lest thereby they be
withdrawn from greater things. Hence Gregory says (Regist. iv, ep. 44): "It is a most discreditable
custom for those who have been raised to the diaconate to serve as choristers, for it behooves
them to give their whole time to the duty of preaching and to taking charge of the alms."

Reply Obj. 4: As the Philosopher says (Polit. viii, 6), "Teaching should not be accompanied
with a flute or any artificial instrument such as the harp or anything else of this kind: but
only with such things as make good hearers." For such like musical instruments move the soul
to pleasure rather than create a good disposition within it. In the Old Testament instruments
of this description were employed, both because the people were more coarse and carnal--so
that they needed to be aroused by such instruments as also by earthly promises--and because
these material instruments were figures of something else.

Reply Obj. 5: The soul is distracted from that which is sung by a chant that is employed for
the purpose of giving pleasure. But if the singer chant for the sake of devotion, he pays more
attention to what he says, both because he lingers more thereon, and because, as Augustine
remarks (Confess. x, 33), "each affection of our spirit, according to its variety, has its
own appropriate measure in the voice, and singing, by some hidden correspondence wherewith
it is stirred." The same applies to the hearers, for even if some of them understand not what
is sung, yet they understand why it is sung, namely, for God's glory: and this is enough to
arouse their devotion.

QUESTION 92

OF SUPERSTITION (TWO ARTICLES)

In due sequence we must consider the vices that are opposed to religion. First we shall consider
those which agree with religion in giving worship to God; secondly, we shall treat of those
vices which are manifestly contrary to religion, through showing contempt of those things that
pertain to the worship of God. The former come under the head of superstition, the latter under
that of irreligion. Accordingly we must consider in the first place, superstition and its parts,
and afterwards irreligion and its parts.

Under the first head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether superstition is a vice opposed to religion?

(2) Whether it has several parts or species?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 92, Art. 1]

Whether Superstition Is a Vice Contrary to Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that superstition is not a vice contrary to religion. One contrary
is not included in the definition of the other. If the ancient glaciers had been first formed
among the highest mountains, and extended downwards into the plains, the largest and highest moraines
ought to be the most distant, and to be formed of the most rounded masses; whereas the actual condition
of the detrital accumulations is the reverse, the distant materials
being widely spread, and true moraines being found only in valleys
connected with great chains of lofty mountains.

Again, all these moraines are within one another,--the most distant from the glacier to which they
owe their origin encircling all those which are nearer and nearer
to it within the same glacial basin.

And as no glacier could reach to its farthest moraine without pushing forward all the intervening
loose materials, it is self-evident that the outer moraines were first formed, and those nearer
the glacier subsequently, in the order in which they follow one another
from the lower valleys to the higher levels at which alone glaciers
exist at present.

Translating these facts into words, we see that the glaciers to which these ancient moraines
owe their origin must have been retreating gradually while the moraines were accumulating. But
a glacier while uniformly retreating forms no high walls of loose
materials around its edges and at its lower extremity; as it melts
away, it only drops the burden of angular rocky fragments which it
carries upon its back over the loose fragments above which it moves,
and which it grinds to powder, or to sand, or to rounded pebbles,
in its progress.

It is only where the glacier remains stationary for a longer or shorter period that large terminal
moraines can accumulate; and they are generally found in such places in the valleys of the Alps
as would naturally determine the lower limit of a glacier for the time being. There is no possibility
of escaping the conclusion that the ancient glaciers must have begun that series of oscillations
to which the accumulation of the moraines is to be ascribed, at a time when ice-fields already occupied
the whole area which they have covered during their greatest extension. After we shall have
seen how many centres of dispersion of erratic boulders existed in the northern hemisphere, similar
to that of the Alps, we may perhaps be able to form some idea of the manner in which these ice-fields
originated and gradually vanished.

Some investigators have been inclined to explain the presence of boulders, moraines, drift, and
the like phenomena, by the action of water.

But even if we could believe that rivers had brought along with them such masses of rock, and
deposited them where they are now found, the regularity in the distribution of the materials disproves
any such theory.

In the lateral moraines of the Lake of Geneva we have a striking illustration of this apparently
systematic division of the loose materials; for the northeastern moraines of that glacial
basin contain rocks belonging exclusively to the northern side of the valley of the Rhone, while
the moraines on the southern shore of the lake consist of rocks belonging to its southern side.
Indeed, rivers, so far from building up moraines, have often partially destroyed them. We find
various instances of moraines through which a river runs, having
worn for itself a passage, on either side of which the form of the
moraine remains unbroken.

In the valley of the Rhone there are villages built on such moraines, as, for instance, Viesch,
with the river running through their centre.

But if we need further confirmation of the fact that these accumulations
on either side of this and other Swiss lakes are ancient lateral moraines,
we have it in their connection with walls of a like nature at their
lower end, where we find again transverse moraines barring their outlet,
and also in the continuity of long trains of fragments of similar
rocks extending side by side across wide plains for great distances
without mixture.

From the beginning of my investigations upon the glaciers, I have
urged these two points as most directly proving their greater extension
in former times, and more recent researches constantly recur to this
kind of evidence.

All our lakes would be filled with loose materials, had their basins not been sheltered by
ice against the encroachments of river-deposits during the transportation of the erratic boulders
to the farthest limits of their respective areas; and all the continuous trails of rocks derived
from the same locality would have been scattered over wide areas,
had they not been carried along, in unyielding tracks, like moraines.

On a small scale the waters of the Rhone and of the Arve recall to this day such a picture.
There are few travellers in Switzerland who have not seen these two rivers, where they flow
side by side, meeting, but not mingling, at the southern extremity of the lake, the different color
of their water marking the two parallel currents.

In old times, when the glaciers filled all the valleys at the base
of Mont Blanc, and to the east of it, uniting in the valley through
which now runs the River Rhone, the glacier of the Arve came down
to meet the ice from the valley of the Rhone, in the same manner as
the River Arve now comes to meet the waters of the Rhone where they
rush out from the southern end of the lake.

This would be the proper place to consider the formation of the lakes of Switzerland, as well
as their preservation by the agency of glaciers. But this subject is so intricate, and has
already given rise to so many controversies which could not be overlooked in this connection,
that I prefer to pass it over altogether in silence.

Suffice it to say that not only are most of the lakes of Switzerland hemmed in by transverse
moraines at their lower extremity, but the lakes of Upper Italy, at the foot of the Alps, are barred
in the same way, as are also the lakes of Norway and Sweden, and some of our own ponds and lakes.
Strange as it may seem to the traveller who sails under an Italian sky over the lovely waters
of Como, Maggiore, and Lugano, it is, nevertheless, true, that these depressions were once
filled by solid masses of ice, and that the walls built by the old glaciers still block their
southern outlets. Indeed, were it not for these moraines, there would be comparatively few
lakes either in Northern Italy or in Switzerland. The greater part of them have such a wall
built across one end; and but for this masonry of the glacier, there would have been nothing
to prevent their waters from flowing out into the plain at the breaking up of the ice-period.
We should then have had open valleys in place of all these sheets of water which give such diversity
and beauty to the scenery of Northern Italy and Switzerland, or,
at least, the lakes would be much fewer and occupy only the deeper
depressions in the hard rocks.

Such being the evidences of the former extent of the glaciers in the plains, what do the mountain-summits
tell us of their height and depth? for here, also, they have left their handwriting on the
wall. Every mountain-side in the Alps is inscribed with these ancient characters, recording the
level of the ice in past times.

Here and there a ledge or terrace on the wall of the valley has afforded support for the lateral
moraines, and wherever such an accumulation is left, it marks the limit of the ice at some former
period. These indications are, however, uncertain and fragmentary, depending upon projections of the
rocky walls.

But thousands of feet above the present level of the glacier, far up toward their summits, we
find the sides of the mountains furrowed, scratched, and polished in exactly the same manner
as the surfaces over which the glaciers pass at present.

These marks are as legible and clear to one who is familiar with glacial traces as are hieroglyphics
to the Egyptian scholar; indeed, more so,--for he not only recognizes their presence, but
reads their meaning at a glance. Above the line at which these indications cease, the edges of
the rocks are sharp and angular, the surface of the mountain rough, unpolished, and absolutely
devoid of all those marks resulting from glacial action.

On the Alps these traces are visible to a height of nine thousand
feet, and across the whole plain of Switzerland, as I have stated,
one may trace the glaciers by their moraines, by the masses of rock
they have let fall here and there, by the drift they have deposited,
to the very foot of the opposite chain, where they have dropped their
boulders along the base of the Jura.

Ascending that chain, one finds the grooved, polished, and scratched
surfaces to its summit, on the very crest of which boulders entirely
foreign to the locality are perched.

Follow the range down upon the other side and you find the same indications extending into the
plains of Burgundy and France beyond.

With a chain of evidence so complete, it seems to me impossible to
deny that the whole space between the opposite chains of the Alps
and the Jura was once filled with ice; that this mass of ice completely
covered the Jura, with the exception of a few high crests, perhaps,
rising island-like above it, and mounted to a height of some nine
thousand feet upon the Alps, while it extended on the one side into
the northern plain of Italy, filling all its depressions, and on the
other down to the plains of Central Europe.

The only natural inference from these facts is, that the climatic
conditions leading to their existence could not have been local; they
must have been cosmic.

When Switzerland was bridged across from range to range by a mass
of ice stretching southward into Lombardy and Tuscany, northward into
France and Burgundy, the rest of Europe could not have remained unaffected
by the causes which induced this state of things.

It was this conviction which led me to seek for the traces of glaciers in Great Britain. I had
never been in the regions I intended to visit, but I knew the forms of the valleys in the lake-country
of England, in the Highlands of Scotland, and in the mountains of Wales and Ireland, and I was
as confident that I should find them crossed by terminal moraines
and bordered by lateral ones, as if I had already seen them.

The reader must not suppose, when I describe these walls, formed of the débris of the glacier, as
consisting of boulders, stones, pebbles, sand, and gravel, a rough
accumulation of loose materials indiscriminately thrown together,
that we find the ancient moraines presenting any such appearance.

Time, which mellows and softens all the wrecks of the past, has clothed them with turf, grassed
them over, planted them with trees, sown his seed and gathered in his harvests upon them, until at
last they make a part of the undulating surface of the country. Were it not for anticipating
my story, I could point out many a green billow, rising out of the fields and meadows immediately
about us, that had its origin in the old ice-time. Thus disguised, they are not so evident
to the casual observer; but, nevertheless, when once familiar with
the peculiar form, character, and position of these rounded ridges
scattered over the face of the country, they are easily recognized.

Of course, the ancient glaciers of Great Britain were far more difficult to trace than those
of Switzerland, where the present glaciers are guides to the old
ones.

But, nevertheless, my expectations were more than answered. The first valley I entered in the
glacial regions of Scotland was barred by a terminal moraine; and throughout the North of England,
as well as in Scotland and Ireland, I found the hill-sides covered with traces of glacial
action, as distinct and unmistakable as those I had left in my native land. And not only was
the surface of the country polished, grooved, and scratched, as in the region of existing glaciers,
and presenting an appearance corresponding exactly to that described
elsewhere, but we could track the path of the boulders where they
had come down from the hills above and been carried from the mouth
of each valley far down into the plains below.

In Scotland and Ireland the phenomena were especially interesting. I had intended to give in this
article some account of the "parallel roads" of Glenroy, marking the ancient levels of glacier-lakes,
so much discussed in this connection. But the reminiscences of old friends, and the many associations
revived in my mind by recurring to a subject which I have long looked upon as a closed chapter,
so far as my own researches are concerned, have constantly led me beyond the limits I had prescribed
to myself in these papers upon glaciers; and as the story of Glenroy and the phenomena connected
with it is a long one, I shall reserve it for a subsequent number.

* * * * *

BRYANT.

The literary life of Bryant begins with the publication of "Thanatopsis" in the "North American
Review," in 1816; for we need take no account of those earlier blossoms,
plucked untimely from the tree, as they had been prematurely expanded
by the heat of party politics.

The strain of that song was of a higher mood. In those days, when American literature spoke with
faint and feeble voice, like the chirp of half-awakened birds in the morning twilight, we need
not say what cordial welcome was extended to a poem which embodied
in blank verse worthy of anybody since Milton thoughts of the highest
reach and noblest power, or what wonder was mingled with the praise
when it was announced that this grand and majestic moral teaching
and this rich and sustained music were the work of a boy of eighteen.

Not that Bryant was no more than eighteen when "Thanatopsis" was printed, for he must pay
one of the tributes of eminence in having all the world know that he was born in 1794; but
he was no more than eighteen when it was written, and surely never
was there riper fruit plucked from so young a tree.

And now we have before us, with the imprint of 1864, his latest volume, entitled "Thirty Poems."
Between this date and that of the publication of "Thanatopsis" there
sweeps an arch of forty-eight years.

With Bryant these have been years of manly toil, of resolute sacrifice,
of faithful discharge of all the duties of life.

The cultivation of the poetical faculty is not always favorable to
the growth of the character, but Bryant is no less estimable as a
man than admirable as a poet.

It has been his lot to earn his bread by the exercise of the prose part of his mind,--by those
qualities which he has in common with other men,--and his poetry has been written in the intervals
and breathing-spaces of a life of regular industry.

This necessity for ungenial toil may have added something to the shyness and gravity of the poet's
manners; but it has doubtless given earnestness, concentration, depth, and a strong flavor of life
to his verse. Had he been a man of leisure, he might have written
more, but he could hardly have written better.

And nothing tends more to prolong to old age the freshness of feeling and the sensibility to
impressions which are characteristic of the poetical temperament than the dedication of a portion
of every day to some kind of task-work.

The sweetest flowers are those which grow upon the rocks of renunciation. Byron at thirty-seven
was a burnt-out volcano: Bryant at threescore and ten is as sensitive to the touch of beauty
as at twenty.

The poetry of Bryant is not great in amount, but it represents a great deal of work, as few men
are more finished artists than he, or more patient in shaping and polishing their productions. No piece
of verse ever leaves his hands till it has received the last touch demanded by the most correct
judgment and the most fastidious taste. Thus the style of his poetry is always admirable. Nowhere
can one find in what he has written a careless or slovenly expression, an awkward phrase, or
an ill-chosen word. He never puts in an epithet to fill out a line, and never uses one which
could be improved by substituting another. The range within which he moves is not wide. He has
not written narrative or dramatic poems: he has not painted poetical
portraits: he has not aspired to the honors of satire, of wit, or
of humor: he has made no contributions to the poetry of passion.

His poems may be divided into two great classes,--those which express the moral aspects of humanity,
and those which interpret the language of Nature; though it may be added that in not a few of
his productions these two elements are combined. Those of the former class are not so remarkable
for originality of treatment as for the beauty and truth with which they express the reflections of
the general mind and the emotions of the general heart. In these poems we see our own experience returned
to us, touched with the lights and colored with the hues of the most exquisite poetry. Their
tone is grave and high, but not gloomy or morbid: the edges of the cloud of life are turned
to gold by faith and hope.

Of the poems of this class, "Thanatopsis," of which we have already spoken, is one of the best
known.

Others are the "Hymn to Death," "The Old Man's Funeral," "A Forest Hymn," "The Lapse of Time,"
"An Evening Reverie," "The Old Man's Counsel," and "The Past." This last is one of the noblest
of his productions, full of solemn beauty and melancholy music, and
we cannot deny ourselves the pleasure of quoting a few of its stanzas.

Here is nothing new.

It is the old, sad strain, of coeval birth with poetry itself.

It may be read in the Hebrew of the Book of Job and in the Greek
of Homer: but with what dignity of sentiment, what majestic music,
what beauty of language, the oft-repeated lesson of humanity is enforced!

Every word is chosen with unerring judgment, and no needless dilution
of language weakens the force of the conceptions and pictures.

Bryant is one of the few poets who will bear the test of the well-nigh
obsolete art of verbal criticism: observe the expressions, "silent
fame," "forgotten arts," "wisdom disappeared": how exactly these epithets
satisfy the ear and the mind! how impossible to change any one of
them for the better!

In Bryant's descriptive poems there is the same finished execution
and the same beauty of style as in his reflective and didactic poems,
with more originality of treatment.

It was his fortune to be born and reared in the western part of Massachusetts, and to become
familiar with some of the most beautiful inland scenery of New England in youth and early manhood,
when the mind takes impressions which the attrition of life never
wears out.

In his study of Nature he combines the faculty and the vision, the eye of the naturalist and
the imagination of the poet. No man observes the outward shows of earth and sky more accurately;
no man feels them more vividly; no man describes them more beautifully.
 For some deemed certain men to have been gods,
whom they worshipped in the images of those men: for instance, Jupiter, Mercury, and so forth.
Others again deemed the whole world to be one god, not by reason of its material substance,
but by reason of its soul, which they believed to be God, for they held God to be nothing else
than a soul governing the world by movement and reason: even as a man is said to be wise in
respect not of his body but of his soul. Hence they thought that divine worship ought to be
given to the whole world and to all its parts, heaven, air, water, and to all such things:
and to these they referred the names of their gods, as Varro asserted, and Augustine relates
(De Civ. Dei vii, 5). Lastly, others, namely, the Platonists, said that there is one supreme
god, the cause of all things. After him they placed certain spiritual substances created by
the supreme god. These they called "gods," on account of their having a share of the godhead;
but we call them "angels." After these they placed the souls of the heavenly bodies, and beneath
these the demons which they stated to be certain animal denizens of the air, and beneath these
again they placed human souls, which they believed to be taken up into the fellowship of the
gods or of the demons by reason of the merit of their virtue. To all these they gave divine
worship, as Augustine relates (De Civ . . Dei xviii, 14).

The last two opinions were held to belong to "natural theology" which the philosophers gathered
from their study of the world and taught in the schools: while the other, relating to the worship
of men, was said to belong to "mythical theology" which was wont to be represented on the stage
according to the fancies of poets. The remaining opinion relating to images was held to belong
to "civil theology," which was celebrated by the pontiffs in the temples [*De Civ. Dei vi, 5].

Now all these come under the head of the superstition of idolatry.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as religion is not faith, but a confession of faith by outward signs, so
superstition is a confession of unbelief by external worship. Such a confession is signified
by the term idolatry, but not by the term heresy, which only means a false opinion. Therefore
heresy is a species of unbelief, but idolatry is a species of superstition.

Reply Obj. 2: The term latria may be taken in two senses. In one sense it may denote a human
act pertaining to the worship of God: and then its signification remains the same, to whomsoever
it be shown, because, in this sense, the thing to which it is shown is not included in its
definition. Taken thus latria is applied univocally, whether to true religion or to idolatry,
just as the payment of a tax is univocally the same, whether it is paid to the true or to a
false king. In another sense latria denotes the same as religion, and then, since it is a virtue,
it is essential thereto that divine worship be given to whom it ought to be given; and in this
way latria is applied equivocally to the latria of true religion, and to idolatry: just as
prudence is applied equivocally to the prudence that is a virtue, and to that which is carnal.

Reply Obj. 3: The saying of the Apostle that "an idol is nothing in the world" means that those
images which were called idols, were not animated, or possessed of a divine power, as Hermes
maintained, as though they were composed of spirit and body. In the same sense we must understand
the saying that "what is offered in sacrifice to idols is not anything," because by being thus
sacrificed the sacrificial flesh acquired neither sanctification, as the Gentiles thought,
nor uncleanness, as the Jews held.

Reply Obj. 4: It was owing to the general custom among the Gentiles of worshipping any kind
of creature under the form of images that the term "idolatry" was used to signify any worship
of a creature, even without the use of images.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 94, Art. 2]

Whether Idolatry Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that idolatry is not a sin. Nothing is a sin that the true faith
employs in worshipping God. Now the true faith employs images for the divine worship: since
both in the Tabernacle were there images of the cherubim, as related in Ex. 25, and in the
Church are images set up which the faithful worship. Therefore idolatry, whereby idols are
worshipped, is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, reverence should be paid to every superior. But the angels and the souls of
the blessed are our superiors. Therefore it will be no sin to pay them reverence by worship,
of sacrifices or the like.

Obj. 3: Further, the most high God should be honored with an inward worship, according to John
4:24, "God . . . they must adore . . . in spirit and in truth": and Augustine says (Enchiridion
iii), that "God is worshipped by faith, hope and charity." Now a man may happen to worship
idols outwardly, and yet not wander from the true faith inwardly. Therefore it seems that we
may worship idols outwardly without prejudice to the divine worship.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 20:5): "Thou shalt not adore them," i.e. outwardly, "nor
serve them," i.e. inwardly, as a gloss explains it: and it is a question of graven things and
images. Therefore it is a sin to worship idols whether outwardly or inwardly.

I answer that, There has been a twofold error in this matter. For some [*The School of Plato]
have thought that to offer sacrifices and other things pertaining to latria, not only to God
but also to the others aforesaid, is due and good in itself, since they held that divine honor
should be paid to every superior nature, as being nearer to God. But this is unreasonable.
For though we ought to revere all superiors, yet the same reverence is not due to them all:
and something special is due to the most high God Who excels all in a singular manner: and
this is the worship of latria.

Nor can it be said, as some have maintained, that "these visible sacrifices are fitting with
regard to other gods, and that to the most high God, as being better than those others, better
sacrifices, namely, the service of a pure mind, should be offered" [*Augustine, as quoted below].
The reason is that, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 19), "external sacrifices are signs of
internal, just as audible words are signs of things. Wherefore, just as by prayer and praise
we utter significant words to Him, and offer to Him in our hearts the things they signify,
so too in our sacrifices we ought to realize that we should offer a visible sacrifice to no
other than to Him Whose invisible sacrifice we ourselves should be in our hearts."

Others held that the outward worship of latria should be given to idols, not as though it were
something good or fitting in itself, but as being in harmony with the general custom. Thus
Augustine (De Civ. Dei vi, 10) quotes Seneca as saying: "We shall adore," says he, "in such
a way as to remember that our worship is in accordance with custom rather than with the reality":
and (De Vera Relig. v) Augustine says that "we must not seek religion from the philosophers,
who accepted the same things for sacred, as did the people; and gave utterance in the schools
to various and contrary opinions about the nature of their gods, and the sovereign good." This
error was embraced also by certain heretics [*The Helcesaitae], who affirmed that it is not
wrong for one who is seized in time of persecution to worship idols outwardly so long as he
keeps the faith in his heart.

But this is evidently false. For since outward worship is a sign of the inward worship, just
as it is a wicked lie to affirm the contrary of what one holds inwardly of the true faith so
too is it a wicked falsehood to pay outward worship to anything counter to the sentiments of
one's heart. Wherefore Augustine condemns Seneca (De Civ. Dei vi, 10) in that "his worship
of idols was so much the more infamous forasmuch as the things he did dishonestly were so done
by him that the people believed him to act honestly."

Reply Obj. 1: Neither in the Tabernacle or Temple of the Old Law, nor again now in the Church
are images set up that the worship of latria may be paid to them, but for the purpose of signification,
in order that belief in the excellence of angels and saints may be impressed and confirmed
in the mind of man. It is different with the image of Christ, to which latria is due on account
of His Divinity, as we shall state in the Third Part (Q. 25, A. 3).

The Replies to the Second and Third Objections are evident from what has been said above.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 94, Art. 3]

Whether Idolatry Is the Gravest of Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that idolatry is not the gravest of sins. The worst is opposed to
the best (Ethic. viii, 10). But interior worship, which consists of faith, hope and charity,
is better than external worship. Therefore unbelief, despair and hatred of God, which are opposed
to internal worship, are graver sins than idolatry, which is opposed to external worship.

Obj. 2: Further, the more a sin is against God the more grievous it is. Now, seemingly, a man
acts more directly against God by blaspheming, or denying the faith, than by giving God's worship
to another, which pertains to idolatry. Therefore blasphemy and denial of the faith are more
grievous sins than idolatry.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems that lesser evils are punished with greater evils. But the sin of
idolatry was punished with the sin against nature, as stated in Rom. 1:26. Therefore the sin
against nature is a graver sin than idolatry.

Obj. 4: Further, Augustine says (Contra Faust. xx, 5): "Neither do we say that you," viz. the
Manichees, "are pagans, or a sect of pagans, but that you bear a certain likeness to them since
you worship many gods: and yet you are much worse than they are, for they worship things that
exist, but should not be worshiped as gods, whereas you worship things that exist not at all."
Therefore the vice of heretical depravity is more grievous than idolatry.

Obj. 5: Further, a gloss of Jerome on Gal. 4:9, "How turn you again to the weak and needy elements?"
says: "The observance of the Law, to which they were then addicted, was a sin almost equal
to the worship of idols, to which they had been given before their conversion." Therefore idolatry
is not the most grievous sin.

On the contrary, A gloss on the saying of Lev. 15:25, about the uncleanness of a woman suffering
from an issue of blood, says: "Every sin is an uncleanness of the soul, but especially idolatry."

I answer that, The gravity of a sin may be considered in two ways. First, on the part of the
sin itself, and thus idolatry is the most grievous sin. For just as the most heinous crime
in an earthly commonwealth would seem to be for a man to give royal honor to another than the
true king, since, so far as he is concerned, he disturbs the whole order of the commonwealth,
so, in sins that are committed against God, which indeed are the greater sins, the greatest
of all seems to be for a man to give God's honor to a creature, since, so far as he is concerned,
he sets up another God in the world, and lessens the divine sovereignty. Secondly, the gravity
of a sin may be considered on the part of the sinner. Thus the sin of one that sins knowingly
is said to be graver than the sin of one that sins through ignorance: and in this way nothing
hinders heretics, if they knowingly corrupt the faith which they have received, from sinning
more grievously than idolaters who sin through ignorance. Furthermore other sins may be more
grievous on account of greater contempt on the part of the sinner.

Reply Obj. 1: Idolatry presupposes internal unbelief, and to this it adds undue worship. But
in a case of external idolatry without internal unbelief, there is an additional sin of falsehood,
as stated above (A. 2).

Reply Obj. 2: Idolatry includes a grievous blasphemy, inasmuch as it deprives God of the singleness
of His dominion and denies the faith by deeds.

Reply Obj. 3: Since it is essential to punishment that it be against the will, a sin whereby
another sin is punished needs to be more manifest, in order that it may make the man more hateful
to himself and to others; but it need not be a more grievous sin: and in this way the sin against
nature is less grievous than the sin of idolatry. But since it is more manifest, it is assigned
as a fitting punishment of the sin of idolatry, in order that, as by idolatry man abuses the
order of the divine honor, so by the sin against nature he may suffer confusion from the abuse
of his own nature.

Reply Obj. 4: Even as to the genus of the sin, the Manichean heresy is more grievous than the
sin of other idolaters, because it is more derogatory to the divine honor, since they set up
two gods in opposition to one another, and hold many vain and fabulous fancies about God. It
is different with other heretics, who confess their belief in one God and worship Him alone.

Reply Obj. 5: The observance of the Law during the time of grace is not quite equal to idolatry
as to the genus of the sin, but almost equal, because both are species of pestiferous superstition.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 94, Art. 4]

Whether the Cause of Idolatry Was on the Part of Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that the cause of idolatry was not on the part of man. In man there
is nothing but either nature, virtue, or guilt. But the cause of idolatry could not be on the
part of man's nature, since rather does man's natural reason dictate that there is one God,
and that divine worship should not be paid to the dead or to inanimate beings. Therefore idolatry
has no cause on the part of man.

Obj. 2: Further, those things which have a cause in man are found among men at all times. Now
idolatry was not always, but is stated [*Peter Comestor, Hist. Genes. xxxvii, xl] to have been
originated either by Nimrod, who is related to have forced men to worship fire, or by Ninus,
who caused the statue of his father Bel to be worshiped. Among the Greeks, as related by Isidore
(Etym. viii, 11), Prometheus was the first to set up statues of men: and the Jews say that
Ismael was the first to make idols of clay. Moreover, idolatry ceased to a great extent in
the sixth age. Therefore idolatry had no cause on the part of man.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 6): "It was not possible to learn, for the
first time, except from their" (i.e. the demons') "teaching, what each of them desired or disliked,
and by what name to invite or compel him: so as to give birth to the magic arts and their professors":
and the same observation seems to apply to idolatry. Therefore idolatry had no cause on the
part of man.

On the contrary, It is written (Wis. 14:14): "By the vanity of men they," i.e. idols, "came
into the world."

I answer that, Idolatry had a twofold cause. One was a dispositive cause; this was on the part
of man, and in three ways. First, on account of his inordinate affections, forasmuch as he
gave other men divine honor, through either loving or revering them too much. This cause is
assigned (Wis. 14:15): "A father being afflicted with bitter grief, made to himself the image
of his son, who was quickly taken away: and him who then had died as a man he began to worship
as a god." The same passage goes on to say (Wis. 14:21) that "men serving either their affection,
or their kings, gave the incommunicable name [Vulg.: 'names']," i.e. of the Godhead, "to stones
and wood." Secondly, because man takes a natural pleasure in representations, as the Philosopher
observes (Poet. iv), wherefore as soon as the uncultured man saw human images skillfully fashioned
by the diligence of the craftsman, he gave them divine worship; hence it is written (Wis. 13:11-17):
"If an artist, a carpenter, hath cut down a tree, proper for his use, in the wood . . . and
by the skill of his art fashioneth it, and maketh it like the image of a man . . . and then
maketh prayer to it, inquiring concerning his substance, and his children, or his marriage."
Thirdly, on account of their ignorance of the true God, inasmuch as through failing to consider
His excellence men gave divine worship to certain creatures, on account of their beauty or
power, wherefore it is written (Wis. 13:1, 2): "All men . . . neither by attending to the works
have acknowledged who was the workman, but have imagined either the fire, or the wind, or the
swift air, or the circle of the stars, or the great water, or the sun and the moon, to be the
gods that rule the world."

The other cause of idolatry was completive, and this was on the part of the demons, who offered
themselves to be worshipped by men, by giving answers in the idols, and doing things which
to men seemed marvelous. Hence it is written (Ps. 95:5): "All the gods of the Gentiles are devils."

Reply Obj. 1: The dispositive cause of idolatry was, on the part of man, a defect of nature,
either through ignorance in his intellect, or disorder in his affections, as stated above;
and this pertains to guilt. Again, idolatry is stated to be the cause, beginning and end of
all sin, because there is no kind of sin that idolatry does not produce at some time, either
through leading expressly to that sin by causing it, or through being an occasion thereof,
either as a beginning or as an end, in so far as certain sins were employed in the worship
of idols; such as homicides, mutilations, and so forth. Nevertheless certain sins may precede
idolatry and dispose man thereto.

Reply Obj. 2: There was no idolatry in the first age, owing to the recent remembrance of the
creation of the world, so that man still retained in his mind the knowledge of one God. In
the sixth age idolatry was banished by the doctrine and power of Christ, who triumphed over
the devil.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers the consummative cause of idolatry.

QUESTION 95

OF SUPERSTITION IN DIVINATIONS (In Eight Articles)

We must now consider superstition in divinations, under which head there are eight points of
inquiry:

(1) Whether divination is a sin?

(2) Whether it is a species of superstition?

(3) Of the species of divination;

(4) Of divination by means of demons;

(5) Of divination by the stars;

(6) Of divination by dreams;

(7) Of divination by auguries and like observances;

(8) Of divination by lots.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 1]

Whether Divination Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination is not a sin. Divination is derived from something
divine: and things that are divine pertain to holiness rather than to sin. Therefore it seems
that divination is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. i, 1): "Who dares to say that learning is an
evil?" and again: "I could nowise admit that intelligence can be an evil." But some arts are
divinatory, as the Philosopher states (De Memor. i): and divination itself would seem to pertain
to a certain intelligence of the truth. Therefore it seems that divination is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, there is no natural inclination to evil; because nature inclines only to its
like. But men by natural inclination seek to foreknow future events; and this belongs to divination.
Therefore divination is not a sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 18:10, 11): "Neither let there be found among you . .
. any one that consulteth pythonic spirits, or fortune tellers": and it is stated in the Decretals
(26, qu. v, can. Qui divinationes): "Those who seek for divinations shall be liable to a penance
of five years' duration, according to the fixed grades of penance."

I answer that, Divination denotes a foretelling of the future. The future may be foreknown
in two ways: first in its causes, secondly in itself. Now the causes of the future are threefold:
for some produce their effects, of necessity and always; and such like future effects can be
foreknown and foretold with certainty, from considering their causes, even as astrologers foretell
a coming eclipse. Other causes produce their effects, not of necessity and always, but for
the most part, yet they rarely fail: and from such like causes their future effects can be
foreknown, not indeed with certainty, but by a kind of conjecture, even as astrologers by considering
the stars can foreknow and foretell things concerning rains and droughts, and physicians, concerning
health and death. Again, other causes, considered in themselves, are indifferent; and this
is chiefly the case in the rational powers, which stand in relation to opposites, according
to the Philosopher [*Metaph. viii, 2, 5, 8]. Such like effects, as also those which ensue from
natural causes by chance and in the minority of instances, cannot be foreknown from a consideration
of their causes, because these causes have no determinate inclination to produce these effects.
Consequently such like effects cannot be foreknown unless they be considered in themselves.
Now man cannot consider these effects in themselves except when they are present, as when he
sees Socrates running or walking: the consideration of such things in themselves before they
occur is proper to God, Who alone in His eternity sees the future as though it were present,
as stated in the First Part (Q. 14, A. 13; Q. 57, A. 3; Q. 86, A. 4). Hence it is written (Isa.
41:23): "Show the things that are to come hereafter, and we shall know that ye are gods." Therefore
if anyone presume to foreknow or foretell such like future things by any means whatever, except
by divine revelation, he manifestly usurps what belongs to God. It is for this reason that
certain men are called divines: wherefore Isidore says (Etym. viii, 9): "They are called divines,
as though they were full of God. For they pretend to be filled with the Godhead, and by a deceitful
fraud they forecast the future to men."

Accordingly it is not called divination, if a man foretells things that happen of necessity,
or in the majority of instances, for the like can be foreknown by human reason: nor again if
anyone knows other contingent future things, through divine revelation: for then he does not
divine, i.e. cause something divine, but rather receives something divine. Then only is a man
said to divine, when he usurps to himself, in an undue manner, the foretelling of future events:
and this is manifestly a sin. Consequently divination is always a sin; and for this reason
Jerome says in his commentary on Mic. 3:9, seqq. that "divination is always taken in an evil
sense."

Reply Obj. 1: Divination takes its name not from a rightly ordered share of something divine,
but from an undue usurpation thereof, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: There are certain arts for the foreknowledge of future events that occur of necessity
or frequently, and these do not pertain to divination. But there are no true arts or sciences
for the knowledge of other future events, but only vain inventions of the devil's deceit, as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 8).

Reply Obj. 3: Man has a natural inclination to know the future by human means, but not by the
undue means of divination.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 2]

Whether Divination Is a Species of Superstition?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination is not a species of superstition. The same thing
cannot be a species of diverse genera. Now divination is apparently a species of curiosity,
according to Augustine (De Vera Relig. xxxviii) [*Cf. De Doctr. Christ. ii, 23, 24; De Divin.
Daem. 3]. Therefore it is not, seemingly, a species of superstition.

Obj. 2: Further, just as religion is due worship, so is superstition undue worship. But divination
does not seem to pertain to undue worship. Therefore it does not pertain to superstition.

Obj. 3: Further, superstition is opposed to religion. But in true religion nothing is to be
found corresponding as a contrary to divination. Therefore divination is not a species of superstition.

On the contrary, Origen says in his Peri Archon [*The quotation is from his sixteenth homily
on the Book of Numbers]: "There is an operation of the demons in the administering of foreknowledge,
comprised, seemingly, under the head of certain arts exercised by those who have enslaved themselves
to the demons, by means of lots, omens, or the observance of shadows. I doubt not that all
these things are done by the operation of the demons." Now, according to Augustine (De Doctr.
Christ. ii, 20, 23), "whatever results from fellowship between demons and men is superstitious."
Therefore divination is a species of superstition.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1; QQ. 92, 94), superstition denotes undue divine worship.
Now a thing pertains to the worship of God in two ways: in one way, it is something offered
to God; as a sacrifice, an oblation, or something of the kind: in another way, it is something
divine that is assumed, as stated above with regard to an oath (Q. 89, A. 4, ad 2). Wherefore
superstition includes not only idolatrous sacrifices offered to demons, but also recourse to
the help of the demons for the purpose of doing or knowing something. But all divination results
from the demons' operation, either because the demons are expressly invoked that the future
may be made known, or because the demons thrust themselves into futile searchings of the future,
in order to entangle men's minds with vain conceits. Of this kind of vanity it is written (Ps.
39:5): "Who hath not regard to vanities and lying follies." Now it is vain to seek knowledge
of the future, when one tries to get it from a source whence it cannot be foreknown. Therefore
it is manifest that divination is a species of superstition.

Reply Obj. 1: Divination is a kind of curiosity with regard to the end in view, which is foreknowledge
of the future; but it is a kind of superstition as regards the mode of operation.

Reply Obj. 2: This kind of divination pertains to the worship of the demons, inasmuch as one
enters into a compact, tacit or express with the demons.

Reply Obj. 3: In the New Law man's mind is restrained from solicitude about temporal things:
wherefore the New Law contains no institution for the foreknowledge of future events in temporal
matters. On the other hand in the Old Law, which contained earthly promises, there were consultations
about the future in connection with religious matters. Hence where it is written (Isa. 8:19):
"And when they shall say to you: Seek of pythons and of diviners, who mutter in their enchantments,"
it is added by way of answer: "Should not the people seek of their God, a vision for the living
and the dead? [*Vulg.: 'seek of their God, for the living of the dead?']"

In the New Testament, however, there were some possessed of the spirit of prophecy, who foretold
many things about future events.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 3]

Whether We Ought to Distinguish Several Species of Divination?

Objection 1: It would seem that we should not distinguish several species of divination. Where
the formality of sin is the same, there are not seemingly several species of sin. Now there
is one formality of sin in all divinations, since they consist in entering into compact with
the demons in order to know the future. Therefore there are not several species of divination.

Obj. But all divination is directed to one end, namely, the foretelling of the future. Therefore
all divinations are of one species.

Obj. 3: Further, signs do not vary the species of a sin, for whether one detracts by word,
writing or gestures, it is the same species of sin. Now divinations seem to differ merely according
to the various signs whence the foreknowledge of the future is derived. Therefore there are
not several species of divination.

On the contrary, Isidore enumerates various species of divination (Etym. viii, 9).

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), all divinations seek to acquire foreknowledge of future
events, by means of some counsel and help of a demon, who is either expressly called upon to
give his help, or else thrusts himself in secretly, in order to foretell certain future things
unknown to men, but known to him in such manners as have been explained in the First Part (Q.
57, A. 3). When demons are expressly invoked, they are wont to foretell the future in many
ways. Sometimes they offer themselves to human sight and hearing by mock apparitions in order
to foretell the future: and this species is called "prestigiation" because man's eyes are blindfolded
(praestringuntur). Sometimes they make use of dreams, and this is called "divination by dreams":
sometimes they employ apparitions or utterances of the dead, and this species is called "necromancy,"
for as Isidore observes (Etym. viii) in Greek, "nekron means dead, and manteia divination,
because after certain incantations and the sprinkling of blood, the dead seem to come to life,
to divine and to answer questions." Sometimes they foretell the future through living men,
as in the case of those who are possessed: this is divination by "pythons," of whom Isidore
says that "pythons are so called from Pythius Apollo, who was said to be the inventor of divination."
Sometimes they foretell the future by means of shapes or signs which appear in inanimate beings.
If these signs appear in some earthly body such as wood, iron or polished stone, it is called
"geomancy," if in water "hydromancy," if in the air "aeromancy," if in fire "pyromancy," if
in the entrails of animals sacrificed on the altars of demons, "aruspicy."

The divination which is practiced without express invocation of the demons is of two kinds.
The first is when, with a view to obtain knowledge of the future, we take observations in the
disposition of certain things. If one endeavor to know the future by observing the position
and movements of the stars, this belongs to "astrologers," who are also called "genethliacs,"
because they take note of the days on which people are born. If one observe the movements and
cries of birds or of any animals, or the sneezing of men, or the sudden movements of limbs,
this belongs in general to "augury," which is so called from the chattering of birds (avium
garritu), just as "auspice" is derived from watching birds (avium inspectione). These are chiefly
wont to be observed in birds, the former by the ear, the latter by the eye. If, however, these
observations have for their object men's words uttered unintentionally, which someone twist
so as to apply to the future that he wishes to foreknow, then it is called an "omen": and as
Valerius Maximus [*De Dict. Fact. Memor. i, 5] remarks, "the observing of omens has a touch
of religion mingled with it, for it is believed to be founded not on a chance movement, but
on divine providence. It was thus that when the Romans were deliberating whether they would
change their position, a centurion happened to exclaim at the time: 'Standard-bearer, fix the
banner, we had best stand here': and on hearing these words they took them as an omen, and
abandoned their intention of advancing further." If, however, the observation regards the dispositions,
that occur to the eye, of figures in certain bodies, there will be another species of divination:
for the divination that is taken from observing the lines of the hand is called "chiromancy,"
i.e. divination of the hand (because cheir is the Greek for hand): while the divination which
is taken from signs appearing in the shoulder-blades of an animal is called "spatulamancy."

To this second species of divination, which is without express invocation of the demons, belongs
that which is practiced by observing certain things done seriously by men in the research of
the occult, whether by drawing lots, which is called "geomancy"; or by observing the shapes
resulting from molten lead poured into water; or by observing which of several sheets of paper,
with or without writing upon them, a person may happen to draw; or by holding out several unequal
sticks and noting who takes the greater or the lesser, or by throwing dice, and observing who
throws the highest score; or by observing what catches the eye when one opens a book, all of
which are named "sortilege."

Accordingly it is clear that there are three kinds of divination. The first is when the demons
are invoked openly, this comes under the head of "necromancy"; the second is merely an observation
of the disposition or movement of some other being, and this belongs to "augury"; while the
third consists in doing something in order to discover the occult; and this belongs to "sortilege."
Under each of these many others are contained, as explained above.

Reply Obj. 1: In all the aforesaid there is the same general, but not the same special, character
of sin: for it is much more grievous to invoke the demons than to do things that deserve the
demons' interference.

Reply Obj. 2: Knowledge of the future or of the occult is the ultimate end whence divination
takes its general formality. But the various species are distinguished by their proper objects
or matters, according as the knowledge of the occult is sought in various things.

Reply Obj. 3: The things observed by diviners are considered by them, not as signs expressing
what they already know, as happens in detraction, but as principles of knowledge. Now it is
evident that diversity of principles diversifies the species, even in demonstrative sciences.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 4]

Whether Divination Practiced by Invoking the Demons Is Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination practiced by invoking the demons is not unlawful.
Christ did nothing unlawful, according to 1 Pet. 2:22, "Who did no sin." Yet our Lord asked
the demon: "What is thy name?" and the latter replied: "My name is Legion, for we are many"
(Mk. 5:9). Therefore it seems lawful to question the demons about the occult.

Obj. 2: Further, the souls of the saints do not encourage those who ask unlawfully. Yet Samuel
appeared to Saul when the latter inquired of the woman that had a divining spirit, concerning
the issue of the coming war (1 Kings 28:8, sqq.). Therefore the divination that consists in
questioning demons is not unlawful.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems lawful to seek the truth from one who knows, if it be useful to know
it. But it is sometimes useful to know what is hidden from us, and can be known through the
demons, as in the discovery of thefts. Therefore divination by questioning demons is not unlawful.

I answer that, All divination by invoking demons is unlawful for two reasons. The first is
gathered from the principle of divination, which is a compact made expressly with a demon by
the very fact of invoking him. This is altogether unlawful; wherefore it is written against
certain persons (Isa. 28:15): "You have said: We have entered into a league with death, and
we have made a covenant with hell." And still more grievous would it be if sacrifice were offered
or reverence paid to the demon invoked. The second reason is gathered from the result. For
the demon who intends man's perdition endeavors, by his answers, even though he sometimes tells
the truth, to accustom men to believe him, and so to lead him on to something prejudicial to
the salvation of mankind. Hence Athanasius, commenting on the words of Luke 4:35, "He rebuked
him, saying: Hold thy peace," says: "Although the demon confessed the truth, Christ put a stop
to his speech, lest together with the truth he should publish his wickedness and accustom us
to care little for such things, however much he may seem to speak the truth. For it is wicked,
while we have the divine Scriptures, to seek knowledge from the demons."

Reply Obj. 1: According to Bede's commentary on Luke 8:30, "Our Lord inquired, not through
ignorance, but in order that the disease, which he tolerated, being made public, the power
of the Healer might shine forth more graciously." Now it is one thing to question a demon who
comes to us of his own accord (and it is lawful to do so at times for the good of others, especially
when he can be compelled, by the power of God, to tell the truth) and another to invoke a demon
in order to gain from him knowledge of things hidden from us.

Reply Obj. 2: According to Augustine (Ad Simplic. ii, 3), "there is nothing absurd in believing
that the spirit of the just man, being about to smite the king with the divine sentence, was
permitted to appear to him, not by the sway of magic art or power, but by some occult dispensation
of which neither the witch nor Saul was aware. Or else the spirit of Samuel was not in reality
aroused from his rest, but some phantom or mock apparition formed by the machinations of the
devil, and styled by Scripture under the name of Samuel, just as the images of things are wont
to be called by the names of those things."

Reply Obj. 3: No temporal utility can compare with the harm to spiritual health that results
from the research of the unknown by invoking the demon.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 5]

Whether Divination by the Stars Is Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by the stars is not unlawful. It is lawful to foretell
effects by observing their causes: thus a physician foretells death from the disposition of
the disease. Now the heavenly bodies are the cause of what takes place in the world, according
to Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv). Therefore divination by the stars is not unlawful.

Obj. 2: Further, human science originates from experiments, according to the Philosopher (Metaph.
i, 1). Now it has been discovered through many experiments that the observation of the stars
is a means whereby some future events may be known beforehand. Therefore it would seem not
unlawful to make use of this kind of divination.

Obj. 3: Further, divination is declared to be unlawful in so far as it is based on a compact
made with the demons. But divination by the stars contains nothing of the kind, but merely
an observation of God's creatures. Therefore it would seem that this species of divination
is not unlawful.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Confess. iv, 3): "Those astrologers whom they call mathematicians,
I consulted without scruple; because they seemed to use no sacrifice, nor to pray to any spirit
for their divinations which art, however, Christian and true piety rejects and condemns."

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 1, 2), the operation of the demon thrusts itself into those
divinations which are based on false and vain opinions, in order that man's mind may become
entangled in vanity and falsehood. Now one makes use of a vain and false opinion if, by observing
the stars, one desires to foreknow the future that cannot be forecast by their means. Wherefore
we must consider what things can be foreknown by observing the stars: and it is evident that
those things which happen of necessity can be foreknown by this means: even so astrologers
forecast a future eclipse.

However, with regard to the foreknowledge of future events acquired by observing the stars
there have been various opinions. For some have stated that the stars signify rather than cause
the things foretold by means of their observation. But this is an unreasonable statement: since
every corporeal sign is either the effect of that for which it stands (thus smoke signifies
fire whereby it is caused), or it proceeds from the same cause, so that by signifying the cause,
in consequence it signifies the effect (thus a rainbow is sometimes a sign of fair weather,
in so far as its cause is the cause of fair weather). Now it cannot be said that the dispositions
and movements of the heavenly bodies are the effect of future events; nor again can they be
ascribed to some common higher cause of a corporeal nature, although they are referable to
a common higher cause, which is divine providence. On the contrary the appointment of the movements
and positions of the heavenly bodies by divine providence is on a different principle from
the appointment of the occurrence of future contingencies, because the former are appointed
on a principle of necessity, so that they always occur in the same way, whereas the latter
are appointed on a principle of contingency, so that the manner of their occurrence is variable.
Consequently it is impossible to acquire foreknowledge of the future from an observation of
the stars, except in so far as effects can be foreknown from their causes.

Now two kinds of effects escape the causality of heavenly bodies. In the first place all effects
that occur accidentally, whether in human affairs or in the natural order, since, as it is
proved in Metaph. vi [*Ed. Did. v, 3], an accidental being has no cause, least of all a natural
cause, such as is the power of a heavenly body, because what occurs accidentally, neither is
a being properly speaking, nor is one--for instance, that an earthquake occur when a stone
falls, or that a treasure be discovered when a man digs a grave--for these and like occurrences
are not one thing, but are simply several things. Whereas the operation of nature has always
some one thing for its term, just as it proceeds from some one principle, which is the form
of a natural thing.

In the second place, acts of the free-will, which is the faculty of will and reason, escape
the causality of heavenly bodies. For the intellect or reason is not a body, nor the act of
a bodily organ, and consequently neither is the will, since it is in the reason, as the Philosopher
shows (De Anima iii, 4, 9). Now no body can make an impression on an incorporeal body. Wherefore
it is impossible for heavenly bodies to make a direct impression on the intellect and will:
for this would be to deny the difference between intellect and sense, with which position Aristotle
reproaches (De Anima iii, 3) those who held that "such is the will of man, as is the day which
the father of men and of gods," i.e. the sun or the heavens, "brings on" [*Odyssey xviii, 135].

Hence the heavenly bodies cannot be the direct cause of the free-will's operations. Nevertheless
they can be a dispositive cause of an inclination to those operations, in so far as they make
an impression on the human body, and consequently on the sensitive powers which are acts of
bodily organs having an inclination for human acts. Since, however, the sensitive powers obey
reason, as the Philosopher shows (De Anima iii, 11; Ethic. i, 13), this does not impose any
necessity on the free-will, and man is able, by his reason, to act counter to the inclination
of the heavenly bodies.

Accordingly if anyone take observation of the stars in order to foreknow casual or fortuitous
future events, or to know with certitude future human actions, his conduct is based on a false
and vain opinion; and so the operation of the demon introduces itself therein, wherefore it
will be a superstitious and unlawful divination. On the other hand if one were to apply the
observation of the stars in order to foreknow those future things that are caused by heavenly
bodies, for instance, drought or rain and so forth, it will be neither an unlawful nor a superstitious
divination.

Wherefore the Reply to the First Objection is evident.

Reply Obj. 2: That astrologers not unfrequently forecast the truth by observing the stars may
be explained in two ways. First, because a great number of men follow their bodily passions,
so that their actions are for the most part disposed in accordance with the inclination of
the heavenly bodies: while there are few, namely, the wise alone, who moderate these inclinations
by their reason. The result is that astrologers in many cases foretell the truth, especially
in public occurrences which depend on the multitude. Secondly, because of the interference
of the demons. Hence Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. ii, 17): "When astrologers tell the truth,
it must be allowed that this is due to an instinct that, unknown to man, lies hidden in his
mind. And since this happens through the action of unclean and lying spirits who desire to
deceive man for they are permitted to know certain things about temporal affairs." Wherefore
he concludes: "Thus a good Christian should beware of astrologers, and of all impious diviners,
especially of those who tell the truth, lest his soul become the dupe of the demons and by
making a compact of of partnership with them enmesh itself in their fellowship."

This suffices for the Reply to the Third Objection.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 6]

Whether Divination by Dreams Is Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by dreams is not unlawful. It is not unlawful to
make use of divine instruction. Now men are instructed by God in dreams, for it is written
(Job 33:15, 16): "By a dream in a vision by night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, and they
are sleeping in their beds, then He," God to wit, "openeth the ears of men, and teaching instructeth
them in what they are to learn." Therefore it is not unlawful to make use of divination by dreams.

Obj. 2: Further, those who interpret dreams, properly speaking, make use of divination by dreams.
Now we read of holy men interpreting dreams: thus Joseph interpreted the dreams of Pharaoh's
butler and of his chief baker (Gen. 40), and Daniel interpreted the dream of the king of Babylon
(Dan. 2, 4). Therefore divination by dreams is not unlawful.

Obj. 3: Further, it is unreasonable to deny the common experiences of men. Now it is the experience
of all that dreams are significative of the future. Therefore it is useless to deny the efficacy
of dreams for the purpose of divination, and it is lawful to listen to them.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 18:10): "Neither let there be found among you any one
that . . . observeth dreams."

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 2, 6), divination is superstitious and unlawful when it
is based on a false opinion. Wherefore we must consider what is true in the matter of foreknowing
the future from dreams. Now dreams are sometimes the cause of future occurrences; for instance,
when a person's mind becomes anxious through what it has seen in a dream and is thereby led
to do something or avoid something: while sometimes dreams are signs of future happenings,
in so far as they are referable to some common cause of both dreams and future occurrences,
and in this way the future is frequently known from dreams. We must, then, consider what is
the cause of dreams, and whether it can be the cause of future occurrences, or be cognizant
of them.

Accordingly it is to be observed that the cause of dreams is sometimes in us and sometimes
outside us. The inward cause of dreams is twofold: one regards the soul, in so far as those
things which have occupied a man's thoughts and affections while awake recur to his imagination
while asleep. A such like cause of dreams is not a cause of future occurrences, so that dreams
of this kind are related accidentally to future occurrences, and if at any time they concur
it will be by chance. But sometimes the inward cause of dreams regards the body: because the
inward disposition of the body leads to the formation of a movement in the imagination consistent
with that disposition; thus a man in whom there is abundance of cold humors dreams that he
is in the water or snow: and for this reason physicians say that we should take note of dreams
in order to discover internal dispositions.

In like manner the outward cause of dreams is twofold, corporal and spiritual. It is corporal
in so far as the sleeper's imagination is affected either by the surrounding air, or through
an impression of a heavenly body, so that certain images appear to the sleeper, in keeping
with the disposition of the heavenly bodies. The spiritual cause is sometimes referable to
God, Who reveals certain things to men in their dreams by the ministry of the angels, according
Num. 12:6, "If there be among you a prophet of the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision,
or I will speak to him in a dream." Sometimes, however, it is due to the action of the demons
that certain images appear to persons in their sleep, and by this means they, at times, reveal
certain future things to those who have entered into an unlawful compact with them.

Accordingly we must say that there is no unlawful divination in making use of dreams for the
foreknowledge of the future, so long as those dreams are due to divine revelation, or to some
natural cause inward or outward, and so far as the efficacy of that cause extends. But it will
be an unlawful and superstitious divination if it be caused by a revelation of the demons,
with whom a compact has been made, whether explicit, through their being invoked for the purpose,
or implicit, through the divination extending beyond its possible limits.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

SEVENTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 7]

Whether Divination by Auguries, Omens, and by Like Observations of External Things Is Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by auguries, omens, and by like observations of
external things is not unlawful. If it were unlawful holy men would not make use thereof. Now
we read of Joseph that he paid attention to auguries, for it is related (Gen. 44:5) that Joseph's
steward said: "The cup which you have stolen is that in which my lord drinketh and in which
he is wont to divine (augurari)": and he himself afterwards said to his brethren (Gen. 44:15):
"Know you not that there is no one like me in the science of divining?" Therefore it is not
unlawful to make use of this kind of divination.

Obj. 2: Further, birds naturally know certain things regarding future occurrences of the seasons,
according to Jer. 8:7, "The kite in the air hath known her time; the turtle, the swallow, and
the stork have observed the time of their coming." Now natural knowledge is infallible and
comes from God. Therefore it seems not unlawful to make use of the birds' knowledge in order
to know the future, and this is divination by augury.

Obj. 3: Further, Gedeon is numbered among the saints (Heb. 11:32). Yet Gedeon made use of an
omen, when he listened to the relation and interpreting of a dream (Judges 7:15): and Eliezer,
Abraham's servant, acted in like manner (Gen. 24). Therefore it seems that this kind of divination
is not unlawful.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 18:10): "Neither let there be found among you anyone
. . . that observeth omens."

I answer that, The movements or cries of birds, and whatever dispositions one may consider
in such things, are manifestly not the cause of future events: wherefore the future cannot
be known therefrom as from its cause. It follows therefore that if anything future can be known
from them, it will be because the causes from which they proceed are also the causes of future
occurrences or are cognizant of them. Now the cause of dumb animals' actions is a certain instinct
whereby they are inclined by a natural movement, for they are not masters of their actions.
This instinct may proceed from a twofold cause. In the first place it may be due to a bodily
cause. For since dumb animals have naught but a sensitive soul, every power of which is the
act of a bodily organ, their soul is subject to the disposition of surrounding bodies, and
primarily to that of the heavenly bodies. Hence nothing prevents some of their actions from
being signs of the future, in so far as they are conformed to the dispositions of the heavenly
bodies and of the surrounding air, to which certain future events are due. Yet in this matter
we must observe two things: first, that such observations must not be applied to the foreknowledge
of future things other than those which can be foreknown from the movements of heavenly bodies,
as stated above (AA. 5, 6): secondly, that they be not applied to other matters than those
which in some way may have reference to these animals (since they acquire through the heavenly
bodies a certain natural knowledge and instinct about things necessary for their life--such
as changes resulting from rain and wind and so forth).

In the second place, this instinct is produced by a spiritual cause, namely, either by God,
as may be seen in the dove that descended upon Christ, the raven that fed Elias, and the whale
that swallowed and vomited Jonas, or by demons, who make use of these actions of dumb animals
in order to entangle our minds with vain opinions. This seems to be true of all such like things;
except omens, because human words which are taken for an omen are not subject to the disposition
of the stars, yet are they ordered according to divine providence and sometimes according to
the action of the demons.

Accordingly we must say that all such like divinations are superstitious and unlawful, if they
be extended beyond the limits set according to the order of nature or of divine providence.

Reply Obj. 1: According to Augustine [*QQ. in Genes., qu. cxlv], when Joseph said that there
was no one like him in the science of divining, he spoke in joke and not seriously, referring
perhaps to the common opinion about him: in this sense also spoke his steward.

Reply Obj. 2: The passage quoted refers to the knowledge that birds have about things concerning
them; and in order to know these things it is not unlawful to observe their cries and movements:
thus from the frequent cawing of crows one might say that it will rain soon.

Reply Obj. 3: Gedeon listened to the recital and interpretation of a dream, seeing therein
an omen, ordered by divine providence for his instruction. In like manner Eliezer listened
to the damsel's words, having previously prayed to God.

EIGHTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 95, Art. 8]

Whether Divination by Drawing Lots Is Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by drawing lots is not unlawful, because a gloss
of Augustine on Ps. 30:16, "My lots are in Thy hands," says: "It is not wrong to cast lots,
for it is a means of ascertaining the divine will when a man is in doubt."

Obj. 2: There is, seemingly, nothing unlawful in the observances which the Scriptures relate
as being practiced by holy men. Now both in the Old and in the New Testament we find holy men
practicing the casting of lots. For it is related (Jos. 7:14, sqq.) that Josue, at the Lord's
command, pronounced sentence by lot on Achan who had stolen of the anathema. Again Saul, by
drawing lots, found that his son Jonathan had eaten honey (1 Kings 14:58, sqq.): Jonas, when
fleeing from the face of the Lord, was discovered and thrown into the sea (Jonah 1:7, sqq.):
Zacharias was chosen by lot to offer incense (Luke 1:9): and the apostles by drawing lots elected
Matthias to the apostleship (Acts 1:26). Therefore it would seem that divination by lots is
not unlawful.

Obj. 3: Further, fighting with the fists, or "monomachy," i.e. single combat as it is called,
and trial by fire and water, which are called "popular" trials, seem to come under the head
of sortilege, because something unknown is sought by their means. Yet these practices seem
to be lawful, because David is related to have engaged in single combat with the Philistine
(1 Kings 17:32, sqq.). Therefore it would seem that divination by lot is not unlawful.

On the contrary, It is written in the Decretals (XXVI, qu. v, can. Sortes): "We decree that
the casting of lots, by which means you make up your mind in all your undertakings, and which
the Fathers have condemned, is nothing but divination and witchcraft. For which reason we wish
them to be condemned altogether, and henceforth not to be mentioned among Christians, and we
forbid the practice thereof under pain of anathema."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 3), sortilege consists, properly speaking, in doing something,
that by observing the result one may come to the knowledge of something unknown. If by casting
lots one seeks to know what is to be given to whom, whether it be a possession, an honor, a
dignity, a punishment, or some action or other, it is called "sortilege of allotment"; if one
seeks to know what ought to be done, it is called "sortilege of consultation"; if one seeks
to know what is going to happen, it is called "sortilege of divination." Now the actions of
man that are required for sortilege and their results are not subject to the dispositions of
the stars. Wherefore if anyone practicing sortilege is so minded as though the human acts requisite
for sortilege depended for their result on the dispositions of the stars, his opinion is vain
and false, and consequently is not free from the interference of the demons, so that a divination
of this kind is superstitious and unlawful.

Apart from this cause, however, the result of sortilegious acts must needs be ascribed to chance,
or to some directing spiritual cause. If we ascribe it to chance, and this can only take place
in "sortilege of allotment," it does not seem to imply any vice other than vanity, as in the
case of persons who, being unable to agree upon the division of something or other, are willing
to draw lots for its division, thus leaving to chance what portion each is to receive.

If, on the other hand, the decision by lot be left to a spiritual cause, it is sometimes ascribed
to demons. Thus we read (Ezech. 21:21) that "the king of Babylon stood in the highway, at the
head of two ways, seeking divination, shuffling arrows; he inquired of the idols, and consulted
entrails": sortilege of this kind is unlawful, and forbidden by the canons.

Sometimes, however, the decision is left to God, according to Prov. 16:33, "Lots are cast into
the lap, but they are disposed of by the Lord": sortilege of this kind is not wrong in itself,
as Augustine declares [*Enarr. ii in Ps. xxx, serm. 2; cf. Obj.[1]].

Yet this may happen to be sinful in four ways. First, if one have recourse to lots without
any necessity: for this would seem to amount to tempting God. Hence Ambrose, commenting on
the words of Luke 1:8, says: "He that is chosen by lot is not bound by the judgment of men."
Secondly, if even in a case of necessity one were to have recourse to lots without reverence.
Hence, on the Acts of the Apostles, Bede says (Super Act. Apost. i): "But if anyone, compelled
by necessity, thinks that he ought, after the apostles' example, to consult God by casting
lots, let him take note that the apostles themselves did not do so, except after calling together
the assembly of the brethren and pouring forth prayer to God." Thirdly, if the Divine oracles
be misapplied to earthly business. Hence Augustine says (ad inquisit. Januar. ii; Ep. lv):
"Those who tell fortunes from the Gospel pages, though it is to be hoped that they do so rather
than have recourse to consulting the demons, yet does this custom also displease me, that anyone
should wish to apply the Divine oracles to worldly matters and to the vain things of this life."
Fourthly, if anyone resort to the drawing of lots in ecclesiastical elections, which should
be carried out by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. Wherefore, as Bede says (Super Act. Apost.
i): "Before Pentecost the ordination of Matthias was decided by lot," because as yet the fulness
of the Holy Ghost was not yet poured forth into the Church: "whereas the same deacons were
ordained not by lot but by the choice of the disciples." It is different with earthly honors,
which are directed to the disposal of earthly things: in elections of this kind men frequently
have recourse to lots, even as in the distribution of earthly possessions.

If, however, there be urgent necessity it is lawful to seek the divine judgment by casting
lots, provided due reverence be observed. Hence Augustine says (Ep. ad Honor. ccxxviii), "If,
at a time of persecution, the ministers of God do not agree as to which of them is to remain
at his post lest all should flee, and which of them is to flee, lest all die and the Church
be forsaken, should there be no other means of coming to an agreement, so far as I can see,
they must be chosen by lot." Again he says (De Doctr. Christ. xxviii): "If thou aboundest in
that which it behooves thee to give to him who hath not, and which cannot be given to two;
should two come to you, neither of whom surpasses the other either in need or in some claim
on thee, thou couldst not act more justly than in choosing by lot to whom thou shalt give that
which thou canst not give to both."

This suffices for the Reply to the First and Second Objections.

Reply Obj. 3: The trial by hot iron or boiling water is directed to the investigation of someone's
hidden sin, by means of something done by a man, and in this it agrees with the drawing of
lots. But in so far as a miraculous result is expected from God, it surpasses the common generality
of sortilege. Hence this kind of trial is rendered unlawful, both because it is directed to
the judgment of the occult, which is reserved to the divine judgment, and because such like
trials are not sanctioned by divine authority. Hence we read in a decree of Pope Stephen V
[*II, qu. v., can. Consuluist i]: "The sacred canons do not approve of extorting a confession
from anyone by means of the trial by hot iron or boiling water, and no one must presume, by
a superstitious innovation, to practice what is not sanctioned by the teaching of the holy
fathers. For it is allowable that public crimes should be judged by our authority, after the
culprit has made spontaneous confession, or when witnesses have been approved, with due regard
to the fear of God; but hidden and unknown crimes must be left to Him Who alone knows the hearts
of the children of men." The same would seem to apply to the law concerning duels, save that
it approaches nearer to the common kind of sortilege, since no miraculous effect is expected
thereupon, unless the combatants be very unequal in strength or skill.

QUESTION 96

OF SUPERSTITION IN OBSERVANCES (In Four Articles)

We must now consider superstition in observances, under which head there are four points of
inquiry:

(1) Of observances for acquiring knowledge, which are prescribed by the magic art;

(2) Of observances for causing alterations in certain bodies;

(3) Of observances practiced in fortune-telling;

(4) Of wearing sacred words at the neck.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 96, Art. 1]

Whether It Be Unlawful to Practice the Observances of the Magic Art?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not unlawful to practice the observances of the magic
art. A thing is said to be unlawful in two ways. First, by reason of the genus of the deed,
as murder and theft: secondly, through being directed to an evil end, as when a person gives
an alms for the sake of vainglory. Now the observances of the magic art are not evil as to
the genus of the deed, for they consist in certain fasts and prayers to God; moreover, they
are directed to a good end, namely, the acquisition of science. Therefore it is not unlawful
to practice these observances.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Dan. 1:17) that "to the children" who abstained, "God gave
knowledge, and understanding in every book, and wisdom." Now the observances of the magic art
consist in certain fasts and abstinences. Therefore it seems that this art achieves its results
through God: and consequently it is not unlawful to practice it.

Obj. 3: Further, seemingly, as stated above (A. 1), the reason why it is wrong to inquire of
the demons concerning the future is because they have no knowledge of it, this knowledge being
proper to God. Yet the demons know scientific truths: because sciences are about things necessary
and invariable, and such things are subject to human knowledge, and much more to the knowledge
of demons, who are of keener intellect, as Augustine says [*Gen. ad lit. ii, 17; De Divin.
Daemon. 3, 4]. Therefore it seems to be no sin to practice the magic art, even though it achieve
its result through the demons.

On the contrary, It is written (Deut. 18:10, 11): "Neither let there be found among you . .
. anyone . . . that seeketh the truth from the dead": which search relies on the demons' help.
Now through the observances of the magic art, knowledge of the truth is sought "by means of
certain signs agreed upon by compact with the demons" [*Augustine, De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20;
see above Q. 92, A. 2]. Therefore it is unlawful to practice the notary art.

I answer that, The magic art is both unlawful and futile. It is unlawful, because the means
it employs for acquiring knowledge have not in themselves the power to cause science, consisting
as they do in gazing certain shapes, and muttering certain strange words, and so forth. Wherefore
this art does not make use of these things as causes, but as signs; not however as signs instituted
by God, as are the sacramental signs. [*Ibid.]. Wherefore the magic art is to be absolutely
repudiated and avoided by Christians, even as other arts of vain and noxious superstition,
as Augustine declares (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 23). This art is also useless for the acquisition
of science. For since it is not intended by means of this art to acquire science in a manner
connatural to man, namely, by discovery and instruction, the consequence is that this effect
is expected either from God or from the demons. Now it is certain that some have received wisdom
and science infused into them by God, as related of Solomon (3 Kings 3 and 2 Paralip. 1). Moreover,
our Lord said to His disciples (Luke 21:15): "I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all
your adversaries shall not be able to resist and gainsay." On the other hand it does not belong
to the demons to enlighten the intellect, as stated in the First Part (Q. 109, A. 3). Now the
acquisition of knowledge and wisdom is effected by the enlightening of the intellect, wherefore
never did anyone acquire knowledge by means of the demons. Hence Augustine says (De Civ. Dei
x, 9): "Porphyry confesses that the intellectual soul is in no way cleansed by theurgic inventions,"
i.e. the operations "of the demons, so as to be fitted to see its God, and discern what is
true," such as are all scientific conclusions. The demons may, however, be able by speaking
to men to express in words certain teachings of the sciences, but this is not what is sought
by means of magic.

Reply Obj. 1: It is a good thing to acquire knowledge, but it is not good to acquire it by
undue means, and it is to this end that the magic art tends.

Reply Obj. 2: The abstinence of these children was not in accordance with a vain observance
of the notary art, but according to the authority of the divine law, for they refused to be
defiled by the meat of Gentiles. Hence as a reward for their obedience they received knowledge
from God, according to Ps. 118:100, "I have had understanding above the ancients, because I
have sought Thy commandments."

Reply Obj. 3: To seek knowledge of the future from the demons is a sin not only because they
are ignorant of the future, but also on account of the fellowship entered into with them, which
also applies to the case in point.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 96, Art. 2]

Whether Observances Directed to the Alteration of Bodies, As for the Purpose of Acquiring Health
or the Like, Are Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that observances directed to the alteration of bodies, as for the
purpose of acquiring health, or the like, are lawful. It is lawful to make use of the natural
forces of bodies in order to produce their proper effects. Now in the physical order things
have certain occult forces, the reason of which man is unable to assign; for instance that
the magnet attracts iron, and many like instances, all of which Augustine enumerates (De Civ.
Dei xxi, 5, 7). Therefore it would seem lawful to employ such like forces for the alteration
of bodies.

Obj. 2: Further, artificial bodies are subject to the heavenly bodies, just as natural bodies
are. Now natural bodies acquire certain occult forces resulting from their species through
the influence of the heavenly bodies. Therefore artificial bodies, e.g. images, also acquire
from the heavenly bodies a certain occult force for the production of certain effects. Therefore
it is not unlawful to make use of them and of such like things.

Obj. 3: Further, the demons too are able to alter bodies in many ways, as Augustine states
(De Trin. iii, 8, 9). But their power is from God. Therefore it is lawful to make use of their
power for the purpose of producing these alterations.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20) that "to superstition belong the
experiments of magic arts, amulets and nostrums condemned by the medical faculty, consisting
either of incantations or of certain cyphers which they call characters, or of any kind of
thing worn or fastened on."

I answer that, In things done for the purpose of producing some bodily effect we must consider
whether they seem able to produce that effect naturally: for if so it will not be unlawful
to do so, since it is lawful to employ natural causes in order to produce their proper effects.
But, if they seem unable to produce those effects naturally, it follows that they are employed
for the purpose of producing those effects, not as causes but only as signs, so that they come
under the head of "compact by tokens entered into with the demons" [*Augustine, De Doctr. Christ.;
see above Q. 92, A. 2]. Wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 6): "The demons are allured
by means of creatures, which were made, not by them, but by God. They are enticed by various
objects differing according to the various things in which they delight, not as animals by
meat, but as spirits by signs, such as are to each one's liking, by means of various kinds
of stones, herbs, trees, animals, songs and rites."

Reply Obj. 1: There is nothing superstitious or unlawful in employing natural things simply
for the purpose of causing certain effects such as they are thought to have the natural power
of producing. But if in addition there be employed certain characters, words, or any other
vain observances which clearly have no efficacy by nature, it will be superstitious and unlawful.

Reply Obj. 2: The natural forces of natural bodies result from their substantial forms which
they acquire through the influence of heavenly bodies; wherefore through this same influence
they acquire certain active forces. On the other hand the forms of artificial bodies result
from the conception of the craftsman; and since they are nothing else but composition, order
and shape, as stated in Phys. i, 5, they cannot have a natural active force. Consequently,
no force accrues to them from the influence of heavenly bodies, in so far as they are artificial,
but only in respect of their natural matter. Hence it is false, what Porphyry held, according
to Augustine (De Civ. Dei x, 11), that "by herbs, stones, animals, certain particular sounds,
words, shapes and devices, or again by certain movements of the stars observed in the course
of the heavens it is possible for men to fashion on earth forces capable of carrying into effect
the various dispositions of the stars," as though the results of the magic arts were to be
ascribed to the power of the heavenly bodies. In fact as Augustine adds (De Civ. Dei x, 11),
"all these things are to be ascribed to the demons, who delude the souls that are subject to them."

Wherefore those images called astronomical also derive their efficacy from the actions of the
demons: a sign of this is that it is requisite to inscribe certain characters on them which
do not conduce to any effect naturally, since shape is not a principle of natural action. Yet
astronomical images differ from necromantic images in this, that the latter include certain
explicit invocations and trickery, wherefore they come under the head of explicit agreements
made with the demons: whereas in the other images there are tacit agreements by means of tokens
in certain shapes or characters.

Reply Obj. 3: It belongs to the domain of the divine majesty, to Whom the demons are subject,
that God should employ them to whatever purpose He will. But man has not been entrusted with
power over the demons, to employ them to whatsoever purpose he will; on the contrary, it is
appointed that he should wage war against the demons. Hence in no way is it lawful for man
to make use of the demons' help by compacts either tacit or express.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 96, Art. 3]

Whether Observances Directed to the Purpose of Fortune-telling Are Unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that observances directed to the purpose of fortune-telling are
not unlawful. Sickness is one of the misfortunes that occur to man. Now sickness in man is
preceded by certain symptoms, which the physician observes. Therefore it seems not unlawful
to observe such like signs.

Obj. 2: Further, it is unreasonable to deny that which nearly everybody experiences. Now nearly
everyone experiences that certain times, or places, hearing of certain words meetings of men
or animals, uncanny or ungainly actions, are presages of good or evil to come. Therefore it
seems not unlawful to observe these things.

Obj. 3: Further, human actions and occurrences are disposed by divine providence in a certain
order: and this order seems to require that precedent events should be signs of subsequent
occurrences: wherefore, according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 10:6), the things that happened to
the fathers of old are signs of those that take place in our time. Now it is not unlawful to
observe the order that proceeds from divine providence. Therefore it is seemingly not unlawful
to observe these presages.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii, 20) that "a thousand vain observances
are comprised under the head of compacts entered into with the demons: for instance, the twitching
of a limb; a stone, a dog, or a boy coming between friends walking together; kicking the door-post
when anyone passes in front of one's house; to go back to bed if you happen to sneeze while
putting on your shoes; to return home if you trip when going forth; when the rats have gnawed
a hole in your clothes, to fear superstitiously a future evil rather than to regret the actual
damage."

I answer that, Men attend to all these observances, not as causes but as signs of future events,
good or evil. Nor do they observe them as signs given by God, since these signs are brought
forward, not on divine authority, but rather by human vanity with the cooperation of the malice
of the demons, who strive to entangle men's minds with such like trifles. Accordingly it is
evident that all these observances are superstitious and unlawful: they are apparently remains
of idolatry, which authorized the observance of auguries, of lucky and unlucky days which is
allied to divination by the stars, in respect of which one day is differentiated from another:
except that these observances are devoid of reason and art, wherefore they are yet more vain
and superstitious.

Reply Obj. 1: The causes of sickness are seated in us, and they produce certain signs of sickness
to come, which physicians lawfully observe. Wherefore it is not unlawful to consider a presage
of future events as proceeding from its cause; as when a slave fears a flogging when he sees
his master's anger. Possibly the same might be said if one were to fear for child lest it take
harm from the evil eye, of which we have spoken in the First Part (Q. 117, A. 3, ad 2). But
this does not apply to this kind of observances.

Reply Obj. 2: That men have at first experienced a certain degree of truth in these observances
is due to chance. But afterwards when a man begins to entangle his mind with observances of
this kind, many things occur in connection with them through the trickery of the demons, "so
that men, through being entangled in these observances, become yet more curious, and more and
more embroiled in the manifold snares of a pernicious error," as Augustine says (De Doctr.
Christ. ii, 23).

Reply Obj. 3: Among the Jewish people of whom Christ was to be born, not only words but also
deeds were prophetic, as Augustine states (Contra Faust. iv, 2; xxii, 24). Wherefore it is
lawful to apply those deeds to our instruction, as signs given by God. Not all things, however,
that occur through divine providence are ordered so as to be signs of the future. Hence the
argument does not prove.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 96, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Unlawful to Wear Divine Words at the Neck?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not unlawful to wear divine words at the neck. Divine
words are no less efficacious when written than when uttered. But it is lawful to utter sacred
words for the purpose of producing certain effects; (for instance, in order to heal the sick),
such as the "Our Father" or the "Hail Mary," or in any way whatever to call on the Lord's name,
according to Mk. 16:17, 18, "In My name they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, they shall take up serpents." Therefore it seems to be lawful to wear sacred words
at one's neck, as a remedy for sickness or for any kind of distress.

Obj. 2: Further, sacred words are no less efficacious on the human body than on the bodies
of serpents and other animals. Now certain incantations are efficacious in checking serpents,
or in healing certain other animals: wherefore it is written (Ps. 57:5): "Their madness is
according to the likeness of a serpent, like the deaf asp that stoppeth her ears, which will
not hear the voice of the charmers, nor of the wizard that charmeth wisely." Therefore it is
lawful to wear sacred words as a remedy for men.

Obj. 3: Further, God's word is no less holy than the relics of the saints; wherefore Augustine
says (Lib. L. Hom. xxvi) that "God's word is of no less account than the Body of Christ." Now
it is lawful for one to wear the relics of the saints at one's neck, or to carry them about
one in any way for the purpose of self-protection. Therefore it is equally lawful to have recourse
to the words of Holy Writ, whether uttered or written, for one's protection.

Obj. 4: On the other hand, Chrysostom says (Hom. xliii in Matth.) [*Cf. the Opus Imperfectum
in Matthaeum, among St. Chrysostom's works, and falsely ascribed to him]: "Some wear round
their necks a passage in writing from the Gospel. Yet is not the Gospel read in church and
heard by all every day? How then, if it does a man no good to have the Gospels in his ears,
will he find salvation by wearing them round his neck? Moreover, where is the power of the
Gospel? In the shapes of the letters or in the understanding of the sense? If in the shapes,
you do well to wear them round your neck; if in the understanding, you will then do better
to bear them in your heart than to wear them round your neck."

I answer that, In every incantation or wearing of written words, two points seem to demand
caution. The first is the thing said or written, because if it is connected with invocation
of the demons it is clearly superstitious and unlawful. In like manner it seems that one should
beware lest it contain strange words, for fear that they conceal something unlawful. Such things
seem fearsome to those who do not understand them." Again, one should take care lest it contain
anything false, because in that case also the effect could not be ascribed to God, Who does
not bear witness to a falsehood.

In the second place, one should beware lest besides the sacred words it contain something vain,
for instance certain written characters, except the sign of the Cross; or if hope be placed
in the manner of writing or fastening, or in any like vanity, having no connection with reverence
for God, because this would be pronounced superstitious: otherwise, however, it is lawful.
Hence it is written in the Decretals (XXVI, qu. v, cap. Non liceat Christianis): "In blending
together medicinal herbs, it is not lawful to make use of observances or incantations, other
than the divine symbol, or the Lord's Prayer, so as to give honor to none but God the Creator
of all."

Reply Obj. 1: It is indeed lawful to pronounce divine words, or to invoke the divine name,
if one do so with a mind to honor God alone, from Whom the result is expected: but it is unlawful
if it be done in connection with any vain observance.

Reply Obj. 2: Even in the case of incantations of serpents or any animals whatever, if the
mind attend exclusively to the sacred words and to the divine power, it will not be unlawful.
Such like incantations, however, often include unlawful observances, and rely on the demons
for their result, especially in the case of serpents, because the serpent was the first instrument
employed by the devil in order to deceive man. Hence a gloss on the passage quoted says: "Note
that Scripture does not commend everything whence it draws its comparisons, as in the case
of the unjust judge who scarcely heard the widow's request."

Reply Obj. 3: The same applies to the wearing of relics, for if they be worn out of confidence
in God, and in the saints whose relics they are, it will not be unlawful. But if account were
taken in this matter of some vain circumstance (for instance that the casket be three-cornered,
or the like, having no bearing on the reverence due to God and the saints), it would be superstitious
and unlawful.

Reply Obj. 4: Chrysostom is speaking of the case in which more attention is paid the written
characters than to the understanding of the words.

QUESTION 97

OF THE TEMPTATION OF GOD (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the vices that are opposed to religion, through lack of religion, and
which are manifestly contrary thereto, so that they come under the head of irreligion. Such
are the vices which pertain to contempt or irreverence for God and holy things. Accordingly
we shall consider: (1) Vices pertaining directly to irreverence for God; (2) Vices pertaining
to irreverence for holy things. With regard to the first we shall consider the temptation whereby
God is tempted, and perjury, whereby God's name is taken with irreverence. Under the first
head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) In what the temptation of God consists;

(2) Whether it is a sin?

(3) To what virtue it is opposed;

(4) Of its comparison with other vices.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 97, Art. 1]

Whether the Temptation of God Consists in Certain Deeds, Wherein the Expected Result Is Ascribed
to the Power of God Alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that the temptation of God does not consist in certain deeds wherein
the result is expected from the power of God alone. Just as God is tempted by man so is man
tempted by God, man, and demons. But when man is tempted the result is not always expected
from his power. Therefore neither is God tempted when the result is expected from His power alone.

Obj. 2: Further, all those who work miracles by invoking the divine name look for an effect
due to God's power alone. Therefore, if the temptation of God consisted in such like deeds,
all who work miracles would tempt God.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems to belong to man's perfection that he should put aside human aids
and put his hope in God alone. Hence Ambrose, commenting on Luke 9:3, "Take nothing for your
journey," etc. says: "The Gospel precept points out what is required of him that announces
the kingdom of God, namely, that he should not depend on worldly assistance, and that, taking
assurance from his faith, he should hold himself to be the more able to provide for himself,
the less he seeks these things." And the Blessed Agatha said: "I have never treated my body
with bodily medicine, I have my Lord Jesus Christ, Who restores all things by His mere word."
[*Office of St. Agatha, eighth Responsory (Dominican Breviary).] But the temptation of God
does not consist in anything pertaining to perfection. Therefore the temptation of God does
not consist in such like deeds, wherein the help of God alone is expected.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxii, 36): "Christ who gave proof of God's power
by teaching and reproving openly, yet not allowing the rage of His enemies to prevail against
Him, nevertheless by fleeing and hiding, instructed human weakness, lest it should dare to
tempt God when it has to strive to escape from that which it needs to avoid." From this it
would seem that the temptation of God consists in omitting to do what one can in order to escape
from danger, and relying on the assistance of God alone.

I answer that, Properly speaking, to tempt is to test the person tempted. Now we put a person
to the test by words or by deeds. By words, that we may find out whether he knows what we ask,
or whether he can and will grant it: by deeds, when, by what we do, we probe another's prudence,
will or power. Either of these may happen in two ways. First, openly, as when one declares
oneself a tempter: thus Samson (Judges 14:12) proposed a riddle to the Philistines in order
to tempt them. In the second place it may be done with cunning and by stealth, as the Pharisees
tempted Christ, as we read in Matt. 22:15, sqq. Again this is sometimes done explicitly, as
when anyone intends, by word or deed, to put some person to the test; and sometimes implicitly,
when, to wit, though he does not intend to test a person, yet that which he does or says can
seemingly have no other purpose than putting him to a test.

Accordingly, man tempts God sometimes by words, sometimes by deeds. Now we speak with God in
words when we pray. Hence a man tempts God explicitly in his prayers when he asks something
of God with the intention of probing God's knowledge, power or will. He tempts God explicitly
by deeds when he intends, by whatever he does, to experiment on God's power, good will or wisdom.
But He will tempt God implicitly, if, though he does not intend to make an experiment on God,
yet he asks for or does something which has no other use than to prove God's power, goodness
or knowledge. Thus when a man wishes his horse to gallop in order to escape from the enemy,
this is not giving the horse a trial: but if he make the horse gallop with out any useful purpose,
it seems to be nothing else than a trial of the horse's speed; and the same applies to all
other things. Accordingly when a man in his prayers or deeds entrusts himself to the divine
assistance for some urgent or useful motive, this is not to tempt God: for it is written (2
Paralip 20:12): "As we know not what to do, we can only turn our eyes to Thee." But if this
be done without any useful or urgent motive, this is to tempt God implicitly.

Reply Obj. 1: Man also is sometimes tempted by means of deeds, to test his ability or knowledge
or will to uphold or oppose those same deeds.

Reply Obj. 2: When saints work miracles by their prayers, they are moved by a motive of necessity
or usefulness to ask for that which is an effect of the divine power.

Reply Obj. 3: The preachers of God's kingdom dispense with temporal aids, so as to be freer
to give their time to the word of God: wherefore if they depend on God alone, it does not follow
that they tempt God. But if they were to neglect human assistance without any useful or urgent
motive, they would be tempting God. Hence Augustine (Contra Faust. xxii, 36) says that "Paul
fled, not through ceasing to believe in God, but lest he should tempt God, were he not to flee
when he had the means of flight." The Blessed Agatha had experience of God's kindness towards
her, so that either she did not suffer such sickness as required bodily medicine, or else she
felt herself suddenly cured by God.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 97, Art. 2]

Whether It Is a Sin to Tempt God?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not a sin to tempt God. For God has not commanded sin.
Yet He has commanded men to try, which is the same as to tempt, Him: for it is written (Malach.
3:10): "Bring all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in My house; and try
Me in this, saith the Lord, if I open not unto you the flood-gates of heaven." Therefore it
seems not to be a sin to tempt God.

Obj. 2: Further, a man is tempted not only in order to test his knowledge and his power, but
also to try his goodness or his will. Now it is lawful to test the divine goodness or will,
for it is written (Ps. 33:9): "O taste and see that the Lord is sweet," and (Rom. 12:2): "That
you may prove what is the good, and the acceptable, and the perfect will of God." Therefore
it is not a sin to tempt God.

Obj. 3: Further, Scripture never blames a man for ceasing from sin, but rather for committing
a sin. Now Achaz is blamed because when the Lord said: "Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God,"
he replied: "I will not ask, and I will not tempt the Lord," and then it was said to him: "Is
it a small thing for you to be grievous to men, that you are grievous to my God also?" (Isa.
7:11-13). And we read of Abraham (Gen. 15:8) that he said to the Lord: "Whereby may I know
that I shall possess it?" namely, the land which God had promised him. Again Gedeon asked God
for a sign of the victory promised to him (Judges 6:36, sqq.). Yet they were not blamed for
so doing. Therefore it is not a sin to tempt God.

On the contrary, It is forbidden in God's Law, for it is written (Deut. 6:10): "Thou shalt
not tempt the Lord thy God."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), to tempt a person is to put him to a test. Now one never
tests that of which one is certain. Wherefore all temptation proceeds from some ignorance or
doubt, either in the tempter (as when one tests a thing in order to know its qualities), or
in others (as when one tests a thing in order to prove it to others), and in this latter way
God is said to tempt us. Now it is a sin to be ignorant of or to doubt that which pertains
to God's perfection. Wherefore it is evident that it is a sin to tempt God in order that the
tempter himself may know God's power.

On the other hand, if one were to test that which pertains to the divine perfection, not in
order to know it oneself, but to prove it to others: this is not tempting God, provided there
be just motive of urgency, or a pious motive of usefulness, and other requisite conditions.
For thus did the apostles ask the Lord that signs might be wrought in the name of Jesus Christ,
as related in Acts 4:30, in order, to wit, that Christ's power might be made manifest to unbelievers.

Reply Obj. 1: The paying of tithes was prescribed in the Law, as stated above (Q. 87, A. 1).
Hence there was a motive of urgency to pay it, through the obligation of the Law, and also
a motive of usefulness, as stated in the text quoted--"that there may be meat in God's house":
wherefore they did not tempt God by paying tithes. The words that follow, "and try Me," are
not to be understood causally, as though they had to pay tithes in order to try if "God would
open the flood-gates of heaven," but consecutively, because, to wit, if they paid tithes, they
would prove by experience the favors which God would shower upon them.

Reply Obj. 2: There is a twofold knowledge of God's goodness or will. One is speculative and
as to this it is not lawful to doubt or to prove whether God's will be good, or whether God
is sweet. The other knowledge of God's will or goodness is effective or experimental and thereby
a man experiences in himself the taste of God's sweetness, and complacency in God's will, as
Dionysius says of Hierotheos (Div. Nom. ii) that "he learnt divine things through experience
of them." It is in this way that we are told to prove God's will, and to taste His sweetness.

Reply Obj. 3: God wished to give a sign to Achaz, not for him alone, but for the instruction
of the whole people. Hence he was reproved because, by refusing to ask a sign, he was an obstacle
to the common welfare. Nor would he have tempted God by asking, both because he would have
asked through God commanding him to do so, and because it was a matter relating to the common
good. Abraham asked for a sign through the divine instinct, and so he did not sin. Gedeon seems
to have asked a sign through weakness of faith, wherefore he is not to be excused from sin,
as a gloss observes: just as Zachary sinned in saying to the angel (Luke 1:18): "Whereby shall
I know this?" so that he was punished for his unbelief.

It must be observed, however, that there are two ways of asking God for a sign: first in order
to test God's power or the truth of His word, and this of its very nature pertains to the temptation
of God. Secondly, in order to be instructed as to what is God's pleasure in some particular
matter; and this nowise comes under the head of temptation of God.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 97, Art. 3]

Whether Temptation of God Is Opposed to the Virtue of Religion?

Objection 1: It would seem that the temptation of God is not opposed to the virtue of religion.
The temptation of God is sinful, because a man doubts God, as stated above (A. 2). Now doubt
about God comes under the head of unbelief, which is opposed to faith. Therefore temptation
of God is opposed to faith rather than to religion.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 18:23): "Before prayer prepare thy soul, and be not
as a man that tempteth God. Such a man," that is, who tempts God, says the interlinear gloss,
"prays for what God taught him to pray for, yet does not what God has commanded him to do."
Now this pertains to imprudence which is opposed to hope. Therefore it seems that temptation
of God is a sin opposed to hope.

Obj. 3: Further, a gloss on Ps. 77:18, "And they tempted God in their hearts," says that "to
tempt God is to pray to Him deceitfully, with simplicity in our words and wickedness in our
hearts." Now deceit is opposed to the virtue of truth. Therefore temptation of God is opposed,
not to religion, but to truth.

On the contrary, According to the gloss quoted above "to tempt God is to pray to Him inordinately."
Now to pray to God becomingly is an act of religion as stated above (Q. 83, A. 15). Therefore
to tempt God is a sin opposed to religion.

I answer that, As clearly shown above (Q. 81, A. 5), the end of religion is to pay reverence
to God. Wherefore whatever pertains directly to irreverence for God is opposed to religion.
Now it is evident that to tempt a person pertains to irreverence for him: since no one presumes
to tempt one of whose excellence he is sure. Hence it is manifest that to tempt God is a sin
opposed to religion.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 81, A. 7), it belongs to religion to declare one's faith
by certain signs indicative of reverence towards God. Consequently it belongs to irreligion
that, through doubtful faith, a man does things indicative of irreverence towards God. To tempt
God is one of these; wherefore it is a species of irreligion.

Reply Obj. 2: He that prepares not his soul before prayer by forgiving those against whom he
has anything, or in some other way disposing himself to devotion, does not do what he can to
be heard by God, wherefore he tempts God implicitly as it were. And though this implicit temptation
would seem to arise from presumption or indiscretion, yet the very fact that a man behaves
presumptuously and without due care in matters relating to God implies irreverence towards
Him. For it is written (1 Pet. 5:6): "Be you humbled . . . under the mighty hand of God," and
(2 Tim. 2:15): "Carefully study to present thyself approved unto God." Therefore also this
kind of temptation is a species of irreligion.

Reply Obj. 3: A man is said to pray deceitfully, not in relation to God, Who knows the secrets
of the heart, but in relation to man. Wherefore deceit is accidental to the temptation of God,
and consequently it does not follow that to tempt God is directly opposed to the truth.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 97, Art. 4]

Whether the Temptation of God Is a Graver Sin Than Superstition?

Objection 1: It would seem that the temptation of God is a graver sin than superstition. The
greater sin receives the greater punishment. Now the sin of tempting God was more severely
punished in the Jews than was the sin of idolatry; and yet the latter is the chief form of
superstition: since for the sin of idolatry three thousand men of their number were slain,
as related in Ex. 32:28 [*Septuagint version. The Vulgate has "twenty-three thousand."], whereas
for the sin of temptation they all without exception perished in the desert, and entered not
into the land of promise, according to Ps. 94:9, "Your fathers tempted Me," and further on,
"so I swore in My wrath that they should not enter into My rest." Therefore to tempt God is
a graver sin than superstition.

Obj. 2: Further, the more a sin is opposed to virtue the graver it would seem to be. Now irreligion,
of which the temptation of God is a species, is more opposed to the virtue of religion, than
superstition which bears some likeness to religion. Therefore to tempt God is a graver sin
than superstition.

Obj. 3: Further, it seems to be a greater sin to behave disrespectfully to one's parents, than
to pay others the respect we owe to our parents. Now God should be honored by us as the Father
of all (Malach. 1:6). Therefore, temptation of God whereby we behave irreverently to God, seems
to be a greater sin than idolatry, whereby we give to a creature the honor we owe to God.

On the contrary, A gloss on Deut. 17:2, "When there shall be found among you," etc. says: "The
Law detests error and idolatry above all: for it is a very great sin to give to a creature
the honor that belongs to the Creator."

I answer that, Among sins opposed to religion, the more grievous is that which is the more
opposed to the reverence due to God. Now it is less opposed to this reverence that one should
doubt the divine excellence than that one should hold the contrary for certain. For just as
a man is more of an unbeliever if he be confirmed in his error, than if he doubt the truth
of faith, so, too, a man acts more against the reverence due to God, if by his deeds he professes
an error contrary to the divine excellence, than if he expresses a doubt. Now the superstitious
man professes an error, as shown above (Q. 94, A. 1, ad 1), whereas he who tempts God by words
or deeds expresses a doubt of the divine excellence, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore the
sin of superstition is graver than the sin of tempting God.

Reply Obj. 1: The sin of idolatry was not punished in the above manner, as though it were a
sufficient punishment; because a more severe punishment was reserved in the future for that
sin, for it is written (Ex. 32:34): "And I, in the day of revenge, will visit this sin also
of theirs."

Reply Obj. 2: Superstition bears a likeness to religion, as regards the material act which
it pays just as religion does. But, as regards the end, it is more contrary to religion than
the temptation of God, since it implies greater irreverence for God, as stated.

Reply Obj. 3: It belongs essentially to the divine excellence that it is singular and incommunicable.
Consequently to give divine reverence to another is the same as to do a thing opposed to the
divine excellence. There is no comparison with the honor due to our parents, which can without
sin be given to others.

QUESTION 98

OF PERJURY (In Four Articles)

We must now consider perjury: under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether falsehood is necessary for perjury?

(2) Whether perjury is always a sin?

(3) Whether it is always a mortal sin?

(4) Whether it is a sin to enjoin an oath on a perjurer?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 98, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Necessary for Perjury That the Statement Confirmed on Oath Be False?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not necessary for perjury that the statement confirmed
on oath be false. As stated above (Q. 89, A. 3), an oath should be accompanied by judgment
and justice no less than by truth. Since therefore perjury is incurred through lack of truth,
it is incurred likewise through lack of judgment, as when one swears indiscreetly, and through
lack of justice, as when one swears to something unjust.

Obj. 2: Further, that which confirms is more weighty than the thing confirmed thereby: thus
in a syllogism the premises are more weighty than the conclusion. Now in an oath a man's statement
is confirmed by calling on the name of God. Therefore perjury seems to consist in swearing
by false gods rather than in a lack of truth in the human statement which is confirmed on oath.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Verb. Apost. Jacobi; Serm. clxxx): "Men swear falsely both
in deceiving others and when they are deceived themselves"; and he gives three examples. The
first is: "Supposing a man to swear, thinking that what he swears to is true, whereas it is
false"; the second is: "Take the instance of another who knows the statement to be false, and
swears to it as though it were true"; and the third is: "Take another, who thinks his statement
false, and swears to its being true, while perhaps it is true," of whom he says afterwards
that he is a perjurer. Therefore one may be a perjurer while swearing to the truth. Therefore
falsehood is not necessary for perjury.

On the contrary, Perjury is defined "a falsehood confirmed by oath" [*Hugh of St. Victor, Sum.
Sent. iv, 5].

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 92, A. 2), moral acts take their species from their end.
Now the end of an oath is the confirmation of a human assertion. To this confirmation falsehood
is opposed: since an assertion is confirmed by being firmly shown to be true; and this cannot
happen to that which is false. Hence falsehood directly annuls the end of an oath: and for
this reason, that perversity in swearing, which is called perjury, takes its species chiefly
from falsehood. Consequently falsehood is essential to perjury.

Reply Obj. 1: As Jerome says on Jer. 4:2, "whichever of these three be lacking, there is perjury,"
but in different order. For first and chiefly perjury consists in a lack of truth, for the
reason stated in the Article. Secondly, there is perjury when justice is lacking, for in whatever
way a man swears to that which is unlawful, for this very reason he is guilty of falsehood,
since he is under an obligation to do the contrary. Thirdly, there is perjury when judgment
is lacking, since by the very fact that a man swears indiscreetly, he incurs the danger of
lapsing into falsehood.

Reply Obj. 2: In syllogisms the premises are of greater weight, since they are in the position
of active principle, as stated in Phys. ii, 3: whereas in moral matters the end is of greater
importance than the active principle. Hence though it is a perverse oath when a man swears
to the truth by false gods, yet perjury takes its name from that kind of perversity in an oath,
that deprives the oath of its end, by swearing what is false.

Reply Obj. 3: Moral acts proceed from the will, whose object is the apprehended good. Wherefore
if the false be apprehended as true, it will be materially false, but formally true, as related
to the will. If something false be apprehended as false, it will be false both materially and
formally. If that which is true be apprehended as false, it will be materially true, and formally
false. Hence in each of these cases the conditions required for perjury are to be found in
some way, on account of some measure of falsehood. Since, however, that which is formal in
anything is of greater importance than that which is material, he that swears to a falsehood
thinking it true is not so much of a perjurer as he that swears to the truth thinking it false.
For Augustine says (De Verb. Apost. Jacobi; Serm. clxxx): "It depends how the assertion proceeds
from the mind, for the tongue is not guilty except the mind be guilty."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 98, Art. 2]

Whether All Perjury Is Sinful?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all perjury is sinful. Whoever does not fulfil what he
has confirmed on oath is seemingly a perjurer. Yet sometimes a man swears he will do something
unlawful (adultery, for instance, or murder): and if he does it, he commits a sin. If therefore
he would commit a sin even if he did it not, it would follow that he is perplexed.

Obj. 2: Further, no man sins by doing what is best. Yet sometimes by committing a perjury one
does what is best: as when a man swears not to enter religion, or not to do some kind of virtuous
deed. Therefore not all perjury is sinful.

Obj. 3: Further, he that swears to do another's will would seem to be guilty of perjury unless
he do it. Yet it may happen sometimes that he sins not, if he do not the man's will: for instance,
if the latter order him to do something too hard and unbearable. Therefore seemingly not all
perjury is sinful.

Obj. 4: Further, a promissory oath extends to future, just as a declaratory oath extends to
past and present things. Now the obligation of an oath may be removed by some future occurrence:
thus a state may swear to fulfil some obligation, and afterwards other citizens come on the
scene who did not take the oath; or a canon may swear to keep the statutes of a certain church,
and afterwards new statutes are made. Therefore seemingly he that breaks an oath does not sin.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Apost. Jacobi; Serm. cxxx), in speaking of perjury:
"See how you should detest this horrible beast and exterminate it from all human business."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 89, A. 1), to swear is to call God as witness. Now it is
an irreverence to God to call Him to witness to a falsehood, because by so doing one implies
either that God ignores the truth or that He is willing to bear witness to a falsehood. Therefore
perjury is manifestly a sin opposed to religion, to which it belongs to show reverence to God.

Reply Obj. 1: He that swears to do what is unlawful is thereby guilty of perjury through lack
of justice: though, if he fails to keep his oath, he is not guilty of perjury in this respect,
since that which he swore to do was not a fit matter of an oath.

Reply Obj. 2: A person who swears not to enter religion, or not to give an alms, or the like,
is guilty of perjury through lack of judgment. Hence when he does that which is best it is
not an act of perjury, but contrary thereto: for the contrary of that which he is doing could
not be a matter of an oath.

Reply Obj. 3: When one man swears or promises to do another's will, there is to be understood
this requisite condition--that the thing commanded be lawful and virtuous, and not unbearable
or immoderate.

Reply Obj. 4: An oath is a personal act, and so when a man becomes a citizen of a state, he
is not bound, as by oath, to fulfil whatever the state has sworn to do. Yet he is bound by
a kind of fidelity, the nature of which obligation is that he should take his share of the
state's burdens if he takes a share of its goods.

The canon who swears to keep the statutes that have force in some particular "college" is not
bound by his oath to keep any that may be made in the future, unless he intends to bind himself
to keep all, past and future. Nevertheless he is bound to keep them by virtue of the statutes
themselves, since they are possessed of coercive force, as stated above (I-II, Q. 96, A. 4).

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 98, Art. 3]

Whether All Perjury Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all perjury is a mortal sin. It is laid down (Extra, De
Jurejur., cap. Verum): "Referring to the question whether an oath is binding on those who have
taken one in order to safeguard their life and possessions, we have no other mind than that
which our predecessors the Roman Pontiffs are known to have had, and who absolved such persons
from the obligations of their oath. Henceforth, that discretion may be observed, and in order
to avoid occasions of perjury, let them not be told expressly not to keep their oath: but if
they should not keep it, they are not for this reason to be punished as for a mortal sin."
Therefore not all perjury is a mortal sin.

Obj. 2. Further, as Chrysostom [*Hom. xliv in the Opus Imperfectum on St. Matthew, falsely
ascribed to St. John Chrysostom] says, "it is a greater thing to swear by God than by the Gospels."
Now it is not always a mortal sin to swear by God to something false; for instance, if we were
to employ such an oath in fun or by a slip of the tongue in the course of an ordinary conversation.
Therefore neither is it always a mortal sin to break an oath that has been taken solemnly on
the Gospels.

Obj. 3: Further, according to the Law a man incurs infamy through committing perjury (VI, qu.
i, cap. Infames). Now it would seem that infamy is not incurred through any kind of perjury,
as it is prescribed in the case of a declaratory oath violated by perjury [*Cap. Cum dilectus,
de Ord. Cognit.]. Therefore, seemingly, not all perjury is a mortal sin.

On the contrary, Every sin that is contrary to a divine precept is a mortal sin. Now perjury
is contrary to a divine precept, for it is written (Lev. 19:12): "Thou shalt not swear falsely
by My name." Therefore it is a mortal sin.

I answer that, According to the teaching of the Philosopher (Poster. i, 2), "that which causes
a thing to be such is yet more so." Now we know that an action which is, by reason of its very
nature, a venial sin, or even a good action, is a mortal sin if it be done out of contempt
of God. Wherefore any action that of its nature, implies contempt of God is a mortal sin. Now
perjury, of its very nature implies contempt of God, since, as stated above (A. 2), the reason
why it is sinful is because it is an act of irreverence towards God. Therefore it is manifest
that perjury, of its very nature, is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 89, A. 7, ad 3), coercion does not deprive a promissory oath
of its binding force, as regards that which can be done lawfully. Wherefore he who fails to
fulfil an oath which he took under coercion is guilty of perjury and sins mortally. Nevertheless
the Sovereign Pontiff can, by his authority, absolve a man from an obligation even of an oath,
especially if the latter should have been coerced into taking the oath through such fear as
may overcome a high-principled man.

When, however, it is said that these persons are not to be punished as for a mortal sin, this
does not mean that they are not guilty of mortal sin, but that a lesser punishment is to be
inflicted on them.

Reply Obj. 2: He that swears falsely in fun is nonetheless irreverent to God, indeed, in a
way, he is more so, and consequently is not excused from mortal sin. He that swears falsely
by a slip of tongue, if he adverts to the fact that he is swearing, and that he is swearing
to something false, is not excused from mortal sin, as neither is he excused from contempt
of God. If, however, he does not advert to this, he would seem to have no intention of swearing,
and consequently is excused from the sin of perjury.

It is, however, a more grievous sin to swear solemnly by the Gospels, than to swear by God
in ordinary conversation, both on account of scandal and on account of the greater deliberation.
But if we consider them equally in comparison with one another, it is more grievous to commit
perjury in swearing by God than in swearing by the Gospels.

Reply Obj. 3: Not every sin makes a man infamous in the eye of the law. Wherefore, if a man
who has sworn falsely in a declaratory oath be not infamous in the eye of the law, but only
when he has been so declared by sentence in a court of law, it does not follow that he has
not sinned mortally. The reason why the law attaches infamy rather to one who breaks a promissory
oath taken solemnly is that he still has it in his power after he has sworn to substantiate
his oath, which is not the case in a declaratory oath.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 98, Art. 4]

Whether He Sins Who Demands an Oath of a Perjurer?

Objection 1: It would seem that he who demands an oath of a perjurer commits a sin. Either
he knows that he swears truly, or he knows that he swears falsely. If he knows him to swear
truly, it is useless for him to demand an oath: and if he believes him to swear falsely, for
his own part he leads him into sin. Therefore nowise seemingly should one enjoin an oath on
another person.

Obj. 2: Further, to receive an oath from a person is less than to impose an oath on him. Now
it would seem unlawful to receive an oath from a person, especially if he swear falsely, because
he would then seem to consent in his sin. Much less therefore would it seem lawful to impose
an oath on one who swears falsely.

Obj. Hence it would seem that when a man knows another to be swearing falsely, he is bound
to denounce him. Therefore it is not lawful to demand an oath of such a man.

Obj. 4: On the other hand, Just as it is a sin to swear falsely so is it to swear by false
gods. Yet it is lawful to take advantage of an oath of one who has sworn by false gods, as
Augustine says (ad Public. Ep. xlvii). Therefore it is lawful to demand an oath from one who
swears falsely.

I answer that, As regards a person who demands an oath from another, a distinction would seem
to be necessary. For either he demands the oath on his own account and of his own accord, or
he demands it on account of the exigencies of a duty imposed on him. If a man demands an oath
on his own account as a private individual, we must make a distinction, as does Augustine (de
Perjuriis. serm. clxxx): "For if he knows not that the man will swear falsely, and says to
him accordingly: 'Swear to me' in order that he may be credited, there is no sin: yet it is
a human temptation" (because, to wit, it proceeds from his weakness in doubting whether the
man will speak the truth). "This is the evil whereof Our Lord says (Matt. 5:37): That which
is over and above these, is of evil. But if he knows the man to have done so," i.e. the contrary
of what he swears to, "and yet forces him to swear, he is a murderer: for the other destroys
himself by his perjury, but it is he who urged the hand of the slayer."

If, on the other hand, a man demands an oath as a public person, in accordance with the requirements
of the law, on the requisition of a third person: he does not seem to be at fault, if he demands
an oath of a person, whether he knows that he will swear falsely or truly, because seemingly
it is not he that exacts the oath but the person at whose instance he demands it.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument avails in the case of one who demands an oath on his own account.
Yet he does not always know that the other will swear truly or falsely, for at times he has
doubts about the fact, and believes he will swear truly. In such a case he exacts an oath in
order that he may be more certain.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (ad Public. serm. xlvii), "though we are forbidden to swear,
I do not remember ever to have read in the Holy Scriptures that we must not accept oaths from
others." Hence he that accepts an oath does not sin, except perchance when of his own accord
he forces another to swear, knowing that he will swear falsely.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (QQ. Super Lev, qu. i), Moses in the passage quoted did not
state to whom one man had to denounce another's perjury: wherefore it must be understood that
the matter had to be denounced "to those who would do the perjurer good rather than harm."
Again, neither did he state in what order the denunciation was to be made: wherefore seemingly
the Gospel order should be followed, if the sin of perjury should be hidden, especially when
it does not tend to another person's injury: because if it did, the Gospel order would not
apply to the case, as stated above (Q. 33, A. 7; Q. 68, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 4: It is lawful to make use of an evil for the sake of good, as God does, but it
is not lawful to lead anyone to do evil. Consequently it is lawful to accept the oath of one
who is ready to swear by false gods, but it is not lawful to induce him to swear by false gods.
Yet it seems to be different in the case of one who swears falsely by the true God, because
an oath of this kind lacks the good of faith, which a man makes use of in the oath of one who
swears truly by false gods, as Augustine says (ad Public. Ep. xlvii). Hence when a man swears
falsely by the true God his oath seems to lack any good that one may use lawfully.

QUESTION 99

OF SACRILEGE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the vices which pertain to irreligion, whereby sacred things are treated
with irreverence. We shall consider (1) Sacrilege; (2) Simony.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) What is sacrilege?

(2) Whether it is a special sin?

(3) Of the species of sacrilege;

(4) Of the punishment of sacrilege.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 99, Art. 1]

Whether Sacrilege Is the Violation of a Sacred Thing?

Objection 1: It would seem that sacrilege is not the violation of a sacred thing. It is stated
(XVII, qu. iv [*Append. Gratian, on can. Si quis suadente]): "They are guilty of sacrilege
who disagree about the sovereign's decision, and doubt whether the person chosen by the sovereign
be worthy of honor." Now this seems to have no connection with anything sacred. Therefore sacrilege
does not denote the violation of something sacred.

Obj. 2: Further, it is stated further on [*Append. Gratian, on can. Constituit.] that if any
man shall allow the Jews to hold public offices, "he must be excommunicated as being guilty
of sacrilege." Yet public offices have nothing to do with anything sacred. Therefore it seems
that sacrilege does not denote the violation of a sacred thing.

Obj. 3: Further, God's power is greater than man's. Now sacred things receive their sacred
character from God. Therefore they cannot be violated by man: and so a sacrilege would not
seem to be the violation of a sacred thing.

On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. x) that "a man is said to be sacrilegious because he selects,"
i.e. steals, "sacred things."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 81, A. 5; I-II, Q. 101, A. 4), a thing is called "sacred"
through being deputed to the divine worship. Now just as a thing acquires an aspect of good
through being deputed to a good end, so does a thing assume a divine character through being
deputed to the divine worship, and thus a certain reverence is due to it, which reverence is
referred to God. Therefore whatever pertains to irreverence for sacred things is an injury
to God, and comes under the head of sacrilege.

Reply Obj. 1: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 2) the common good of the nation is a
divine thing, wherefore in olden times the rulers of a commonwealth were called divines, as
being the ministers of divine providence, according to Wis. 6:5, "Being ministers of His kingdom,
you have not judged rightly." Hence by an extension of the term, whatever savors of irreverence
for the sovereign, such as disputing his judgment, and questioning whether one ought to follow
it, is called sacrilege by a kind of likeness.

Reply Obj. 2: Christians are sanctified by faith and the sacraments of Christ, according to
1 Cor. 6:11, "But you are washed, but you are sanctified." Wherefore it is written (1 Pet.
2:9): "You are a chosen generation, a kingly priesthood, a holy nation, a purchased people."
Therefore any injury inflicted on the Christian people, for instance that unbelievers should
be put in authority over it, is an irreverence for a sacred thing, and is reasonably called
a sacrilege.

Reply Obj. 3: Violation here means any kind of irreverence or dishonor. Now as "honor is in
the person who honors and not in the one who is honored" (Ethic. i, 5), so again irreverence
is in the person who behaves irreverently even though he do no harm to the object of his irreverence.
Hence, so far he is concerned, he violates the sacred thing, though the latter be not violated
in itself.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 99, Art. 2]

Whether Sacrilege Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sacrilege is not a special sin. It is stated (XVII, qu. iv)
"They are guilty of sacrilege who through ignorance sin against the sanctity of the law, violate
and defile it by their negligence." But this is done in every sin, because sin is "a word,
deed or desire contrary to the law of God," according to Augustine (Contra Faust. xxi, 27).
Therefore sacrilege is a general sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no special sin is comprised under different kinds of sin. Now sacrilege is
comprised under different kinds of sin, for instance under murder, if one kill a priest under
lust, as the violation of a consecrate virgin, or of any woman in a sacred place under theft,
if one steal a sacred thing. Therefore sacrilege is not a special sin.

Obj. 3: Further, every special sin is to found apart from other sins as the Philosopher states,
in speaking of special justice (Ethic. v, 11). But, seemingly, sacrilege is not to be found
apart from other sins; for it is sometimes united to theft, sometimes to murder, as stated
in the preceding objection. Therefore it is not a special sin.

On the contrary, That which is opposed to a special virtue is a special sin. But sacrilege
is opposed to a special virtue, namely religion, to which it belongs to reverence God and divine
things. Therefore sacrilege is a special sin.

I answer that, Wherever we find a special aspect of deformity, there must needs be a special
sin; because the species of a thing is derived chiefly from its formal aspect, and not from
its matter or subject. Now in sacrilege we find a special aspect of deformity, namely, the
violation of a sacred thing by treating it irreverently. Hence it is a special sin.

Moreover, it is opposed to religion. For according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv, 3), "When
the purple has been made into a royal robe, we pay it honor and homage, and if anyone dishonor
it he is condemned to death," as acting against the king: and in the same way if a man violate
a sacred thing, by so doing his behavior is contrary to the reverence due to God and consequently
he is guilty of irreligion.

Reply Obj. 1: Those are said to sin against the sanctity of the divine law who assail God's
law, as heretics and blasphemers do. These are guilty of unbelief, through not believing in
God; and of sacrilege, through perverting the words of the divine law.

Reply Obj. 2: Nothing prevents one specific kind of sin being found in various generic kinds
of sin, inasmuch as various sins are directed to the end of one sin, just as happens in the
case of virtues commanded by one virtue. In this way, by whatever kind of sin a man acts counter
to reverence due to sacred things, he commits a sacrilege formally; although his act contains
various kinds of sin materially.

Reply Obj. 3: Sacrilege is sometimes found apart from other sins, through its act having no
other deformity than the violation of a sacred thing: for instance, if a judge were to take
a person from a sacred place, for he might lawfully have taken him from elsewhere.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 99, Art. 3]

Whether the Species of Sacrilege Are Distinguished According to the Sacred Things?

Objection 1: It would seem that the species of sacrilege are not distinguished according to
the sacred things. Material diversity does not differentiate species, if the formal aspect
remains the same. Now there would seem to be the same formal aspect of sin in all violations
of sacred things, and that the only difference is one of matter. Therefore the species of sacrilege
are not distinguished thereby.

Obj. 2: Further, it does not seem possible that things belonging to the same species should
at the same time differ specifically. Now murder, theft, and unlawful intercourse, are different
species of sin. Therefore they cannot belong to the one same species of sacrilege: and consequently
it seems that the species of sacrilege are distinguished in accordance with the species of
other sins, and not according to the various sacred things.

Obj. 3: Further, among sacred things sacred persons are reckoned. If, therefore, one species
of sacrilege arises from the violation of a sacred person, it would follow that every sin committed
by a sacred person is a sacrilege, since every sin violates the person of the sinner. Therefore
the species of sacrilege are not reckoned according to the sacred things.

On the contrary, Acts and habits are distinguished by their objects. Now the sacred thing is
the object of sacrilege, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore the species of sacrilege are distinguished
according to the sacred things.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), the sin of sacrilege consists in the irreverent treatment
of a sacred thing. Now reverence is due to a sacred thing by reason of its holiness: and consequently
the species of sacrilege must needs be distinguished according to the different aspects of
sanctity in the sacred things which are treated irreverently: for the greater the holiness
ascribed to the sacred thing that is sinned against, the more grievous the sacrilege.

Now holiness is ascribed, not only to sacred persons, namely, those who are consecrated to
the divine worship, but also to sacred places and to certain other sacred things. And the holiness
of a place is directed to the holiness of man, who worships God in a holy place. For it is
written (2 Macc. 5:19): "God did not choose the people for the place's sake, but the place
for the people's sake." Hence sacrilege committed against a sacred person is a graver sin than
that which is committed against a sacred place. Yet in either species there are various degrees
of sacrilege, according to differences of sacred persons and places.

In like manner the third species of sacrilege, which is committed against other sacred things,
has various degrees, according to the differences of sacred things. Among these the highest
place belongs to the sacraments whereby man is sanctified: chief of which is the sacrament
of the Eucharist, for it contains Christ Himself. Wherefore the sacrilege that is committed
against this sacrament is the gravest of all. The second place, after the sacraments, belongs
to the vessels consecrated for the administration of the sacraments; also sacred images, and
the relics of the saints, wherein the very persons of the saints, so to speak, are reverenced
and honored. After these come things connected with the apparel of the Church and its ministers;
and those things, whether movable or immovable, that are deputed to the upkeep of the ministers.
And whoever sins against any one of the aforesaid incurs the crime of sacrilege.

Reply Obj. 1: There is not the same aspect of holiness in all the aforesaid: wherefore the
diversity of sacred things is not only a material, but also a formal difference.

Reply Obj. 2: Nothing hinders two things from belonging to one species in one respect, and
to different species in another respect. Thus Socrates and Plato belong to the one species,
"animal," but differ in the species "colored thing," if one be white and the other black. In
like manner it is possible for two sins to differ specifically as to their material acts, and
to belong to the same species as regards the one formal aspect of sacrilege: for instance,
the violation of a nun by blows or by copulation.

Reply Obj. 3: Every sin committed by a sacred person is a sacrilege materially and accidentally
as it were. Hence Jerome [*The quotation is from St. Bernard, De Consideration. ii, 13] says
that "a trifle on a priest's lips is a sacrilege or a blasphemy." But formally and properly
speaking a sin committed by a sacred person is a sacrilege only when it is committed against
his holiness, for instance if a virgin consecrated to God be guilty of fornication: and the
same is to be said of other instances.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 99, Art. 4]

Whether the Punishment of Sacrilege Should Be Pecuniary?

Objection 1: It would seem that the punishment of sacrilege should not be pecuniary. A pecuniary
punishment is not wont to be inflicted for a criminal fault. But sacrilege is a criminal fault,
wherefore it is punished by capital sentence according to civil law [*Dig. xlviii, 13; Cod.
i, 3, de Episc. et Cleric.]. Therefore sacrilege should not be awarded a pecuniary punishment.

Obj. 2: Further, the same sin should not receive a double punishment, according to Nahum 1:9,
"There shall not rise a double affliction." But sacrilege is punished with excommunication;
major excommunication, for violating a sacred person, and for burning or destroying a church,
and minor excommunication for other sacrileges. Therefore sacrilege should not be awarded a
pecuniary punishment.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (1 Thess. 2:5): "Neither have we taken an occasion of covetousness."
But it seems to involve an occasion of covetousness that a pecuniary punishment should be exacted
for the violation of a sacred thing. Therefore this does not seem to be a fitting punishment
of sacrilege.

On the contrary, It is written [*XVII, qu. iv, can. Si quis contumax]: "If anyone contumaciously
or arrogantly take away by force an escaped slave from the confines of a church he shall pay
nine hundred soldi": and again further on (XVII, qu. iv, can. Quisquis inventus, can. 21):
"Whoever is found guilty of sacrilege shall pay thirty pounds of tried purest silver."

I answer that, In the award of punishments two points must be considered. First equality, in
order that the punishment may be just, and that "by what things a man sinneth by the same .
. . he may be tormented" (Wis. 11:17). In this respect the fitting punishment of one guilty
of sacrilege, since he has done an injury to a sacred thing, is excommunication [*Append. Gratian.
on can. Si quis contumax, quoted above] whereby sacred things are withheld from him. The second
point to be considered is utility. For punishments are inflicted as medicines, that men being
deterred thereby may desist from sin. Now it would seem that the sacrilegious man, who reverences
not sacred things, is not sufficiently deterred from sinning by sacred things being withheld
from him, since he has no care for them. Wherefore according to human laws he is sentenced
to capital punishment, and according to the statutes of the Church, which does not inflict
the death of the body, a pecuniary punishment is inflicted, in order that men may be deterred
from sacrilege, at least by temporal punishments.

Reply Obj. 1: The Church inflicts not the death of the body, but excommunication in its stead.

Reply Obj. 2: When one punishment is not sufficient to deter a man from sin, a double punishment
must be inflicted. Wherefore it was necessary to inflict some kind of temporal punishment in
addition to the punishment of excommunication, in order to coerce those who despise spiritual
things.

Reply Obj. 3: If money were exacted without a reasonable cause, this would seem to involve
an occasion of covetousness. But when it is exacted for the purpose of man's correction, it
has a manifest utility, and consequently involves no occasion of avarice.

QUESTION 100

ON SIMONY (In Six Articles)

We must now consider simony, under which head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) What is simony?

(2) Whether it is lawful to accept money for the sacraments?

(3) Whether it is lawful to accept money for spiritual actions?

(4) Whether it is lawful to sell things connected with spirituals?

(5) Whether real remuneration alone makes a man guilty of simony, or also oral remuneration
or remuneration by service?

(6) Of the punishment of simony.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 100, Art. 1]

Whether Simony Is an Intentional Will to Buy or Sell Something Spiritual or Connected with
a Spiritual Thing?

Objection 1: It would seem that simony is not "an express will to buy or sell something spiritual
or connected with a spiritual thing." Simony is heresy, since it is written (I, qu. i [*Can.
Eos qui per pecunias]): "The impious heresy of Macedonius and of those who with him impugned
the Holy Ghost, is more endurable than that of those who are guilty of simony: since the former
in their ravings maintained that the Holy Spirit of Father and Son is a creature and the slave
of God, whereas the latter make the same Holy Spirit to be their own slave. For every master
sells what he has just as he wills, whether it be his slave or any other of his possessions."
But unbelief, like faith, is an act not of the will but of the intellect, as shown above (Q.
10, A. 2). Therefore simony should not be defined as an act of the will.

Obj. 2: Further, to sin intentionally is to sin through malice, and this is to sin against
the Holy Ghost. Therefore, if simony is an intentional will to sin, it would seem that it is
always a sin against the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing is more spiritual than the kingdom of heaven. But it is lawful to
buy the kingdom of heaven: for Gregory says in a homily (v, in Ev.): "The kingdom of heaven
is worth as much as you possess." Therefore simony does not consist in a will to buy something
spiritual.

Obj. 4: Further, simony takes its name from Simon the magician, of whom we read (Acts 8:18,
19) that "he offered the apostles money" that he might buy a spiritual power, in order, to
wit, "that on whomsoever he imposed his hand they might receive the Holy Ghost." But we do
not read that he wished to sell anything. Therefore simony is not the will to sell a spiritual
thing.

Obj. 5: Further, there are many other voluntary commutations besides buying and selling, such
as exchange and transaction [*A kind of legal compromise--Oxford Dictionary]. Therefore it
would seem that simony is defined insufficiently.

Obj. 6: Further, anything connected with spiritual things is itself spiritual. Therefore it
is superfluous to add "or connected with spiritual things."

Obj. 7: Further, according to some, the Pope cannot commit simony: yet he can buy or sell something
spiritual. Therefore simony is not the will to buy or sell something spiritual or connected
with a spiritual thing.

On the contrary, Gregory VII says (Regist. [*Caus. I, qu. i, can. Presbyter, qu. iii, can.
Altare]): "None of the faithful is ignorant that buying or selling altars, tithes, or the Holy
Ghost is the heresy of simony."

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 18, A. 2) an act is evil generically when it bears
on undue matter. Now a spiritual thing is undue matter for buying and selling for three reasons.
First, because a spiritual thing cannot be appraised at any earthly price, even as it is said
concerning wisdom (Prov.

Secondly, because a thing cannot be due matter for sale if the vendor is not the owner thereof,
as appears from the authority quoted (Obj. 1).

Thirdly, because sale is opposed to the source of spiritual things, since they flow from the
gratuitous will of God. Wherefore Our Lord said (Matt. 10:8): "Freely have you received, freely
give."

Therefore by buying or selling a spiritual thing, a man treats God and divine things with irreverence,
and consequently commits a sin of irreligion.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as religion consists in a kind of protestation of faith, without, sometimes,
faith being in one's heart, so too the vices opposed to religion include a certain protestation
of unbelief without, sometimes, unbelief being in the mind. Accordingly simony is said to be
a "heresy," as regards the outward protestation, since by selling a gift of the Holy Ghost
a man declares, in a way, that he is the owner of a spiritual gift; and this is heretical.
It must, however, be observed that Simon Magus, besides wishing the apostles to sell him a
grace of the Holy Ghost for money, said that the world was not created by God, but by some
heavenly power, as Isidore states (Etym. viii, 5): and so for this reason simoniacs are reckoned
with other heretics, as appears from Augustine's book on heretics.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 58, A. 4), justice, with all its parts, and consequently
all the opposite vices, is in the will as its subject. Hence simony is fittingly defined from
its relation to the will. This act is furthermore described as "express," in order to signify
that it proceeds from choice, which takes the principal part in virtue and vice. Nor does everyone
sin against the Holy Ghost that sins from choice, but only he who chooses sin through contempt
of those things whereby man is wont to be withdrawn from sin, as stated above (Q. 14, A. 1).

Reply Obj. 3: The kingdom of heaven is said to be bought when a man gives what he has for God's
sake. But this is to employ the term "buying" in a wide sense, and as synonymous with merit:
nor does it reach to the perfect signification of buying, both because neither "the sufferings
of this time," nor any gift or deed of ours, "are worthy to be compared with the glory to come,
that shall be revealed in us" (Rom. 8:18), and because merit consists chiefly, not in an outward
gift, action or passion, but in an inward affection.

Reply Obj. 4: Simon the magician wished to buy a spiritual power in order that afterwards he
might sell it. For it is written (I, qu. iii [*Can. Salvator]), that "Simon the magician wished
to buy the gift of the Holy Ghost, in order that he might make money by selling the signs to
be wrought by him." Hence those who sell spiritual things are likened in intention to Simon
the magician: while those who wish to buy them are likened to him in act. Those who sell them
imitate, in act, Giezi the disciple of Eliseus, of whom we read (4 Kings 5:20-24) that he received
money from the leper who was healed: wherefore the sellers of spiritual things may be called
not only "simoniacs" but also "giezites."

Reply Obj. 5: The terms "buying" and "selling" cover all kinds of non-gratuitous contracts.
Wherefore it is impossible for the exchange or agency of prebends or ecclesiastical benefices
to be made by authority of the parties concerned without danger of committing simony, as laid
down by law [*Cap. Quaesitum, de rerum Permutat.; cap. Super, de Transact.]. Nevertheless the
superior, in virtue of his office, can cause these exchanges to be made for useful or necessary
reasons.

Reply Obj. 6: Even as the soul lives by itself, while the body lives through being united to
the soul; so, too, certain things are spiritual by themselves, such as the sacraments and the
like, while others are called spiritual, through adhering to those others. Hence (I, qu. iii,
cap. Siquis objecerit) it is stated that "spiritual things do not progress without corporal
things, even as the soul has no bodily life without the body."

Reply Obj. 7: The Pope can be guilty of the vice of simony, like any other man, since the higher
a man's position the more grievous is his sin. For although the possessions of the Church belong
to him as dispenser in chief, they are not his as master and owner. Therefore, were he to accept
money from the income of any church in exchange for a spiritual thing, he would not escape
being guilty of the vice of simony. In like manner he might commit simony by accepting from
a layman moneys not belonging to the goods of the Church.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 100, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Always Unlawful to Give Money for the Sacraments?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not always unlawful to give money for the sacraments.
Baptism is the door of the sacraments, as we shall state in the Third Part (Q. 68, A. 6; Q.
73, A. 3). But seemingly it is lawful in certain cases to give money for Baptism, for instance
if a priest were unwilling to baptize a dying child without being paid. Therefore it is not
always unlawful to buy or sell the sacraments.

Obj. 2: Further, the greatest of the sacraments is the Eucharist, which is consecrated in the
Mass. But some priests receive a prebend or money for singing masses. Much more therefore is
it lawful to buy or sell the other sacraments.

Obj. 3: Further, the sacrament of Penance is a necessary sacrament consisting chiefly in the
absolution. But some persons demand money when absolving from excommunication. Therefore it
is not always unlawful to buy or sell a sacrament.

Obj. 4: Further, custom makes that which otherwise were sinful to be not sinful; thus Augustine
says (Contra Faust. xxii, 47) that "it was no crime to have several wives, so long as it was
the custom." Now it is the custom in some places to give something in the consecration of bishops,
blessings of abbots, ordinations of the clergy, in exchange for the chrism, holy oil, and so
forth. Therefore it would seem that it is not unlawful.

Obj. 5: Further, it happens sometimes that someone maliciously hinders a person from obtaining
a bishopric or some like dignity. But it is lawful for a man to make good his grievance. Therefore
it is lawful, seemingly, in such a case to give money for a bishopric or a like ecclesiastical
dignity.

Obj. 6: Further, marriage is a sacrament. But sometimes money is given for marriage. Therefore
it is lawful to sell a sacrament.

On the contrary, It is written (I, qu. i [*Can. Qui per pecunias]): "Whosoever shall consecrate
anyone for money, let him be cut off from the priesthood."

I answer that, The sacraments of the New Law are of all things most spiritual, inasmuch as
they are the cause of spiritual grace, on which no price can be set, and which is essentially
incompatible with a non-gratuitous giving. Now the sacraments are dispensed through the ministers
of the Church, whom the people are bound to support, according to the words of the Apostle
(1 Cor. 9:13), "Know you not, that they who work in the holy place, eat the things that are
of the holy place; and they that serve the altar, partake with the altar?"

Accordingly we must answer that to receive money for the spiritual grace of the sacraments,
is the sin of simony, which cannot be excused by any custom whatever, since "custom does not
prevail over natural or divine law" [*Cap. Cum tanto, de Consuetud.; cf. I-II, Q. 97, A. 3].
Now by money we are to understand anything that has a pecuniary value, as the Philosopher states
(Ethic. iv, 1). On the other hand, to receive anything for the support of those who administer
the sacraments, in accordance with the statutes of the Church and approved customs, is not
simony, nor is it a sin. For it is received not as a price of goods, but as a payment for their
need. Hence a gloss of Augustine on 1 Tim. 5:17, "Let the priests that rule well," says: "They
should look to the people for a supply to their need, but to the Lord for the reward of their
ministry."

Reply Obj. 1: In a case of necessity anyone may baptize. And since nowise ought one to sin,
if the priest be unwilling to baptize without being paid, one must act as though there were
no priest available for the baptism. Hence the person who is in charge of the child can, in
such a case, lawfully baptize it, or cause it to be baptized by anyone else. He could, however,
lawfully buy the water from the priest, because it is merely a bodily element. But if it were
an adult in danger of death that wished to be baptized, and the priest were unwilling to baptize
him without being paid, he ought, if possible, to be baptized by someone else. And if he is
unable to have recourse to another, he must by no means pay a price for Baptism, and should
rather die without being baptized, because for him the baptism of desire would supply the lack
of the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: The priest receives money, not as the price for consecrating the Eucharist, or
for singing the Mass (for this would be simoniacal), but as payment for his livelihood, as
stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: The money exacted of the person absolved is not the price of his absolution (for
this would be simoniacal), but a punishment of a past crime for which he was excommunicated.

Reply Obj. 4: As stated above, "custom does not prevail over natural or divine law" whereby
simony is forbidden. Wherefore the custom, if such there be, of demanding anything as the price
of a spiritual thing, with the intention of buying or selling it, is manifestly simoniacal,
especially when the demand is made of a person unwilling to pay. But if the demand be made
in payment of a stipend recognized by custom it is not simoniacal, provided there be no intention
of buying or selling, but only of doing what is customary, and especially if the demand be
acceded to voluntarily. In all these cases, however, one must beware of anything having an
appearance of simony or avarice, according to the saying of the Apostle (1 Thess. 5:22), "From
all appearance of evil restrain yourselves."

Reply Obj. 5: It would be simoniacal to buy off the opposition of one's rivals, before acquiring
the right to a bishopric or any dignity or prebend, by election, appointment or presentation,
since this would be to use money as a means of obtaining a spiritual thing. But it is lawful
to use money as a means of removing unjust opposition, after one has already acquired that right.

Reply Obj. 6: Some [*Innocent IV on Cap. Cum in Ecclesia, de Simonia] say that it is lawful
to give money for Matrimony because no grace is conferred thereby. But this is not altogether
true, as we shall state in the Third Part of the work [* Supp., Q. 42, A. 3]. Wherefore we
must reply that Matrimony is not only a sacrament of the Church, but also an office of nature.
Consequently it is lawful to give money for Matrimony considered as an office of nature, but
unlawful if it be considered as a sacrament of the Church. Hence, according to the law [*Cap.
Cum in Ecclesia, de Simonia], it is forbidden to demand anything for the Nuptial Blessing.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 100, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Lawful to Give and Receive Money for Spiritual Actions?

Objection 1: It seems that it is lawful to give and receive money for spiritual actions. The
use of prophecy is a spiritual action. But something used to be given of old for the use of
prophecy, as appears from 1 Kings 9:7, 8, and 3 Kings 14:3. Therefore it would seem that it
is lawful to give and receive money for a spiritual action.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer, preaching, divine praise, are most spiritual actions. Now money is
given to holy persons in order to obtain the assistance of their prayers, according to Luke
16:9, "Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity." To preachers also, who sow spiritual
things, temporal things are due according to the Apostle (1 Cor. 9:14). Moreover, something
is given to those who celebrate the divine praises in the ecclesiastical office, and make processions:
and sometimes an annual income is assigned to them. Therefore it is lawful to receive something
for spiritual actions.

Obj. 3: Further, science is no less spiritual than power. Now it is lawful to receive money
for the use of science: thus a lawyer may sell his just advocacy, a physician his advice for
health, and a master the exercise of his teaching. Therefore in like manner it would seem lawful
for a prelate to receive something for the use of his spiritual power, for instance, for correction,
dispensation, and so forth.

Obj. 4: Further, religion is the state of spiritual perfection. Now in certain monasteries
something is demanded from those who are received there. Therefore it is lawful to demand something
for spiritual things.

On the contrary, It is stated (I, qu. i [*Can. Quidquid invisibilis]): "It is absolutely forbidden
to make a charge for what is acquired by the consolation of invisible grace, whether by demanding
a price or by seeking any kind of return whatever." Now all these spiritual things are acquired
through an invisible grace. Therefore it is not lawful to charge a price or return for them.

I answer that, Just as the sacraments are called spiritual, because they confer a spiritual
grace, so, too, certain other things are called spiritual, because they flow from spiritual
grace and dispose thereto. And yet these things are obtainable through the ministry of men,
according to 1 Cor. 9:7, "Who serveth as a soldier at any time at his own charges? Who feedeth
the flock, and eateth not of the milk of the flock?" Hence it is simoniacal to sell or buy
that which is spiritual in such like actions; but to receive or give something for the support
of those who minister spiritual things in accordance with the statutes of the Church and approved
customs is lawful, yet in such wise that there be no intention of buying or selling, and that
no pressure be brought to bear on those who are unwilling to give, by withholding spiritual
things that ought to be administered, for then there would be an appearance of simony. But
after the spiritual things have been freely bestowed, then the statutory and customary offerings
and other dues may be exacted from those who are unwilling but able to pay, if the superior
authorize this to be done.

Reply Obj. 1: As Jerome says in his commentary on Mic. 3:9, certain gifts were freely offered
to the good prophets, for their livelihood, but not as a price for the exercise of their gift
of prophecy. Wicked prophets, however, abused this exercise by demanding payment for it.

Reply Obj. 2: Those who give alms to the poor in order to obtain from them the assistance of
their prayers do not give with the intent of buying their prayers; but by their gratuitous
beneficence inspire the poor with the mind to pray for them freely and out of charity. Temporal
things are due to the preacher as means for his support, not as a price of the words he preaches.
Hence a gloss on 1 Tim. 5:11, "Let the priests that rule well," says: "Their need allows them
to receive the wherewithal to live, charity demands that this should be given to them: yet
the Gospel is not for sale, nor is a livelihood the object of preaching: for if they sell it
for this purpose, they sell a great thing for a contemptible price." In like manner temporal
things are given to those who praise God by celebrating the divine office whether for the living
or for the dead, not as a price but as a means of livelihood; and the same purpose is fulfilled
when alms are received for making processions in funerals. Yet it is simoniacal to do such
things by contract, or with the intention of buying or selling. Hence it would be an unlawful
ordinance if it were decreed in any church that no procession would take place at a funeral
unless a certain sum of money were paid, because such an ordinance would preclude the free
granting of pious offices to any person. The ordinance would be more in keeping with the law,
if it were decreed that this honor would be accorded to all who gave a certain alms, because
this would not preclude its being granted to others. Moreover, the former ordinance has the
appearance of an exaction, whereas the latter bears a likeness to a gratuitous remuneration.

Reply Obj. 3: A person to whom a spiritual power is entrusted is bound by virtue of his office
to exercise the power entrusted to him in dispensing spiritual things. Moreover, he receives
a statutory payment from the funds of the Church as a means of livelihood. Therefore, if he
were to accept anything for the exercise of his spiritual power, this would imply, not a hiring
of his labor (which he is bound to give, as a duty arising out of the office he has accepted),
but a sale of the very use of a spiritual grace. For this reason it is unlawful for him to
receive anything for any dispensing whatever, or for allowing someone else to take his duty,
or for correcting his subjects, or for omitting to correct them. On the other hand it is lawful
for him to receive "procurations," when he visits his subjects, not as a price for correcting
them, but as a means of livelihood. He that is possessed of science, without having taken upon
himself the obligation of using it for the benefit of others can lawfully receive a price for
his learning or advice, since this is not a sale of truth or science, but a hiring of labor.
If, on the other hand, he be so bound by virtue of his office, this would amount to a sale
of the truth, and consequently he would sin grievously. For instance, those who in certain
churches are appointed to instruct the clerics of that church and other poor persons, and are
in receipt of an ecclesiastical benefice for so doing, are not allowed to receive anything
in return, either for teaching, or for celebrating or omitting any feasts.

Reply Obj. 4: It is unlawful to exact or receive anything as price for entering a monastery:
but, in the case of small monasteries, that are unable to support so many persons, it is lawful,
while entrance to the monastery is free, to accept something for the support of those who are
about to be received into the monastery, if its revenues are insufficient. In like manner it
is lawful to be easier in admitting to a monastery a person who has proved his regard for that
monastery by the generosity of his alms: just as, on the other hand, it is lawful to incite
a person's regard for a monastery by means of temporal benefits, in order that he may thereby
be induced to enter the monastery; although it is unlawful to agree to give or receive something
for entrance into a monastery (I, qu. ii, cap. Quam pio).

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 100, Art. 4]

Whether It Is Lawful to Receive Money for Things Annexed to Spiritual Things?

Objection 1: It would seem lawful to receive money for things annexed to spiritual things.
Seemingly all temporal things are annexed to spiritual things, since temporal things ought
to be sought for the sake of spiritual things. If, therefore, it is unlawful to sell what is
annexed to spiritual things, it will be unlawful to sell anything temporal, and this is clearly
false.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing would seem to be more annexed to spiritual things than consecrated
vessels. Yet it is lawful to sell a chalice for the ransom of prisoners, according to Ambrose
(De Offic. ii, 28). Therefore it is lawful to sell things annexed to spiritual things.

Obj. 3: Further, things annexed to spiritual things include right of burial, right of patronage,
and, according to ancient writers, right of the first-born (because before the Lord the first-born
exercised the priestly office), and the right to receive tithes. Now Abraham bought from Ephron
a double cave for a burying-place (Gen. 23:8, sqq.), and Jacob bought from Esau the right of
the first-born (Gen. 25:31, sqq.). Again the right of patronage is transferred with the property
sold, and is granted "in fee." Tithes are granted to certain soldiers, and can be redeemed.
Prelates also at times retain for themselves the revenues of prebends of which they have the
presentation, although a prebend is something annexed to a spiritual thing. Therefore it is
lawful to sell things annexed to spiritual things.

On the contrary, Pope Paschal [*Paschal II] says (cf. I, qu. iii, cap. Si quis objecerit):
"Whoever sells one of two such things, that the one is unproductive without the other, leaves
neither unsold. Wherefore let no person sell a church, or a prebend, or anything ecclesiastical."

I answer that, A thing may be annexed to spiritual things in two ways. First, as being dependent
on spiritual things. Thus to have ecclesiastical benefices is said to be annexed to spiritual
things, because it is not competent save to those who hold a clerical office. Hence such things
can by no means exist apart from spiritual things. Consequently it is altogether unlawful to
sell such things, because the sale thereof implies the sale of things spiritual. Other things
are annexed to spiritual things through being directed thereto, for instance the right of patronage,
which is directed to the presentation of clerics to ecclesiastical benefices; and sacred vessels,
which are directed to the use of the sacraments. Wherefore such things as these do not presuppose
spiritual things, but precede them in the order of time. Hence in a way they can be sold, but
not as annexed to spiritual things.

Reply Obj. 1: All things temporal are annexed to spiritual things, as to their end, wherefore
it is lawful to sell temporal things, but their relation to spiritual things cannot be the
matter of a lawful sale.

Reply Obj. 2: Sacred vessels also are annexed to spiritual things as to their end, wherefore
their consecration cannot be sold. Yet their material can be sold for the needs of the Church
or of the poor provided they first be broken, after prayer has been said over them, since when
once broken, they are considered to be no longer sacred vessels but mere metal: so that if
like vessels were to be made out of the same material they would have to be consecrated again.

Reply Obj. 3: We have no authority for supposing that the double cave which Abraham bought
for a burial place was consecrated for that purpose: wherefore Abraham could lawfully buy that
site to be used for burial, in order to turn it into a sepulchre: even so it would be lawful
now to buy an ordinary field as a site for a cemetery or even a church. Nevertheless because
even among the Gentiles burial places are looked upon as religious, if Ephron intended to accept
the price as payment for a burial place, he sinned in selling, though Abraham did not sin in
buying, because he intended merely to buy an ordinary plot of ground. Even now, it is lawful
in a case of necessity to sell or buy land on which there has previously been a church, as
we have also said with regard to sacred vessels (Reply Obj. 2). Or again, Abraham is to be
excused because he thus freed himself of a grievance. For although Ephron offered him the burial
place for nothing, Abraham deemed that he could not accept it gratis without prejudice to himself.

The right of the first-born was due to Jacob by reason of God's choice, according to Malach.
1:2, 3, "I have loved Jacob, but have hated Esau." Wherefore Esau sinned by selling his birthright,
yet Jacob sinned not in buying, because he is understood to have freed himself of his grievance.

The right of patronage cannot be the matter of a direct sale, nor can it be granted "in fee,"
but is transferred with the property sold or granted.

The spiritual right of receiving tithes is not granted to layfolk, but merely the temporal
commodities which are granted in the name of tithe, as stated above (Q. 87, A. 3).

With regard to the granting of benefices it must, however, be observed, that it is not unlawful
for a bishop, before presenting a person to a benefice, to decide, for some reason, to retain
part of the revenues of the benefice in question, and to spend it on some pious object. But,
on the other hand, if he were to require part of the revenues of that benefice to be given
to him by the beneficiary, it would be the same as though he demanded payment from him, and
he would not escape the guilt of simony.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 100, Art. 5]

Whether It Is Lawful to Grant Spiritual Things in Return for an Equivalent of Service, or for
an Oral Remuneration? Gregory says (Regist. iii, ep. 18): "It is right that those who serve
the interests of the Church should be rewarded." Now an equivalent of service denotes serving
the interests of the Church. Therefore it seems lawful to confer ecclesiastical benefices for
services received.

Obj. 2: Further, to confer an ecclesiastical benefice for service received seems to indicate
a carnal intention, no less than to do so on account of kinship. Yet the latter seemingly is
not simoniacal since it implies no buying or selling. Therefore neither is the former simoniacal.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is done only at another's request would seem to be done gratis:
so that apparently it does not involve simony, which consists in buying or selling. Now oral
remuneration denotes the conferring of an ecclesiastical benefice at some person's request.
Therefore this is not simoniacal.

Obj. 4: Further, hypocrites perform spiritual deeds in order that they may receive human praise,
which seems to imply oral remuneration: and yet hypocrites are not said to be guilty of simony.
Therefore oral remuneration does not entail simony.

On the contrary, Pope Urban [*Urban II, Ep. xvii ad Lucium] says: "Whoever grants or acquires
ecclesiastical things, not for the purpose for which they were instituted but for his own profit,
in consideration of an oral remuneration or of an equivalent in service rendered or money received,
is guilty of simony."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 2), the term "money" denotes "anything that can have a pecuniary
value." Now it is evident that a man's service is directed to some kind of usefulness, which
has a pecuniary value, wherefore servants are hired for a money wage. Therefore to grant a
spiritual thing for a service rendered or to be rendered is the same as to grant it for the
money, received or promised, at which that service could be valued. Likewise, to grant a person's
request for the bestowal of a temporary favor is directed to some kind of usefulness which
has a pecuniary value. Wherefore just as a man contracts the guilt of simony by accepting money
or any external thing which comes under the head of "real remuneration," so too does he contract
it, by receiving "oral remuneration" or an "equivalent in service rendered."

Reply Obj. 1: If a cleric renders a prelate a lawful service, directed to spiritual things
(e.g. to the good of the Church, or benefit of her ministers), he becomes worthy of an ecclesiastical
benefice by reason of the devotion that led him to render the service, as he would by reason
of any other good deed. Hence this is not a case of remuneration for service rendered, such
as Gregory has in mind. But if the service be unlawful, or directed to carnal things (e.g.
a service rendered to the prelate for the profit of his kindred, or the increase of his patrimony,
or the like), it will be a case of remuneration for service rendered, and this will be simony.

Reply Obj. 2: The bestowal of a spiritual thing gratis on a person by reason of kinship or
of any carnal affection is unlawful and carnal, but not simoniacal: since nothing is received
in return, wherefore it does not imply a contract of buying and selling, on which simony is
based. But to present a person to an ecclesiastical benefice with the understanding or intention
that he provide for one's kindred from the revenue is manifest simony.

Reply Obj. 3: Oral remuneration denotes either praise that pertains to human favor, which has
its price, or a request whereby man's favor is obtained or the contrary avoided. Hence if one
intend this chiefly one commits simony. Now to grant a request made for an unworthy person
implies, seemingly, that this is one's chief intention wherefore the deed itself is simoniacal.
But if the request be made for a worthy person, the deed itself is not simoniacal, because
it is based on a worthy cause, on account of which a spiritual thing is granted to the person
for whom the request is made. Nevertheless there may be simony in the intention, if one look,
not to the worthiness of the person, but to human favor. If, however, a person asks for himself,
that he may obtain the cure of souls, his very presumption renders him unworthy, and so his
request is made for an unworthy person. But, if one be in need, one may lawfully seek for oneself
an ecclesiastical benefice without the cure of souls.

Reply Obj. 4: A hypocrite does not give a spiritual thing for the sake of praise, he only makes
a show of it, and under false pretenses stealthily purloins rather than buys human praise:
so that seemingly the hypocrite is not guilty of simony.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 100, Art. 6]

Whether Those Who Are Guilty of Simony Are Fittingly Punished by Being Deprived of What They
Have Acquired by Simony?

Objection 1: It would seem that those who are guilty of simony are not fittingly punished by
being deprived of what they have acquired by simony. Simony is committed by acquiring spiritual
things in return for a remuneration. Now certain spiritual things cannot be lost when once
acquired, such as all characters that are imprinted by a consecration. Therefore it is not
a fitting punishment for a person to be deprived of what he has acquired simoniacally.

Obj. 2: Further, it sometimes happens that one who has obtained the episcopate by simony commands
a subject of his to receive orders from him: and apparently the subject should obey, so long
as the Church tolerates him. Yet no one ought to receive from him that has not the power to
give. Therefore a bishop does not lose his episcopal power, if he has acquired it by simony.

Obj. 3: Further, no one should be punished for what was done without his knowledge and consent,
since punishment is due for sin which is voluntary, as was shown above (I-II, Q. 74, AA. 1,
2; Q. 77, A. 7). Now it happens sometimes that a person acquires something spiritual, which
others have procured for him without his knowledge and consent. Therefore he should not be
punished by being deprived of what has been bestowed on him.

Obj. 4: Further, no one should profit by his own sin. Yet, if a person who has acquired an
ecclesiastical benefice by simony, were to restore what he has received, this would sometimes
turn to the profit of those who had a share in his simony; for instance, when a prelate and
his entire chapter have consented to the simony. Therefore that which has been acquired by
simony ought not always to be restored.

Obj. 5: Further, sometimes a person obtains admission to a monastery by simony, and there takes
the solemn vow of profession. But no one should be freed from the obligation of a vow on account
of a fault he has committed. Therefore he should not be expelled from the monastic state which
he has acquired by simony.

Obj. 6: Further, in this world external punishment is not inflicted for the internal movements
of the heart, whereof God alone is the judge. Now simony is committed in the mere intention
or will, wherefore it is defined in reference to the will, as stated above (A. 1, ad 2). Therefore
a person should not always be deprived of what he has acquired by simony.

Obj. 7: Further, to be promoted to greater dignity is much less than to retain that which one
has already received. Now sometimes those who are guilty of simony are, by dispensation, promoted
to greater dignity. Therefore they should not always be deprived of what they have received.

On the contrary, It is written (I, qu. i, cap. Si quis Episcopus): "He that has been ordained
shall profit nothing from his ordination or promotion that he has acquired by the bargain,
but shall forfeit the dignity or cure that he has acquired with his money."

I answer that, No one can lawfully retain that which he has acquired against the owner's will.
For instance, if a steward were to give some of his lord's property to a person, against his
lord's will and orders, the recipient could not lawfully retain what he received. Now Our Lord,
Whose stewards and ministers are the prelates of churches, ordered spiritual things to be given
gratis, according to Matt. 10:8, "Freely have you received, freely give." Wherefore whosoever
acquires spiritual things in return for a remuneration cannot lawfully retain them. Moreover,
those who are guilty of simony, by either selling or buying spiritual things, as well as those
who act as go-between, are sentenced to other punishments, namely, infamy and deposition, if
they be clerics, and excommunication if they be laymen, as stated qu. i, cap. Si quis Episcopus
[*Qu. iii, can. Si quis praebendas].

Reply Obj. 1: He that has received a sacred Order simoniacally, receives the character of the
Order on account of the efficacy of the sacrament: but he does not receive the grace nor the
exercise of the Order, because he has received the character by stealth as it were, and against
the will of the Supreme Lord. Wherefore he is suspended, by virtue of the law, both as regards
himself, namely, that he should not busy himself about exercising his Order, and as regards
others, namely, that no one may communicate with him in the exercise of his Order, whether
his sin be public or secret. Nor may he reclaim the money which he basely gave, although the
other party unjustly retains it.

Again, a man who is guilty of simony, through having conferred Orders simoniacally, or through
having simoniacally granted or received a benefice, or through having been a go-between in
a simoniacal transaction, if he has done so publicly, is suspended by virtue of the law, as
regards both himself and others; but if he has acted in secret he is suspended by virtue of
the law, as regards himself alone, and not as regards others.

Reply Obj. 2: One ought not to receive Orders from a bishop one knows to have been promoted
simoniacally, either on account of his command or for fear of his excommunication: and such
as receive Orders from him do not receive the exercise of their Orders, even though they are
ignorant of his being guilty of simony; and they need to receive a dispensation. Some, however,
maintain that one ought to receive Orders in obedience to his command unless one can prove
him to be guilty of simony, but that one ought not to exercise the Order without a dispensation.
But this is an unreasonable statement, because no one should obey a man to the extent of communicating
with him in an unlawful action. Now he that is, by virtue of the law, suspended as regards
both himself and others, confers Orders unlawfully: wherefore no one should communicate with
him, by receiving Orders from him for any cause whatever. If, however, one be not certain on
the point, one ought not to give credence to another's sin, and so one ought with a good conscience
to receive Orders from him. And if the bishop has been guilty of simony otherwise than by a
simoniacal promotion, and the fact be a secret, one can receive Orders from him because he
is not suspended as regards others, but only as regards himself, as stated above (ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: To be deprived of what one has received is not only the punishment of a sin,
but is also sometimes the effect of acquiring unjustly, as when one buys a thing of a person
who cannot sell it. Wherefore if a man, knowingly and spontaneously, receives Orders or an
ecclesiastical benefice simoniacally, not only is he deprived of what he has received, by forfeiting
the exercise of his order, and resigning the benefice and the fruits acquired therefrom, but
also in addition to this he is punished by being marked with infamy. Moreover, he is bound
to restore not only the fruit actually acquired, but also such as could have been acquired
by a careful possessor (which, however, is to be understood of the net fruits, allowance being
made for expenses incurred on account of the fruits), excepting those fruits that have been
expended for the good of the Church.

On the other hand, if a man's promotion be procured simoniacally by others, without his knowledge
and consent, he forfeits the exercise of his Order, and is bound to resign the benefice obtained
together with fruits still extant; but he is not bound to restore the fruits which he has consumed,
since he possessed them in good faith. Exception must be made in the case when his promotion
has been deceitfully procured by an enemy of his; or when he expressly opposes the transaction,
for then he is not bound to resign, unless subsequently he agree to the transaction, by paying
what was promised.

Reply Obj. 4: Money, property, or fruits simoniacally received, must be restored to the Church
that has incurred loss by their transfer, notwithstanding the fact that the prelate or a member
of the chapter of that church was at fault, since others ought not to be the losers by his
sin: in suchwise, however, that, as far as possible, the guilty parties be not the gainers.
But if the prelate and the entire chapter be at fault, restitution must be made, with the consent
of superior authority, either to the poor or to some other church.

Reply Obj. 5: If there are any persons who have been simoniacally admitted into a monastery,
they must quit: and if the simony was committed with their knowledge since the holding of the
General Council [*Fourth Lateran Council, A.D. 1215, held by Innocent III], they must be expelled
from their monastery without hope of return, and do perpetual penance under a stricter rule,
or in some house of the same order, if a stricter one be not found. If, however, this took
place before the Council, they must be placed in other houses of the same order. If this cannot
be done, they must be received into monasteries of the same order, by way of compensation,
lest they wander about the world, but they must not be admitted to their former rank, and must
be assigned a lower place.

On the other hand, if they were received simoniacally, without their knowledge, whether before
or after the Council, then after quitting they may be received again, their rank being changed
as stated.

Reply Obj. 6: In God's sight the mere will makes a man guilty of simony; but as regards the
external ecclesiastical punishment he is not punished as a simoniac, by being obliged to resign,
but is bound to repent of his evil intention.

Reply Obj. 7: The Pope alone can grant a dispensation to one who has knowingly received a benefice
(simoniacally). In other cases the bishop also can dispense, provided the beneficiary first
of all renounce what he has received simoniacally, so that he will receive either the lesser
dispensation allowing him to communicate with the laity, or a greater dispensation, allowing
him after doing penance to retain his order in some other Church; or again a greater dispensation,
allowing him to remain in the same Church, but in minor orders; or a full dispensation allowing
him to exercise even the major orders in the same Church, but not to accept a prelacy.

QUESTION 101

OF PIETY (In Four Articles)

After religion we must consider piety, the consideration of which will render the opposite
vices manifest. Accordingly four points of inquiry arise with regard to piety:

(1) To whom does piety extend?

(2) What does piety make one offer a person?

(3) Whether piety is a special virtue?

(4) Whether the duties of piety should be omitted for the sake of religion?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 101, Art. 1]

Whether Piety Extends to Particular Human Individuals?

Objection 1: It seems that piety does not extend to particular human individuals. For Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei x) that piety denotes, properly speaking, the worship of God, which the Greeks
designate by the term eusebeia. But the worship of God does not denote relation to man, but
only to God. Therefore piety does not extend definitely to certain human individuals.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. i): "Piety, on her day, provides a banquet, because she
fills the inmost recesses of the heart with works of mercy." Now the works of mercy are to
be done to all, according to Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i). Therefore piety does not extend
definitely to certain special persons.

Obj. 3: Further, in human affairs there are many other mutual relations besides those of kindred
and citizenship, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 11, 12), and on each of them is founded
a kind of friendship, which would seem to be the virtue of piety, according to a gloss on 2
Tim. 3:5, "Having an appearance indeed of piety [Douay: 'godliness']." Therefore piety extends
not only to one's kindred and fellow-citizens.

On the contrary, Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "it is by piety that we do our duty
towards our kindred and well-wishers of our country and render them faithful service."

I answer that, Man becomes a debtor to other men in various ways, according to their various
excellence and the various benefits received from them. On both counts God holds first place,
for He is supremely excellent, and is for us the first principle of being and government. In
the second place, the principles of our being and government are our parents and our country,
that have given us birth and nourishment. Consequently man is debtor chiefly to his parents
and his country, after God. Wherefore just as it belongs to religion to give worship to God,
so does it belong to piety, in the second place, to give worship to one's parents and one's
country.

The worship due to our parents includes the worship given to all our kindred, since our kinsfolk
are those who descend from the same parents, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 12).
The worship given to our country includes homage to all our fellow-citizens and to all the
friends of our country. Therefore piety extends chiefly to these.

Reply Obj. 1: The greater includes the lesser: wherefore the worship due to God includes the
worship due to our parents as a particular. Hence it is written (Malach. 1:6): "If I be a father,
where is My honor?" Consequently the term piety extends also to the divine worship.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x), "the term piety is often used in connection
with works of mercy, in the language of the common people; the reason for which I consider
to be the fact that God Himself has declared that these works are more pleasing to Him than
sacrifices. This custom has led to the application of the word 'pious' to God Himself."

Reply Obj. 3: The relations of a man with his kindred and fellow-citizens are more referable
to the principles of his being than other relations: wherefore the term piety is more applicable
to them.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 101, Art. 2]

Whether Piety Provides Support for Our Parents?

Objection 1: It seems that piety does not provide support for our parents. For, seemingly,
the precept of the decalogue, "Honor thy father and mother," belongs to piety. But this prescribes
only the giving of honor. Therefore it does not belong to piety to provide support for one's
parents.

Obj. 2: Further, a man is bound to lay up for those whom he is bound to support. Therefore
piety does not oblige them to support their parents.

Obj. 3: Further, piety extends not only to one's parents, but also to other kinsmen and to
one's fellow-citizens, as stated above (A. 1). But one is not bound to support all one's kindred
and fellow-citizens. Therefore neither is one bound to support one's parents.

On the contrary, our Lord (Matt. 15:3-6) reproved the Pharisees for hindering children from
supporting their parents.

I answer that, We owe something to our parents in two ways: that is to say, both essentially,
and accidentally. We owe them essentially that which is due to a father as such: and since
he is his son's superior through being the principle of his being, the latter owes him reverence
and service. Accidentally, that is due to a father, which it befits him to receive in respect
of something accidental to him, for instance, if he be ill, it is fitting that his children
should visit him and see to his cure; if he be poor, it is fitting that they should support
him; and so on in like instance, all of which come under the head of service due. Hence Tully
says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "piety gives both duty and homage": "duty" referring to service,
and "homage" to reverence or honor, because, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x), "we are said
to give homage to those whose memory or presence we honor."

Reply Obj. 1: According to our Lord's interpretation (Matt. 15:3-6) the honor due to our parents
includes whatever support we owe them; and the reason for this is that support is given to
one's father because it is due to him as to one greater.

Reply Obj. 2: Since a father stands in the relation of principle, and his son in the relation
of that which is from a principle, it is essentially fitting for a father to support his son:
and consequently he is bound to support him not only for a time, but for all his life, and
this is to lay by. On the other hand, for the son to bestow something on his father is accidental,
arising from some momentary necessity, wherein he is bound to support him, but not to lay by
as for a long time beforehand, because naturally parents are not the successors of their children,
but children of their parents.

Reply Obj. 3: As Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii), "we offer homage and duty to all our kindred
and to the well-wishers of our country"; not, however, equally to all, but chiefly to our parents,
and to others according to our means and their personal claims.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 101, Art. 3]

Whether Piety Is a Special Virtue Distinct from Other Virtues?

Objection 1: It seems that piety is not a special virtue distinct from other virtues. For the
giving of service and homage to anyone proceeds from love. But it belongs to piety. Therefore
piety is not a distinct virtue from charity.

Obj. 2: Further, it is proper to religion to give worship to God. But piety also gives worship
to God, according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei x). Therefore piety is not distinct from religion.

Obj. 3: Further, piety, whereby we give our country worship and duty, seems to be the same
as legal justice, which looks to the common good. But legal justice is a general virtue, according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 1, 2). Therefore piety is not a special virtue.

On the contrary, It is accounted by Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) as a part of justice.

I answer that, A special virtue is one that regards an object under a special aspect. Since,
then, the nature of justice consists in rendering another person his due, wherever there is
a special aspect of something due to a person, there is a special virtue. Now a thing is indebted
in a special way to that which is its connatural principle of being and government. And piety
regards this principle, inasmuch as it pays duty and homage to our parents and country, and
to those who are related thereto. Therefore piety is a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as religion is a protestation of faith, hope and charity, whereby man is
primarily directed to God, so again piety is a protestation of the charity we bear towards
our parents and country.

Reply Obj. 2: God is the principle of our being and government in a far more excellent manner
than one's father or country. Hence religion, which gives worship to God, is a distinct virtue
from piety, which pays homage to our parents and country. But things relating to creatures
are transferred to God as the summit of excellence and causality, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom.
i): wherefore, by way of excellence, piety designates the worship of God, even as God, by way
of excellence, is called "Our Father."

Reply Obj. 3: Piety extends to our country in so far as the latter is for us a principle of
being: but legal justice regards the good of our country, considered as the common good: wherefore
legal justice has more of the character of a general virtue than piety has.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 101, Art. 4]

Whether the Duties of Piety Towards One's Parents Should Be Omitted for the Sake of Religion?

Objection 1: It seems that the duties of piety towards one's parents should be omitted for
the sake of religion. Hence it is said in praise of James and John (Matt. 4:22) that they left
"their nets and father, and followed" Christ. Again it is said in praise of the Levites (Deut.
33:9): "Who hath said to his father, and to his mother: I do not know you; and to his brethren:
I know you not; and their own children they have not known. These have kept Thy word." Now
a man who knows not his parents and other kinsmen, or who even hates them, must needs omit
the duties of piety. Therefore the duties of piety should be omitted for the sake of religion.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Luke 9:59, 60) that in answer to him who said: "Suffer me first
to go and bury my father," Our Lord replied: "Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou, and
preach the kingdom of God." Now the latter pertains to religion, while it is a duty of piety
to bury one's father. Therefore a duty of piety should be omitted for the sake of religion.

Obj. 3: Further, God is called "Our Father" by excellence. Now just as we worship our parents
by paying them the duties of piety so do we worship God by religion. Therefore the duties of
piety should be omitted for the sake of the worship of religion.

Obj. 4: Further, religious are bound by a vow which they may not break to fulfil the observances
of religion. Now in accordance with those observances they are hindered from supporting their
parents, both on the score of poverty, since they have nothing of their own, and on the score
of obedience, since they may not leave the cloister without the permission of their superior.
Therefore the duties of piety towards one's parents should be omitted for the sake of religion.

On the contrary, Our Lord reproved the Pharisees (Matt. 15:3-6) who taught that for the sake
of religion one ought to refrain from paying one's parents the honor we owe them.

I answer that, Religion and piety are two virtues. Now no virtue is opposed to another virtue,
since according to the Philosopher, in his book on the Categories (Cap. De oppos.), "good is
not opposed to good." Therefore it is impossible that religion and piety mutually hinder one
another, so that the act of one be excluded by the act of the other. Now, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 7, A. 2; Q. 18, A. 3), the act of every virtue is limited by the circumstances due thereto,
and if it overstep them it will be an act no longer of virtue but of vice. Hence it belongs
to piety to pay duty and homage to one's parents according to the due mode. But it is not the
due mode that man should tend to worship his father rather than God, but, as Ambrose says on
Luke 12:52, "the piety of divine religion takes precedence of the claims of kindred."

Accordingly, if the worship of one's parents take one away from the worship of God it would
no longer be an act of piety to pay worship to one's parents to the prejudice of God. Hence
Jerome says (Ep. ad Heliod.): "Though thou trample upon thy father, though thou spurn thy mother,
turn not aside, but with dry eyes hasten to the standard of the cross; it is the highest degree
of piety to be cruel in this matter." Therefore in such a case the duties of piety towards
one's parents should be omitted for the sake of the worship religion gives to God. If, however,
by paying the services due to our parents, we are not withdrawn from the service of God, then
will it be an act of piety, and there will be no need to set piety aside for the sake of religion.

Reply Obj. 1: Gregory expounding this saying of our Lord says (Hom. xxxvii in Ev.) that "when
we find our parents to be a hindrance in our way to God, we must ignore them by hating and
fleeing from them." For if our parents incite us to sin, and withdraw us from the service of
God, we must, as regards this point, abandon and hate them. It is in this sense that the Levites
are said to have not known their kindred, because they obeyed the Lord's command, and spared
not the idolaters (Ex. 32). James and John are praised for leaving their parents and following
our Lord, not that their father incited them to evil, but because they deemed it possible for
him to find another means of livelihood, if they followed Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: Our Lord forbade the disciple to bury his father because, according to Chrysostom
(Hom. xxviii in Matth.), "Our Lord by so doing saved him from many evils, such as the sorrows
and worries and other things that one anticipates under these circumstances. For after the
burial the will had to be read, the estate had to be divided, and so forth: but chiefly, because
there were others who could see to the funeral." Or, according to Cyril's commentary on Luke
9, "this disciple's request was, not that he might bury a dead father, but that he might support
a yet living father in the latter's old age, until at length he should bury him. This is what
Our Lord did not grant, because there were others, bound by the duties of kindred, to take
care of him."

Reply Obj. 3: Whatever we give our parents out of piety is referred by us to God; just as other
works of mercy which we perform with regard to any of our neighbors are offered to God, according
to Matt. 25:40: "As long as you did it to one of . . . My least . . . you did it to Me." Accordingly,
if our carnal parents stand in need of our assistance, so that they have no other means of
support, provided they incite us to nothing against God, we must not abandon them for the sake
of religion. But if we cannot devote ourselves to their service without sin, or if they can
be supported without our assistance, it is lawful to forego their service, so as to give more
time to religion.

Reply Obj. 4: We must speak differently of one who is yet in the world, and of one who has
made his profession in religion. For he that is in the world, if he has parents unable to find
support without him, he must not leave them and enter religion, because he would be breaking
the commandment prescribing the honoring of parents. Some say, however, that even then he might
abandon them, and leave them in God's care. But this, considered aright, would be to tempt
God: since, while having human means at hand, he would be exposing his parents to danger, in
the hope of God's assistance. On the other hand, if the parents can find means of livelihood
without him, it is lawful for him to abandon them and enter religion, because children are
not bound to support their parents except in cases of necessity, as stated above. He that has
already made his profession in religion is deemed to be already dead to the world: wherefore
he ought not, under pretext of supporting his parents, to leave the cloister where he is buried
with Christ, and busy himself once more with worldly affairs. Nevertheless he is bound, saving
his obedience to his superiors, and his religious state withal, to make points efforts for
his parents' support.

QUESTION 102

OF OBSERVANCE, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF, AND OF ITS PARTS (In Three Articles)

We must now consider observance and its parts, the considerations of which will manifest the
contrary vices.

Under the head of observance there are three points of inquiry:

(1) Whether observance is a special virtue, distinct from other virtues?

(2) What does observance offer?

(3) Of its comparison with piety.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 102, Art. 1]

Whether Observance Is a Special Virtue, Distinct from Other Virtues?

Objection 1: It seems that observance is not a special virtue, distinct from other virtues.
For virtues are distinguished by their objects. But the object of observance is not distinct
from the object of piety: for Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that "it is by observance that
we pay worship and honor to those who excel in some kind of dignity." But worship and honor
are paid also by piety to our parents, who excel in dignity. Therefore observance is not a
distinct virtue from piety.

Obj. 2: Further, just as honor and worship are due to those that are in a position of dignity,
so also are they due to those who excel in science and virtue. But there is no special virtue
whereby we pay honor and worship to those who excel in science and virtue. Therefore observance,
whereby we pay worship and honor to those who excel in dignity, is not a special virtue distinct
from other virtues.

Obj. Therefore observance is not by itself a special virtue distinct from other virtues.

On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) reckons observance along with the other parts
of justice, which are special virtues.

I answer that, As explained above (Q. 101, AA. 1, 3; Q. 80), according to the various excellences
of those persons to whom something is due, there must needs be a corresponding distinction
of virtues in a descending order. Now just as a carnal father partakes of the character of
principle in a particular way, which character is found in God in a universal way, so too a
person who, in some way, exercises providence in one respect, partakes of the character of
father in a particular way, since a father is the principle of generation, of education, of
learning and of whatever pertains to the perfection of human life: while a person who is in
a position of dignity is as a principle of government with regard to certain things: for instance,
the governor of a state in civil matters, the commander of an army in matters of warfare, a
professor in matters of learning, and so forth. Hence it is that all such persons are designated
as "fathers," on account of their being charged with like cares: thus the servants of Naaman
said to him (4 Kings 5:13): "Father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing," etc.

Therefore, just as, in a manner, beneath religion, whereby worship is given to God, we find
piety, whereby we worship our parents; so under piety we find observance, whereby worship and
honor are paid to persons in positions of dignity.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (Q. 101, A. 3, ad 2), religion goes by the name of piety by way
of supereminence, although piety properly so called is distinct from religion; and in the same
way piety can be called observance by way of excellence, although observance properly speaking
is distinct from piety.

Reply Obj. 2: By the very fact of being in a position of dignity a man not only excels as regards
his position, but also has a certain power of governing subjects, wherefore it is fitting that
he should be considered as a principle inasmuch as he is the governor of others. On the other
hand, the fact that a man has perfection of science and virtue does not give him the character
of a principle in relation to others, but merely a certain excellence in himself. Wherefore
a special virtue is appointed for the payment of worship and honor to persons in positions
of dignity. Yet, forasmuch as science, virtue and all like things render a man fit for positions
of dignity, the respect which is paid to anyone on account of any excellence whatever belongs
to the same virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: It belongs to special justice, properly speaking, to pay the equivalent to those
to whom we owe anything. Now this cannot be done to the virtuous, and to those who make good
use of their position of dignity, as neither can it be done to God, nor to our parents. Consequently
these matters belong to an annexed virtue, and not to special justice, which is a principal virtue.

Legal justice extends to the acts of all the virtues, as stated above (Q. 58, A. 6).

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 102, Art. 2]

Whether It Belongs to Observance to Pay Worship and Honor to Those Who Are in Positions of Dignity?

Objection 1: It seems that it does not belong to observance to pay worship and honor to persons
in positions of dignity. For according to Augustine (De Civ. Dei x), we are said to worship
those persons whom we hold in honor, so that worship and honor would seem to be the same. Therefore
it is unfitting to define observance as paying worship and honor to persons in positions of
dignity.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to justice that we pay what we owe: wherefore this belongs to observance
also, since it is a part of justice. Now we do not owe worship and honor to all persons in
positions of dignity, but only to those who are placed over us. Therefore observance is unfittingly
defined as giving worship and honor to all.

Obj. 3: Further, not only do we owe honor to persons of dignity who are placed over us; we
owe them also fear and a certain payment of remuneration, according to Rom. 13:17, "Obey your
prelates, and be subject to them." Therefore observance is not fittingly defined as paying
worship and honor.

I answer that, It belongs to persons in positions of dignity to govern subjects. Now to govern
is to move certain ones to their due end: thus a sailor governs his ship by steering it to
port. But every mover has a certain excellence and power over that which is moved. Wherefore,
a person in a position of dignity is an object of twofold consideration: first, in so far as
he obtains excellence of position, together with a certain power over subjects: secondly, as
regards the exercise of his government. In respect of his excellence there is due to him honor,
which is the recognition of some kind of excellence; and in respect of the exercise of his
government, there is due to him worship, consisting in rendering him service, by obeying his
commands, and by repaying him, according to one's faculty, for the benefits we received from him.

Reply Obj. 1: Worship includes not only honor, but also whatever other suitable actions are
connected with the relations between man and man.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 80), debt is twofold. One is legal debt, to pay which man
is compelled by law; and thus man owes honor and worship to those persons in positions of dignity
who are placed over him. The other is moral debt, which is due by reason of a certain honesty:
it is in this way that we owe worship and honor to persons in positions of dignity even though
we be not their subjects.

Reply Obj. 3: Honor is due to the excellence of persons in positions of dignity, on account
of their higher rank: while fear is due to them on account of their power to use compulsion:
and to the exercise of their government there is due both obedience, whereby subjects are moved
at the command of their superiors, and tributes, which are a repayment of their labor.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 102, Art. 3]

Whether Observance Is a Greater Virtue Than Piety?

Objection 1: It seems that observance is a greater virtue than piety. For the prince to whom
worship is paid by observance is compared to a father who is worshiped by piety, as a universal
to a particular governor; because the household which a father governs is part of the state
which is governed by the prince. Now a universal power is greater, and inferiors are more subject
thereto. Therefore observance is a greater virtue than piety.

Obj. 2: Further, persons in positions of dignity take care of the common good. Now our kindred
pertain to the private good, which we ought to set aside for the common good: wherefore it
is praiseworthy to expose oneself to the danger of death for the sake of the common good. Therefore
observance, whereby worship is paid to persons in positions of dignity, is a greater virtue
than piety, which pays worship to one's kindred.

Obj. 3: Further honor and reverence are due to the virtuous in the first place after God. Now
honor and reverence are paid to the virtuous by the virtue of observance, as stated above (A.
1, ad 3). Therefore observance takes the first place after religion.

On the contrary, The precepts of the Law prescribe acts of virtue. Now, immediately after the
precepts of religion, which belong to the first table, follows the precept of honoring our
parents which refers to piety. Therefore piety follows immediately after religion in the order
of excellence.

I answer that, Something may be paid to persons in positions of dignity in two ways. First,
in relation to the common good, as when one serves them in the administration of the affairs
of the state. This no longer belongs to observance, but to piety, which pays worship not only
to one's father but also to one's fatherland. Secondly, that which is paid to persons in positions
of dignity refers specially to their personal usefulness or renown, and this belongs properly
to observance, as distinct from piety. Therefore in comparing observance with piety we must
needs take into consideration the different relations in which other persons stand to ourselves,
which relations both virtues regard. Now it is evident that the persons of our parents and
of our kindred are more substantially akin to us than persons in positions of dignity, since
birth and education, which originate in the father, belong more to one's substance than external
government, the principle of which is seated in those who are in positions of dignity. For
this reason piety takes precedence of observance, inasmuch as it pays worship to persons more
akin to us, and to whom we are more strictly bound.

Reply Obj. 1: The prince is compared to the father as a universal to a particular power, as
regards external government, but not as regards the father being a principle of generation:
for in this way the father should be compared with the divine power from which all things derive
their being.

Reply Obj. 2: In so far as persons in positions of dignity are related to the common good,
their worship does not pertain to observance, but to piety, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: The rendering of honor or worship should be proportionate to the person to whom
it is paid not only as considered in himself, but also as compared to those who pay them. Wherefore,
though virtuous persons, considered in themselves, are more worthy of honor than the persons
of one's parents, yet children are under a greater obligation, on account of the benefits they
have received from their parents and their natural kinship with them, to pay worship and honor
to their parents than to virtuous persons who are not of their kindred.

QUESTION 103

OF DULIA (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the parts of observance. We shall consider (1) dulia, whereby we pay honor
and other things pertaining thereto to those who are in a higher position; (2) obedience, whereby
we obey their commands.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether honor is a spiritual or a corporal thing?

(2) Whether honor is due to those only who are in a higher position?

(3) Whether dulia, which pays honor and worship to those who are above us, is a special virtue,
distinct from latria?

(4) Whether it contains several species?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 103, Art. 1]

Whether Honor Denotes Something Corporal?

Objection 1: It seems that honor does not denote something corporal. For honor is showing reverence
in acknowledgment of virtue, as may be gathered from the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 5). Now showing
reverence is something spiritual, since to revere is an act of fear, as stated above (Q. 81,
A. 2, ad 1). Therefore honor is something spiritual.

Obj. 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3), "honor is the reward of virtue."
Now, since virtue consists chiefly of spiritual things, its reward is not something corporal,
for the reward is more excellent than the merit. Therefore honor does not consist of corporal
things.

Obj. 3: Further, honor is distinct from praise, as also from glory. Now praise and glory consist
of external things. Therefore honor consists of things internal and spiritual.

On the contrary, Jerome in his exposition of 1 Tim. 5:3, "Honor widows that are widows indeed,"
and (1 Tim. 5:17), "let the priests that rule well be esteemed worthy of double honor" etc.
says (Ep. ad Ageruch.): "Honor here stands either for almsgiving or for remuneration." Now
both of these pertain to [corporal] things. Therefore honor consists of corporal things.

I answer that, Honor denotes a witnessing to a person's excellence. Therefore men who wish
to be honored seek a witnessing to their excellence, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. i,
5; viii, 8). Now witness is borne either before God or before man. Before God, Who is the searcher
of hearts, the witness of one's conscience suffices. wherefore honor, so far as God is concerned,
may consist of the mere internal movement of the heart, for instance when a man acknowledges
either God's excellence or another man's excellence before God. But, as regards men, one cannot
bear witness, save by means of signs, either by words, as when one proclaims another's excellence
by word of mouth, or by deeds, for instance by bowing, saluting, and so forth, or by external
things, as by offering gifts, erecting statues, and the like. Accordingly honor consists of
signs, external and corporal.

Reply Obj. 1: Reverence is not the same as honor: but on the one hand it is the primary motive
for showing honor, in so far as one man honors another out of the reverence he has for him;
and on the other hand, it is the end of honor, in so far as a person is honored in order that
he may be held in reverence by others.

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 3), honor is not a sufficient reward
of virtue: yet nothing in human and corporal things can be greater than honor, since these
corporal things themselves are employed as signs in acknowledgment of excelling virtue. It
is, however, due to the good and the beautiful, that they may be made known, according to Matt.
5:15, "Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that
it may shine to all that are in the house." In this sense honor is said to be the reward of virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Praise is distinguished from honor in two ways. First, because praise consists
only of verbal signs, whereas honor consists of any external signs, so that praise is included
in honor. Secondly, because by paying honor to a person we bear witness to a person's excelling
goodness absolutely, whereas by praising him we bear witness to his goodness in reference to
an end: thus we praise one that works well for an end. On the other hand, honor is given even
to the best, which is not referred to an end, but has already arrived at the end, according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 5).

Glory is the effect of honor and praise, since the result of our bearing witness to a person's
goodness is that his goodness becomes clear to the knowledge of many. The word "glory" signifies
this, for "glory" is the same as kleria, wherefore a gloss of Augustine on Rom. 16:27 observes
that glory is "clear knowledge together with praise."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 103, Art. 2]

Whether Honor Is Properly Due to Those Who Are Above Us?

Objection 1: It seems that honor is not properly due to those who are above us. Yet an angel
forbade John when the latter wished to honor him (Apoc. 22:10). Therefore honor is not due
to those who are above us.

Obj. 2: Further, honor is due to a person in acknowledgment of his virtue, as stated above
(A. 1; Q. 63, A. 3). But sometimes those who are above us are not virtuous. Therefore honor
is not due to them, as neither is it due to the demons, who nevertheless are above us in the
order of nature.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 12:10): "With honor preventing one another," and we
read (1 Pet. 2:17): "Honor all men." But this would not be so if honor were due to those alone
who are above us. Therefore honor is not due properly to those who are above us.

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (Tob. 1:16) that Tobias "had ten talents of silver of that which
he had been honored by the king": and we read (Esther 6:11) that Assuerus honored Mardochaeus,
and ordered it to be proclaimed in his presence: "This honor is he worthy of whom the king
hath a mind to honor." Therefore honor is paid to those also who are beneath us, and it seems,
in consequence, that honor is not due properly to those who are above us.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 12) that "honor is due to the best."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), honor is nothing but an acknowledgment of a person's
excelling goodness. Now a person's excellence may be considered, not only in relation to those
who honor him, in the point of his being more excellent than they, but also in itself, or in
relation to other persons, and in this way honor is always due to a person, on account of some
excellence or superiority.

For the person honored has no need to be more excellent than those who honor him; it may suffice
for him to be more excellent than some others, or again he may be more excellent than those
who honor him in some respect and not simply.

Reply Obj. 1: The angel forbade John to pay him, not any kind of honor, but the honor of adoration
and latria, which is due to God. Or again, he forbade him to pay the honor of dulia, in order
to indicate the dignity of John himself, for which Christ equaled him to the angels "according
to the hope of glory of the children of God": wherefore he refused to be honored by him as
though he were superior to him.

Reply Obj. 2: A wicked superior is honored for the excellence, not of his virtue but of his
dignity, as being God's minister, and because the honor paid to him is paid to the whole community
over which he presides. As for the demons, they are wicked beyond recall, and should be looked
upon as enemies, rather than treated with honor.

Reply Obj. 3: In every man is to be found something that makes it possible to deem him better
than ourselves, according to Phil. 2:3, "In humility, let each esteem others better than themselves,"
and thus, too, we should all be on the alert to do honor to one another.

Reply Obj. 4: Private individuals are sometimes honored by kings, not that they are above them
in the order of dignity but on account of some excellence of their virtue: and in this way
Tobias and Mardochaeus were honored by kings.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 103, Art. 3]

Whether Dulia Is a Special Virtue Distinct from Latria?

Objection 1. It seems that dulia is not a special virtue distinct from latria. For a gloss
on Ps. 7:1, "O Lord my God, in Thee have I put my trust," says: "Lord of all by His power,
to Whom dulia is due; God by creation, to Whom we owe latria." Now the virtue directed to God
as Lord is not distinct from that which is directed to Him as God. Therefore dulia is not a
distinct virtue from latria. Now the charity with which we love God is the same as that whereby
we love our neighbor. Therefore dulia whereby we honor our neighbor is not a distinct virtue
from latria with which we honor God.

Obj. 3: Further, the movement whereby one is moved towards an image is the same as the movement
whereby one is moved towards the thing represented by the image. Now by dulia we honor a man
as being made to the image of God. For it is written of the wicked (Wis. 2:22, 23) that "they
esteemed not the honor of holy souls, for God created man incorruptible, and to the image of
His own likeness He made him." Therefore dulia is not a distinct virtue from latria whereby
God is honored.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x), that "the homage due to man, of which the
Apostle spoke when he commanded servants to obey their masters and which in Greek is called
dulia, is distinct from latria which denotes the homage that consists in the worship of God."

I answer that, According to what has been stated above (Q. 101, A. 3), where there are different
aspects of that which is due, there must needs be different virtues to render those dues. Now
servitude is due to God and to man under different aspects: even as lordship is competent to
God and to man under different aspects. For God has absolute and paramount lordship over the
creature wholly and singly, which is entirely subject to His power: whereas man partakes of
a certain likeness to the divine lordship, forasmuch as he exercises a particular power over
some man or creature. Wherefore dulia, which pays due service to a human lord, is a distinct
virtue from latria, which pays due service to the lordship of God. It is, moreover, a species
of observance, because by observance we honor all those who excel in dignity, while dulia properly
speaking is the reverence of servants for their master, dulia being the Greek for servitude.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as religion is called piety by way of excellence, inasmuch as God is our
Father by way of excellence, so again latria is called dulia by way of excellence, inasmuch
as God is our Lord by way of excellence. Now the creature does not partake of the power to
create by reason of which latria is due to God: and so this gloss drew a distinction, by ascribing
latria to God in respect of creation, which is not communicated to a creature, but dulia in
respect of lordship, which is communicated to a creature.

Reply Obj. 2: The reason why we love our neighbor is God, since that which we love in our neighbor
through charity is God alone. Wherefore the charity with which we love God is the same as that
with which we love our neighbor. Yet there are other friendships distinct from charity, in
respect of the other reasons for which a man is loved. In like manner, since there is one reason
for serving God and another for serving man, and for honoring the one or the other, latria
and dulia are not the same virtue.

Reply Obj. 3: Movement towards an image as such is referred to the thing represented by the
image: yet not every movement towards an image is referred to the image as such, and consequently
sometimes the movement to the image differs specifically from the movement to the thing. Accordingly
we must reply that the honor or subjection of dulia regards some dignity of a man absolutely.
For though, in respect of that dignity, man is made to the image or likeness of God, yet in
showing reverence to a person, one does not always refer this to God actually.

Or we may reply that the movement towards an image is, after a fashion, towards the thing,
yet the movement towards the thing need not be towards its image. Wherefore reverence paid
to a person as the image of God redounds somewhat to God: and yet this differs from the reverence
that is paid to God Himself, for this in no way refers to His image.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 103, Art. 4]

Whether Dulia Has Various Species?

Objection 1: It seems that dulia has various species. For by dulia we show honor to our neighbor.
Now different neighbors are honored under different aspects, for instance king, father and
master, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ix, 2). Since this difference of aspect in the object
differentiates the species of virtue, it seems that dulia is divided into specifically different
virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, the mean differs specifically from the extremes, as pale differs from white
and black. Now hyperdulia is apparently a mean between latria and dulia: for it is shown towards
creatures having a special affinity to God, for instance to the Blessed Virgin as being the
mother of God. Therefore it seems that there are different species of dulia, one being simply
dulia, the other hyperdulia.

Obj. 3: Further, just as in the rational creature we find the image of God, for which reason
it is honored, so too in the irrational creature we find the trace of God. Now the aspect of
likeness denoted by an image differs from the aspect conveyed by a trace. Therefore we must
distinguish a corresponding difference of dulia: and all the more since honor is shown to certain
irrational creatures, as, for instance, to the wood of the Holy Cross.

On the contrary, Dulia is condivided with latria. But latria is not divided into different
species. Neither therefore is dulia.

I answer that, Dulia may be taken in two ways. In one way it may be taken in a wide sense as
denoting reverence paid to anyone on account of any kind of excellence, and thus it comprises
piety and observance, and any similar virtue whereby reverence is shown towards a man. Taken
in this sense it will have parts differing specifically from one another. In another way it
may be taken in a strict sense as denoting the reverence of a servant for his lord, for dulia
signifies servitude, as stated above (A. 3). Taken in this sense it is not divided into different
species, but is one of the species of observance, mentioned by Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii),
for the reason that a servant reveres his lord under one aspect, a soldier his commanding officer
under another, the disciple his master under another, and so on in similar cases.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument takes dulia in a wide sense.

Reply Obj. 2: Hyperdulia is the highest species of dulia taken in a wide sense, since the greatest
reverence is that which is due to a man by reason of his having an affinity to God.

Reply Obj. 3: Man owes neither subjection nor honor to an irrational creature considered in
itself, indeed all such creatures are naturally subject to man. As to the Cross of Christ,
the honor we pay to it is the same as that which we pay to Christ, just as the king's robe
receives the same honor as the king himself, according to Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv).

QUESTION 104

OF OBEDIENCE (In Six Articles)

We must now consider obedience, under which head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether one man is bound to obey another?

(2) Whether obedience is a special virtue?

(3) Of its comparison with other virtues;

(4) Whether God must be obeyed in all things?

(5) Whether subjects are bound to obey their superiors in all things?

(6) Whether the faithful are bound to obey the secular power?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 104, Art. 1]

Whether One Man Is Bound to Obey Another?

Objection 1: It seems that one man is not bound to obey another. For nothing should be done
contrary to the divine ordinance. Now God has so ordered that man is ruled by his own counsel,
according to Ecclus. 15:14, "God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his
own counsel." Therefore one man is not bound to obey another.

Obj. 2: Further, if one man were bound to obey another, he would have to look upon the will
of the person commanding him, as being his rule of conduct. Now God's will alone, which is
always right, is a rule of human conduct. Therefore man is bound to obey none but God.

Obj. 3: Further, the more gratuitous the service the more is it acceptable. Now what a man
does out of duty is not gratuitous. Therefore if a man were bound in duty to obey others in
doing good deeds, for this very reason his good deeds would be rendered less acceptable through
being done out of obedience. Therefore one man is not bound to obey another.

On the contrary, It is prescribed (Heb. 13:17): "Obey your prelates and be subject to them."

I answer that, Just as the actions of natural things proceed from natural powers, so do human
actions proceed from the human will. In natural things it behooved the higher to move the lower
to their actions by the excellence of the natural power bestowed on them by God: and so in
human affairs also the higher must move the lower by their will in virtue of a divinely established
authority. Now to move by reason and will is to command. Wherefore just as in virtue of the
divinely established natural order the lower natural things need to be subject to the movement
of the higher, so too in human affairs, in virtue of the order of natural and divine law, inferiors
are bound to obey their superiors.

Reply Obj. 1: God left man in the hand of his own counsel, not as though it were lawful to
him to do whatever he will, but because, unlike irrational creatures, he is not compelled by
natural necessity to do what he ought to do, but is left the free choice proceeding from his
own counsel. And just as he has to proceed on his own counsel in doing other things, so too
has he in the point of obeying his superiors. For Gregory says (Moral. xxxv), "When we humbly
give way to another's voice, we overcome ourselves in our own hearts."

Reply Obj. 2: The will of God is the first rule whereby all rational wills are regulated: and
to this rule one will approaches more than another, according to a divinely appointed order.
Hence the will of the one man who issues a command may be as a second rule to the will of this
other man who obeys him.

Reply Obj. 3: A thing may be deemed gratuitous in two ways. In one way on the part of the deed
itself, because, to wit, one is not bound to do it; in another way, on the part of the doer,
because he does it of his own free will. Now a deed is rendered virtuous, praiseworthy and
meritorious, chiefly according as it proceeds from the will. Wherefore although obedience be
a duty, if one obey with a prompt will, one's merit is not for that reason diminished, especially
before God, Who sees not only the outward deed, but also the inward will.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q, 104, Art. 2]

Whether Obedience Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that obedience is not a special virtue. For disobedience is contrary
to obedience. But disobedience is a general sin, because Ambrose says (De Parad. viii) that
"sin is to disobey the divine law." Therefore obedience is not a special virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, every special virtue is either theological or moral. But obedience is not
a theological virtue, since it is not comprised under faith, hope or charity. Nor is it a moral
virtue, since it does not hold the mean between excess and deficiency, for the more obedient
one is the more is one praised. Therefore obedience is not a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience is the more meritorious and praiseworthy,
the less it holds its own." But every special virtue is the more to be praised the more it
holds its own, since virtue requires a man to exercise his will and choice, as stated in Ethic.
ii, 4. Therefore obedience is not a special virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, virtues differ in species according to their objects. Now the object of obedience
would seem to be the command of a superior, of which, apparently, there are as many kinds as
there are degrees of superiority. Therefore obedience is a general virtue, comprising many
special virtues.

On the contrary, obedience is reckoned by some to be a part of justice, as stated above (Q. 80).

I answer that, A special virtue is assigned to all good deeds that have a special reason of
praise: for it belongs properly to virtue to render a deed good. First Part, Q. 5, A. 5]. Again,
this act has a special aspect of praiseworthiness by reason of its object. For while subjects
have many obligations towards their superiors, this one, that they are bound to obey their
commands, stands out as special among the rest. Wherefore obedience is a special virtue, and
its specific object is a command tacit or express, because the superior's will, however it
become known, is a tacit precept, and a man's obedience seems to be all the more prompt, forasmuch
as by obeying he forestalls the express command as soon as he understands his superior's will.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing prevents the one same material object from admitting two special aspects
to which two special virtues correspond: thus a soldier, by defending his king's fortress,
fulfils both an act of fortitude, by facing the danger of death for a good end, and an act
of justice, by rendering due service to his lord. Accordingly the aspect of precept, which
obedience considers, occurs in acts of all virtues, but not in all acts of virtue, since not
all acts of virtue are a matter of precept, as stated above (I-II, Q. 96, A. 3). Moreover,
certain things are sometimes a matter of precept, and pertain to no other virtue, such things
for instance as are not evil except because they are forbidden. Wherefore, if obedience be
taken in its proper sense, as considering formally and intentionally the aspect of precept,
it will be a special virtue, and disobedience a special sin: because in this way it is requisite
for obedience that one perform an act of justice or of some other virtue with the intention
of fulfilling a precept; and for disobedience that one treat the precept with actual contempt.
On the other hand, if obedience be taken in a wide sense for the performance of any action
that may be a matter of precept, and disobedience for the omission of that action through any
intention whatever, then obedience will be a general virtue, and disobedience a general sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Obedience is not a theological virtue, for its direct object is not God, but
the precept of any superior, whether expressed or inferred, namely, a simple word of the superior,
indicating his will, and which the obedient subject obeys promptly, according to Titus 3:1,
"Admonish them to be subject to princes, and to obey at a word," etc.

It is, however, a moral virtue, since it is a part of justice, and it observes the mean between
excess and deficiency. Excess thereof is measured in respect, not of quantity, but of other
circumstances, in so far as a man obeys either whom he ought not, or in matters wherein he
ought not to obey, as we have stated above regarding religion (Q. 92, A. 2). We may also reply
that as in justice, excess is in the person who retains another's property, and deficiency
in the person who does not receive his due, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. v, 4), so
too obedience observes the mean between excess on the part of him who fails to pay due obedience
to his superior, since he exceeds in fulfilling his own will, and deficiency on the part of
the superior, who does not receive obedience. Wherefore in this way obedience will be a mean
between two forms of wickedness, as was stated above concerning justice (Q. 58, A. 10).

Reply Obj. 3: Obedience, like every virtue, requires the will to be prompt towards its proper
object, but not towards that which is repugnant to it. Now the proper object of obedience is
a precept, and this proceeds from another's will. Wherefore obedience makes a man's will prompt
in fulfilling the will of another, the maker, namely, of the precept. If that which is prescribed
to him is willed by him for its own sake apart from its being prescribed, as happens in agreeable
matters, he tends towards it at once by his own will and seems to comply, not on account of
the precept, but on account of his own will. But if that which is prescribed is nowise willed
for its own sake, but, considered in itself, repugnant to his own will, as happens in disagreeable
matters, then it is quite evident that it is not fulfilled except on account of the precept.
Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience perishes or diminishes when it holds its own
in agreeable matters," because, to wit, one's own will seems to tend principally, not to the
accomplishment of the precept, but to the fulfilment of one's own desire; but that "it increases
in disagreeable or difficult matters," because there one's own will tends to nothing beside
the precept. Yet this must be understood as regards outward appearances: for, on the other
hand, according to the judgment of God, Who searches the heart, it may happen that even in
agreeable matters obedience, while holding its own, is nonetheless praiseworthy, provided the
will of him that obeys tend no less devotedly [*Cf. Q. 82, A. 2] to the fulfilment of the precept.

Reply Obj. 4: Reverence regards directly the person that excels: wherefore it admits a various
species according to the various aspects of excellence. Obedience, on the other hand, regards
the precept of the person that excels, and therefore admits of only one aspect. And since obedience
is due to a person's precept on account of reverence to him, it follows that obedience to a
man is of one species, though the causes from which it proceeds differ specifically.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 104, Art. 3]

Whether Obedience Is the Greatest of the Virtues?

Objection 1: It seems that obedience is the greatest of the virtues. For it is written (1 Kings
15:22): "Obedience is better than sacrifices." Now the offering of sacrifices belongs to religion,
which is the greatest of all moral virtues, as shown above (Q. 81, A. 6). Therefore obedience
is the greatest of all virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience is the only virtue that ingrafts
virtues in the soul and protects them when ingrafted." Now the cause is greater than the effect.
Therefore obedience is greater than all the virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "evil should never be done out of obedience:
yet sometimes for the sake of obedience we should lay aside the good we are doing." Now one
does not lay aside a thing except for something better. Therefore obedience, for whose sake
the good of other virtues is set aside, is better than other virtues.

On the contrary, obedience deserves praise because it proceeds from charity: for Gregory says
(Moral. xxxv) that "obedience should be practiced, not out of servile fear, but from a sense
of charity, not through fear of punishment, but through love of justice." Therefore charity
is a greater virtue than obedience.

I answer that, Just as sin consists in man contemning God and adhering to mutable things, so
the merit of a virtuous act consists in man contemning created goods and adhering to God as
his end. Now the end is greater than that which is directed to the end. Therefore if a man
contemns created goods in order that he may adhere to God, his virtue derives greater praise
from his adhering to God than from his contemning earthly things. And so those, namely the
theological, virtues whereby he adheres to God in Himself, are greater than the moral virtues,
whereby he holds in contempt some earthly thing in order to adhere to God.

Among the moral virtues, the greater the thing which a man contemns that he may adhere to God,
the greater the virtue. Now there are three kinds of human goods that man may contemn for God's
sake. The lowest of these are external goods, the goods of the body take the middle place,
and the highest are the goods of the soul; and among these the chief, in a way, is the will,
in so far as, by his will, man makes use of all other goods. Therefore, properly speaking,
the virtue of obedience, whereby we contemn our own will for God's sake, is more praiseworthy
than the other moral virtues, which contemn other goods for the sake of God.

Hence Gregory says (Moral. xxxv) that "obedience is rightly preferred to sacrifices, because
by sacrifices another's body is slain whereas by obedience we slay our own will." Wherefore
even any other acts of virtue are meritorious before God through being performed out of obedience
to God's will. For were one to suffer even martyrdom, or to give all one's goods to the poor,
unless one directed these things to the fulfilment of the divine will, which pertains directly
to obedience, they could not be meritorious: as neither would they be if they were done without
charity, which cannot exist apart from obedience. For it is written (1 John 2:4, 5): "He who
saith that he knoweth God, and keepeth not His commandments, is a liar . . . but he that keepeth
His word, in him in very deed the charity of God is perfected": and this because friends have
the same likes and dislikes.

Reply Obj. 1: Obedience proceeds from reverence, which pays worship and honor to a superior,
and in this respect it is contained under different virtues, although considered in itself,
as regarding the aspect of precept, it is one special virtue. Accordingly, in so far as it
proceeds from reverence for a superior, it is contained, in a way, under observance; while
in so far as it proceeds from reverence for one's parents, it is contained under piety; and
in so far as it proceeds from reverence for God, it comes under religion, and pertains to devotion,
which is the principal act of religion. Wherefore from this point of view it is more praiseworthy
to obey God than to offer sacrifice, as well as because, "in a sacrifice we slay another's
body, whereas by obedience we slay our own will," as Gregory says (Moral. xxxv). As to the
special case in which Samuel spoke, it would have been better for Saul to obey God than to
offer in sacrifice the fat animals of the Amalekites against the commandment of God.

Reply Obj. 2: All acts of virtue, in so far as they come under a precept, belong to obedience.
Wherefore according as acts of virtue act causally or dispositively towards their generation
and preservation, obedience is said to ingraft and protect all virtues. And yet it does not
follow that obedience takes precedence of all virtues absolutely, for two reasons. First, because
though an act of virtue come under a precept, one may nevertheless perform that act of virtue
without considering the aspect of precept. Consequently, if there be any virtue, whose object
is naturally prior to the precept, that virtue is said to be naturally prior to obedience.
Such a virtue is faith, whereby we come to know the sublime nature of divine authority, by
reason of which the power to command is competent to God. Secondly, because infusion of grace
and virtues may precede, even in point of time, all virtuous acts: and in this way obedience
is not prior to all virtues, neither in point of time nor by nature.

Reply Obj. 3: There are two kinds of good. There is that to which we are bound of necessity,
for instance to love God, and so forth: and by no means may such a good be set aside on account
of obedience. But there is another good to which man is not bound of necessity, and this good
we ought sometimes to set aside for the sake of obedience to which we are bound of necessity,
since we ought not to do good by falling into sin. Yet as Gregory remarks (Moral. xxxv), "he
who forbids his subjects any single good, must needs allow them many others, lest the souls
of those who obey perish utterly from starvation, through being deprived of every good." Thus
the loss of one good may be compensated by obedience and other goods.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 104, Art. 4]

Whether God Ought to Be Obeyed in All Things?

Objection 1: It seems that God need not be obeyed in all things. For it is written (Matt. 9:30,
31) that our Lord after healing the two blind men commanded them, saying: "See that no man
know this. But they going out spread His fame abroad in all that country." Yet they are not
blamed for so doing. Therefore it seems that we are not bound to obey God in all things.

Obj. 2: Further, no one is bound to do anything contrary to virtue. Now we find that God commanded
certain things contrary to virtue: thus He commanded Abraham to slay his innocent son (Gen.
22); and the Jews to steal the property of the Egyptians (Ex. 11), which things are contrary
to justice; and Osee to take to himself a woman who was an adulteress (Osee 3), and this is
contrary to chastity. Therefore God is not to be obeyed in all things.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever obeys God conforms his will to the divine will even as to the thing
willed. But we are not bound in all things to conform our will to the divine will as to the
thing willed, as stated above (I-II, Q. 19, A. 10). Therefore man is not bound to obey God
in all things.

On the contrary, It is written (Ex. 24:7): "All things that the Lord hath spoken we will do,
and we will be obedient."

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), he who obeys is moved by the command of the person he
obeys, just as natural things are moved by their motive causes. Now just a God is the first
mover of all things that are moved naturally, so too is He the first mover of all wills, as
shown above (I-II, Q. 9, A. 6). Therefore just as all natural things are subject to the divine
motion by a natural necessity so too all wills, by a kind of necessity of justice, are bound
to obey the divine command.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord in telling the blind men to conceal the miracle had no intention of
binding them with the force of a divine precept, but, as Gregory says (Moral. xix), "gave an
example to His servants who follow Him that they might wish to hide their virtue and yet that
it should be proclaimed against their will, in order that others might profit by their example."

Reply Obj. 2: Even as God does nothing contrary to nature (since "the nature of a thing is
what God does therein," according to a gloss on Rom. 11), and yet does certain things contrary
to the wonted course of nature; so to God can command nothing contrary to virtue since virtue
and rectitude of human will consist chiefly in conformity with God's will and obedience to
His command, although it be contrary to the wonted mode of virtue. Accordingly, then, the command
given to Abraham to slay his innocent son was not contrary to justice, since God is the author
of life and death. Nor again was it contrary to justice that He commanded the Jews to take
things belonging to the Egyptians, because all things are His, and He gives them to whom He
will. Nor was it contrary to chastity that Osee was commanded to take an adulteress, because
God Himself is the ordainer of human generation, and the right manner of intercourse with woman
is that which He appoints. Hence it is evident that the persons aforesaid did not sin, either
by obeying God or by willing to obey Him.

Reply Obj. 3: Though man is not always bound to will what God wills, yet he is always bound
to will what God wills him to will. This comes to man's knowledge chiefly through God's command,
wherefore man is bound to obey God's commands in all things.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 104, Art. 5]

Whether Subjects Are Bound to Obey Their Superiors in All Things?

Objection 1: It seems that subjects are bound to obey their superiors in all things. For the
Apostle says (Col. 3:20): "Children, obey your parents in all things," and farther on (Col.
3:22): "Servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh." Therefore in like
manner other subjects are bound to obey their superiors in all things.

Obj. 2: Further, superiors stand between God and their subjects, according to Deut. 5:5, "I
was the mediator and stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show you His words." Now
there is no going from extreme to extreme, except through that which stands between. 2:13):
"When you had received of us the word of the hearing of God, you received it, not as the word
of men, but, as it is indeed, the word of God." Therefore as man is bound to obey God in all
things, so is he bound to obey his superiors.

Obj. 3: Further, just as religious in making their profession take vows of chastity and poverty,
so do they also vow obedience. Now a religious is bound to observe chastity and poverty in
all things. Therefore he is also bound to obey in all things.

On the contrary, It is written (Acts 5:29): "We ought to obey God rather than men." Now sometimes
the things commanded by a superior are against God. Therefore superiors are not to be obeyed
in all things.

I answer that, As stated above (AA. 1, 4), he who obeys is moved at the bidding of the person
who commands him, by a certain necessity of justice, even as a natural thing is moved through
the power of its mover by a natural necessity. That a natural thing be not moved by its mover,
may happen in two ways. First, on account of a hindrance arising from the stronger power of
some other mover; thus wood is not burnt by fire if a stronger force of water intervene. Secondly,
through lack of order in the movable with regard to its mover, since, though it is subject
to the latter's action in one respect, yet it is not subject thereto in every respect. Thus,
a humor is sometimes subject to the action of heat, as regards being heated, but not as regards
being dried up or consumed. In like manner there are two reasons, for which a subject may not
be bound to obey his superior in all things. First on account of the command of a higher power.
For as a gloss says on Rom. 13:2, "They that resist [Vulg.: 'He that resisteth'] the power,
resist the ordinance of God" (cf. St. Augustine, De Verb. Dom. viii). "If a commissioner issue
an order, are you to comply, if it is contrary to the bidding of the proconsul? Again if the
proconsul command one thing, and the emperor another, will you hesitate to disregard the former
and serve the latter? Therefore if the emperor commands one thing and God another, you must
disregard the former and obey God." Secondly, a subject is not bound to obey his superior if
the latter command him to do something wherein he is not subject to him. For Seneca says (De
Beneficiis iii): "It is wrong to suppose that slavery falls upon the whole man: for the better
part of him is excepted." His body is subjected and assigned to his master but his soul is
his own. Consequently in matters touching the internal movement of the will man is not bound
to obey his fellow-man, but God alone.

Nevertheless man is bound to obey his fellow-man in things that have to be done externally
by means of the body: and yet, since by nature all men are equal, he is not bound to obey another
man in matters touching the nature of the body, for instance in those relating to the support
of his body or the begetting of his children. Wherefore servants are not bound to obey their
masters, nor children their parents, in the question of contracting marriage or of remaining
in the state of virginity or the like. But in matters concerning the disposal of actions and
human affairs, a subject is bound to obey his superior within the sphere of his authority;
for instance a soldier must obey his general in matters relating to war, a servant his master
in matters touching the execution of the duties of his service, a son his father in matters
relating to the conduct of his life and the care of the household; and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: When the Apostle says "in all things," he refers to matters within the sphere
of a father's or master's authority.

Reply Obj. 2: Man is subject to God simply as regards all things, both internal and external,
wherefore he is bound to obey Him in all things. On the other hand, inferiors are not subject
to their superiors in all things, but only in certain things and in a particular way, in respect
of which the superior stands between God and his subjects, whereas in respect of other matters
the subject is immediately under God, by Whom he is taught either by the natural or by the
written law.

Reply Obj. 3: Religious profess obedience as to the regular mode of life, in respect of which
they are subject to their superiors: wherefore they are bound to obey in those matters only
which may belong to the regular mode of life, and this obedience suffices for salvation. If
they be willing to obey even in other matters, this will belong to the superabundance of perfection;
provided, however, such things be not contrary to God or to the rule they profess, for obedience
in this case would be unlawful.

Accordingly we may distinguish a threefold obedience; one, sufficient for salvation, and consisting
in obeying when one is bound to obey: secondly, perfect obedience, which obeys in all things
lawful: thirdly, indiscreet obedience, which obeys even in matters unlawful.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 104, Art. 6]

Whether Christians Are Bound to Obey the Secular Powers?

Objection 1: It seems that Christians are not bound to obey the secular power. For a gloss
on Matt. 17:25, "Then the children are free," says: "If in every kingdom the children of the
king who holds sway over that kingdom are free, then the children of that King, under Whose
sway are all kingdoms, should be free in every kingdom." Now Christians, by their faith in
Christ, are made children of God, according to John 1:12: "He gave them power to be made the
sons of God, to them that believe in His name." Therefore they are not bound to obey the secular
power.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Rom. 7:4): "You . . . are become dead to the law by the body
of Christ," and the law mentioned here is the divine law of the Old Testament. Now human law
whereby men are subject to the secular power is of less account than the divine law of the
Old Testament. Much more, therefore, since they have become members of Christ's body, are men
freed from the law of subjection, whereby they were under the power of secular princes.

Obj. 3: Further, men are not bound to obey robbers, who oppress them with violence. Now, Augustine
says (De Civ. Dei iv): "Without justice, what else is a kingdom but a huge robbery?" Since
therefore the authority of secular princes is frequently exercised with injustice, or owes
its origin to some unjust usurpation, it seems that Christians ought not to obey secular princes.

On the contrary, It is written (Titus 3:1): "Admonish them to be subject to princes and powers,"
and (1 Pet. 2:13, 14): "Be ye subject . . . to every human creature for God's sake: whether
it be to the king as excelling, or to governors as sent by him." Now the order of justice requires
that subjects obey their superiors, else the stability of human affairs would cease. Hence
faith in Christ does not excuse the faithful from the obligation of obeying secular princes.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (A. 5), subjection whereby one man is bound to another regards
the body; not the soul, which retains its liberty. Now, in this state of life we are freed
by the grace of Christ from defects of the soul, but not from defects of the body, as the Apostle
declares by saying of himself (Rom. 7:23) that in his mind he served the law of God, but in
his flesh the law of sin. Wherefore those that are made children of God by grace are free from
the spiritual bondage of sin, but not from the bodily bondage, whereby they are held bound
to earthly masters, as a gloss observes on 1 Tim. 6:1, "Whosoever are servants under the yoke,"
etc.

Reply Obj. 2: The Old Law was a figure of the New Testament, and therefore it had to cease
on the advent of truth. And the comparison with human law does not stand because thereby one
man is subject to another. Yet man is bound by divine law to obey his fellow-man.

Reply Obj. 3: Man is bound to obey secular princes in so far as this is required by order of
justice. Wherefore if the prince's authority is not just but usurped, or if he commands what
is unjust, his subjects are not bound to obey him, except perhaps accidentally, in order to
avoid scandal or danger.

QUESTION 105

OF DISOBEDIENCE (In Two Articles)

We must now consider disobedience, under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is a mortal sin?

(2) Whether it is the most grievous of sins?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 105, Art. 2]

Whether Disobedience Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that disobedience is not a mortal sin. For every sin is a disobedience,
as appears from Ambrose's definition given above (Q. 104, A. 2, Obj. 1). Therefore if disobedience
were a mortal sin, every sin would be mortal.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi) that disobedience is born of vainglory. But vainglory
is not a mortal sin. Neither therefore is disobedience.

Obj. 3: Further, a person is said to be disobedient when he does not fulfil a superior's command.
But superiors often issue so many commands that it is seldom, if ever, possible to fulfil them.
Therefore if disobedience were a mortal sin, it would follow that man cannot avoid mortal sin,
which is absurd. Wherefore disobedience is not a mortal sin.

On the contrary, The sin of disobedience to parents is reckoned (Rom. 1:30; 2 Tim. 3:2) among
other mortal sins.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 24, A. 12; I-II, Q. 72, A. 5; I-II, Q. 88, A. 1), a mortal
sin is one that is contrary to charity which is the cause of spiritual life. Now by charity
we love God and our neighbor. The charity of God requires that we obey His commandments, as
stated above (Q. 24, A. 12). Therefore to be disobedient to the commandments of God is a mortal
sin, because it is contrary to the love of God.

Again, the commandments of God contain the precept of obedience to superiors. Wherefore also
disobedience to the commands of a superior is a mortal sin, as being contrary to the love of
God, according to Rom. 13:2, "He that resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God."
It is also contrary to the love of our neighbor, as it withdraws from the superior who is our
neighbor the obedience that is his due.

Reply Obj. 1: The definition given by Ambrose refers to mortal sin, which has the character
of perfect sin. Venial sin is not disobedience, because it is not contrary to a precept, but
beside it. Nor again is every mortal sin disobedience, properly and essentially, but only when
one contemns a precept, since moral acts take their species from the end. And when a thing
is done contrary to a precept, not in contempt of the precept, but with some other purpose,
it is not a sin of disobedience except materially, and belongs formally to another species of sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Vainglory desires display of excellence. And since it seems to point to a certain
excellence that one be not subject to another's command, it follows that disobedience arises
from vainglory. But there is nothing to hinder mortal sin from arising out of venial sin, since
venial sin is a disposition to mortal.

Reply Obj. 3: No one is bound to do the impossible: wherefore if a superior makes a heap of
precepts and lays them upon his subjects, so that they are unable to fulfil them, they are
excused from sin. Wherefore superiors should refrain from making a multitude of precepts.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 105, Art. 2]

Whether Disobedience Is the Most Grievous of Sins?

Objection 1: It seems that disobedience is the most grievous of sins. For it is written (1
Kings 15:23): "It is like the sin of witchcraft to rebel, and like the crime of idolatry to
refuse to obey." But idolatry is the most grievous of sins, as stated above (Q. 94, A. 3).
Therefore disobedience is the most grievous of sins.

Obj. 2: Further, the sin against the Holy Ghost is one that removes the obstacles of sin, as
stated above (Q. 14, A. 2). Now disobedience makes a man contemn a precept which, more than
anything, prevents a man from sinning. Therefore disobedience is a sin against the Holy Ghost,
and consequently is the most grievous of sins.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 5:19) that "by the disobedience of one man, many were
made sinners." Now the cause is seemingly greater than its effect. Therefore disobedience seems
to be a more grievous sin than the others that are caused thereby.

On the contrary, Contempt of the commander is a more grievous sin than contempt of his command.
Now some sins are against the very person of the commander, such as blasphemy and murder. Therefore
disobedience is not the most grievous of sins.

I answer that, Not every disobedience is equally a sin: for one disobedience may be greater
than another, in two ways. First, on the part of the superior commanding, since, although a
man should take every care to obey each superior, yet it is a greater duty to obey a higher
than a lower authority, in sign of which the command of a lower authority is set aside if it
be contrary to the command of a higher authority. Consequently the higher the person who commands,
the more grievous is it to disobey him: so that it is more grievous to disobey God than man.
Secondly, on the part of the things commanded. For the person commanding does not equally desire
the fulfilment of all his commands: since every such person desires above all the end, and
that which is nearest to the end. Wherefore disobedience is the more grievous, according as
the unfulfilled commandment is more in the intention of the person commanding. As to the commandments
of God, it is evident that the greater the good commanded, the more grievous the disobedience
of that commandment, because since God's will is essentially directed to the good, the greater
the good the more does God wish it to be fulfilled. Consequently he that disobeys the commandment
of the love of God sins more grievously than one who disobeys the commandment of the love of
our neighbor. On the other hand, man's will is not always directed to the greater good: hence,
when we are bound by a mere precept of man, a sin is more grievous, not through setting aside
a greater good, but through setting aside that which is more in the intention of the person
commanding.

Accordingly the various degrees of disobedience must correspond with the various degrees of
precepts: because the disobedience in which there is contempt of God's precept, from the very
nature of disobedience is more grievous than a sin committed against a man, apart from the
latter being a disobedience to God. And I say this because whoever sins against his neighbor
acts also against God's commandment. And if the divine precept be contemned in a yet graver
matter, the sin is still more grievous. The disobedience that contains contempt of a man's
precept is less grievous than the sin which contemns the man who made the precept, because
reverence for the person commanding should give rise to reverence for his command. In like
manner a sin that directly involves contempt of God, such as blasphemy, or the like, is more
grievous (even if we mentally separate the disobedience from the sin) than would be a sin involving
contempt of God's commandment alone.

Reply Obj. 1: This comparison of Samuel is one, not of equality but of likeness, because disobedience
redounds to the contempt of God just as idolatry does, though the latter does so more.

Reply Obj. 2: Not every disobedience is sin against the Holy Ghost, but only that which obstinacy
is added: for it is not the contempt of any obstacle to sin that constitutes sin against the
Holy Ghost, else the contempt of any good would be a sin against the Holy Ghost, since any
good may hinder a man from committing sin. The sin against the Holy Ghost consists in the contempt
of those goods which lead directly to repentance and the remission of sins.

Reply Obj. 3: The first sin of our first parent, from which sin was transmitted to all men,
was not disobedience considered as a special sin, but pride, from which then man proceeded
to disobey. Hence the Apostle in these words seems to take disobedience in its relation to
every sin.

QUESTION 106

OF THANKFULNESS OR GRATITUDE (In Six Articles)

We must now consider thankfulness or gratitude, and ingratitude. Concerning thankfulness there
are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether thankfulness is a special virtue distinct from other virtues?

(2) Who owes more thanks to God, the innocent or the penitent?

(3) Whether man is always bound to give thanks for human favors?

(4) Whether thanksgiving should be deferred?

(5) Whether thanksgiving should be measured according to the favor received or the disposition
of the giver?

(6) Whether one ought to pay back more than one has received?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 106, Art. 1]

Whether Thankfulness Is a Special Virtue, Distinct from Other Virtues?

Objection 1: It seems that thankfulness is not a special virtue, distinct from other virtues.
For we have received the greatest benefits from God, and from our parents. Now the honor which
we pay to God in return belongs to the virtue of religion, and the honor with which we repay
our parents belongs to the virtue of piety. Therefore thankfulness or gratitude is not distinct
from the other virtues.

Obj. 2: Further, proportionate repayment belongs to commutative justice, according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. v, 4). Now the purpose of giving thanks is repayment (Ethic. 5, 4). Therefore thanksgiving,
which belongs to gratitude, is an act of justice. Therefore gratitude is not a special virtue,
distinct from other virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, acknowledgment of favor received is requisite for the preservation of friendship,
according to the Philosopher (Ethic. viii, 13; ix, 1). Now friendship is associated with all
the virtues, since they are the reason for which man is loved. Therefore thankfulness or gratitude,
to which it belongs to repay favors received, is not a special virtue.

On the contrary, Tully reckons thankfulness a special part of justice (De Invent. Rhet. ii).

I answer that, As stated above (I-II, Q. 60, A. 3), the nature of the debt to be paid must
needs vary according to various causes giving rise to the debt, yet so that the greater always
includes the lesser. Now the cause of debt is found primarily and chiefly in God, in that He
is the first principle of all our goods: secondarily it is found in our father, because he
is the proximate principle of our begetting and upbringing: thirdly it is found in the person
that excels in dignity, from whom general favors proceed; fourthly it is found in a benefactor,
from whom we have received particular and private favors, on account of which we are under
particular obligation to him.

Accordingly, since what we owe God, or our father, or a person excelling in dignity, is not
the same as what we owe a benefactor from whom we have received some particular favor, it follows
that after religion, whereby we pay God due worship, and piety, whereby we worship our parents,
and observance, whereby we worship persons excelling in dignity, there is thankfulness or gratitude,
whereby we give thanks to our benefactors. And it is distinct from the foregoing virtues, just
as each of these is distinct from the one that precedes, as falling short thereof.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as religion is superexcelling piety, so is it excelling thankfulness or
gratitude: wherefore giving thanks to God was reckoned above (Q. 83, A. 17) among things pertaining
to religion.

Reply Obj. 2: Proportionate repayment belongs to commutative justice, when it answers to the
legal due; for instance when it is contracted that so much be paid for so much. But the repayment
that belongs to the virtue of thankfulness or gratitude answers to the moral debt, and is paid
spontaneously. Hence thanksgiving is less thankful when compelled, as Seneca observes (De Beneficiis
iii).

Reply Obj. 3: Since true friendship is based on virtue, whatever there is contrary to virtue
in a friend is an obstacle to friendship, and whatever in him is virtuous is an incentive to
friendship. In this way friendship is preserved by repayment of favors, although repayment
of favors belongs specially to the virtue of gratitude.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 106, Art. 2]

Whether the Innocent Is More Bound to Give Thanks to God Than the Penitent?

Objection 1: It seems that the innocent is more bound to give thanks to God than the penitent.
For the greater the gift one has received from God, the more one is bound to give Him thanks.
Now the gift of innocence is greater than that of justice restored. Therefore it seems that
the innocent is more bound to give thanks to God than the penitent.

Obj. 2: Further, a man owes love to his benefactor just as he owes him gratitude. Now Augustine
says (Confess. ii): "What man, weighing his own infirmity, would dare to ascribe his purity
and innocence to his own strength; that so he should love Thee the less, as if he had less
needed Thy mercy, whereby Thou remittest sins to those that turn to Thee?" And farther on he
says: "And for this let him love Thee as much, yea and more, since by Whom he sees me to have
been recovered from such deep torpor of sin, by Him he sees himself to have been from the like
torpor of sin preserved." Therefore the innocent is also more bound to give thanks than the
penitent.

Obj. 3: Further, the more a gratuitous favor is continuous, the greater the thanksgiving due
for it. Now the favor of divine grace is more continuous in the innocent than in the penitent.
For Augustine says (Confess. iii): "To Thy grace I ascribe it, and to Thy mercy, that Thou
hast melted away my sins as it were ice. To Thy grace I ascribe also whatsoever I have not
done of evil; for what might I not have done? . . . Yea, all I confess to have been forgiven
me, both what evils I committed by my own wilfulness, and what by Thy guidance committed not."
Therefore the innocent is more bound to give thanks than the penitent.

On the contrary, It is written (Luke 7:43): "To whom more is forgiven, he loveth more [*Vulg.:
'To whom less is forgiven, he loveth less' Luke 7:47]." Therefore for the same reason he is
bound to greater thanksgiving.

I answer that, Thanksgiving (gratiarum actio) in the recipient corresponds to the favor (gratia)
of the giver: so that when there is greater favor on the part of the giver, greater thanks
are due on the part of the recipient. Now a favor is something bestowed gratis: wherefore on
the part of the giver the favor may be greater on two counts. First, owing to the quantity
of the thing given: and in this way the innocent owes greater thanksgiving, because he receives
a greater gift from God, also, absolutely speaking, a more continuous gift, other things being
equal. Secondly, a favor may be said to be greater, because it is given more gratuitously;
and in this sense the penitent is more bound to give thanks than the innocent, because what
he receives from God is more gratuitously given: since, whereas he was deserving of punishment,
he has received grace. Wherefore, although the gift bestowed on the innocent is, considered
absolutely, greater, yet the gift bestowed on the penitent is greater in relation to him: even
as a small gift bestowed on a poor man is greater to him than a great gift is to a rich man.
And since actions are about singulars, in matters of action, we have to take note of what is
such here and now, rather than of what is such absolutely, as the Philosopher observes (Ethic.
iii) in treating of the voluntary and the involuntary.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 106, Art. 3]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Give Thanks to Every Benefactor?

Objection 1: It seems that a man is not bound to give thanks to every benefactor. For a man
may benefit himself just as he may harm himself, according to Ecclus. 14:5, "He that is evil
to himself, to whom will he be good?" But a man cannot thank himself, since thanksgiving seems
to pass from one person to another. Therefore thanksgiving is not due to every benefactor.

Obj. 2: Further, gratitude is a repayment of an act of grace. But some favors are granted without
grace, and are rudely, slowly and grudgingly given. Therefore gratitude is not always due to
a benefactor.

Obj. 3: Further, no thanks are due to one who works for his own profit. But sometimes people
bestow favors for their own profit. Therefore thanks are not due to them.

Obj. 4: Further, no thanks are due to a slave, for all that he is belongs to his master. Yet
sometimes a slave does a good turn to his master. Therefore gratitude is not due to every benefactor.

Obj. 5: Further, no one is bound to do what he cannot do equitably and advantageously. Now
it happens at times that the benefactor is very well off, and it would be of no advantage to
him to be repaid for a favor he has bestowed. Again it happens sometimes that the benefactor
from being virtuous has become wicked, so that it would not seem equitable to repay him. Also
the recipient of a favor may be a poor man, and is quite unable to repay. Therefore seemingly
a man is not always bound to repayment for favors received.

Obj. 6: Further, no one is bound to do for another what is inexpedient and hurtful to him.
Now sometimes it happens that repayment of a favor would be hurtful or useless to the person
repaid. Therefore favors are not always to be repaid by gratitude.

On the contrary, It is written (1 Thess. 5:18): "In all things give thanks."

I answer that, Every effect turns naturally to its cause; wherefore Dionysius says (Div. Nom.
i) that "God turns all things to Himself because He is the cause of all": for the effect must
needs always be directed to the end of the agent. Now it is evident that a benefactor, as such,
is cause of the beneficiary. Hence the natural order requires that he who has received a favor
should, by repaying the favor, turn to his benefactor according to the mode of each. And, as
stated above with regard to a father (Q. 31, A. 3; Q. 101, A. 2), a man owes his benefactor,
as such, honor and reverence, since the latter stands to him in the relation of principle;
but accidentally he owes him assistance or support, if he need it.

Reply Obj. 1: In the words of Seneca (1 Benef. v), "just as a man is liberal who gives not
to himself but to others, and gracious who forgives not himself but others, and merciful who
is moved, not by his own misfortunes but by another's, so too, no man confers a favor on himself,
he is but following the bent of his nature, which moves him to resist what hurts him, and to
seek what is profitable." Wherefore in things that one does for oneself, there is no place
for gratitude or ingratitude, since a man cannot deny himself a thing except by keeping it.
Nevertheless things which are properly spoken of in relation to others are spoken of metaphorically
in relation to oneself, as the Philosopher states regarding justice (Ethic. v, 11), in so far,
to wit, as the various parts of man are considered as though they were various persons.

Reply Obj. 2: It is the mark of a happy disposition to see good rather than evil. Wherefore
if someone has conferred a favor, not as he ought to have conferred it, the recipient should
not for that reason withhold his thanks. Yet he owes less thanks, than if the favor had been
conferred duly, since in fact the favor is less, for, as Seneca remarks (De Benef. ii.) "promptness
enhances, delay discounts a favor."

Reply Obj. 3: As Seneca observes (De Benef. vi), "it matters much whether a person does a kindness
to us for his own sake, or for ours, or for both his and ours. He that considers himself only,
and benefits because cannot otherwise benefit himself, seems to me like a man who seeks fodder
for his cattle." And farther on: "If he has done it for me in common with himself, having both
of us in his mind, I am ungrateful and not merely unjust, unless I rejoice that what was profitable
to him is profitable to me also. It is the height of malevolence to refuse to recognize a kindness,
unless the giver has been the loser thereby."

Reply Obj. 4: As Seneca observes (De Benef. iii), "when a slave does what is wont to be demanded
of a slave, it is part of his service: when he does more than a slave is bound to do, it is
a favor: for as soon as he does anything from a motive of friendship, if indeed that be his
motive, it is no longer called service." Wherefore gratitude is due even to a slave, when he
does more than his duty.

Reply Obj. 5: A poor man is certainly not ungrateful if he does what he can. For since kindness
depends on the heart rather than on the deed, so too gratitude depends chiefly the heart. Hence
Seneca says (De Benef. ii): "Who receives a favor gratefully, has already begun to pay it back:
and that we are grateful for favors received should be shown by the outpourings of the heart,
not only in his hearing but everywhere." From this it is evident that however well off a man
may be, it is possible to thank him for his kindness by showing him reverence and honor. Wherefore
the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii, 14): "He that abounds should be repaid with honor, he that
is in want should be repaid with money": and Seneca writes (De Benef. vi): "There are many
ways of repaying those who are well off, whatever we happen to owe them; such as good advice,
frequent fellowship, affable and pleasant conversation without flattery." Therefore there is
no need for a man to desire neediness or distress in his benefactor before repaying his kindness,
because, as Seneca says (De Benef. vi), "it were inhuman to desire this in one from whom you
have received no favor; how much more so to desire it in one whose kindness has made you his
debtor!"

If, however, the benefactor has lapsed from virtue, nevertheless he should be repaid according
to his state, that he may return to virtue if possible. But if he be so wicked as to be incurable,
then his heart has changed, and consequently no repayment is due for his kindness, as heretofore.
And yet, as far as it possible without sin, the kindness he has shown should be held in memory,
as the Philosopher says (Ethic. ix, 3).

Reply Obj. 6: As stated in the preceding reply, repayment of a favor depends chiefly on the
affection of the heart: wherefore repayment should be made in such a way as to prove most beneficial.
If, however, through the benefactor's carelessness it prove detrimental to him, this is not
imputed to the person who repays him, as Seneca observes (De Benef. vii): "It is my duty to
repay, and not to keep back and safeguard my repayment."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 106, Art. 4]

Whether a Man Is Bound to Repay a Favor at Once?

Objection 1: It seems that a man is bound to repay a favor at once. For we are bound to restore
at once what we owe, unless the term be fixed. Now there is no term prescribed for the repayment
of favors, and yet this repayment is a duty, as stated above (A. 3). Therefore a man is bound
to repay a favor at once.

Obj. 2: Further, a good action would seem to be all the more praiseworthy according as it is
done with greater earnestness. Now earnestness seems to make a man do his duty without any
delay. Therefore it is apparently more praiseworthy to repay a favor at once.

Obj. 3: Further, Seneca says (De Benef. ii) that "it is proper to a benefactor to act freely
and quickly." Now repayment ought to equal the favor received. Therefore it should be done at once.

On the contrary, Seneca says (De Benef. iv): "He that hastens to repay, is animated with a
sense, not of gratitude but of indebtedness."

I answer that, Just as in conferring a favor two things are to be considered, namely, the affection
of the heart and the gift, so also must these things be considered in repaying the favor. As
regards the affection of the heart, repayment should be made at once, wherefore Seneca says
(De Benef. ii): "Do you wish to repay a favor? Receive it graciously." As regards the gift,
one ought to wait until such a time as will be convenient to the benefactor. In fact, if instead
of choosing a convenient time, one wished to repay at once, favor for favor, it would not seem
to be a virtuous, but a constrained repayment. For, as Seneca observes (De Benef. iv), "he
that wishes to repay too soon, is an unwilling debtor, and an unwilling debtor is ungrateful."

Reply Obj. 1: A legal debt must be paid at once, else the equality of justice would not be
preserved, if one kept another's property without his consent. But a moral debt depends on
the equity of the debtor: and therefore it should be repaid in due time according as the rectitude
of virtue demands.

Reply Obj. 2: Earnestness of the will is not virtuous unless it be regulated by reason; wherefore
it is not praiseworthy to forestall the proper time through earnestness.

Reply Obj. 3: Favors also should be conferred at a convenient time and one should no longer
delay when the convenient time comes; and the same is to be observed in repaying favors.

FIFTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 106, Art. 5]

Whether in Giving Thanks We Should Look at the Benefactor's Disposition or at the Deed?

Objection 1: It seems that in repaying favors we should not look at the benefactor's disposition
but at the deed. For repayment is due to beneficence, and beneficence consists in deeds, as
the word itself denotes. Therefore in repaying favors we should look at the deed.

Obj. 2: Further, thanksgiving, whereby we repay favors, is a part of justice. But justice considers
equality between giving and taking. Therefore also in repaying favors we should consider the
deed rather than the disposition of the benefactor.

Obj. 3: Further, no one can consider what he does not know. Now God alone knows the interior
disposition. Therefore it is impossible to repay a favor according to the benefactor's disposition.

On the contrary, Seneca says (De Benef. i): "We are sometimes under a greater obligation to
one who has given little with a large heart, and has bestowed a small favor, yet willingly."

I answer that, The repayment of a favor may belong to three virtues, namely, justice, gratitude
and friendship. It belongs to justice when the repayment has the character of a legal debt,
as in a loan and the like: and in such cases repayment must be made according to the quantity
received.

On the other hand, repayment of a favor belongs, though in different ways, to friendship and
likewise to the virtue of gratitude when it has the character of a moral debt. For in the repayment
of friendship we have to consider the cause of friendship; so that in the friendship that is
based on the useful, repayment should be made according to the usefulness accruing from the
favor conferred, and in the friendship based on virtue repayment should be made with regard
for the choice or disposition of the giver, since this is the chief requisite of virtue, as
stated in Ethic. viii, 13. And likewise, since gratitude regards the favor inasmuch as it is
bestowed gratis, and this regards the disposition of the giver, it follows again that repayment
of a favor depends more on the disposition of the giver than on the effect.

Reply Obj. 1: Every moral act depends on the will. Hence a kindly action, in so far as it is
praiseworthy and is deserving of gratitude, consists materially in the thing done, but formally
and chiefly in the will. Hence Seneca says (De Benef. i): "A kindly action consists not in
deed or gift, but in the disposition of the giver or doer."

Reply Obj. 2: Gratitude is a part of justice, not indeed as a species is part of a genus, but
by a kind of reduction to the genus of justice, as stated above (Q. 80). Hence it does not
follow that we shall find the same kind of debt in both virtues.

Reply Obj. 3: God alone sees man's disposition in itself: but in so far as it is shown by certain
signs, man also can know it. It is thus that a benefactor's disposition is known by the way
in which he does the kindly action, for instance through his doing it joyfully and readily.

SIXTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 106, Art. 6]

Whether the Repayment of Gratitude Should Surpass the Favor Received?

Objection 1: It seems that there is no need for the repayment of gratitude to surpass the favor
received. For it is not possible to make even equal repayment to some, for instance, one's
parents, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 14). Now virtue does not attempt the impossible.
Therefore gratitude for a favor does not tend to something yet greater.

Obj. 2: Further, if one person repays another more than he has received by his favor, by that
very fact he gives him something his turn, as it were. But the latter owes him repayment for
the favor which in his turn the former has conferred on him. Therefore he that first conferred
a favor will be bound to a yet greater repayment, and so on indefinitely. Now virtue does not
strive at the indefinite, since "the indefinite removes the nature of good" (Metaph. ii, text.
8). Therefore repayment of gratitude should not surpass the favor received.

Obj. 3: Further, justice consists in equality. But "more" is excess of equality. Since therefore
excess is sinful in every virtue, it seems that to repay more than the favor received is sinful
and opposed to justice.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 5): "We should repay those who are gracious
to us, by being gracious to them return," and this is done by repaying more than we have received.
Therefore gratitude should incline to do something greater.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 5), gratitude regards the favor received according the intention
of the benefactor; who seems be deserving of praise, chiefly for having conferred the favor
gratis without being bound to do so. Wherefore the beneficiary is under a moral obligation
to bestow something gratis in return. Now he does not seem to bestow something gratis, unless
he exceeds the quantity of the favor received: because so long as he repays less or an equivalent,
he would seem to do nothing gratis, but only to return what he has received. Therefore gratitude
always inclines, as far as possible, to pay back something more.

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (A. 3, ad 5; A. 5), in repaying favors we must consider the disposition
rather than the deed. Accordingly, if we consider the effect of beneficence, which a son receives
from his parents namely, to be and to live, the son cannot make an equal repayment, as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 14). But if we consider the will of the giver and of the repayer,
then it is possible for the son to pay back something greater to his father, as Seneca declares
(De Benef. iii). If, however, he were unable to do so, the will to pay back would be sufficient
for gratitude.

Reply Obj. 2: The debt of gratitude flows from charity, which the more it is paid the more
it is due, according to Rom. 13:8, "Owe no man anything, but to love one another." Wherefore
it is not unreasonable if the obligation of gratitude has no limit.

Reply Obj. 3: As in injustice, which is a cardinal virtue, we consider equality of things,
so in gratitude we consider equality of wills. For while on the one hand the benefactor of
his own free-will gave something he was not bound to give, so on the other hand the beneficiary
repays something over and above what he has received.

QUESTION 107

OF INGRATITUDE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider ingratitude, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether ingratitude is always a sin?

(2) Whether ingratitude is a special sin?

(3) Whether every act of ingratitude is a mortal sin?

(4) Whether favors should be withdrawn from the ungrateful?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 107, Art. 1]

Whether Ingratitude Is Always a Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that ingratitude is not always a sin. For Seneca says (De Benef. iii)
that "he who does not repay a favor is ungrateful." But sometimes it is impossible to repay
a favor without sinning, for instance if one man has helped another to commit a sin. Therefore,
since it is not a sin to refrain from sinning, it seems that ingratitude is not always a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, every sin is in the power of the person who commits it: because, according
to Augustine (De Lib. Arb. iii; Retract. i), "no man sins in what he cannot avoid." Now sometimes
it is not in the power of the sinner to avoid ingratitude, for instance when he has not the
means of repaying. Again forgetfulness is not in our power, and yet Seneca declares (De Benef.
iii) that "to forget a kindness is the height of ingratitude." Therefore ingratitude is not
always a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, there would seem to be no repayment in being unwilling to owe anything, according
to the Apostle (Rom. 13:8), "Owe no man anything." Yet "an unwilling debtor is ungrateful,"
as Seneca declares (De Benef. iv). Therefore ingratitude is not always a sin.

On the contrary, Ingratitude is reckoned among other sins (2 Tim. 3:2), where it is written:
"Disobedient to parents, ungrateful, wicked." etc.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 106, A. 4, ad 1, A. 6) a debt of gratitude is a moral debt
required by virtue. Now a thing is a sin from the fact of its being contrary to virtue. Wherefore
it is evident that every ingratitude is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Gratitude regards a favor received: and he that helps another to commit a sin
does him not a favor but an injury: and so no thanks are due to him, except perhaps on account
of his good will, supposing him to have been deceived, and to have thought to help him in doing
good, whereas he helped him to sin. In such a case the repayment due to him is not that he
should be helped to commit a sin, because this would be repaying not good but evil, and this
is contrary to gratitude.

Reply Obj. 2: No man is excused from ingratitude through inability to repay, for the very reason
that the mere will suffices for the repayment of the debt of gratitude, as stated above (Q.
106, A. 6, ad 1).

Forgetfulness of a favor received amounts to ingratitude, not indeed the forgetfulness that
arises from a natural defect, that is not subject to the will, but that which arises from negligence.
For, as Seneca observes (De Benef. iii), "when forgetfulness of favors lays hold of a man,
he has apparently given little thought to their repayment."

Reply Obj. 3: The debt of gratitude flows from the debt of love, and from the latter no man
should wish to be free. Hence that anyone should owe this debt unwillingly seems to arise from
lack of love for his benefactor.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 107, Art. 2]

Whether Ingratitude Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that ingratitude is not a special sin. For whoever sins acts against
God his sovereign benefactor. But this pertains to ingratitude. Therefore ingratitude is not
a special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no special sin is contained under different kinds of sin. But one can be ungrateful
by committing different kinds of sin, for instance by calumny, theft, or something similar
committed against a benefactor. Therefore ingratitude is not a special sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Seneca writes (De Benef. iii): "It is ungrateful to take no notice of a kindness,
it is ungrateful not to repay one, but it is the height of ingratitude to forget it." Now these
do not seem to belong to the same species of sin. Therefore ingratitude is not a special sin.

On the contrary, Ingratitude is opposed to gratitude or thankfulness, which is a special virtue.
Therefore it is a special sin.

I answer that, Every vice is denominated from a deficiency of virtue, because deficiency is
more opposed to virtue: thus illiberality is more opposed to liberality than prodigality is.
Now a vice may be opposed to the virtue of gratitude by way of excess, for instance if one
were to show gratitude for things for which gratitude is not due, or sooner than it is due,
as stated above (Q. 106, A. 4). But still more opposed to gratitude is the vice denoting deficiency
of gratitude, because the virtue of gratitude, as stated above (Q. 106, A. 6), inclines to
return something more. Wherefore ingratitude is properly denominated from being a deficiency
of gratitude. Now every deficiency or privation takes its species from the opposite habit:
for blindness and deafness differ according to the difference of sight and hearing. Therefore
just as gratitude or thankfulness is one special virtue, so also is ingratitude one special sin.

It has, however, various degrees corresponding in their order to the things required for gratitude.
The first of these is to recognize the favor received, the second to express one's appreciation
and thanks, and the third to repay the favor at a suitable place and time according to one's
means. And since what is last in the order of generation is first in the order of destruction,
it follows that the first degree of ingratitude is when a man fails to repay a favor, the second
when he declines to notice or indicate that he has received a favor, while the third and supreme
degree is when a man fails to recognize the reception of a favor, whether by forgetting it
or in any other way. Moreover, since opposite affirmation includes negation, it follows that
it belongs to the first degree of ingratitude to return evil for good, to the second to find
fault with a favor received, and to the third to esteem kindness as though it were unkindness.

Reply Obj. 1: In every sin there is material ingratitude to God, inasmuch as a man does something
that may pertain to ingratitude. But formal ingratitude is when a favor is actually contemned,
and this is a special sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Nothing hinders the formal aspect of some special sin from being found materially
in several kinds of sin, and in this way the aspect of ingratitude is to be found in many kinds
of sin.

Reply Obj. 3: These three are not different species but different degrees of one special sin.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 107, Art. 3]

Whether Ingratitude Is Always a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that ingratitude is always a mortal sin. For one ought to be grateful
to God above all. But one is not ungrateful to God by committing a venial sin: else every man
would be guilty of ingratitude. Therefore no ingratitude is a venial sin.

Obj. 2: Further, a sin is mortal through being contrary to charity, as stated above (Q. 24,
A. 12). But ingratitude is contrary to charity, since the debt of gratitude proceeds from that
virtue, as stated above (Q. 106, A. 1, ad 3; A. 6, ad 2). Therefore ingratitude is always a
mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Seneca says (De Benef. ii): "Between the giver and the receiver of a favor
there is this law, that the former should forthwith forget having given, and the latter should
never forget having received." Now, seemingly, the reason why the giver should forget is that
he may be unaware of the sin of the recipient, should the latter prove ungrateful; and there
would be no necessity for that if ingratitude were a slight sin. Therefore ingratitude is always
a mortal sin.

Obj. 4: On the contrary, No one should be put in the way of committing a mortal sin. Yet, according
to Seneca (De Benef. ii), "sometimes it is necessary to deceive the person who receives assistance,
in order that he may receive without knowing from whom he has received." But this would seem
to put the recipient in the way of ingratitude. Therefore ingratitude is not always a mortal sin.

I answer that, As appears from what we have said above (A. 2), a man may be ungrateful in two
ways: first, by mere omission, for instance by failing to recognize the favor received, or
to express his appreciation of it or to pay something in return, and this is not always a mortal
sin, because, as stated above (Q. 106, A. 6), the debt of gratitude requires a man to make
a liberal return, which, however, he is not bound to do; wherefore if he fail to do so, he
does not sin mortally. It is nevertheless a venial sin, because it arises either from some
kind of negligence or from some disinclination to virtue in him. And yet ingratitude of this
kind may happen to be a mortal sin, by reason either of inward contempt, or of the kind of
thing withheld, this being needful to the benefactor, either simply, or in some case of necessity.

Secondly, a man may be ungrateful, because he not only omits to pay the debt of gratitude,
but does the contrary. This again is sometimes a mortal and sometimes a venial sin, according
to the kind of thing that is done.

It must be observed, however, that when ingratitude arises from a mortal sin, it has the perfect
character of ingratitude, and when it arises from venial sin, it has the imperfect character.

Reply Obj. 1: By committing a venial sin one is not ungrateful to God to the extent of incurring
the guilt of perfect ingratitude: but there is something of ingratitude in a venial sin, in
so far as it removes a virtuous act of obedience to God.

Reply Obj. 2: When ingratitude is a venial sin it is not contrary to, but beside charity: since
it does not destroy the habit of charity, but excludes some act thereof.

Reply Obj. 3: Seneca also says (De Benef. vii): "When we say that a man after conferring a
favor should forget about it, it is a mistake to suppose that we mean him to shake off the
recollection of a thing so very praiseworthy. When we say: He must not remember it, we mean
that he must not publish it abroad and boast about it."

Reply Obj. 4: He that is unaware of a favor conferred on him is not ungrateful, if he fails
to repay it, provided he be prepared to do so if he knew. It is nevertheless commendable at
times that the object of a favor should remain in ignorance of it, both in order to avoid vainglory,
as when Blessed Nicolas threw gold into a house secretly, wishing to avoid popularity: and
because the kindness is all the greater through the benefactor wishing not to shame the person
on whom he is conferring the favor.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 107, Art. 4]

Whether Favors Should Be Withheld from the Ungrateful?

Objection 1: It seems that favors should withheld from the ungrateful. For it is written (Wis.
16:29): "The hope of the unthankful shall melt away as the winter's ice." But this hope would
not melt away unless favors were withheld from him. Therefore favors should be withheld from
the ungrateful.

Obj. 2: Further, no one should afford another an occasion of committing sin. But the ungrateful
in receiving a favor is given an occasion of ingratitude. Therefore favors should not be bestowed
on the ungrateful.

Obj. 3: Further, "By what things a man sinneth, by the same also he is tormented" (Wis. 11:17).
Now he that is ungrateful when he receives a favor sins against the favor. Therefore he should
be deprived of the favor.

On the contrary, It is written (Luke 6:35) that "the Highest . . . is kind to the unthankful,
and to the evil." Now we should prove ourselves His children by imitating Him (Luke 6:36).
Therefore we should not withhold favors from the ungrateful.

I answer that, There are two points to be considered with regard to an ungrateful person. The
first is what he deserves to suffer and thus it is certain that he deserves to be deprived
of our favor. The second is, what ought his benefactor to do? For in the first place he should
not easily judge him to be ungrateful, since, as Seneca remarks (De Benef. iii), "a man is
often grateful although he repays not," because perhaps he has not the means or the opportunity
of repaying. Secondly, he should be inclined to turn his ungratefulness into gratitude, and
if he does not achieve this by being kind to him once, he may by being so a second time. If,
however, the more he repeats his favors, the more ungrateful and evil the other becomes, he
should cease from bestowing his favors upon him.

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted speaks of what the ungrateful man deserves to suffer.

Reply Obj. 2: He that bestows a favor on an ungrateful person affords him an occasion not of
sin but of gratitude and love. And if the recipient takes therefrom an occasion of ingratitude,
this is not to be imputed to the bestower.

Reply Obj. 3: He that bestows a favor must not at once act the part of a punisher of ingratitude,
but rather that of a kindly physician, by healing the ingratitude with repeated favors.

QUESTION 108

OF VENGEANCE (In Four Articles)

We must now consider vengeance, under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether vengeance is lawful?

(2) Whether it is a special virtue?

(3) Of the manner of taking vengeance;

(4) On whom should vengeance be taken?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 108, Art. 1]

Whether Vengeance Is Lawful?

Objection 1: It seems that vengeance is not lawful. For whoever usurps what is God's sins.
But vengeance belongs to God, for it is written (Deut. 32:35, Rom. 12:19): "Revenge to Me,
and I will repay." Therefore all vengeance is unlawful.

Obj. 2: Further, he that takes vengeance on a man does not bear with him. But we ought to bear
with the wicked, for a gloss on Cant. 2:2, "As the lily among the thorns," says: "He is not
a good man that cannot bear with a wicked one." Therefore we should not take vengeance on the
wicked.

Obj. 3: Further, vengeance is taken by inflicting punishment, which is the cause of servile
fear. But the New Law is not a law of fear, but of love, as Augustine states (Contra Adamant.
xvii). Therefore at least in the New Testament all vengeance is unlawful.

Obj. 4: Further, a man is said to avenge himself when he takes revenge for wrongs inflicted
on himself. But, seemingly, it is unlawful even for a judge to punish those who have wronged
him: for Chrysostom [*Cf. Opus Imperfectum, Hom. v in Matth., falsely ascribed to St. Chrysostom]
says: "Let us learn after Christ's example to bear our own wrongs with magnanimity, yet not
to suffer God's wrongs, not even by listening to them." Therefore vengeance seems to be unlawful.

Obj. 5: Further, the sin of a multitude is more harmful than the sin of only one: for it is
written (Ecclus. 26:5-7): "Of three things my heart hath been afraid . . . the accusation of
a city, and the gathering together of the people, and a false calumny." But vengeance should
not be taken on the sin of a multitude, for a gloss on Matt. 13:29, 30, "Lest perhaps . . .
you root up the wheat . . . suffer both to grow," says that "a multitude should not be excommunicated,
nor should the sovereign." Neither therefore is any other vengeance lawful.

On the contrary, We should look to God for nothing save what is good and lawful. But we are
to look to God for vengeance on His enemies: for it is written (Luke 18:7): "Will not God revenge
His elect who cry to Him day and night?" as if to say: "He will indeed." Therefore vengeance
is not essentially evil and unlawful.

I answer that, Vengeance consists in the infliction of a penal evil on one who has sinned.
Accordingly, in the matter of vengeance, we must consider the mind of the avenger. For if his
intention is directed chiefly to the evil of the person on whom he takes vengeance and rests
there, then his vengeance is altogether unlawful: because to take pleasure in another's evil
belongs to hatred, which is contrary to the charity whereby we are bound to love all men. Nor
is it an excuse that he intends the evil of one who has unjustly inflicted evil on him, as
neither is a man excused for hating one that hates him: for a man may not sin against another
just because the latter has already sinned against him, since this is to be overcome by evil,
which was forbidden by the Apostle, who says (Rom. 12:21): "Be not overcome by evil, but overcome
evil by good."

If, however, the avenger's intention be directed chiefly to some good, to be obtained by means
of the punishment of the person who has sinned (for instance that the sinner may amend, or
at least that he may be restrained and others be not disturbed, that justice may be upheld,
and God honored), then vengeance may be lawful, provided other due circumstances be observed.

Reply Obj. 1: He who takes vengeance on the wicked in keeping with his rank and position does
not usurp what belongs to God but makes use of the power granted him by God. For it is written
(Rom. 13:4) of the earthly prince that "he is God's minister, an avenger to execute wrath upon
him that doeth evil." If, however, a man takes vengeance outside the order of divine appointment,
he usurps what is God's and therefore sins.

Reply Obj. 2: The good bear with the wicked by enduring patiently, and in due manner, the wrongs
they themselves receive from them: but they do not bear with them as to endure the wrongs they
inflict on God and their neighbor.

Reply Obj. 3: The law of the Gospel is the law of love, and therefore those who do good out
of love, and who alone properly belong to the Gospel, ought not to be terrorized by means of
punishment, but only those who are not moved by love to do good, and who, though they belong
to the Church outwardly, do not belong to it in merit.

Reply Obj. 4: Sometimes a wrong done to a person reflects on God and the Church: and then it
is the duty of that person to avenge the wrong. For example, Elias made fire descend on those
who were come to seize him (4 Kings 1); likewise Eliseus cursed the boys that mocked him (4
Kings 2); and Pope Sylverius excommunicated those who sent him into exile (XXIII, Q. iv, Cap.
Guilisarius). But in so far as the wrong inflicted on a man affects his person, he should bear
it patiently if this be expedient. For these precepts of patience are to be understood as referring
to preparedness of the mind, as Augustine states (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i).

Reply Obj. 5: When the whole multitude sins, vengeance must be taken on them, either in respect
of the whole multitude--thus the Egyptians were drowned in the Red Sea while they were pursuing
the children of Israel (Ex. 14), and the people of Sodom were entirely destroyed (Gen. 19)--or
as regards part of the multitude, as may be seen in the punishment of those who worshipped
the calf.

Sometimes, however, if there is hope of many making amends, the severity of vengeance should
be brought to bear on a few of the principals, whose punishment fills the rest with fear; thus
the Lord (Num. 25) commanded the princes of the people to be hanged for the sin of the multitude.

On the other hand, if it is not the whole but only a part of the multitude that has sinned,
then if the guilty can be separated from the innocent, vengeance should be wrought on them:
provided, however, that this can be done without scandal to others; else the multitude should
be spared and severity foregone. The same applies to the sovereign, whom the multitude follow.
For his sin should be borne with, if it cannot be punished without scandal to the multitude:
unless indeed his sin were such, that it would do more harm to the multitude, either spiritually
or temporally, than would the scandal that was feared to arise from his punishment.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 108, Art. 2]

Whether Vengeance Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that vengeance is not a special and distinct virtue. For just as the
good are rewarded for their good deeds, so are the wicked punished for their evil deeds. Now
the rewarding of the good does not belong to a special virtue, but is an act of commutative
justice. Therefore in the same way vengeance should not be accounted a special virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, there is no need to appoint a special virtue for an act to which a man is
sufficiently disposed by the other virtues. Now man is sufficiently disposed by the virtues
of fortitude or zeal to avenge evil. Therefore vengeance should not be reckoned a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, there is a special vice opposed to every special virtue. But seemingly no
special vice is opposed to vengeance. Therefore it is not a special virtue.

On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) reckons it a part of justice.

I answer that, As the Philosopher states (Ethic. ii, 1), aptitude to virtue is in us by nature,
but the complement of virtue is in us through habituation or some other cause. Hence it is
evident that virtues perfect us so that we follow in due manner our natural inclinations, which
belong to the natural right. Wherefore to every definite natural inclination there corresponds
a special virtue. Now there is a special inclination of nature to remove harm, for which reason
animals have the irascible power distinct from the concupiscible. Man resists harm by defending
himself against wrongs, lest they be inflicted on him, or he avenges those which have already
been inflicted on him, with the intention, not of harming, but of removing the harm done. And
this belongs to vengeance, for Tully says (De Invent. Rhet. ii) that by "vengeance we resist
force, or wrong, and in general whatever is obscure" [*Obscurum. Cicero wrote obfuturum but
the sense is the same as St. Thomas gives in the parenthesis] "(i.e. derogatory), either by
self-defense or by avenging it." Therefore vengeance is a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as repayment of a legal debt belongs to commutative justice, and as repayment
of a moral debt, arising from the bestowal of a particular favor, belongs to the virtue of
gratitude, so too the punishment of sins, so far as it is the concern of public justice, is
an act of commutative justice; while so far as it is concerned in defending the rights of the
individual by whom a wrong is resisted, it belongs to the virtue of revenge.

Reply Obj. 2: Fortitude disposes to vengeance by removing an obstacle thereto, namely, fear
of an imminent danger. Zeal, as denoting the fervor of love, signifies the primary root of
vengeance, in so far as a man avenges the wrong done to God and his neighbor, because charity
makes him regard them as his own. Now every act of virtue proceeds from charity as its root,
since, according to Gregory (Hom. xxvii in Ev.), "there are no green leaves on the bough of
good works, unless charity be the root."

Reply Obj. But the virtue of vengeance consists in observing the due measure of vengeance with
regard to all the circumstances.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 108, Art. 3]

Whether Vengeance Should Be Wrought by Means of Punishments Customary Among Men?

Objection 1: It seems that vengeance should not be wrought by means of punishments customary
among men. For to put a man to death is to uproot him. But our Lord forbade (Matt. 13:29) the
uprooting of the cockle, whereby the children of the wicked one are signified. Therefore sinners
should not be put to death.

Obj. 2: Further, all who sin mortally seem to be deserving of the same punishment. Therefore
if some who sin mortally are punished with death, it seems that all such persons should be
punished with death: and this is evidently false.

Obj. 3: Further, to punish a man publicly for his sin seems to publish his sin: and this would
seem to have a harmful effect on the multitude, since the example of sin is taken by them as
an occasion for sin. Therefore it seems that the punishment of death should not be inflicted
for a sin.

On the contrary, These punishments are fixed by the divine law as appears from what we have
said above (I-II, Q. 105, A. 2).

I answer that, Vengeance is lawful and virtuous so far as it tends to the prevention of evil.
Now some who are not influenced by motive of virtue are prevented from committing sin, through
fear of losing those things which they love more than those they obtain by sinning, else fear
would be no restraint to sin. Consequently vengeance for sin should be taken by depriving a
man of what he loves most. Now the things which man loves most are life, bodily safety, his
own freedom, and external goods such as riches, his country and his good name. Wherefore, according
to Augustine's reckoning (De Civ. Dei xxi), "Tully writes that the laws recognize eight kinds
of punishment": namely, "death," whereby man is deprived of life; "stripes," "retaliation,"
or the loss of eye for eye, whereby man forfeits his bodily safety; "slavery," and "imprisonment,"
whereby he is deprived of freedom; "exile" whereby he is banished from his country; "fines,"
whereby he is mulcted in his riches; "ignominy," whereby he loses his good name.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord forbids the uprooting of the cockle, when there is fear lest the wheat
be uprooted together with it. But sometimes the wicked can be uprooted by death, not only without
danger, but even with great profit, to the good. Wherefore in such a case the punishment of
death may be inflicted on sinners.

Reply Obj. 2: All who sin mortally are deserving of eternal death, as regards future retribution,
which is in accordance with the truth of the divine judgment. But the punishments of this life
are more of a medicinal character; wherefore the punishment of death is inflicted on those
sins alone which conduce to the grave undoing of others.

Reply Obj. 3: The very fact that the punishment, whether of death or of any kind that is fearsome
to man, is made known at the same time as the sin, makes man's will avers to sin: because the
fear of punishment is greater than the enticement of the example of sin.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 108, Art. 4]

Whether Vengeance Should Be Taken on Those Who Have Sinned Involuntarily?

Objection 1: It seems that vengeance should be taken on those who have sinned involuntarily.
For the will of one man does not follow from the will of another. Yet one man is punished for
another, according to Ex. 20:5, "I am . . . Thus for the sin of Cham, his son Chanaan was cursed
(Gen. 9:25) and for the sin of Giezi, his descendants were struck with leprosy (4 Kings 5).
Again the blood of Christ lays the descendants of the Jews under the ban of punishment, for
they said (Matt. 27:25): "His blood be upon us and upon our children." Moreover we read (Josue
7) that the people of Israel were delivered into the hands of their enemies for the sin of
Achan, and that the same people were overthrown by the Philistines on account of the sin of
the sons of Heli (1 Kings 4). Therefore a person is to be punished without having deserved
it voluntarily.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing is voluntary except what is in a man's power. But sometimes a man
is punished for what is not in his power; thus a man is removed from the administration of
the Church on account of being infected with leprosy; and a Church ceases to be an episcopal
see on account of the depravity or evil of the people. Therefore vengeance is taken not only
for voluntary sins.

Obj. 3: Further, ignorance makes an act involuntary. Now vengeance is sometimes taken on the
ignorant. Thus the children of the people of Sodom, though they were in invincible ignorance,
perished with their parents (Gen. 19). Again, for the sin of Dathan and Abiron their children
were swallowed up together with them (Num 16). Moreover, dumb animals, which are devoid of
reason, were commanded to be slain on account of the sin of the Amalekites (1 Kings 15). Therefore
vengeance is sometimes taken on those who have deserved it involuntarily.

Obj. 4: Further, compulsion is most opposed to voluntariness. But a man does not escape the
debt of punishment through being compelled by fear to commit a sin. Therefore vengeance is
sometimes taken on those who have deserved it involuntarily.

Obj. 5: Further Ambrose says on Luke 5 that "the ship in which Judas was, was in distress";
wherefore "Peter, who was calm in the security of his own merits, was in distress about those
of others." But Peter did not will the sin of Judas. Therefore a person is sometimes punished
without having voluntarily deserved it.

On the contrary, Punishment is due to sin. But every sin is voluntary according to Augustine
(De Lib. Arb. iii; Retract. i). Therefore vengeance should be taken only on those who have
deserved it voluntarily.

I answer that, Punishment may be considered in two ways. First, under the aspect of punishment,
and in this way punishment is not due save for sin, because by means of punishment the equality
of justice is restored, in so far as he who by sinning has exceeded in following his own will
suffers something that is contrary to this will. Wherefore, since every sin is voluntary, not
excluding original sin, as stated above (I-II, Q. 81, A. 1), it follows that no one is punished
in this way, except for something done voluntarily. Secondly, punishment may be considered
as a medicine, not only healing the past sin, but also preserving from future sin, or conducing
to some good, and in this way a person is sometimes punished without any fault of his own,
yet not without cause.

It must, however, be observed that a medicine never removes a greater good in order to promote
a lesser; thus the medicine of the body never blinds the eye, in order to repair the heel:
yet sometimes it is harmful in lesser things that it may be helpful in things of greater consequence.
And since spiritual goods are of the greatest consequence, while temporal goods are least important,
sometimes a person is punished in his temporal goods without any fault of his own. Such are
many of the punishments inflicted by God in this present life for our humiliation or probation.
But no one is punished in spiritual goods without any fault on his part, neither in this nor
in the future life, because in the latter punishment is not medicinal, but a result of spiritual
condemnation.

Reply Obj. 1: A man is never condemned to a spiritual punishment for another man's sin, because
spiritual punishment affects the soul, in respect of which each man is master of himself. But
sometimes a man is condemned to punishment in temporal matters for the sin of another, and
this for three reasons. First, because one man may be the temporal goods of another, and so
he may be punished in punishment of the latter: thus children, as to the body, are a belonging
of their father, and slaves are a possession of their master. Secondly, when one person's sin
is transmitted to another, either by imitation, as children copy the sins of their parents,
and slaves the sins of their masters, so as to sin with greater daring; or by way of merit,
as the sinful subjects merit a sinful superior, according to Job 34:30, "Who maketh a man that
is a hypocrite to reign for the sins of the people?" Hence the people of Israel were punished
for David's sin in numbering the people (2 Kings 24). This may also happen through some kind
of consent or connivance: thus sometimes even the good are punished in temporal matters together
with the wicked, for not having condemned their sins, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei i, 9).
Thirdly, in order to mark the unity of human fellowship, whereby one man is bound to be solicitous
for another, lest he sin; and in order to inculcate horror of sin, seeing that the punishment
of one affects all, as though all were one body, as Augustine says in speaking of the sin of
Achan (QQ. sup. Josue viii).

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine states (QQ. sup. Josue viii), human judgment should conform to the
divine judgment, when this is manifest, and God condemns men spiritually for their own sins.
But human judgment cannot be conformed to God's hidden judgments, whereby He punishes certain
persons in temporal matters without any fault of theirs, since man is unable to grasp the reasons
of these judgments so as to know what is expedient for each individual. Wherefore according
to human judgment a man should never be condemned without fault of his own to an inflictive
punishment, such as death, mutilation or flogging. But a man may be condemned, even according
to human judgment, to a punishment of forfeiture, even without any fault on his part, but not
without cause: and this in three ways.

First, through a person becoming, without any fault of his, disqualified for having or acquiring
a certain good: thus for being infected with leprosy a man is removed from the administration
of the Church: and for bigamy, or through pronouncing a death sentence a man is hindered from
receiving sacred orders.

Secondly, because the particular good that he forfeits is not his own but common property:
thus that an episcopal see be attached to a certain church belongs to the good of the whole
city, and not only to the good of the clerics.

Thirdly, because the good of one person may depend on the good of another: thus in the crime
of high treason a son loses his inheritance through the sin of his parent.

Reply Obj. 3: By the judgment of God children are punished in temporal matters together with
their parents, both because they are a possession of their parents, so that their parents are
punished also in their person, and because this is for their good lest, should they be spared,
they might imitate the sins of their parents, and thus deserve to be punished still more severely.
Vengeance is wrought on dumb animals and any other irrational creatures, because in this way
their owners are punished; and also in horror of sin.

Reply Obj. 4: An act done through compulsion of fear is not involuntary simply, but has an
admixture of voluntariness, as stated above (I-II, Q. 6, AA. 5, 6).

Reply Obj. 5: The other apostles were distressed about the sin of Judas, in the same way as
the multitude is punished for the sin of one, in commendation of unity, as state above (Reply
Obj. 1, 2).

QUESTION 109

OF TRUTH (In Four Articles)

We must now consider truth and the vices opposed thereto. Concerning truth there are four points
of inquiry:

(1) Whether truth is a virtue?

(2) Whether it is a special virtue?

(3) Whether it is a part of justice?

(4) Whether it inclines to that which is less?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 109, Art. 1]

Whether Truth Is a Virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that truth is not a virtue. For the first of virtues is faith, whose
object is truth. Since then the object precedes the habit and the act, it seems that truth
is not a virtue, but something prior to virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7), it belongs to truth that a man
should state things concerning himself to be neither more nor less than they are. But this
is not always praiseworthy--neither in good things, since according to Prov. Therefore truth
is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, every virtue is either theological, or intellectual, or moral. Now truth is
not a theological virtue, because its object is not God but temporal things. For Tully says
(De Invent. Rhet. ii) that by "truth we faithfully represent things as they are, were, or will
be." Likewise it is not one of the intellectual virtues, but their end. Nor again is it a moral
virtue, since it is not a mean between excess and deficiency, for the more one tells the truth,
the better it is. Therefore truth is not a virtue.

On the contrary, The Philosopher both in the Second and in the Fourth Book of Ethics places
truth among the other virtues.

I answer that, Truth can be taken in two ways. First, for that by reason of which a thing is
said to be true, and thus truth is not a virtue, but the object or end of a virtue: because,
taken in this way, truth is not a habit, which is the genus containing virtue, but a certain
equality between the understanding or sign and the thing understood or signified, or again
between a thing and its rule, as stated in the First Part (Q. 16, A. 1; Q. 21, A. 2). Secondly,
truth may stand for that by which a person says what is true, in which sense one is said to
be truthful. This truth or truthfulness must needs be a virtue, because to say what is true
is a good act: and virtue is "that which makes its possessor good, and renders his action good."

Reply Obj. 1: This argument takes truth in the first sense.

Reply Obj. 2: To state that which concerns oneself, in so far as it is a statement of what
is true, is good generically. Yet this does not suffice for it to be an act of virtue, since
it is requisite for that purpose that it should also be clothed with the due circumstances,
and if these be not observed, the act will be sinful. Accordingly it is sinful to praise oneself
without due cause even for that which is true: and it is also sinful to publish one's sin,
by praising oneself on that account, or in any way proclaiming it uselessly.

Reply Obj. 3: A person who says what is true, utters certain signs which are in conformity
with things; and such signs are either words, or external actions, or any external thing. Now
such kinds of things are the subject-matter of the moral virtues alone, for the latter are
concerned with the use of the external members, in so far as this use is put into effect at
the command of the will. Wherefore truth is neither a theological, nor an intellectual, but
a moral virtue. And it is a mean between excess and deficiency in two ways. First, on the part
of the object, secondly, on the part of the act. On the part of the object, because the true
essentially denotes a kind of equality, and equal is a mean between more and less. Hence for
the very reason that a man says what is true about himself, he observes the mean between one
that says more than the truth about himself, and one that says less than the truth. On the
part of the act, to observe the mean is to tell the truth, when one ought, and as one ought.
Excess consists in making known one's own affairs out of season, and deficiency in hiding them
when one ought to make them known.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 109, Art. 2]

Whether Truth Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that truth is not a special virtue. For the true and the good are convertible.
Now goodness is not a special virtue, in fact every virtue is goodness, because "it makes its
possessor good." Therefore truth is not a special virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, to make known what belongs to oneself is an act of truth as we understand
it here. But this belongs to every virtue, since every virtuous habit is made known by its
own act. Therefore truth is not a special virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, the truth of life is the truth whereby one lives aright, and of which it is
written (Isa. 38:3): "I beseech Thee . . . remember how I have walked before Thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart." Now one lives aright by any virtue, as follows from the definition
of virtue given above (I-II, Q. 55, A. 4). Therefore truth is not a special virtue.

Obj. 4: Further, truth seems to be the same as simplicity, since hypocrisy is opposed to both.
But simplicity is not a special virtue, since it rectifies the intention, and that is required
in every virtue. Therefore neither is truth a special virtue.

On the contrary, It is numbered together with other virtues (Ethic. ii, 7).

I answer that, The nature of human virtue consists in making a man's deed good. Consequently
whenever we find a special aspect of goodness in human acts, it is necessary that man be disposed
thereto by a special virtue. And since according to Augustine (De Nat. Boni iii) good consists
in order, it follows that a special aspect of good will be found where there is a special order.
Now there is a special order whereby our externals, whether words or deeds, are duly ordered
in relation to some thing, as sign to thing signified: and thereto man is perfected by the
virtue of truth. Wherefore it is evident that truth is a special virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: The true and the good are convertible as to subject, since every true thing is
good, and every good thing is true. But considered logically, they exceed one another, even
as the intellect and will exceed one another. For the intellect understands the will and many
things besides, and the will desires things pertaining to the intellect, and many others. Wherefore
the true considered in its proper aspect as a perfection of the intellect is a particular good,
since it is something appetible: and in like manner the good considered in its proper aspect
as the end of the appetite is something true, since it is something intelligible. Therefore
since virtue includes the aspect of goodness, it is possible for truth to be a special virtue,
just as the true is a special good; yet it is not possible for goodness to be a special virtue,
since rather, considered logically, it is the genus of virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: The habits of virtue and vice take their species from what is directly intended,
and not from that which is accidental and beside the intention. Now that a man states that
which concerns himself, belongs to the virtue of truth, as something directly intended: although
it may belong to other virtues consequently and beside his principal intention. For the brave
man intends to act bravely: and that he shows his fortitude by acting bravely is a consequence
beside his principal intention.

Reply Obj. 3: The truth of life is the truth whereby a thing is true, not whereby a person
says what is true. Life like anything else is said to be true, from the fact that it attains
its rule and measure, namely, the divine law; since rectitude of life depends on conformity
to that law. This truth or rectitude is common to every virtue.

Reply Obj. 4: Simplicity is so called from its opposition to duplicity, whereby, to wit, a
man shows one thing outwardly while having another in his heart: so that simplicity pertains
to this virtue. And it rectifies the intention, not indeed directly (since this belongs to
every virtue), but by excluding duplicity, whereby a man pretends one thing and intends another.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 109, Art. 3]

Whether Truth Is a Part of Justice?

Objection 1: It seems that truth is not a part of justice. For it seems proper to justice to
give another man his due. But, by telling the truth, one does not seem to give another man
his due, as is the case in all the foregoing parts of justice. Therefore truth is not a part
of justice.

Obj. 2: Further, truth pertains to the intellect: whereas justice is in the will, as stated
above (Q. 58, A. 4). Therefore truth is not a part of justice.

Obj. 3: Further, according to Jerome truth is threefold, namely, "truth of life," "truth of
justice," and "truth of doctrine." But none of these is a part of justice. For truth of life
comprises all virtues, as stated above (A. 2, ad 3): truth of justice is the same as justice,
so that it is not one of its parts; and truth of doctrine belongs rather to the intellectual
virtues. Therefore truth is nowise a part of justice.

On the contrary, Tully (De Invent. Rhet. ii) reckons truth among the parts of justice.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 80), a virtue is annexed to justice, as secondary to a principal
virtue, through having something in common with justice, while falling short from the perfect
virtue thereof. Now the virtue of truth has two things in common with justice. In the first
place it is directed to another, since the manifestation, which we have stated to be an act
of truth, is directed to another, inasmuch as one person manifests to another the things that
concern himself. In the second place, justice sets up a certain equality between things, and
this the virtue of truth does also, for it equals signs to the things which concern man himself.
Nevertheless it falls short of the proper aspect of justice, as to the notion of debt: for
this virtue does not regard legal debt, which justice considers, but rather the moral debt,
in so far as, out of equity, one man owes another a manifestation of the truth. Therefore truth
is a part of justice, being annexed thereto as a secondary virtue to its principal.

Reply Obj. 1: Since man is a social animal, one man naturally owes another whatever is necessary
for the preservation of human society. Now it would be impossible for men to live together,
unless they believed one another, as declaring the truth one to another. Hence the virtue of
truth does, in a manner, regard something as being due.

Reply Obj. 2: Truth, as known, belongs to the intellect. But man, by his own will, whereby
he uses both habits and members, utters external signs in order to manifest the truth, and
in this way the manifestation of the truth is an act of the will.

Reply Obj. 3: The truth of which we are speaking now differs from the truth of life, as stated
in the preceding A. 2, ad 3.

We speak of the truth of justice in two ways. In one way we refer to the fact that justice
itself is a certain rectitude regulated according to the rule of the divine law; and in this
way the truth of justice differs from the truth of life, because by the truth of life a man
lives aright in himself, whereas by the truth of justice a man observes the rectitude of the
law in those judgments which refer to another man: and in this sense the truth of justice has
nothing to do with the truth of which we speak now, as neither has the truth of life. In another
way the truth of justice may be understood as referring to the fact that, out of justice, a
man manifests the truth, as for instance when a man confesses the truth, or gives true evidence
in a court of justice. This truth is a particular act of justice, and does not pertain directly
to this truth of which we are now speaking, because, to wit, in this manifestation of the truth
a man's chief intention is to give another man his due. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic.
iv, 7) in describing this virtue: "We are not speaking of one who is truthful in his agreements,
nor does this apply to matters in which justice or injustice is questioned."

The truth of doctrine consists in a certain manifestation of truths relating to science wherefore
neither does this truth directly pertain to this virtue, but only that truth whereby a man,
both in life and in speech, shows himself to be such as he is, and the things that concern
him, not other, and neither greater nor less, than they are. Nevertheless since truths of science,
as known by us, are something concerning us, and pertain to this virtue, in this sense the
truth of doctrine may pertain to this virtue, as well as any other kind of truth whereby a
man manifests, by word or deed, what he knows.

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 109, Art. 4]

Whether the Virtue of Truth Inclines Rather to That Which Is Less?

Objection 1: It seems that the virtue of truth does not incline to that which is less. For
as one incurs falsehood by saying more, so does one by saying less: thus it is no more false
that four are five, than that four are three. But "every falsehood is in itself evil, and to
be avoided," as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. iv, 7). Therefore the virtue of truth does
not incline to that which is less rather than to that which is greater.

Obj. 2: Further, that a virtue inclines to the one extreme rather than to the other, is owing
to the fact that the virtue's mean is nearer to the one extreme than to the other: thus fortitude
is nearer to daring than to timidity. But the mean of truth is not nearer to one extreme than
to the other; because truth, since it is a kind of equality, holds to the exact mean. Therefore
truth does not more incline to that which is less.

Obj. 3: Further, to forsake the truth for that which is less seems to amount to a denial of
the truth, since this is to subtract therefrom; and to forsake the truth for that which is
greater seems to amount to an addition thereto. Now to deny the truth is more repugnant to
truth than to add something to it, because truth is incompatible with the denial of truth,
whereas it is compatible with addition. Therefore it seems that truth should incline to that
which is greater rather than to that which is less.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) that "by this virtue a man declines rather
from the truth towards that which is less."

I answer that, There are two ways of declining from the truth to that which is less. First,
by affirming, as when a man does not show the whole good that is in him, for instance science,
holiness and so forth. This is done without prejudice to truth, since the lesser is contained
in the greater: and in this way this virtue inclines to what is less. For, as the Philosopher
says (Ethic. iv, 7), "this seems to be more prudent because exaggerations give annoyance."
For those who represent themselves as being greater than they are, are a source of annoyance
to others, since they seem to wish to surpass others: whereas those who make less account of
themselves are a source of pleasure, since they seem to defer to others by their moderation.
Hence the Apostle says (2 Cor. 12:6): "Though I should have a mind to glory, I shall not be
foolish: for I will say the truth. But I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that
which he seeth in me or anything he heareth from me."

Secondly, one may incline to what is less by denying, so as to say that what is in us is not.
In this way it does not belong to this virtue to incline to what is less, because this would
imply falsehood. And yet this would be less repugnant to the truth, not indeed as regards the
proper aspect of truth, but as regards the aspect of prudence, which should be safeguarded
in all the virtues. For since it is fraught with greater danger and is more annoying to others,
it is more repugnant to prudence to think or boast that one has what one has not, than to think
or say that one has not what one has.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

QUESTION 110

OF THE VICES OPPOSED TO TRUTH, AND FIRST OF LYING (In Four Articles)

We must now consider the vices opposed to truth, and (1) lying: (2) dissimulation or hypocrisy:
(3) boasting and the opposite vice. Concerning lying there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether lying, as containing falsehood, is always opposed to truth?

(2) Of the species of lying;

(3) Whether lying is always a sin?

(4) Whether it is always a mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 110, Art. 1]

Whether Lying Is Always Opposed to Truth?

Objection 1: It seems that lying is not always opposed to truth. For opposites are incompatible
with one another. But lying is compatible with truth, since he that speaks the truth, thinking
it to be false, lies, according to Augustine (Lib. De Mendac. iii). Therefore lying is not
opposed to truth.

Obj. 2: Further, the virtue of truth applies not only to words but also to deeds, since according
to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7) by this virtue one tells the truth both in one's speech and
in one's life. But lying applies only to words, for Augustine says (Contra Mend. xii) that
"a lie is a false signification by words." Accordingly, it seems that lying is not directly
opposed to the virtue of truth.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Lib. De Mendac. iii) that the "liar's sin is the desire to
deceive." But this is not opposed to truth, but rather to benevolence or justice. Therefore
lying is not opposed to truth.

On the contrary, Augustine says (Contra Mend. x): "Let no one doubt that it is a lie to tell
a falsehood in order to deceive. Wherefore a false statement uttered with intent to deceive
is a manifest lie." But this is opposed to truth. Therefore lying is opposed to truth.

I answer that, A moral act takes its species from two things, its object, and its end: for
the end is the object of the will, which is the first mover in moral acts. And the power moved
by the will has its own object, which is the proximate object of the voluntary act, and stands
in relation to the will's act towards the end, as material to formal, as stated above (I-II,
Q. 18, AA. 6, 7).

Now it has been said above (Q. 109, A. 1, ad 3) that the virtue of truth--and consequently
the opposite vices--regards a manifestation made by certain signs: and this manifestation or
statement is an act of reason comparing sign with the thing signified; because every representation
consists in comparison, which is the proper act of the reason. Wherefore though dumb animals
manifest something, yet they do not intend to manifest anything: but they do something by natural
instinct, and a manifestation is the result. But when this manifestation or statement is a
moral act, it must needs be voluntary, and dependent on the intention of the will. Now the
proper object of a manifestation or statement is the true or the false. And the intention of
a bad will may bear on two things: one of which is that a falsehood may be told; while the
other is the proper effect of a false statement, namely, that someone may be deceived.

Accordingly if these three things concur, namely, falsehood of what is said, the will to tell
a falsehood, and finally the intention to deceive, then there is falsehood--materially, since
what is said is false, formally, on account of the will to tell an untruth, and effectively,
on account of the will to impart a falsehood.

However, the essential notion of a lie is taken from formal falsehood, from the fact namely,
that a person intends to say what is false; wherefore also the word mendacium (lie) is derived
from its being in opposition to the mind. Consequently if one says what is false, thinking
it to be true, it is false materially, but not formally, because the falseness is beside the
intention of the speaker so that it is not a perfect lie, since what is beside the speaker's
intention is accidental for which reason it cannot be a specific difference. If, on the other
hand, one utters falsehood formally, through having the will to deceive, even if what one says
be true, yet inasmuch as this is a voluntary and moral act, it contains falseness essentially
and truth accidentally, and attains the specific nature of a lie.

That a person intends to cause another to have a false opinion, by deceiving him, does not
belong to the species of lying, but to perfection thereof, even as in the physical order, a
thing acquires its species if it has its form, even though the form's effect be lacking; for
instance a heavy body which is held up aloft by force, lest it come down in accordance with
the exigency of its form. Therefore it is evident that lying is directly an formally opposed
to the virtue of truth.

Reply Obj. 1: We judge of a thing according to what is in it formally and essentially rather
than according to what is in it materially and accidentally. Hence it is more in opposition
to truth, considered as a moral virtue, to tell the truth with the intention of telling a falsehood
than to tell a falsehood with the intention of telling the truth.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. ii), words hold the chief place among other
signs. And so when it is said that "a lie is a false signification by words," the term "words"
denotes every kind of sign. Wherefore if a person intended to signify something false by means
of signs, he would not be excused from lying.

Reply Obj. 3: The desire to deceive belongs to the perfection of lying, but not to its species,
as neither does any effect belong to the species of its cause.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 110, Art. 2]

Whether Lies Are Sufficiently Divided into Officious, Jocose, and Mischievous Lies?

Objection 1: It seems that lies are not sufficiently divided into "officious," "jocose" and
"mischievous" lies. For a division should be made according to that which pertains to a thing
by reason of its nature, as the Philosopher states (Metaph. vii, text. 43; De Part. Animal
i, 3). But seemingly the intention of the effect resulting from a moral act is something beside
and accidental to the species of that act, so that an indefinite number of effects can result
from one act. Now this division is made according to the intention of the effect: for a "jocose"
lie is told in order to make fun, an "officious" lie for some useful purpose, and a "mischievous"
lie in order to injure someone. Therefore lies are unfittingly divided in this way.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine (Contra Mendac. xiv) gives eight kinds of lies. The first is "in
religious doctrine"; the second is "a lie that profits no one and injures someone"; the third
"profits one party so as to injure another"; the fourth is "told out of mere lust of lying
and deceiving"; the fifth is "told out of the desire to please"; the sixth "injures no one,
and profits someone in saving his money"; the seventh "injures no one and profits someone in
saving him from death"; the eighth "injures no one, and profits someone in saving him from
defilement of the body." Therefore it seems that the first division of lies is insufficient.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7) divides lying into "boasting," which exceeds
the truth in speech, and "irony," which falls short of the truth by saying something less:
and these two are not contained under any one of the kinds mentioned above. Therefore it seems
that the aforesaid division of lies is inadequate.

On the contrary, A gloss on Ps. 5:7, "Thou wilt destroy all that speak a lie," says "that there
are three kinds of lies; for some are told for the wellbeing and convenience of someone; and
there is another kind of lie that is told in fun; but the third kind of lie is told out of
malice." The first of these is called an officious lie, the second a jocose lie, the third
a mischievous lie. Therefore lies are divided into these three kinds.

I answer that, Lies may be divided in three ways. First, with respect to their nature as lies:
and this is the proper and essential division of lying. In this way, according to the Philosopher
(Ethic. iv, 7), lies are of two kinds, namely, the lie which goes beyond the truth, and this
belongs to "boasting," and the lie which stops short of the truth, and this belongs to "irony."
This division is an essential division of lying itself, because lying as such is opposed to
truth, as stated in the preceding Article: and truth is a kind of equality, to which more and
less are in essential opposition.

Secondly, lies may be divided with respect to their nature as sins, and with regard to those
things that aggravate or diminish the sin of lying, on the part of the end intended. Now the
sin of lying is aggravated, if by lying a person intends to injure another, and this is called
a "mischievous" lie, while the sin of lying is diminished if it be directed to some good--either
of pleasure and then it is a "jocose" lie, or of usefulness, and then we have the "officious"
lie, whereby it is intended to help another person, or to save him from being injured. In this
way lies are divided into the three kinds aforesaid.

Thirdly, lies are divided in a more general way, with respect to their relation to some end,
whether or not this increase or diminish their gravity: and in this way the division comprises
eight kinds, as stated in the Second Objection. Here the first three kinds are contained under
"mischievous" lies, which are either against God, and then we have the lie "in religious doctrine,"
or against man, and this either with the sole intention of injuring him, and then it is the
second kind of lie, which "profits no one, and injures someone"; or with the intention of injuring
one and at the same time profiting another, and this is the third kind of lie, "which profits
one, and injures another." Of these the first is the most grievous, because sins against God
are always more grievous, as stated above (I-II, Q. 73, A. 3): and the second is more grievous
than the third, since the latter's gravity is diminished by the intention of profiting another.

After these three, which aggravate the sin of lying, we have a fourth, which has its own measure
of gravity without addition or diminution; and this is the lie which is told "out of mere lust
of lying and deceiving." This proceeds from a habit, wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic.
iv, 7) that "the liar, when he lies from habit, delights in lying."

The four kinds that follow lessen the gravity of the sin of lying. For the fifth kind is the
jocose lie, which is told "with a desire to please": and the remaining three are comprised
under the officious lie, wherein something useful to another person is intended. This usefulness
regards either external things, and then we have the sixth kind of lie, which "profits someone
in saving his money"; or his body, and this is the seventh kind, which "saves a man from death";
or the morality of his virtue, and this is the eighth kind, which "saves him from unlawful
defilement of his body."

Now it is evident that the greater the good intended, the more is the sin of lying diminished
in gravity. Wherefore a careful consideration of the matter will show that these various kinds
of lies are enumerated in their order of gravity: since the useful good is better than the
pleasurable good, and life of the body than money, and virtue than the life of the body.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 110, Art. 3]

Whether Every Lie Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that not every lie is a sin. For it is evident that the evangelists did
not sin in the writing of the Gospel. Yet they seem to have told something false: since their
accounts of the words of Christ and of others often differ from one another: wherefore seemingly
one of them must have given an untrue account. Therefore not every lie is a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no one is rewarded by God for sin. But the midwives of Egypt were rewarded
by God for a lie, for it is stated that "God built them houses" (Ex. 1:21). Therefore a lie
is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the deeds of holy men are related in Sacred Writ that they may be a model
of human life. But we read of certain very holy men that they lied. Thus (Gen. 12 and 20) we
are told that Abraham said of his wife that she was his sister. Jacob also lied when he said
that he was Esau, and yet he received a blessing (Gen. 27:27-29). Again, Judith is commended
(Judith 15:10, 11) although she lied to Holofernes. Therefore not every lie is a sin.

Obj. 4: Further, one ought to choose the lesser evil in order to avoid the greater: even so
a physician cuts off a limb, lest the whole body perish. Yet less harm is done by raising a
false opinion in a person's mind, than by someone slaying or being slain. Therefore a man may
lawfully lie, to save another from committing murder, or another from being killed.

Obj. 5: Further, it is a lie not to fulfill what one has promised. Yet one is not bound to
keep all one's promises: for Isidore says (Synonym. ii): "Break your faith when you have promised
ill." Therefore not every lie is a sin.

Obj. 6: Further, apparently a lie is a sin because thereby we deceive our neighbor: wherefore
Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. xxi): "Whoever thinks that there is any kind of lie that is not
a sin deceives himself shamefully, since he deems himself an honest man when he deceives others."
Yet not every lie is a cause of deception, since no one is deceived by a jocose lie; seeing
that lies of this kind are told, not with the intention of being believed, but merely for the
sake of giving pleasure. Hence again we find hyperbolical expressions in Holy Writ. Therefore
not every lie is a sin.

On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 7:14): "Be not willing to make any manner of lie."

I answer that, An action that is naturally evil in respect of its genus can by no means be
good and lawful, since in order for an action to be good it must be right in every respect:
because good results from a complete cause, while evil results from any single defect, as Dionysius
asserts (Div. Nom. iv). Now a lie is evil in respect of its genus, since it is an action bearing
on undue matter. For as words are naturally signs of intellectual acts, it is unnatural and
undue for anyone to signify by words something that is not in his mind. Hence the Philosopher
says (Ethic. iv, 7) that "lying is in itself evil and to be shunned, while truthfulness is
good and worthy of praise." Therefore every lie is a sin, as also Augustine declares (Contra
Mend. i).

Reply Obj. 1: It is unlawful to hold that any false assertion is contained either in the Gospel
or in any canonical Scripture, or that the writers thereof have told untruths, because faith
would be deprived of its certitude which is based on the authority of Holy Writ. That the words
of certain people are variously reported in the Gospel and other sacred writings does not constitute
a lie. Hence Augustine says (De Consens. Evang. ii): "He that has the wit to understand that
in order to know the truth it is necessary to get at the sense, will conclude that he must
not be the least troubled, no matter by what words that sense is expressed." Hence it is evident,
as he adds (De Consens. Evang. ii), that "we must not judge that someone is lying, if several
persons fail to describe in the same way and in the same words a thing which they remember
to have seen or heard."

Reply Obj. 2: The midwives were rewarded, not for their lie, but for their fear of God, and
for their good-will, which latter led them to tell a lie. Hence it is expressly stated (Ex.
2:21): "And because the midwives feared God, He built them houses." But the subsequent lie
was not meritorious.

Reply Obj. 3: In Holy Writ, as Augustine observes (Lib. De Mend. v), the deeds of certain persons
are related as examples of perfect virtue: and we must not believe that such persons were liars.
If, however, any of their statements appear to be untruthful, we must understand such statements
to have been figurative and prophetic. Hence Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. v): "We must believe
that whatever is related of those who, in prophetical times, are mentioned as being worthy
of credit, was done and said by them prophetically." As to Abraham "when he said that Sara
was his sister, he wished to hide the truth, not to tell a lie, for she is called his sister
since she was the daughter of his father," Augustine says (QQ. Super. Gen. xxvi; Contra Mend.
x; Contra Faust. xxii). Wherefore Abraham himself said (Gen. 20:12): "She is truly my sister,
the daughter of my father, and not the daughter of my mother," being related to him on his
father's side. Jacob's assertion that he was Esau, Isaac's first-born, was spoken in a mystical
sense, because, to wit, the latter's birthright was due to him by right: and he made use of
this mode of speech being moved by the spirit of prophecy, in order to signify a mystery, namely,
that the younger people, i.e. the Gentiles, should supplant the first-born, i.e. the Jews.

Some, however, are commended in the Scriptures, not on account of perfect virtue, but for a
certain virtuous disposition, seeing that it was owing to some praiseworthy sentiment that
they were moved to do certain undue things. It is thus that Judith is praised, not for lying
to Holofernes, but for her desire to save the people, to which end she exposed herself to danger.
And yet one might also say that her words contain truth in some mystical sense.

Reply Obj. 4: A lie is sinful not only because it injures one's neighbor, but also on account
of its inordinateness, as stated above in this Article. Now it is not allowed to make use of
anything inordinate in order to ward off injury or defects from another: as neither is it lawful
to steal in order to give an alms, except perhaps in a case of necessity when all things are
common. Therefore it is not lawful to tell a lie in order to deliver another from any danger
whatever. Nevertheless it is lawful to hide the truth prudently, by keeping it back, as Augustine
says (Contra Mend. x).

Reply Obj. 5: A man does not lie, so long as he has a mind to do what he promises, because
he does not speak contrary to what he has in mind: but if he does not keep his promise, he
seems to act without faith in changing his mind. He may, however, be excused for two reasons.
First, if he has promised something evidently unlawful, because he sinned in promise, and did
well to change his mind. Secondly, if circumstances have changed with regard to persons and
the business in hand. For, as Seneca states (De Benef. iv), for a man to be bound to keep a
promise, it is necessary for everything to remain unchanged: otherwise neither did he lie in
promising--since he promised what he had in his mind, due circumstances being taken for granted--nor
was he faithless in not keeping his promise, because circumstances are no longer the same.
Hence the Apostle, though he did not go to Corinth, whither he had promised to go (2 Cor. 1),
did not lie, because obstacles had arisen which prevented him.

Reply Obj. 6: An action may be considered in two ways. First, in itself, secondly, with regard
to the agent. Accordingly a jocose lie, from the very genus of the action, is of a nature to
deceive; although in the intention of the speaker it is not told to deceive, nor does it deceive
by the way it is told. Nor is there any similarity in the hyperbolical or any kind of figurative
expressions, with which we meet in Holy Writ: because, as Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. v),
"it is not a lie to do or say a thing figuratively: because every statement must be referred
to the thing stated: and when a thing is done or said figuratively, it states what those to
whom it is tendered understand it to signify."

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 110, Art. 4]

Whether Every Lie Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that every lie is a mortal sin. For it is written (Ps. 6:7): "Thou wilt
destroy all that speak a lie," and (Wis. 1:11): "The mouth that belieth killeth the soul."
Now mortal sin alone causes destruction and death of the soul. Therefore every lie is a mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is against a precept of the decalogue is a mortal sin. Now lying
is against this precept of the decalogue: "Thou shalt not bear false witness." Therefore every
lie is a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 36): "Every liar breaks his faith in
lying, since forsooth he wishes the person to whom he lies to have faith in him, and yet he
does not keep faith with him, when he lies to him: and whoever breaks his faith is guilty of
iniquity." Now no one is said to break his faith or "to be guilty of iniquity," for a venial
sin. Therefore no lie is a venial sin.

Obj. 4: Further, the eternal reward is not lost save for a mortal sin. Now, for a lie the eternal
reward was lost, being exchanged for a temporal meed. For Gregory says (Moral. xviii) that
"we learn from the reward of the midwives what the sin of lying deserves: since the reward
which they deserved for their kindness, and which they might have received in eternal life,
dwindled into a temporal meed on account of the lie of which they were guilty." Therefore even
an officious lie, such as was that of the midwives, which seemingly is the least of lies, is
a mortal sin.

Obj. 5: Further, Augustine says (Lib. De Mend. xvii) that "it is a precept of perfection, not
only not to lie at all, but not even to wish to lie." Now it is a mortal sin to act against
a precept. Therefore every lie of the perfect is a mortal sin: and consequently so also is
a lie told by anyone else, otherwise the perfect would be worse off than others.

On the contrary, Augustine says on Ps. 5:7, "Thou wilt destroy," etc.: "There are two kinds
of lie, that are not grievously sinful yet are not devoid of sin, when we lie either in joking,
or for the sake of our neighbor's good." But every mortal sin is grievous. Therefore jocose
and officious lies are not mortal sins.

I answer that, A mortal sin is, properly speaking, one that is contrary to charity whereby
the soul lives in union with God, as stated above (Q. 24, A. 12; Q. 35, A. 3). Now a lie may
be contrary to charity in three ways: first, in itself; secondly, in respect of the evil intended;
thirdly, accidentally.

A lie may be in itself contrary to charity by reason of its false signification. For if this
be about divine things, it is contrary to the charity of God, whose truth one hides or corrupts
by such a lie; so that a lie of this kind is opposed not only to the virtue of charity, but
also to the virtues of faith and religion: wherefore it is a most grievous and a mortal sin.
If, however, the false signification be about something the knowledge of which affects a man's
good, for instance if it pertain to the perfection of science or to moral conduct, a lie of
this description inflicts an injury on one's neighbor, since it causes him to have a false
opinion, wherefore it is contrary to charity, as regards the love of our neighbor, and consequently
is a mortal sin. On the other hand, if the false opinion engendered by the lie be about some
matter the knowledge of which is of no consequence, then the lie in question does no harm to
one's neighbor; for instance, if a person be deceived as to some contingent particulars that
do not concern him. Wherefore a lie of this kind, considered in itself, is not a mortal sin.

As regards the end in view, a lie may be contrary to charity, through being told with the purpose
of injuring God, and this is always a mortal sin, for it is opposed to religion; or in order
to injure one's neighbor, in his person, his possessions or his good name, and this also is
a mortal sin, since it is a mortal sin to injure one's neighbor, and one sins mortally if one
has merely the intention of committing a mortal sin. But if the end intended be not contrary
to charity, neither will the lie, considered under this aspect, be a mortal sin, as in the
case of a jocose lie, where some little pleasure is intended, or in an officious lie, where
the good also of one's neighbor is intended. Accidentally a lie may be contrary to charity
by reason of scandal or any other injury resulting therefrom: and thus again it will be a mortal
sin, for instance if a man were not deterred through scandal from lying publicly.

Reply Obj.

Reply Obj. 2: Since all the precepts of the decalogue are directed to the love of God and our
neighbor, as stated above (Q. 44, A. 1, ad 3; I-II, Q. 100, A. 5, ad 1), a lie is contrary
to a precept of the decalogue, in so far as it is contrary to the love of God and our neighbor.
Hence it is expressly forbidden to bear false witness against our neighbor.

Reply Obj. It is in this sense that Augustine is speaking.

Reply Obj. 4: The lie of the midwives may be considered in two ways. First as regards their
feeling of kindliness towards the Jews, and their reverence and fear of God, for which their
virtuous disposition is commended. For this an eternal reward is due. Wherefore Jerome (in
his exposition of Isa. 65:21, 'And they shall build houses') explains that God "built them
spiritual houses." Secondly, it may be considered with regard to the external act of lying.
For thereby they could merit, not indeed eternal reward, but perhaps some temporal meed, the
deserving of which was not inconsistent with the deformity of their lie, though this was inconsistent
with their meriting an eternal reward. It is in this sense that we must understand the words
of Gregory, and not that they merited by that lie to lose the eternal reward as though they
had already merited it by their preceding kindliness, as the objection understands the words
to mean.

Reply Obj. 5: Some say that for the perfect every lie is a mortal sin. But this assertion is
unreasonable. For no circumstance causes a sin to be infinitely more grievous unless it transfers
it to another species. Now a circumstance of person does not transfer a sin to another species,
except perhaps by reason of something annexed to that person, for instance if it be against
his vow: and this cannot apply to an officious or jocose lie. Wherefore an officious or a jocose
lie is not a mortal sin in perfect men, except perhaps accidentally on account of scandal.
We may take in this sense the saying of Augustine that "it is a precept of perfection not only
not to lie at all, but not even to wish to lie": although Augustine says this not positively
but dubiously, for he begins by saying: "Unless perhaps it is a precept," etc. Nor does it
matter that they are placed in a position to safeguard the truth: because they are bound to
safeguard the truth by virtue of their office in judging or teaching, and if they lie in these
matters their lie will be a mortal sin: but it does not follow that they sin mortally when
they lie in other matters.

QUESTION 111

OF DISSIMULATION AND HYPOCRISY (In Four Articles)

In due sequence we must consider dissimulation and hypocrisy. Under this head there are four
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether all dissimulation is a sin?

(2) Whether hypocrisy is dissimulation?

(3) Whether it is opposed to truth?

(4) Whether it is a mortal sin?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 111, Art. 1]

Whether All Dissimulation Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that not all dissimulation is a sin. For it is written (Luke 24:28) that
our Lord "pretended [Douay: 'made as though'] he would go farther"; and Ambrose in his book
on the Patriarchs (De Abraham i) says of Abraham that he "spoke craftily to his servants, when
he said" (Gen. 22:5): "I and the boy will go with speed as far as yonder, and after we have
worshipped, will return to you." Now to pretend and to speak craftily savor of dissimulation:
and yet it is not to be said that there was sin in Christ or Abraham. Therefore not all dissimulation
is a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no sin is profitable. But according to Jerome, in his commentary on Gal. 2:11,
"When Peter [Vulg.: 'Cephas'] was come to Antioch:--The example of Jehu, king of Israel, who
slew the priest of Baal, pretending that he desired to worship idols, should teach us that
dissimulation is useful and sometimes to be employed"; and David "changed his countenance before"
Achis, king of Geth (1 Kings 21:13). Therefore not all dissimulation is a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, good is contrary to evil. Therefore if it is evil to simulate good, it is
good to simulate evil.

Obj. Now it pertains to dissimulation to hide one's sin. Therefore it is reprehensible sometimes
not to simulate. But it is never reprehensible to avoid sin. Therefore dissimulation is not a sin.

On the contrary, A gloss on Isa. 16:14, "In three years," etc., says: "Of the two evils it
is less to sin openly than to simulate holiness." But to sin openly is always a sin. Therefore
dissimulation is always a sin.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 109, A. 3; Q. 110, A. 1), it belongs to the virtue of truth
to show oneself outwardly by outward signs to be such as one is. Now outward signs are not
only words, but also deeds. Accordingly just as it is contrary to truth to signify by words
something different from that which is in one's mind, so also is it contrary to truth to employ
signs of deeds or things to signify the contrary of what is in oneself, and this is what is
properly denoted by dissimulation. Consequently dissimulation is properly a lie told by the
signs of outward deeds. Now it matters not whether one lie in word or in any other way, as
stated above (Q. 110, A. 1, Obj. 2). Wherefore, since every lie is a sin, as stated above (Q.
110, A. 3), it follows that also all dissimulation is a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (De QQ. Evang. ii), "To pretend is not always a lie: but only
when the pretense has no signification, then it is a lie. When, however, our pretense refers
to some signification, there is no lie, but a representation of the truth." And he cites figures
of speech as an example, where a thing is "pretended," for we do not mean it to be taken literally
but as a figure of something else that we wish to say. In this way our Lord "pretended He would
go farther," because He acted as if wishing to go farther; in order to signify something figuratively
either because He was far from their faith, according to Gregory (Hom. xxiii in Ev.); or, as
Augustine says (De QQ. Evang. ii), because, "as He was about to go farther away from them by
ascending into heaven, He was, so to speak, held back on earth by their hospitality."

Abraham also spoke figuratively. Wherefore Ambrose (De Abraham i) says that Abraham "foretold
what he knew not": for he intended to return alone after sacrificing his son: but by his mouth
the Lord expressed what He was about to do. It is evident therefore that neither dissembled.

Reply Obj. 2: Jerome employs the term "simulation" in a broad sense for any kind of pretense.
David's change of countenance was a figurative pretense, as a gloss observes in commenting
on the title of Ps. 33, "I will bless the Lord at all times." There is no need to excuse Jehu's
dissimulation from sin or lie, because he was a wicked man, since he departed not from the
idolatry of Jeroboam (4 Kings 10:29, 31). And yet he is praised withal and received an earthly
reward from God, not for his dissimulation, but for his zeal in destroying the worship of Baal.

Reply Obj. 3: Some say that no one may pretend to be wicked, because no one pretends to be
wicked by doing good deeds, and if he do evil deeds, he is evil. But this argument proves nothing.
Because a man might pretend to be evil, by doing what is not evil in itself but has some appearance
of evil: and nevertheless this dissimulation is evil, both because it is a lie, and because
it gives scandal; and although he is wicked on this account, yet his wickedness is not the
wickedness he simulates. And because dissimulation is evil in itself, its sinfulness is not
derived from the thing simulated, whether this be good or evil.

Reply Obj. 4: Just as a man lies when he signifies by word that which he is not, yet lies not
when he refrains from saying what he is, for this is sometimes lawful; so also does a man dissemble,
when by outward signs of deeds or things he signifies that which he is not, yet he dissembles
not if he omits to signify what he is. Hence one may hide one's sin without being guilty of
dissimulation. It is thus that we must understand the saying of Jerome on the words of Isa.
3:9, that the "second remedy after shipwreck is to hide one's sin," lest, to wit, others be
scandalized thereby.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 111, Art. 2]

Whether Hypocrisy Is the Same As Dissimulation?

Objection 1: It seems that hypocrisy is not the same as dissimulation. For dissimulation consists
in lying by deeds. But there may be hypocrisy in showing outwardly what one does inwardly,
according to Matt. 6:2, "When thou dost an alms-deed sound not a trumpet before thee, as the
hypocrites do." Therefore hypocrisy is not the same as dissimulation.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory says (Moral. xxxi, 7): "Some there are who wear the habit of holiness,
yet are unable to attain the merit of perfection. We must by no means deem these to have joined
the ranks of the hypocrites, since it is one thing to sin from weakness, and another to sin
from malice." Now those who wear the habit of holiness, without attaining the merit of perfection,
are dissemblers, since the outward habit signifies works of perfection. Therefore dissimulation
is not the same as hypocrisy.

Obj. 3: Further, hypocrisy consists in the mere intention. For our Lord says of hypocrites
(Matt. 23:5) that "all their works they do for to be seen of men": and Gregory says (Moral.
xxxi, 7) that "they never consider what it is that they do, but how by their every action they
may please men." But dissimulation consists, not in the mere intention, but in the outward
action: wherefore a gloss on Job 36:13, "Dissemblers and crafty men prove the wrath of God,"
says that "the dissembler simulates one thing and does another: he pretends chastity, and delights
in lewdness, he makes a show of poverty and fills his purse." Therefore hypocrisy is not the
same as dissimulation.

On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. x): "'Hypocrite' is a Greek word corresponding to the
Latin 'simulator,' for whereas he is evil within," he "shows himself outwardly as being good;
hypo denoting falsehood, and krisis, judgment."

I answer that, As Isidore says (Etym. x), "the word hypocrite is derived from the appearance
of those who come on to the stage with a disguised face, by changing the color of their complexion,
so as to imitate the complexion of the person they simulate, at one time under the guise of
a man, at another under the guise of a woman, so as to deceive the people in their acting."
Hence Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. ii) that "just as hypocrites by simulating other persons
act the parts of those they are not (since he that acts the part of Agamemnon is not that man
himself but pretends to be), so too in the Church and in every department of human life, whoever
wishes to seem what he is not is a hypocrite: for he pretends to be just without being so in
reality."

We must conclude, therefore, that hypocrisy is dissimulation, not, however, any form of dissimulation,
but only when one person simulates another, as when a sinner simulates the person of a just man.

Reply Obj. 1: The outward deed is a natural sign of the intention. Accordingly when a man does
good works pertaining by their genus to the service of God, and seeks by their means to please,
not God but man, he simulates a right intention which he has not. Wherefore Gregory says (Moral.)
that "hypocrites make God's interests subservient to worldly purposes, since by making a show
of saintly conduct they seek, not to turn men to God, but to draw to themselves the applause
of their approval:" and so they make a lying pretense of having a good intention, which they
have not, although they do not pretend to do a good deed without doing it.

Reply Obj. 2: The habit of holiness, for instance the religious or the clerical habit, signifies
a state whereby one is bound to perform works of perfection. And so when a man puts on the
habit of holiness, with the intention of entering the state of perfection, if he fail through
weakness, he is not a dissembler or a hypocrite, because he is not bound to disclose his sin
by laying aside the habit of holiness. If, however, he were to put on the habit of holiness
in order to make a show of righteousness, he would be a hypocrite and a dissembler.

Reply Obj. 3: In dissimulation, as in a lie, there are two things: one by way of sign, the
other by way of thing signified. Accordingly the evil intention in hypocrisy is considered
as a thing signified, which does not tally with the sign: and the outward words, or deeds,
or any sensible objects are considered in every dissimulation and lie as a sign.

THIRD ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 111, Art. 3]

Whether Hypocrisy Is Contrary to the Virtue of Truth?

Objection 1: It seems that hypocrisy is not contrary to the virtue of truth. For in dissimulation
or hypocrisy there is a sign and a thing signified. Now with regard to neither of these does
it seem to be opposed to any special virtue: for a hypocrite simulates any virtue, and by means
of any virtuous deeds, such as fasting, prayer and alms deeds, as stated in Matt. 6:1-18. Therefore
hypocrisy is not specially opposed to the virtue of truth.

Obj. 2: Further, all dissimulation seems to proceed from guile, wherefore it is opposed to
simplicity. Now guile is opposed to prudence as above stated (Q. 55, A. 4). Therefore, hypocrisy
which is dissimulation is not opposed to truth, but rather to prudence or simplicity.

Obj. 3: Further, the species of moral acts is taken from their end. Now the end of hypocrisy
is the acquisition of gain or vainglory: wherefore a gloss on Job 27:8, "What is the hope of
the hypocrite, if through covetousness he take by violence," says: "A hypocrite or, as the
Latin has it, a dissimulator, is a covetous thief: for through desire of being honored for
holiness, though guilty of wickedness, he steals praise for a life which is not his." [*The
quotation is from St. Gregory's Moralia, Bk XVIII.] Therefore since covetousness or vainglory
is not directly opposed to truth, it seems that neither is hypocrisy or dissimulation.

On the contrary, All dissimulation is a lie, as stated above (A. 1). Now a lie is directly
opposed to truth. Therefore dissimulation or hypocrisy is also.

I answer that, According to the Philosopher (Metaph. text. 13, 24, x), "contrariety is opposition
as regards form," i.e. the specific form. Accordingly we must reply that dissimulation or hypocrisy
may be opposed to a virtue in two ways, in one way directly, in another way indirectly. Its
direct opposition or contrariety is to be considered with regard to the very species of the
act, and this species depends on that act's proper object. Wherefore since hypocrisy is a kind
of dissimulation, whereby a man simulates a character which is not his, as stated in the preceding
article, it follows that it is directly opposed to truth whereby a man shows himself in life
and speech to be what he is, as stated in Ethic. iv, 7.

The indirect opposition or contrariety of hypocrisy may be considered in relation to any accident,
for instance a remote end, or an instrument of action, or anything else of that kind.

Reply Obj. 1: The hypocrite in simulating a virtue regards it as his end, not in respect of
its existence, as though he wished to have it, but in respect of appearance, since he wishes
to seem to have it. Hence his hypocrisy is not opposed to that virtue, but to truth, inasmuch
as he wishes to deceive men with regard to that virtue. And he performs acts of that virtue,
not as intending them for their own sake, but instrumentally, as signs of that virtue, wherefore
his hypocrisy has not, on that account, a direct opposition to that virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 55, AA. 3, 4, 5), the vice directly opposed to prudence is
cunning, to which it belongs to discover ways of achieving a purpose, that are apparent and
not real: while it accomplishes that purpose, by guile in words, and by fraud in deeds: and
it stands in relation to prudence, as guile and fraud to simplicity. Now guile and fraud are
directed chiefly to deception, and sometimes secondarily to injury. Wherefore it belongs directly
to simplicity to guard oneself from deception, and in this way the virtue of simplicity is
the same as the virtue of truth as stated above (Q. 109, A. 2, ad 4). There is, however, a
mere logical difference between them, because by truth we mean the concordance between sign
and thing signified, while simplicity indicates that one does not tend to different things,
by intending one thing inwardly, and pretending another outwardly.

Reply Obj. 3: Gain or glory is the remote end of the dissembler as also of the liar. Hence
it does not take its species from this end, but from the proximate end, which is to show oneself
other than one is. Wherefore it sometimes happens to a man to pretend great things of himself,
for no further purpose than the mere lust of hypocrisy, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv,
7), and as also we have said above with regard to lying (Q. 110, A. 2).

FOURTH ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 111, Art. 4]

Whether Hypocrisy Is Always a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that hypocrisy is always a mortal sin. For Jerome says on Isa. 16:14:
"Of the two evils it is less to sin openly than to simulate holiness": and a gloss on Job 1:21
[*St. Augustine, on Ps. 63:7], "As it hath pleased the Lord," etc., says that "pretended justice
is no justice, but a twofold sin": and again a gloss on Lam. 4:6, "The iniquity . . . of my
people is made greater than the sin of Sodom," says: "He deplores the sins of the soul that
falls into hypocrisy, which is a greater iniquity than the sin of Sodom." 1775.]

[Footnote 284: See page 114, ante. When Lysander talks, above, of the reign of Henry the Seventh
being the "AUGUSTAN AGE for BOOKS," he must be supposed to allude to the facility and beauty
of publishing them by means of THE PRESS: for at this period, abroad,
the typographical productions of Verard, Eustace, Vostre, Bonfons,
Pigouchet, Regnier, and many others ("quæ nunc perscribere longum
est") were imitated, and sometimes equalled by W. de Worde, Pynson,
and Notary, at home.

In regard to intellectual fame, if my authority be good, "in the reign of Henry VII. Greek was a
stranger in both universities; and so little even of Latin had Cambridge,
of its own growth, that it had not types sufficient to furnish out
the common letters and epistles of the University.

They usually employed an Italian, one Caius Auberinus, to compose them, whose ordinarry fee
was twentypence a letter." (MSS. in Benet College Library, lib. P.
p. 194,) Ridley's Life of Ridley, p. 22.

"Greek began to be taught in both universities: quietly at Cambridge, but ('Horresco referens!')
with some tumult at Oxford!" ibid.]

PHIL.

Before we proceed to discuss the bibliomaniacal ravages of this age, we had better retire,
with Lorenzo's leave, to the DRAWING-ROOM; to partake of a beverage less potent than that which
is now before us.

LORENZ. Just as you please. But I should apprehend that Lysander could hold out 'till he reached
the Reformation;--and, besides, I am not sure whether our retreat be quite ready for us.

LIS. Pray let us not take leave of all these beauteous books, and busts, and pictures, just
at present. If Lysander's lungs will bear him out another twenty minutes, we shall, by that
time, have reached the Reformation; and then "our retreat," as Lorenzo calls it, may be quite
ready for our reception.

LYSAND. Settle it between yourselves. But I think I could hold out for another twenty minutes--since
you will make me your only book-orator.

LORENZ. Let it be so, then. I will order the lamps to be lit; so that Lisardo may see his favourite
Wouvermans and Berghems, in company with my romances, (which latter are confined in my satin-wood
book-case) to every possible degree of perfection!

LYSAND.

Provided you indulge me also with a sight of these delightful objects, you shall have what you
desire:--and thus I proceed:

Of the great passion of HENRY THE VIITH for fine books, even before
he ascended the throne of England,[285] there is certainly no doubt.

And while he was king, we may judge, even from the splendid fragments
of his library, which are collected in the British Museum, of the
nicety of his taste, and of the soundness of his judgment.

That he should love extravagant books of devotion,[286] as well as
histories and chronicles, must be considered the fault of the age,
rather than of the individual.

I will not, however, take upon me to say that the slumbers of this monarch were disturbed in consequence
of the extraordinary and frightful passages, which, accompanied with bizarre cuts,[287] were
now introduced into almost every work, both of ascetic divinity and also of plain practical
morality. His predecessor, Richard, had in all probability been alarmed by the images which the
reading of these books had created; and I guess that it was from
such frightful objects, rather than from the ghosts of his murdered
brethren, that he was compelled to pass a sleepless night before the
memorable battle of Bosworth Field.

If one of those artists who used to design the horrible pictures which are engraved in many old
didactic volumes of this period had ventured to take a peep into Richard's tent, I question whether
he would not have seen, lying upon an oaken table, an early edition of some of those fearful
works of which he had himself aided in the embellishment, and of which Heinecken has given us such
curious fac-similes:[288]--and this, in my humble apprehension, is quite sufficient to account
for all the terrible workings in Richard, which Shakespeare has so vividly described.

[Footnote 285: Mr. Heber has a fine copy of one of the volumes of a black-letter edition of Froissart,
printed by Eustace, upon the exterior of the binding of which are HENRY'S arms, with his name--HENRICVS
DVX RICHMVNDIÆ.


I answer that, Jactantia (boasting) seems properly to denote the uplifting of self by words:
since if a man wishes to throw (jactare) a thing far away, he lifts it up high. And to uplift
oneself, properly speaking, is to talk of oneself above oneself [*Or 'tall-talking' as we should
say in English]. This happens in two ways. For sometimes a man speaks of himself, not above
what he is in himself, but above that which he is esteemed by men to be: and this the Apostle
declines to do when he says (2 Cor. 12:6): "I forbear lest any man should think of me above
that which he seeth in me, or anything he heareth of me." In another way a man uplifts himself
in words, by speaking of himself above that which he is in reality. And since we should judge
of things as they are in themselves, rather than as others deem them to be, it follows that
boasting denotes more properly the uplifting of self above what one is in oneself, than the
uplifting of self above what others think of one: although in either case it may be called
boasting. Hence boasting properly so called is opposed to truth by way of excess.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument takes boasting as exceeding men's opinion.

Reply Obj. 2: The sin of boasting may be considered in two ways. First, with regard to the
species of the act, and thus it is opposed to truth; as stated (in the body of the article
and Q. 110, A. 2). Secondly, with regard to its cause, from which more frequently though not
always it arises: and thus it proceeds from pride as its inwardly moving and impelling cause.
For when a man is uplifted inwardly by arrogance, it often results that outwardly he boasts
of great things about himself; though sometimes a man takes to boasting, not from arrogance,
but from some kind of vanity, and delights therein, because he is a boaster by habit. Hence
arrogance, which is an uplifting of self above oneself, is a kind of pride; yet it is not the
same as boasting, but is very often its cause. For this reason Gregory reckons boasting among
the species of pride. Moreover, the boaster frequently aims at obtaining glory through his
boasting, and so, according to Gregory, it arises from vainglory considered as its end.

Reply Obj. 3: Wealth also causes boasting, in two ways. First, as an occasional cause, inasmuch
as a man prides himself on his riches. Hence (Prov. 8:18) "riches" are significantly described
as "proud" [Douay: 'glorious']. Secondly, as being the end of boasting, since according to
Ethic. iv, 7, some boast, not only for the sake of glory, but also for the sake of gain. Such
people invent stories about themselves, so as to make profit thereby; for instance, they pretend
to be skilled in medicine, wisdom, or divination.

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 112, Art. 2]

Whether Boasting Is a Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that boasting is a mortal sin. Now it is a mortal sin to stir up quarrels,
since God hates those that sow discord, according to Prov. 6:19. Therefore boasting is a mortal
sin.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is forbidden in God's law is a mortal sin. Now a gloss on Ecclus.
6:2, "Extol not thyself in the thoughts of thy soul," says: "This is a prohibition of boasting
and pride." Therefore boasting is a mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, boasting is a kind of lie. But it is neither an officious nor a jocose lie.
This is evident from the end of lying; for according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7), "the
boaster pretends to something greater than he is, sometimes for no further purpose, sometimes
for the sake of glory or honor, sometimes for the sake of money." Thus it is evident that it
is neither an officious nor a jocose lie, and consequently it must be a mischievous lie. Therefore
seemingly it is always a mortal sin. For Gregory says (Moral. viii, 30) that "it belongs to
the very perfect, by outward deeds so to seek the glory of their author, that they are not
inwardly uplifted by the praise awarded them." Therefore boasting is not always a mortal sin.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 110, A. 4), a mortal sin is one that is contrary to charity.
Accordingly boasting may be considered in two ways. First, in itself, as a lie, and thus it
is sometimes a mortal, and sometimes a venial sin. It will be a mortal sin when a man boasts
of that which is contrary to God's glory--thus it is said in the person of the king of Tyre
(Ezech. 28:2): "Thy heart is lifted up, and thou hast said: I am God"--or contrary to the love
of our neighbor, as when a man while boasting of himself breaks out into invectives against
others, as told of the Pharisee who said (Luke 18:11): "I am not as the rest of men, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, as also is this publican." Sometimes it is a venial sin, when, to wit,
a man boasts of things that are against neither God nor his neighbor. Secondly, it may be considered
with regard to its cause, namely, pride, or the desire of gain or of vainglory: and then if
it proceeds from pride or from such vainglory as is a mortal sin, then the boasting will also
be a mortal sin: otherwise it will be a venial sin. Sometimes, however, a man breaks out into
boasting through desire of gain, and for this very reason he would seem to be aiming at the
deception and injury of his neighbor: wherefore boasting of this kind is more likely to be
a mortal sin. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) that "a man who boasts for the sake
of gain, is viler than one who boasts for the sake of glory or honor." Yet it is not always
a mortal sin because the gain may be such as not to injure another man.

Reply Obj. 1: To boast in order to stir quarrels is a mortal sin. But it happens sometimes
that boasts are the cause of quarrels, not intentionally but accidentally: and consequently
boasting will not be a mortal sin on that account.

Reply Obj. 2: This gloss speaks of boasting as arising from pride that is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Boasting does not always involve a mischievous lie, but only where it is contrary
to the love of God or our neighbor, either in itself or in its cause. That a man boast, through
mere pleasure in boasting, is an inane thing to do, as the Philosopher remarks (Ethic. iv,
7): wherefore it amounts to a jocose lie. Unless perchance he were to prefer this to the love
of God, so as to contemn God's commandments for the sake of boasting: for then it would be
against the charity of God, in Whom alone ought our mind to rest as in its last end.

To boast for the sake of glory or gain seems to involve an officious lie: provided it be done
without injury to others, for then it would at once become a mischievous lie.

QUESTION 113

IRONY* (In Two Articles) [*Irony here must be given the signification of the Greek eironia,
whence it is derived: dissimulation of one's own good points.]

We must now consider irony, under which head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether irony is a sin?

(2) Of its comparison with boasting.

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 113, Art. 1]

Whether Irony Is a Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that irony, which consists in belittling oneself, is not a sin. For no
sin arises from one's being strengthened by God: and yet this leads one to belittle oneself,
according to Prov. 30:1, 2: "The vision which the man spoke, with whom is God, and who being
strengthened by God, abiding with him, said, I am the most foolish of men." Also it is written
(Amos 7:14): "Amos answered . . . I am not a prophet." Therefore irony, whereby a man belittles
himself in words, is not a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, Gregory says in a letter to Augustine, bishop of the English (Regist. xii):
"It is the mark of a well-disposed mind to acknowledge one's fault when one is not guilty."
But all sin is inconsistent with a well-disposed mind. Therefore irony is not a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, it is not a sin to shun pride. But "some belittle themselves in words, so
as to avoid pride," according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7). Therefore irony is not a sin.

On the contrary, Augustine says (De Verb. Apost., Serm. xxix): "If thou liest on account of
humility, if thou wert not a sinner before lying, thou hast become one by lying."

I answer that, To speak so as to belittle oneself may occur in two ways. First so as to safeguard
truth, as when a man conceals the greater things in himself, but discovers and asserts lesser
things of himself the presence of which in himself he perceives. To belittle oneself in this
way does not belong to irony, nor is it a sin in respect of its genus, except through corruption
of one of its circumstances. Secondly, a person belittles himself by forsaking the truth, for
instance by ascribing to himself something mean the existence of which in himself he does not
perceive, or by denying something great of himself, which nevertheless he perceives himself
to possess: this pertains to irony, and is always a sin.

Reply Obj. 1: There is a twofold wisdom and a twofold folly. But there is another wisdom that
is worldly, which as the same text goes on to say, "is foolishness with God." Accordingly,
he that is strengthened by God acknowledges himself to be most foolish in the estimation of
men, because, to wit, he despises human things, which human wisdom seeks. Hence the text quoted
continues, "and the wisdom of men is not with me," and farther on, "and I have known the science
of the saints" [*Vulg.: 'and I have not known the science of the saints'].

It may also be replied that "the wisdom of men" is that which is acquired by human reason,
while the "wisdom of the saints" is that which is received by divine inspiration.

Amos denied that he was a prophet by birth, since, to wit, he was not of the race of prophets:
hence the text goes on, "nor am I the son of a prophet."

Reply Obj. 2: It belongs to a well-disposed mind that a man tend to perfect righteousness,
and consequently deem himself guilty, not only if he fall short of common righteousness, which
is truly a sin, but also if he fall short of perfect righteousness, which sometimes is not
a sin. But he does not call sinful that which he does not acknowledge to be sinful: which would
be a lie of irony.

Reply Obj. 3: A man should not commit one sin in order to avoid another: and so he ought not
to lie in any way at all in order to avoid pride. Hence Augustine says (Tract. xliii in Joan.):
"Shun not arrogance so as to forsake truth": and Gregory says (Moral. xxvi, 3) that "it is
a reckless humility that entangles itself with lies."

SECOND ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 113, Art. 2]

Whether Irony Is a Less Grievous Sin Than Boasting?

Objection 1: It seems that irony is not a less grievous sin than boasting. For each of them
is a sin through forsaking truth, which is a kind of equality. But one does not forsake truth
by exceeding it any more than by diminishing it. Therefore irony is not a less grievous sin
than boasting.

Obj. 2: Further, according to the Philosopher (Ethic. iv, 7), irony sometimes is boasting.
But boasting is not irony. Therefore irony is not a less grievous sin than boasting.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Prov. 26:25): "When he shall speak low, trust him not: because
there are seven mischiefs in his heart." Now it belongs to irony to speak low. Therefore it
contains a manifold wickedness.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7): "Those who speak with irony and belittle
themselves are more gracious, seemingly, in their manners."

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 110, AA. 2, 4), one lie is more grievous than another, sometimes
on account of the matter which it is about--thus a lie about a matter of religious doctrine
is most grievous--and sometimes on account of the motive for sinning; thus a mischievous lie
is more grievous than an officious or jocose lie. Now irony and boasting lie about the same
matter, either by words, or by any other outward signs, namely, about matters affecting the
person: so that in this respect they are equal.

But for the most part boasting proceeds from a viler motive, namely, the desire of gain or
honor: whereas irony arises from a man's averseness, albeit inordinate, to be disagreeable
to others by uplifting himself: and in this respect the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) that
"boasting is a more grievous sin than irony."

Sometimes, however, it happens that a man belittles himself for some other motive, for instance
that he may deceive cunningly: and then irony is more grievous.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument applies to irony and boasting, according as a lie is considered
to be grievous in itself or on account of its matter: for it has been said that in this way
they are equal.

Reply Obj. 2: Excellence is twofold: one is in temporal, the other in spiritual things. Now
it happens at times that a person, by outward words or signs, pretends to be lacking in external
things, for instance by wearing shabby clothes, or by doing something of the kind, and that
he intends by so doing to make a show of some spiritual excellence. Thus our Lord said of certain
men (Matt. 6:16) that "they disfigure their faces that they may appear unto men to fast." Wherefore
such persons are guilty of both vices, irony and boasting, although in different respects,
and for this reason they sin more grievously. Hence the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 7) that
it is "the practice of boasters both to make overmuch of themselves, and to make very little
of themselves": and for the same reason it is related of Augustine that he was unwilling to
possess clothes that were either too costly or too shabby, because by both do men seek glory.

Reply Obj. 3: According to the words of Ecclus. 19:23, "There is one that humbleth himself
wickedly, and his interior is full of deceit," and it is in this sense that Solomon speaks
of the man who, through deceitful humility, "speaks low" wickedly.

QUESTION 114

OF THE FRIENDLINESS WHICH IS CALLED AFFABILITY (In Two Articles)

We must now consider the friendliness which is called affability, and the opposite vices which
are flattery and quarreling. Concerning friendliness or affability, there are two points of
inquiry:

(1) Whether it is a special virtue?

(2) Whether it is a part of justice?

FIRST ARTICLE [II-II, Q. 114, Art. 1]

Whether Friendliness Is a Special Virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that friendliness is not a special virtue. For the Philosopher says (Ethic.
viii, 3) that "the perfect friendship is that which is on account of virtue." Now any virtue
is the cause of friendship: "since the good is lovable to all," as Dionysius states (Div. Nom.
iv). Therefore friendliness is not a special virtue, but a consequence of every virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 6) of this kind of friend that he "takes
everything in a right manner both from those he loves and from those who are not his friends."
Now it seems to pertain to simulation that a person should show signs of friendship to those
whom he loves not, and this is incompatible with virtue. Therefore this kind of friendliness
is not a virtue.

Obj. 3: Further, virtue "observes the mean according as a wise man decides" (Ethic. ii, 6).
Now it is written (Eccles. 7:5): "The heart of the wise is where there is mourning, and the
heart of fools where there is mirth": wherefore "it belongs to a virtuous man to be most wary
of pleasure" (Ethic. ii, 9). Now this kind of friendship, according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
iv, 6), "is essentially desirous of sharing pleasures, but fears to give pain." Therefore this
kind of friendliness is not a virtue.

On the contrary, The precepts of the law are about acts of virtue. Now it is written (Ecclus.
4:7): "Make thyself affable to the congregation of the poor." Therefore affability, which is
what we mean by friendship, is a special virtue.

I answer that, As stated above (Q. 109, A. 2; I-II, Q. 55, A. 3), since virtue is directed
to good, wherever there is a special kind of good, there must needs be a special kind of virtue.
Now good consists in order, as stated above (Q. 109, A. 2). And it behooves man to be maintained
in a becoming order towards other men as regards their mutual relations with one another, in
point of both deeds and words, so that they behave towards one another in a becoming manner.
Hence the need of a special virtue that maintains the becomingness of this order: and this
virtue is called friendliness.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher speaks of a twofold friendship in his Ethics. One consists chiefly
in the affection whereby one man loves another and may result from any virtue. We have stated
above, in treating of charity (Q. 23, A. 1, A. 3, ad 1; QQ. 25, 26), what things belong to
this kind of friendship. But he mentions another friendliness, which consists merely in outward
words or deeds; this has not the perfect nature of friendship, but bears a certain likeness
thereto, in so far as a man behaves in a becoming manner towards those with whom he is in contact.

