He is quite pathetic, too, about the British Constitution. 'Destroy the House of Lords,' he
exclaims, 'and henceforward, for people like you and me, England will be no habitable land.'
Here, he seems to say, is one charming elysium, where no rude hand has swept away the cobwebs
or replaced the good old-fashioned machinery; here we may find rest in the 'pure, holy, and
magnificent Church,' whose Articles, interpreted by Coleridge, may guide us through the most
wondrous of metaphysical labyrinths, and dwell in a grand constitutional edifice, rich in picturesque
memories, and blending into one complex harmony elements contributed by a long series of centuries.
And you, wretched French revolutionists, with your love of petty precision, and irreverent
radicals and utilitarians, with your grovelling material notions, propose to level, and destroy,
and break in upon my delicious reveries. No old Hebrew prophet could be more indignant with
the enemy who threatened to break down the carved work of his temples with axes and hammers.
But his complaint is, after all, the voice of the sluggard. Let me dream a little longer; for
much as I love my country and its institutions, I cannot rouse myself to fight for them. It
is enough if I call their assailants an ugly name or so, and at times begin to write what might
be the opening pages of the preface to some very great work of the future. Alas! the first
digression diverts the thread of the discourse; the task becomes troublesome, and the labour
is abruptly broken off. And so in a life of seventy-three years De Quincey read extensively
and thought acutely by fits, ate an enormous quantity of opium, wrote a few pages which revealed
new capacities in the language, and provided a good deal of respectable padding for magazines.
It sounds, and many people will say that it is, a harsh and, perhaps they will add, a stupid
judgment. If so, they may find plenty of admirers who will supply the eulogistic side here
too briefly indicated. I will only say two things: first, that there are very few writers who
have revealed new capacities in the language, and in English literature they might almost be
counted on the fingers. Secondly, I must confess that I have often consulted De Quincey in
regard to biographic and critical questions, and that though I have generally found something
to admire, I have always found gross inaccuracies and almost always effeminate prejudices and
mere flippancies draped in elaborate rhetoric. I take leave, therefore, to insist upon faults
which are passed over too easily by writers of more geniality than I claim to possess.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] It is curious that De Quincey, in his Essay on Style, explains that political economy,
and especially the doctrine of value, is one of those subjects which cannot be satisfactorily
treated in dialogue--the very form which he chose to adopt for that particular purpose.

SIR THOMAS BROWNE

'Let me not injure the felicity of others,' says Sir Thomas Browne in a suppressed passage
of the 'Religio Medici,' 'if I say that I am the happiest man alive. I have that in me that
can convert poverty into riches, adversity into prosperity, and I am more invulnerable than
Achilles; fortune hath not one place to hit me.' Perhaps on second thoughts, Sir Thomas felt
that the phrase savoured of that presumption which is supposed to provoke the wrath of Nemesis;
and at any rate, he, of all men, is the last to be taken too literally at his word. He is a
humorist to the core, and is here writing dramatically. For, if we set aside external circumstances
of life, what qualities offer a more certain guarantee of happiness than those of which he
is an almost typical example? I will not be hypercritical, or I might suggest that in that case
the words would have been "thither wend;" but I maintain that the change is contrary to the sense.
The spirit of Hermione never could have been intended to say that the child should be left
crying. She would rather wish that it might not cry! The meaning, as it seems to me, is, that Antigonus
should weep over the babe, and leave it while so weeping.
In p. 487. the words "missingly noted" are altered to "musingly noted,"
which is a very questionable improvement. To them, moreover, we must add
a disposition absolutely incapable of controversial bitterness; 'a constitution,' as he says
of himself, 'so general that it consorts and sympathises with all things;' an absence of all
antipathies to loathsome objects in nature--to French 'dishes of snails, frogs, and toadstools,'
or to Jewish repasts on 'locusts or grasshoppers;' an equal toleration--which in the first
half of the seventeenth century is something astonishing--for all theological systems; an admiration
even of our natural enemies, the French, the Spaniards, the Italians, and the Dutch; a love
of all climates, of all countries; and, in short, an utter incapacity to 'absolutely detest
or hate any essence except the devil.' Indeed, his hatred even for that personage has in it
so little of bitterness, that no man, we may be sure, would have joined more heartily in the
Scotch minister's petition for 'the puir de'il'--a prayer conceived in the very spirit of his
writings. A man so endowed--and it is not only from his explicit assertions, but from his unconscious
self-revelation, that we may credit him with closely approaching his own ideal--is admirably
qualified to discover one great secret of human happiness. No man was ever better prepared
to keep not only one, but a whole stableful of hobbies, nor more certain to ride them so as
to amuse himself, without loss of temper or dignity, and without rude collisions against his
neighbours. That happy art is given to few, and thanks to his skill in it, Sir Thomas reminds
us strongly of the two illustrious brothers Shandy combined in one person. To the exquisite
kindliness and simplicity of Uncle Toby he unites the omnivorous intellectual appetite and
the humorous pedantry of the head of the family. The resemblance, indeed, may not be quite
fortuitous. Though it does not appear that Sterne, amidst his multifarious pilferings, laid
hands upon Sir Thomas Browne, one may fancy that he took a general hint or two from so congenial
an author.

The best mode of approaching so original a writer is to examine the intellectual food on which
his mind was nourished. He dwelt by preference in strange literary pastures; and their nature
will let us into some secrets as to his taste and character. We will begin, therefore, by examining
the strange furniture of his mind, as described in his longest, though not his most characteristic
book--the 'Inquiry into Vulgar Errors.' When we turn over its quaint pages, we feel as though
we were entering one of those singular museums of curiosities which existed in the pre-scientific
ages. Every corner is filled with a strange, incoherent medley, in which really valuable objects
are placed side by side with what is simply grotesque and ludicrous. The modern man of science
may find some objects of interest; but they are mixed inextricably with strange rubbish that
once delighted the astrologer, the alchemist, or the dealer in apocryphal relics. And the possessor
of this miscellaneous collection accompanies us with an unfailing flow of amusing gossip: at
one moment pouring forth a torrent of out-of-the-way learning; at another, making a really
passable scientific remark; and then lapsing into an elaborate discussion of some inconceivable
absurdity; affecting the air of a grave inquirer, and to all appearance fully believing in
his own pretensions, and yet somehow indulging himself in a half-suppressed smile, which indicates
that the humorous aspect of a question can never be far removed from his mind. Mere curiosity
is not yet differentiated from scientific thirst for knowledge; and a quaint apologue is as
good a reward for the inquirer as the discovery of a law of nature. The numerous class which
insists upon a joke being as unequivocal as a pistol-shot, and a serious statement as grave
as a Blue-book, should therefore keep clear of Sir Thomas Browne. His most congenial readers
are those who take a simple delight in following out any quaint train of reflections, careless
whether it may culminate in a smile or a sigh, or in some thought in which the two elements
of the sad and the ludicrous are inextricably blended. Sir Thomas, however, is in the 'Inquiry'
content generally with bringing out the strange curiosities of his museum, and does not care
to draw any explicit moral. The quaintness of the objects unearthed seems to be a sufficient
recompense for the labour of the search. Fortunately for his design, he lived in the time when
a poet might have spoken without hyperbole of the 'fairy tales of science.' To us, who have
to plod through an arid waste of painful observation, and slow piecing together of cautious
inferences before reaching the promised land of wondrous discoveries, the expression sometimes
appears to be ironical. Does not science, we may ask with a primâ facie resemblance of right,
destroy as much poetry as it generates? To him no such doubts could present themselves, for
fairyland was still a province of the empire of science. Strange beings moved through the pages
of natural history, which were equally at home in the 'Arabian Nights' or in poetical apologues.
The griffin, the phoenix, and the dragon were not yet extinct; the salamander still sported
in flames; and the basilisk slew men at a distance with his deadly glance. More commonplace
animals indulged in the habits which they had learnt in fables, and of which only some feeble
vestiges now remain in the eloquence of strolling showmen. The elephant had no joints, and
was caught by felling the tree against which he rested his stiff limbs in sleep; the pelican
pierced its breast for the good of its young; ostriches were regularly painted with a horseshoe
in their bills, to indicate their ordinary diet; storks refused to live except in republics
and free states; the crowing of a cock put lions to flight, and men were struck dumb in good
sober earnest by the sight of a wolf. The curiosity-hunter, in short, found his game still
plentiful, and, by a few excursions into Aristotle, Pliny, and other more recondite authors,
was able still to display a rich bag for the edification of his readers. Sir Thomas Browne
sets out on that quest with all imaginable seriousness. He persuaded himself, and he has persuaded
some of his editors, that he was a genuine disciple of Bacon, by one of whose suggestions the
'Inquiry' is supposed to have been prompted. Accordingly, as Bacon describes the idols by which
the human mind is misled, Sir Thomas sets out with investigating the causes of error; but his
introductory remarks immediately diverge into strange paths, from which it is obvious that
the discovery of true scientific method was a very subordinate object in his mind. Instead
of telling us by what means truth is to be attained, his few perfunctory remarks on logic are
lost in an historical narrative given with infinite zest, of the earliest recorded blunders.
The period of history in which he most delighted was the antediluvian--probably because it
afforded the widest field for speculation. His books are full of references to the early days
of the world. He takes a keen personal interest in our first parents. He discusses the unfortunate
lapse of Adam and Eve from every possible point of view. It is not without a visible effort
that he declines to settle which of the two was the more guilty, and what would have been the
result if they had tasted the fruit of the Tree of Life before applying to the Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil. Then he passes in review every recorded speech before the Flood,
shows that in each of them, with one exception, there is a mixture of falsehood and error,
and settles to his own satisfaction that Cain showed less 'truth, wisdom, and reverence' than
Satan under similar circumstances. I can neither subscribe to the emendation of A. E. B., nor to
that of the old commentator, but infinitely prefer the original words, which appear to me perfectly
intelligible. The sense, as it strikes me, is, that however we may desire things which we have
not, the means we already possess are sufficient for our security; and even our defects prove
serviceable. Blindness, for instance, will make a man more careful of himself; and then the
other faculties he enjoys will secure him from harm. He tells us, indeed, that Medea was
simply a predecessor of certain modern artists, with an excellent 'recipe to make white hair
black;' and that Actæon was a spirited master of hounds, who, like too many of his ancestors,
went metaphorically, instead of literally, to the dogs. He points out, moreover, that we must
not believe on authority that the sea is the sweat of the earth, that the serpent, before the
Fall, went erect like man, or that the right eye of a hedgehog, boiled in oil, and preserved
in a brazen vessel, will enable us to see in the dark. Such stories, he moderately remarks,
being 'neither consonant unto reason nor correspondent unto experiment,' are unto us 'no axioms.'
But we may judge of his scepticism by his remarks on 'Oppianus, that famous Cilician poet.'
Of this writer he says that 'abating the annual mutation of sexes in the hyæna, the single
sex of the rhinoceros, the antipathy between two drums of a lamb's and a wolf's skin, the informity
of cubs, the venation of centaurs, and some few others, he may be read with delight and profit.'
Obviously we shall find in Sir Thomas Browne no inexorably severe guide to truth! he will not
too sternly reject the amusing because it happens to be slightly improbable, or doubt an authority
because he sometimes sanctions a mass of absurd fables. Satan, as he argues at great length,
is at the bottom of most errors, from false religions down to a belief that there is another
world in the moon; but Sir Thomas takes little trouble to provide us with an Ithuriel's spear,
and, indeed, we have a faint suspicion that he will overlook at times the diabolic agency in
sheer enthusiasm at the marvellous results. The logical design is little more than ostensible;
and Sir Thomas, though he knew it not himself, is really satisfied with any line of inquiry
that will bring him in sight of some freak of nature or of opinion suitable to his museum of
curiosities.

Let us, however, pass from the anteroom, and enter this queer museum. We pause in sheer bewilderment
on the threshold, and despair of classifying its contents intelligibly within any moderate
space. This much, indeed, is obvious at first sight--that the title 'vulgar errors' is to some
extent a misnomer. It is not given to vulgar brains to go wrong by such complex methods. There
are errors which require more learning and ingenuity than are necessary for discovering truths;
and it is in those queer freaks of philosophical minds that Sir Thomas specially delights.
Though far, indeed, from objecting to any absurdity which lies on the common highroad, he rejoices
in the true spirit of a collector when he can discover some grotesque fancy by rambling into
less frequented paths of inquiry. Perhaps it will be best to take down one or two specimens,
pretty much at random, and mark their nature and mode of treatment. Here, for example, is that
quaint old wonder, the phoenix, 'which, after many hundred years, burneth itself, and from
the ashes thereof ariseth up another.' Sir Thomas carefully discusses the pros and cons of
this remarkable legend. In favour of the phoenix, it may be alleged that he is mentioned 'not
only by human authors,' but also by such 'holy writers' as Cyril, Epiphanius, and Ambrose.
Moreover, allusions are made to him in Job and the Psalms. 'All which notwithstanding,' the
following grave reasons may be alleged against his existence: First, nobody has ever seen a
phoenix. Secondly, those who mention him speak doubtfully, and even Pliny, after telling a
story about a particular phoenix which came to Rome in the censorship of Claudius, unkindly
turns round and declares the whole story to be a palpable lie. Thirdly, the name phoenix has
been applied to many other birds, and those who speak unequivocally of the genuine phoenix
contradict each other in the most flagrant way as to his age and habitat. Fourthly, many writers,
such as Ovid, only speak poetically, and others, as Paracelsus, only mystically, whilst the
remainder speak rhetorically, emblematically, or hieroglyphically. Fifthly, in the Scriptures,
the word translated phoenix means a palm tree. Sixthly, his existence, if we look closely,
is implicitly denied in the Scriptures, because all fowls entered the ark in pairs, and animals
were commanded to increase and multiply, neither of which statements is compatible with the
solitary nature of the phoenix. Seventhly, nobody could have known by experience whether the
phoenix actually lived for a thousand years, and, therefore, 'there may be a mistake in the
compute.' Eighthly, and finally, no animals really spring, or could spring, from the ashes
of their predecessors and it is impossible to believe that they could enter the world in such
a fashion. Having carefully summed up this negative evidence--enough, one would have fancied,
to blow the poor phoenix into summary annihilation--Sir Thomas finally announces his grave
conclusion in these words--'How far to rely on this tradition we refer unto consideration.'
And yet he feels impelled to add a quaint reflection on the improbability of a statement made
by Plutarch, that 'the brain of a phoenix is a pleasant bit, but that it causeth the headache.'
Heliogabalus, he observes, could not have slain the phoenix, for it must of necessity be 'a
vain design to destroy any species, or mutilate the great accomplishment of six days.' To which
it is added, by way of final corollary, that after Cain had killed Abel, he could not have
destroyed Eve, supposing her to have been the only woman in existence; for then there must
have been another creation, and a second rib of Adam must have been animated.

We must not, however, linger too long with these singular speculations, for it is probable
that phoenix-fanciers are becoming rare. It is enough to say briefly, that if anyone wishes
to understand the natural history of the basilisk, the griffin, the salamander, the cockatrice,
or the amphisboena--if he wishes to know whether a chameleon lives on air, and an ostrich on
horseshoes--whether a carbuncle gives light in the dark, whether the Glastonbury thorn bore
flowers on Christmas-day, whether the mandrake 'naturally groweth under gallowses,' and shrieks
'upon eradication,'--on these and many other such points he may find grave discussions in Sir
Thomas Browne's pages. He lived in the period when it was still held to be a sufficient proof
of a story that it was written in a book, especially if the book were Latin; and some persons,
such as Alexander Ross, whose memory is preserved only by the rhyme in 'Hudibras,' argued gravely
against his scepticism.[5] For Sir Thomas, in spite of his strange excursions into the marvellous,
inclines for the most part to the sceptical side of the question. He was not insensible to
the growing influence of the scientific spirit, though he believed implicitly in witchcraft,
spoke with high respect of alchemy and astrology, and refused to believe that the earth went
round the sun. He feels that his favourite creatures are doomed to extinction, and though dealing
lovingly with them, speaks rather like an attached mourner at their funerals than a physician
endeavouring to maintain their flickering vitality. He tries experiments and has a taste for
dissection. He proves by the evidence of his senses, and believes them in spite of the general
report, that a dead kingfisher will not turn its breast to the wind. He convinced himself that
if two magnetic needles were placed in the centre of rings marked with the alphabet (an odd
anticipation of the electric telegraph, minus the wires), they would not point to the same
letter by an occult sympathy. His arguments are often to the point, though overlaid with a
strange accretion of the fabulous. In discussing the question of the blackness of negroes,
he may remind benevolent readers of some of Mr. Darwin's recent speculations. He rejects, and
on the same grounds which Mr. Darwin declares to be conclusive, the hypothesis that the blackness
is the immediate effect of the climate; and he points out, what is important in regard to 'sexual
selection,' that a negro may admire a flat nose as we admire an aquiline; though, of course,
he diverges into extra-scientific questions when discussing the probable effects of the curse
of Ham, and rather loses himself in a 'digression concerning blackness.' We may fancy that
this problem pleased Sir Thomas rather because it appeared to be totally insoluble than for
any other reason; and in spite of his occasional gleams of scientific observation, he is always
most at home when on the border-land which divides the purely marvellous from the region of
ascertainable fact. In the last half of his book, indeed, having exhausted natural history,
he plunges with intense delight into questions which bear the same relation to genuine antiquarianism
that his phoenixes and salamanders bear to scientific inquiry: whether the sun was created
in Libra; what was the season of the year in Paradise; whether the forbidden fruit was an apple;
whether Methuselah was the longest-lived of all men (a main argument on the other side being
that Adam was created at the perfect age of man, which in those days was fifty or sixty, and
thus had a right to add sixty to his natural years); what was the nature of St. John the Baptist's
camel's-hair garment; what were the secret motives of the builders of the Tower of Babel; whether
the three kings really lived at Cologne,--these and many other profound inquiries are detailed
with all imaginable gravity, and the interest of the inquirer is not the less because he generally
comes to the satisfactory and sensible conclusion that we cannot possibly know anything whatever
about it.

The 'Inquiry into Vulgar Errors' was published in 1646, and Sir Thomas's next publication appeared
in 1658. The dates are significant. Whilst all England was in the throes of the first civil
war, Sir Thomas had been calmly finishing his catalogue of intellectual oddities. This book
was published soon after the crushing victory of Naseby. King, Parliament, and army, illustrating
a very different kind of vulgar error, continued to fight out their quarrel to the death. Whilst
Milton, whose genius was in some way most nearly akin to his own, was raising his voice in
favour of the liberty of the press, good Sir Thomas was meditating profoundly on quincunxes.
Milton hurled fierce attacks at Salmasius, and meanwhile Sir Thomas, in his quiet country town,
was discoursing on 'certain sepulchral urns lately found in Norfolk.' In the year of Cromwell's
death, the result of his labours appeared in a volume containing 'The Garden of Cyrus' and
the 'Hydriotaphia.'

The first of these essays illustrates Sir Thomas's peculiar mysticism. The external world was
not to him the embodiment of invariable forces, and therefore capable of revealing a general
law in a special instance; but rather a system of symbols, signatures of the Plastic Nature,
to which mysterious truths were arbitrarily annexed. A Pythagorean doctrine of numbers was
therefore congenial to his mind. He ransacks heaven and earth, he turns over all his stores
of botanical knowledge, he searches all sacred and profane literature to discover anything
that is in the form of an X, or that reminds him in any way of the number five. From the garden
of Cyrus, where the trees were arranged in this order, he rambles through the universe, stumbling
over quincunxes at every step. To take, for example, his final, and, of course, his fifth chapter,
we find him modestly disavowing an 'inexcusable Pythagorism,' and yet unable to refrain from
telling us that five was anciently called the number of justice: that it was also called the
divisive number; that most flowers have five leaves; that feet have five toes; that the cone
has a 'quintuple division;' that there were five wise and five foolish virgins; that the 'most
generative animals' were created on the fifth day; that the cabalists discovered strange meanings
in the number five; that there were five golden mice; that five thousand persons were fed with
five barley-loaves; that the ancients mixed five parts of water with wine; that plays have
five acts; that starfish have five points; and that if anyone inquire into the causes of this
strange repetition, 'he shall not pass his hours in vulgar speculations.' We, however, must
decline the task, and will content ourselves with a few characteristic phrases from his peroration.
'The quincunx of heaven,' he says, referring to the Hyades, 'runs low, and 'tis time to close
the five parts of knowledge. We are unwilling to spin out our awaking thoughts into the phantasms
of sleep, which often continueth precogitations, making cables of cobwebs, and wildernesses
of handsome groves.... Night, which Pagan theology could make the daughter of chaos, affords
no advantage to the description of order; although no lower than that mass can we derive its
genealogy. All things began in order, so shall they end, and so shall they begin again; according
to the admirer of order and mystical mathematics of the City of Heaven. Nature pleads the cause
of pleasure as Hyperides pleaded that of Phryne. She has no need of eloquence: she unveils
the bosom of her client, and the client is acquitted."

"Monseigneur shows at least that he has learned to profit by my humble
instructions in the classics," said Dubois.

The Duke did not answer. I turned my eyes to some drawings on the table; I expressed my admiration
of them. "They are mine," said the Regent. "Ah! I should have been much more accomplished as a private gentleman
than I fear I ever shall be as a public man of toil and business. Business--bah! But Necessity
is the only real sovereign in the world, the only despot for whom there is no law. What! are
you going already, Count Devereux?"

"Monseigneur's anteroom is crowded with less fortunate persons than myself, whose sins of envy and
covetousness I am now answerable for."

"Ah--well! I must hear the poor devils; the only pleasure I have is in seeing how easily I
can make them happy. Would to Heaven, Dubois, that one could govern a great kingdom only by fair
words! Count Devereux, you have seen me to-day as my acquaintance;
see me again as my petitioner. /Bon jour, Monsieur/."

And I retired,
very well pleased with my reception; from that time, indeed, during
the rest of my short stay at Paris, the Prince honoured me with his
especial favour. But I have dwelt too long on my sojourn at the French
court. The persons whom I have described, and who alone made that
sojourn memorable, must be my apology. From his travels he had learnt the best
lesson of a lofty toleration. The furious controversies of that age, in which the stake, the
prison, and the pillory were the popular theological arguments, produced a characteristic effect
on his sympathies. He did not give in to the established belief, like his kindly natured contemporary
Fuller, who remarks, in a book published about the same time with the 'Religio Medici,' that
even 'the mildest authors' agree in the propriety of putting certain heretics to death. Nor,
on the other hand, does he share the glowing indignation which prompted the great protests
of Chillingworth and Taylor against the cruelties practised in the name of religion. Browne
has a method of his own in view of such questions. He shrinks from the hard, practical world
into spiritual meditation. He regards all opinions less as a philosopher than as a poet. He
asks, not whether a dogma is true, but whether it is amusing or quaint. If his imagination
or his fancy can take pleasure in contemplating it, he is not curious to investigate its scientific
accuracy. And therefore he catches the poetical side of creeds which differ from his own, and
cannot even understand why anybody should grow savage over their shortcomings. He never could
be angry with a man's judgment 'for not agreeing with me in that from which, perhaps, within
a few days, I should dissent myself.' Travelling in this spirit through countries where the
old faith still prevailed, he felt a lively sympathy for the Catholic modes of worship. Holy
water and crucifixes do not offend him. He is willing to enter the churches and to pray with
the worshippers of other persuasions. He is naturally inclined, he says, 'to that which misguided
zeal terms superstition,' and would show his respect rather than his unbelief. Setting aside
one purely fantastical theory, they all imply a desire for toleration even in the next world.
He doubted whether the damned would not ultimately be released from torture. He felt great
difficulty in giving up prayers for the dead, and thought that to be the object of such prayers,
was 'a good way to be remembered by posterity, and far more noble than a history.' These heresies,
he says, as he never tried to propagate them, or to dispute over them, 'without additions of
new fuel, went out insensibly of themselves.' Yet he still retained, in spite of its supposed
heterodoxy, some hope for the fate of virtuous heathens. 'Amongst so many subdivisions of hell,'
he says, 'there might have been one limbo left for these.' With a most characteristic turn,
he softens the horror of the reflection by giving it an almost humorous aspect. Heresies such
as these will not be harshly condemned at the present day. From others of a different kind,
Sir Thomas is shielded by his natural love of the marvellous. He loves to puzzle and confound
his understanding with the thoughts that pass the limits of our intellectual powers: he rejoices
in contemplating eternity, because nobody can 'speak of it without a solecism,' and to plunge
his imagination into the abysses of the infinite. 'When I cannot satisfy my reason,' he says,
'I love to recreate my fancy.' He recreates it by soaring into the regions where the most daring
metaphysical logic breaks down beneath us, and delights in exposing his reason to the rude
test of believing both sides of a contradiction. Here, as everywhere, the strangest freaks
of fancy intrude themselves into his sublime contemplations. A mystic, when abasing reason
in the presence of faith, may lose sight of earthly objects in the splendour of the beatific
vision. But Sir Thomas, even when he enters the holiest shrine, never quite loses his grasp
of the grotesque. Wonder, whether produced by the sublime or the simply curious, has equal
attraction for him. His mind is distracted between the loftiest mysteries of Christianity and
the strangest conceits of Talmudists or schoolmen. Thus, for example, whilst eloquently descanting
on the submissiveness of his reason, he informs us (obviously claiming credit for the sacrifice
of his curiosity) that he can read of the raising of Lazarus, and yet refrain from raising
a 'law case whether his heir might lawfully detain his inheritance bequeathed unto him by his
death, and he, though restored to life, have no plea or title unto his former possessions.'
Or we might take the inverse transition from the absurd to the sublime, in his meditations
upon hell. He begins by inquiring whether the everlasting fire is the same with that of our
earth. I feel sometimes a hell within myself; Lucifer keeps his courts in my breast; Legion
is revived in me. It is plain that in his mind they have not the slightest tinge of conscious
irreverence. They are simply his natural mode of expression; forbid him to be humorous, and
you might as well forbid him to speak at all. It is not wonderful, perhaps, that, with our
associations, the performance seems of questionable taste; and that some strains of tavern
music mix unpleasantly in the grander harmonies which they suggest. Few people find their religious
emotions stimulated by the performance of a nigger melody, and they have some difficulty in
keeping pace with a mind which springs in happy unconsciousness, or rather in keen enjoyment,
of the contrast from the queer or commonplace to the most exalted objects of human thought.

One other peculiarity shows itself chiefly in the last pages of the 'Religio Medici.' His worthy
commentators have laboured to defend Sir Thomas from the charge of vanity. He expatiates upon
his own universal charity; upon his inability to regard even vice as a fitting object for satire;
upon his warm affection to his friend, whom he already loves better than himself, and whom
yet in a few months he will regard with a love which will make his present feelings seem indifference;
upon his absolute want of avarice or any kind of meanness; and, which certainly seems a little
odd in the midst of these self-laudations, upon his freedom from the 'first and father sin,
not only of man, but of the devil, pride.' Good Dr. Watts was shocked at this 'arrogant temerity,'
and Dr. Johnson appears rather to concur in the charge. And certainly, if we are to interpret
his language in a matter-of-fact spirit, it must be admitted that a gentleman who openly claims
for himself the virtues of charity, generosity, courage, and modesty, might be not unfairly
accused of vanity. To no one, as we have already remarked, is such a matter-of-fact criticism
less applicable. If a humorist was to be denied the right of saying with a serious face what
he does not quite think, we should make strange work of some of the most charming books in
the world. The Sir Thomas Browne of the 'Religio Medici' is by no means to be identified with
the everyday flesh-and-blood physician of Norwich. He is the ideal and glorified Sir Thomas,
and represents rather what ought to have been than what was. We all have such doubles who visit
us in our day-dreams and sometimes cheat us into the belief that they are our real selves,
but most of us luckily hide the very existence of such phantoms; for few of us, indeed, could
make them agreeable to our neighbours. And yet the apology is scarcely needed. Bating some
few touches, Sir Thomas seems to have claimed little that he did not really possess. And if
he was a little vain, why should we be angry? Vanity is only offensive when it is sullen or
exacting. When it merely amounts to an unaffected pleasure in dwelling on the peculiarities
of a man's own character, it is rather an agreeable literary ingredient. Sir Thomas defines
his point of view with his usual felicity. And no one can deny that it is a good and kindly
world--a world full of the strangest combinations, where even the most sacred are allied with
the oddest objects. Yet his imagination everywhere diffuses a solemn light such as that which
falls through painted windows, and which somehow harmonises the whole quaint assemblage of
images. The sacred is made more interesting instead of being degraded by its association with
the quaint; and on the whole, after a stay in this microcosm, we feel better, calmer, more
tolerant, and a good deal more amused than when we entered it.

Passing from the portrait to the original, we may recognise, or fancy that we recognise, the
same general features. 'Surely,' he says, 'a man may visit France and Italy, reside at Montpelier
and Padua, and at last take his degree at Leyden, without anything miraculous.' And although
Southey endeavours to maintain that the miracle consisted in Browne's preservation from infidelity,
it must be admitted that to the ordinary mind that result seems explicable by natural causes.
We must be content with Johnson's explanation, that, in some sense, 'all life is miraculous;'
and, in short, that the strangeness consists rather in Browne's view of his own history, than
in any unusual phenomena. Certainly, no man seems on the whole to have slipped down the stream
of life more smoothly. After his travels he settled quietly at Norwich, and there passed forty-five
years of scarcely interrupted prosperity. In the 'Religio Medici' he indulges in some disparaging
remarks upon marriage. It is not difficult, from the fragmentary notices that have been left
to us, to put together some picture of his personal appearance. He was a man of dignified appearance,
with a striking resemblance, as Southey has remarked, to Charles I., 'always cheerful, but
never merry,' given to unseasonable blushing, little inclined to talk, but strikingly original
when once launched in conversation; sedate in his dress, and obeying some queer medical crotchets
as to its proper arrangement; always at work in the intervals of his 'drudging practice;' and
generally a sober and dignified physician. From some letters which have been preserved we catch
a view of his social demeanour. He was evidently an affectionate and liberal father, with good
old orthodox views of the wide extent of the paternal prerogative. One of his sons was a promising
naval officer, and sends home from beyond the seas accounts of such curiosities as were likely
to please the insatiable curiosity of his parent. In his answers, the good Sir Thomas quotes
Aristotle's definition of fortitude for the benefit of his gallant lieutenant, and argues elaborately
to dissuade him from a practice which he believes to prevail in 'the king's shipps, when, in
desperate cases, they blow up the same.' He proves by most excellent reasons, and by the authority
of Plutarch, that such self-immolation is an unnecessary strain of gallantry; yet somehow we
feel rather glad that Sir Thomas could not be a witness to the reception of this sensible,
but perhaps rather superfluous, advice, in the messroom of the 'Marie Rose.' It is more pleasant
to observe the carefulness with which he has treasured up and repeats all the compliments to
the lieutenant's valour and wisdom which have reached him from trustworthy sources. This son
appears to have died at a comparatively early age; but with the elder son, Edward--who, like
his father, travelled in various parts of Europe, and then became a distinguished physician--he
maintained a long correspondence, full of those curious details in which his soul delighted.
His son, for example, writes from Prague that 'in the mines at Brunswick is reported to be
a spirit; and another at the tin mine at Stackenwald, in the shape of a monke, which strikes
the miners, playeth on the bagpipe, and many such tricks.' They correspond, however, on more
legitimate inquiries, and especially on the points to be noticed in the son's medical lectures.
Sir Thomas takes a keen interest in the fate of an unlucky 'oestridge' which found its way
to London in 1681, and was doomed to illustrate some of the vulgar errors. The poor bird was
induced to swallow a piece of iron weighing two and a-half ounces, which, strange to say, it
could not digest. It soon afterwards died 'of a soden,' either from the severity of the weather
or from the peculiar nature of its diet.

In one well-known case Sir Thomas's peculiar theories received a more unfortunate application;
he contributed by his evidence to the death of the witches tried by Hale in 1664; and one could
wish that in this case his love of the wonderful had been more checked by his sense of humour.

The fact that he was knighted by Charles II. in 1671 is now memorable only for Johnson's characteristic
remark. The lexicographer's love of truth and loyalty to his pet monarch struggle with each
other in the equivocal compliment to Charles's virtue in rewarding excellence 'with such honorary
distinctions at least as cost him nothing.' The good doctor died in 1682, in the seventy-seventh
year of age, and met his end, as we are assured, in the spirit of his own writings. Will you
be kind enough to give us the old doctor's literary prescription, that we may produce the same
effects at will? In what proportions shall we mingle humour, imagination, and learning? How
are we to select the language which will be the fittest vehicle for the thought? or rather,
for the metaphor is a little too mechanical, what were the magic spells with which he sways
our imaginative moods? Like other spells, we must reply, it is incommunicable: no real answer
can be given even by critics who, like Coleridge and De Quincey, show something of the same
power. Coarser observers can only point to such external peculiarities as the Latinisms in
which he indulges even more freely than most of his contemporaries. To Johnson they seemed
'pedantic;' to most modern readers they have an old-world charm; but in any case we know little
more of Sir Thomas when we have observed that he is capable of using for 'hanging' the periphrasis
'illaqueation or pendulous suffocation.' The perusal of a page will make us recognise what
could not be explained in a whole volume of analysis. One may, however, hazard a remark upon
the special mood which is clothed or incarnated in his stately rhetoric. The imagination of
Sir Thomas, of course, shows the generic qualities roughly described as Northern, Gothic, Teutonic,
or romantic. He writes about tombs, and all Englishmen, as M. Taine tells us, like to write
about tombs. When we try to find the specific differences which distinguish it from other imaginations
of similar quality, we should be inclined to define him as belonging to a very rare intellectual
family. He is a mystic with a sense of humour, or rather, his habitual mood is determined by
an attraction towards the two opposite poles of humour and mysticism. The fully-developed mystic
loses sight of the world and its practical duties in the rapture of formless meditations; facts
become shadows, and emotions the only realities. But the presence of a mystical element is
the mark of all lofty imaginations. The greatest poet is he who feels most deeply and habitually
that our 'little lives are rounded with a sleep;' that we are but atoms in the boundless abysses
of space and time; that the phenomenal world is but a transitory veil, to be valued only as
its contemplation arouses or disciplines our deepest emotions. Mysticism proper is the abuse
of this tendency, which prompts to the impossible feat of soaring altogether beyond the necessary
base of concrete realities. The mystic temperament is balanced in some great men, as in Shakespeare,
by their intense interest in human passion; in others, as in Wordsworth, by their profound
sense of the primary importance of the moral law; and in others, as in Jeremy Taylor, by their
hold upon the concrete imagery of a traditional theology; whilst to some, the mystic vision
is strangely blended with an acceptance of the epicurean precept, Let us eat and drink, for
to-morrow we die. Sir Thomas Browne seems to be held back from abandoning himself to the ecstasies
of abstract meditation, chiefly by his peculiar sense of humour. There is a closer connection
than we are always willing to admit between humour and profanity. Humour is the faculty which
always keeps us in mind of the absurdity which is the shadow of sublimity. It is naturally
allied to intellectual scepticism, as in Rabelais or Montaigne; and Sir Thomas shared the tendency
sufficiently to be called atheist by some wiseacres. But his humour was too gentle to suggest
scepticism of the aggressive kind. It is almost too free from cynicism. He cannot adopt any
dogma unreservedly, but neither does any dogma repel him. He revels in the mental attitude
of hopeless perplexity, which is simply unendurable to the commonplace and matter-of-fact intellects.
He likes to be balanced between opposing difficulties; to play with any symbol of worship without
actually worshipping it; to prostrate himself sincerely at many shrines, and yet with a half
smile on his lips. He cannot be a rhetorician in the ordinary sense of the word; he would have
been hopelessly out of place on the floor of the senate, stirring men's patriotism or sense
of right; for half his sympathy would always be with the Opposition. He could not have moved
the tears or the devotional ecstasies of a congregation, for he has too vivid a sense that
any and every dogma is but one side of an inevitable antinomy. Strong convictions are needed
for the ordinary controversial successes, and his favourite point of view is the centre from
which all convictions radiate and all look equally probable. But then, instead of mocking at
all, he sympathises with all, and expresses the one sentiment which may be extracted from their
collision--the sentiment of reverence blended with scepticism. It is a contradictory sentiment,
one may say, in a sense, but the essence of humour is to be contradictory. The language in
which he utters himself was determined by his omnivorous appetite for every quaint or significant
symbol to be discovered in the whole field of learning. With no prejudices, nothing comes amiss
to him; and the signature of some mysterious principle may be found in every object of art
or nature. Science in its infancy was still half mystic, and the facts which he gathered were
all tinged with the semi-mythical fancies of the earliest explorers of the secrets of nature.
In an old relic, recalling 'the drums and tramplings of three conquests,' in a queer annual,
or an ancient fragment of history might be the appropriate emblem, or something more than the
emblem of a truth equally impressive to the scientific and the poetical imagination. He would
have been happy by the midnight lamp in Milton's 'high lonely tower;' but his humour would
look at the romances which Milton loved rather with the eyes of Cervantes than of Milton. Their
tone of sentiment would be too strained and highflown; and he would prefer to read of the spirits
that are found

    'In fire, air, flood, or underground,'

or to try to penetrate the secret of

    'Every star that heaven doth show,
     And every herb that sips the dew,'

