The Family Chapter III. Education And Death Chapter IV. Slavery And The Free Laborer Chapter
V. Manners And Customs Chapter VI. Trades, Houses, And Land; Wages And Prices Chapter VII.
The Money-Lender And Banker Chapter VIII. The Government And The Army Chapter IX. The Law Chapter
X. Letter-Writing Chapter XI. Religion Appendix: Weights And Measures Index Footnotes

SERIES ADVERTISEMENT.

Series of Handbooks in Semitics

Edited By

James Alexander Craig

Professor of Semitic Languages and Literatures and Hellenistic Greek, University of Michigan

Recent scientific research has stimulated an increasing interest in the study of the Babylonians,
Assyrians, and allied Semitic races of ancient history among scholars, students, and the serious
reading public generally. It has provided us with a picture of a hitherto unknown civilization,
and a history of one of the great branches of the human family. The object of the present Series
is to state its results in popularly scientific form. Each work is complete in itself, and
the Series, taken as a whole, neglects no phase of the general subject. Each contributor is
a specialist in the subject assigned him, and has been chosen from the body of eminent Semitic
scholars both in Europe and America.

The Series will be composed of the following volumes:—

I. *Hebrews. History and Government.* By Professor J. F. McCurdy, University of Toronto, Canada.

II. *Hebrews. Ethics and Religion.* By Professor Archibald Duff, Airedale College, Bradford.

III. *The Sumerians. Language, History, and Religion.* By Professor Fritz Hommel, University
of Munich, Germany.

IV. *Babylonians and Assyrians. History to the Fall of Babylon.* By Professor Fritz Hommel,
University of Munich, Germany.

V. *Babylonians and Assyrians. Religion.* By Professor J. A. Craig, University of Michigan.

VI. *Babylonians and Assyrians. Life and Customs.* (With special reference to the Contract
Tablets and Letters.) By Professor A. H. Sayce, University of Oxford. Now Ready.

VII. *Babylonians and Assyrians. Excavations and Account of Decipherment of Inscriptions.*
By Professor A. V. Hilprecht, University of Pennsylvania.

VIII. *Arabia. Discoveries in, and History and Religion until Mohammed.* By Dr. Eduard Glazer,
University of Munich, Germany.

IX. *Development of Islamic Theology, Jurisprudence, and Theory of the State.* By Professor
D. B. MacDonald, Hartford Theological Seminary.

In addition to the above the following volumes are to be included in the Series, and others
may be added from time to time:—

X. *Phœnicia. History and Government, including Colonies, Trade, and Religion.*

XI. *Palestine and Syria. Important Discoveries in Recent Years.*

XII. *Arabic Literature and Science Since Mohammed.*

XIII. *The Influence of Semitic Art and Mythology on Western Nations.*

EDITOR’S PREFACE

Semitic studies, both linguistically and archæologically, have advanced by rapid strides during
the last two decades. Fresh light has fallen upon the literary, scientific, theological, mercantile,
and other achievements of this great branch of the human family. What these peoples thought
and achieved has a very direct bearing upon some of the problems that lie nearest to the hearts
of a large portion of the intelligent peoples of Christendom to-day. Classical studies no longer
enjoy a monopoly of attention in the curricula of our colleges and universities. It is, in
fact, more and more plainly perceived by scholars that among the early peoples who have contributed
to the ideas inwrought into our present civilization there is none to whom we owe a greater
debt than we do to the Semitic family. Apart from the genetic relation which the thought of
these peoples bears to the Christianity of the past and present, a study of their achievements
in general has become a matter of general human interest. It is here that we find the earliest
beginnings of civilization historically known to us—here that early religious ideas, social
customs and manners, political organizations, the beginnings of art and architecture, the rise
and growth of mythological ideas that have endured and spread to western nations, can be seen
in their earliest stages, and here alone the information is supplied which enables us to follow
them most successfully in their development.

The object of this series is to present, in brief and compact form, a knowledge of the more
important facts in the history of this family in a way that will be serviceable to students
in colleges, universities, and theological seminaries, to the clergy, and to intelligent lay
readers.

It has been the good fortune of the Editor and Publishers to secure the interest and co-operation
of scholars who are fitted by their special knowledge of the subjects entrusted to them. Works
written on Semitic subjects by those whose knowledge is gained from other than the original
sources are sure to be defective in many ways. It is only the specialist whose knowledge enables
him to take a comprehensive view of the entire field in which he labors who is able to gain
the perspective necessary for the production of a general work which will set forth prominently,
and in their proper relations, the salient and most interesting facts.

Each contributor to the Series presents his contribution subject to no change by the Editor.
In cases where it may be deemed of sufficient importance to notice a divergent view this will
be done in a foot-note. The authors, however, will aim to make their several contributions
consistent with the latest discoveries.

James Alexander Craig.

University of Michigan,

September, 1899.

CHAPTER I. BABYLONIA AND ITS INHABITANTS

Babylonia was the gathering-place of the nations. Berossus, the Chaldean historian, tells us
that after the creation it was peopled by a mixture of races, and we read in the book of Genesis
that Babel, or Babylon, was the first home of the manifold languages of mankind. The country
for the most part had been won from the sea; it was the gift of the two great rivers, Euphrates
and Tigris, which once flowed separately into the Persian Gulf. Its first settlers must have
established themselves on the desert plateau which fringes the Babylonian plain rather than
in the plain itself.

The plain is formed of the silt deposited each year by the rivers that flow through it. It
is, in fact, as much a delta as Northern Egypt, and is correspondingly fertile. Materials exist
for determining approximately the rate at which this delta has been formed. The waters of the
Persian Gulf are continually receding from the shore, and Ainsworth(1) calculates that about
ninety feet of land are added annually to the coast-line. But the rate of deposit seems to
have been somewhat more rapid in the past. At all events, Mohammerah, which in 1835 was forty-seven
miles distant from the Gulf, stands on the site of Spasinus Charax, which, in the time of Alexander
the Great, was not quite a mile from the sea. In 2,160 years, therefore, no less than forty-six
miles of land have been formed at the head of the Persian Gulf, or nearly one hundred and fifteen
feet each year.

The deposit of soil, however, may not have been so rapid in the flourishing days of Babylonian
history, when the canals were carefully attended to and the irrigation of the country kept
under control. It is safer, therefore, to assume for the period preceding the rise of the Macedonian
Empire a rate of deposit of not more than one hundred feet each year. The seaport of primitive
Chaldea was Eridu, not far from Ur, and as the mounds of Abu-Shahrein or Nowâwis, which now
mark its site, are nearly one hundred and thirty miles from the present line of coast, we must
go back as far as 6500 B.C. for the foundation of the town. “Ur of the Chaldees,” as it is
called in the Book of Genesis, was some thirty miles to the north, and on the same side of
the Euphrates; the ruins of its great temple of the Moon-god are now known by the name of Muqayyar
or Mugheir. It must have been founded on the sandy plateau of the Arabian desert at a time
when the plain enclosed between the Tigris and the Euphrates was still too marshy for human
habitation. As the Moon-god of Ur was held to be the son of El-lil of Nippur, Dr. Peters is
doubtless right in believing that Ur was a colony of the latter city. Nippur is the modern
Niffer or Nuffar in the north of Babylonia, and recent excavations have shown that its temple
was the chief sanctuary and religious centre of the civilized eastern world in the earliest
epoch to which our records reach. Eridu, Ur, and Nippur seem to have been the three chief cities
of primeval Babylonia. As we shall see in a future chapter, Eridu and Nippur were the centres
from which the early culture and religion of the country were diffused. But there was an essential
difference between them. Ea, the god of Eridu, was a god of light and beneficence, who employed
his divine wisdom in healing the sick and restoring the dead to life. He had given man all
the elements of civilization; rising each morning out of his palace under the waters of the
deep, he taught them the arts and sciences, the industries and manners, of civilized life.
El-lil of Nippur, on the contrary, was the lord of the underworld; magical spells and incantations
were his gifts to mankind, and his kingdom was over the dead rather than the living. The culture
which emanated from Eridu and Nippur was thus of a wholly different kind. Is it possible that
the settlers in the two cities were of a different race?

Of this there is no proof. Such evidence as we have tells against it. And the contrast in the
character of the cultures of Eridu and Nippur can be explained in another way. Eridu was a
seaport; its population was in contact with other races, and its ships traded with the coasts
of Arabia. The myth which told how Ea or Oannes had brought the elements of civilization to
his people expressly stated that he came from the waters of the Persian Gulf. The culture of
Eridu may thus have been due to foreign intercourse; Eridu was a city of merchants and sailors,
Nippur of sorcerer-priests.

Eridu and Nippur, however, alike owed their origin to a race which we will term Sumerian. Its
members spoke agglutinative dialects, and the primitive civilization of Babylonia was their
creation. They were the founders of its great cities and temples, the inventors of the pictorial
system of writing out of which the cuneiform characters subsequently developed, the instructors
in culture of their Semitic neighbors. How deep and far-reaching was their influence may be
gathered from the fact that the earliest civilization of Western Asia finds its expression
in the Sumerian language and script. To whatever race the writer might belong he clothed his
thoughts in the words and characters of the Sumerian people. The fact makes it often difficult
for us to determine whether the princes of primitive Chaldea whose inscriptions have come down
to us were Semites or not. Their very names assume Sumerian forms.

It was from the Sumerian that the Semite learnt to live in cities. His own word for “city”
was âlu, the Hebrew ’ohel “a tent,” which is still used in the Old Testament in the sense of
“home;” the Hebrew ’îr is the Sumerian eri. Ekallu, the Hebrew hêkal, “a palace,” comes from
the Sumerian ê-gal or “great house;” the first palaces seen by the Semitic nomad must have
been those of the Chaldean towns.

But a time came when the Semite had absorbed the culture of his Sumerian teachers and had established
kingdoms of his own in the future Babylonia. For untold centuries he lived in intermixture
with the older population of the country, and the two races acted and re-acted on each other.
A mixed people was the result, with a mixed language and a mixed form of religion. The Babylonia
of later days was, in fact, a country whose inhabitants and language were as composite as the
inhabitants and language of modern England. Members of the same family had names derived from
different families of speech, and while the old Sumerian borrowed Semitic words which it spelt
phonetically, the Semitic lexicon was enriched with loan-words from Sumerian which were treated
like Semitic roots.

The Semite improved upon the heritage he had received. Even the system of writing was enlarged
and modified. Its completion and arrangement are due to Semitic scribes who had been trained
in Sumerian literature. It was probably at the court of Sargon of Akkad that what we may term
the final revision of the syllabary took place. At all events, after his epoch the cuneiform
script underwent but little real change.

Sargon was the founder of the first Semitic empire in Asia. His date was placed by the native
historians as far back as 3800 B.C., and as they had an abundance of materials at their disposal
for settling it, which we do not possess, we have no reason to dispute it. Moreover, it harmonizes
with the length of time required for bringing about that fusion of Sumerian and Semitic elements
which created the Babylonia we know. The power of Sargon extended to the Mediterranean, even,
it may be, to the island of Cyprus. His conquests were continued by his son and successor Naram-Sin,
who made his way to the precious copper-mines of the Sinaitic peninsula, the chief source of
the copper that was used so largely in the work of his day. “The land of the Amorites,” as
Syria was called, was already a Babylonian province, and he could therefore march in safety
toward the south through the desert region which was known as Melukhkha.

How long the empire of Sargon lasted we do not know. But it spread Babylonian culture to the
distant west and brought it to the very border of Egypt. It was, too, a culture which had become
essentially Semitic; the Sumerian elements on which it was based had been thoroughly transformed.
What Babylonian civilization was in the latest days of Chaldean history, that it already was,
to all intents and purposes, in the age of Sargon. The Sumerian and the Semite had become one
people.

But the mixture of nationalities in Babylonia was not yet complete. Colonies of Amorites, from
Canaan, settled in it for the purposes of trade; wandering tribes of Semites, from Northern
Arabia, pastured their cattle on the banks of its rivers, and in the Abrahamic age a line of
kings from Southern Arabia made themselves masters of the country, and established their capital
at Babylon. Their names resembled those of Southern Arabia on the one hand, of the Hebrews
on the other, and the Babylonian scribes were forced to give translations of them in their
own language.

But all these incomers belonged to the Semitic race, and the languages they spoke were but
varieties of the same family of speech. It is probable that such was the case with the Kaldâ,
who lived in the marshes at the mouth of the Euphrates, and from whom classical geography has
derived the name of Chaldean. The extension of the name to the whole population of Babylonia
was due to the reign of the Kaldâ prince, Merodach-baladan, at Babylon. For years he represented
Babylonian freedom in its struggle with Assyria, and his “Chaldean” subjects became an integral
part of the population. Perhaps, too, the theory is right which makes Nebuchadnezzar of Kaldâ
descent. If so, there is a good reason why the inhabitants of Babylonia should have become
“Chaldeans” in the classical age.

Of wholly different origin were the Kassites, mountaineers from the east of Elam, who conquered
Babylonia, and founded a dynasty of kings which lasted for several centuries. They also gave
their name to the population of the country, and, in the Tel-el-Amarna tablets, accordingly,
the natives of Babylonia are known as “Kassi.” Sennacherib found their kinsfolk in the Elamite
mountains, and here they still lived in the age of the Greek writers. Strabo calls them Kosseans,
and it seems probable that they are the same as the Kissians, after whom the whole of Elam
was named. At any rate the Kassites were neither Sumerians nor Semites; and their language,
of which several words have been preserved, has no known connections. But they left their mark
upon the Babylonian people, and several family names were borrowed from them.

The Babylonian was thus a compound of Sumerian, Semitic, and Kassite elements. They all went
to form the culture which we term Babylonian, and which left such enduring traces on Western
Asia and the world. Mixed races are invariably the best, and the Babylonians were no exception
to the rule. We have only to compare them with their neighbors, the more purely blooded Semitic
Assyrians, to assure ourselves of the fact. The culture of Assyria was but an imitation and
reflection of that of Babylonia—there was nothing original about it. The Assyrian excelled
only in the ferocities of war, not in the arts of peace. Even the gods of Assyria had migrated
from the southern kingdom.

The dual character of Babylonian civilization must never be forgotten. It serves to explain
a good deal that would otherwise be puzzling in the religious and social life of the people.
But the social life was also influenced and conditioned by the peculiar nature of the country
in which the people lived. It was an alluvial plain, sloping toward the sea, and inundated
by the overflow of the two great rivers which ran through it. When cultivated it was exceedingly
fertile; but cultivation implied a careful regulation of the overflow, as well as a constant
attention to the embankments which kept out the waters, or to the canals which drained and
watered the soil.

The inhabitants were therefore, necessarily, agriculturists. They were also irrigators and
engineers, compelled to study how best to regulate the supply of water, to turn the pestiferous
marsh into a fruitful field, and to confine the rivers and canals within their channels. Agriculture
and engineering thus had their natural home in Babylonia, and originated in the character of
the country itself.

The neighborhood of the sea and the two great waterways which flanked the Babylonian plain
further gave an impetus to trade. The one opened the road to the spice-bearing coasts of Southern
Arabia and the more distant shores of Egypt; the other led to the highlands of Western Asia.
From the first the Babylonians were merchants and sailors as well as agriculturists. The “cry”
of the Chaldeans was “in their ships.” The seaport of Eridu was one of the earliest of Babylonian
cities; and a special form of boat took its name from the more inland town of Ur. While the
population of the country devoted itself to agriculture, the towns grew wealthy by the help
of trade.

Their architecture was dependent on the nature of the country. In the alluvial plain no stone
was procurable; clay, on the other hand, was everywhere. All buildings, accordingly, were constructed
of clay bricks, baked in the sun, and bonded together with cement of the same material; their
roofs were of wood, supported, not unfrequently, by the stems of the palm. The palm stems,
in time, became pillars, and Babylonia was thus the birthplace of columnar architecture. It
was also the birthplace of decorated walls. It was needful to cover the sun-dried bricks with
plaster, for the sake both of their preservation and of appearance. This was the origin of
the stucco with which the walls were overlaid, and which came in time to be ornamented with
painting. Ezekiel refers to the figures, portrayed in vermilion, which adorned the walls of
the houses of the rich.

The want of stone and the abundance of clay had another and unique influence upon Babylonian
culture. It led to the invention of the written clay tablet, which has had such momentous results
for the civilization of the whole Eastern world. The pictures with which Babylonian writing
began were soon discarded for the conventional forms, which could so easily be impressed by
the stylus upon the soft clay. It is probable that the use of the clay as a writing material
was first suggested by the need there was in matters of business that the contracting parties
should record their names. The absence of stone made every pebble valuable, and pebbles were
accordingly cut into cylindrical forms and engraved with signs. When the cylinder was rolled
over a lump of wet clay, its impress remained forever. The signs became cuneiform characters,
and the Babylonian wrote them upon clay instead of stone.

The seal-cylinder and the use of clay as a writing material must consequently be traced to
the peculiar character of the country in which the Babylonian lived. To the same origin must
be ascribed his mode of burial. The tomb was built of bricks; there were no rocky cliffs in
which to excavate it, and the marshy soil made a grave unsanitary. It was doubtless sanitary
reasons alone that caused wood to be heaped about the tomb after an interment and set on fire
so that all within it was partially consumed. The narrow limits of the Babylonian plain obliged
the cemetery of the dead to adjoin the houses of the living, and cremation, whether partial
or complete, became a necessity.

Even the cosmogony of the Babylonians has been influenced by their surroundings. The world,
it was believed, originated in a watery chaos, like that in which the first settlers had found
the Babylonian plain. The earth not only rested on the waters, but the waters themselves, dark
and unregulated, were the beginning of all things. This cosmological conception was carried
with the rest of Babylonian culture to the West, and after passing through Canaan found its
way into Greek philosophy. In the Book of Genesis we read that “darkness was on the face of
the deep” before the creative spirit of God brooded over it, and Thales, the first of Greek
philosophers, taught that water was the principle out of which all things have come.

The fertility of the Babylonian soil was remarkable. Grain, it was said, gave a return of two
hundred for one, sometimes of three hundred for one. Herodotus, or the authority he quotes,
grows enthusiastic upon the subject. “The leaf of the wheat and barley,” he says, “is as much
as three inches in width, and the stalks of the millet and sesamum are so tall that no one
who has never been in that country would believe me were I to mention their height.” In fact,
naturalists tell us that Babylonia was the primitive home of the cultivated cereals, wheat
and probably barley, and that from the banks of the Euphrates they must have been disseminated
throughout the civilized world. Wheat, indeed, has been found growing wild in our own days
in the neighborhood of Hit.

The dissemination of wheat goes back to a remote epoch. Like barley, it is met with in the
tombs of that prehistoric population of Egypt which still lived in the neolithic age and whose
later remains are coeval with the first Pharaonic epoch. The fact throws light on the antiquity
of the intercourse which existed between the Euphrates and the Nile, and bears testimony to
the influence already exerted on the Western world by the culture of Babylonia. It happened to be
a deliciously cool evening, and the chattering of numerous parrots as well as the twittering
songs of other birds--less gorgeous, perhaps, but more musical than they--refreshed our ears as the
glories of the landscape did our eyes. While we were gazing dreamily before us in silent enjoyment,
Jack suddenly interrupted our meditations by exclaiming--

"Hist!
look yonder!"

He pointed as he spoke to a distant part of the plain on which the forest closely pressed.

"A zebra!" cried I, with delight; for besides the feeling of pleasure at seeing this splendid
creature, I entertained a hope that we might shoot him and procure a steak for supper, of which
at that time we stood much in need.

"I'm too tired to stalk it now," said Peterkin, with an air of chagrin.--"Are you up to it, Jack?"

"Quite;
but I fear he's an animal that's very difficult to stalk in such
an open country.--What say you, Mak?"

"Hims no be cotched dis yer night, massa; hims too far away an' too wide 'wake."

"What say you to a long shot, Peterkin? Your rifle is sighted for four hundred yards, and he seems to
be little more than six hundred off."

"I'll try," said our friend, going down on one knee and adjusting
the sight of his piece.

Taking a long, steady aim, he fired, and in another instant the zebra lay dead on the plain.
I need hardly add that our amazement was excessive. Even Peterkin himself could scarcely believe his
eyes. Had his rifle been sighted for such a distance, the shot, although a splendid one, would
not have amazed us so much, because we knew that our friend's aim was deadly; but as he had to
elevate the muzzle above the object fired at and guess the amount of elevation, the shot was indeed
wonderful. It was a long time before our guide could move, but when he did recover himself he
danced and shouted like a madman with delight, and then, setting
off with a bound, sped across the plain like a deer.

"Come along," cried Jack with a laugh--"let's follow; for Mak looked so rabid when he went off that
I believe he'll eat the beast raw before we can claim our share, if we don't look sharp."

We
all of us set off at a smart trot, and soon came to the spot where our prize lay. It was a splendid
creature, and in prime condition. After examining it carefully, and descanting on the beauty
of its striped skin, I sat down beside it and pulled out my note-book, while my comrades entered
the forest to search for a suitable place on which to encamp, and to kindle a fire. A spot was
quickly found, and I had scarcely finished making notes when they returned to carry the zebra
into the encampment. We accomplished this with some difficulty, and
laid it beside the fire.

Then cutting four large steaks from its flanks we proceeded to sup, after which we made our arrangements
for spending the night there. We little knew the startling surprise that was in store for us
that night.

As the forest in that place happened to be swarming with wild animals of every kind, we deemed it prudent
to set a watch as well as to keep up a blazing fire. Jack and I and the negro kept watch by
turns; Peterkin, being still sufficiently an invalid to claim exemption from laborious duties,
was permitted to rest undisturbed.

About midnight I aroused Jack, and having made him sit up, in order to show that he was thoroughly
awake, I lay down and went to sleep.

How long I slept I cannot tell, but I was suddenly awakened by one of the most tremendous roars
I ever heard. It was so chose to me that, in the confusion of my sleepy brain, it seemed to be far more
terrible than that even of the gorilla. I was mistaken in this, however, and no doubt my semi-somnolent
condition tended to increase its awfulness.

Springing into a sitting posture, and by an involuntary impulse reaching out my hand for my
gun which lay close to me, I beheld a sight that was calculated to appal the stoutest heart.
A lion of the largest size was in the very act of springing over the bushes and alighting on
the zebra, which, as I have said, lay on the other side of the fire and not four yards off from
us. As the light glared in the brute's eyes, and, as it were, sparkled in gleams on its shaggy
mane, which streamed out under the force of its majestic bound, it seemed to my bewildered gaze as
though the animal were in the air almost above my head, and that he must inevitably alight upon
myself.

This, at least, is the impression left upon my mind now that I look back upon that terrific scene.
But there was no time for thought. The roar was uttered, the bound was made, and the lion alighted on
the carcass of the zebra almost in one and the same moment. I freely confess that my heart quailed
within me. Yet that did not prevent my snatching up my gun; but before I had time to cock it the crashing
report of Jack's elephant rifle almost split the drum of my ear, and I beheld the lion drop as
if it had been a stone.

It lay without motion, completely dead, and we found, on examination, that the ball had smashed
in the centre of its forehead and completely penetrated its brain.

Some time elapsed before we could find words to express our feelings. Our guide, who had so
completely enveloped his head and shoulders in grass when he lay down to sleep that he was the
last to spring up, looked at the huge carcass of the lion with an expression of utter bewilderment.

"What
a magnificent fellow! And what a splendid shot!" exclaimed Peterkin at last. "Why, Jack, I
don't believe there's a finer lion in Africa. It's lucky, though, that you were on the qui vive."

"Yes,"
said I; "had it not been for you we might have been all killed by
this time."

"No fear o' dat," chimed in our guide, as he sat down on the lion's shoulder, and began to stroke
its mane; "hims was want him's supper off de zebra, ho! ho! Hims got him's supper off a bullet!"

"'Tis
well that he has," observed Jack, as he reloaded his rifle. "To say truth, comrades, I scarcely
deserve credit for being guardian of the camp, for I'm ashamed to say that I was sound asleep
at the moment the lion roared. How I ever managed to take so quick and so good an aim is more than
I can tell. Luckily my rifle was handy, and I had fallen asleep in
a sitting posture.

Had it been otherwise, I could scarcely have been in time to prevent the brute springing on us, had
he felt so disposed."

Here was now another subject for my note-book, so I sat down, and began a minute inspection
of the noble-looking animal, while my comrades, heaping fresh logs on the fire, sat down in
front of it, and for upwards of an hour, "fought their battles o'er again."

It was a matter of deep regret to us all that we could not afford to carry away with us the skin
of this lion as a memorial; but circumstanced as we then were, that was out of the question, so
we contented ourselves with extracting his largest teeth and all his claws, which we still
preserve in our museum as trophies of the adventure.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

WE VISIT A NATURAL MENAGERIE, SEE WONDERFUL SIGHTS, AND MEET WITH STRANGE ADVENTURES.

We observed, on this journey, that the elephants which we met with
in our farthest north point were considerably smaller than those farther
to the south, yet though smaller animals, their tusks were much larger
then those of the south.

The weight of those tusks varied from twenty to fifty pounds, and I saw one that was actually
upwards of one hundred pounds in weight--equal, in fact, to the weight of a big boy or a little
man. Such tusks, however, were rare.

At nights, when we encamped near to a river or pool of water, we saw immense numbers of elephants
come down to drink and enjoy themselves. They seemed, in fact, to be intoxicated with delight, if
not with water; for they screamed with joy, and filling their trunks with water, spurted it over themselves
and each other in copious showers. Of course, we never disturbed them on such occasions, for we
came to the conclusion that it would be the height of barbarity and selfishness to spoil the pleasure
of so many creatures merely for the sake of a shot.

Frequently we were wont to go after our supper to one of those ponds, when we chanced to be in
the immediate neighbourhood of one, and lying concealed among the bushes, watch by the light
of the moon the strange habits and proceedings of the wild creatures
that came there to drink.

The hours thus passed were to me the most interesting by far that I spent in Africa. There
was something so romantic in the kind of scenery, in the dim mysterious light, and in the grand
troops of wild creatures that came there in all the pith and fire of untamed freedom to drink.
It was like visiting a natural menagerie on the most magnificent scale; for in places where
water is scarce any pool that may exist is the scene of constant and ever-changing visits during
the entire night.

In fact, I used to find it almost impossible to tear myself away, although I knew that repose
was absolutely needful, in order to enable me to continue the journey on the succeeding day, and
I am quite certain that had not Peterkin and Jack often dragged me off in a jocular way by main
force, I should have remained there all night, and have fallen asleep
probably in my ambush.

One night of this kind that we passed I shall never forget. It was altogether a remarkable and
tremendously exciting night; and as it is a good type of the style of night entertainment to
be found in that wild country, I shall describe it.

It happened on a Saturday night. We were then travelling through a rather dry district, and
had gone a whole day without tasting water. As evening approached we came, to our satisfaction,
to a large pond of pretty good water, into which we ran knee-deep,
and filling our caps with water, drank long and repeated draughts.

Then we went into a piece of jungle about a quarter of a mile distant, and made our encampment,
intending to rest there during the whole of the Sabbath.

I may mention here that it was our usual custom to rest on the Sabbath days. This we did because we
thought it right, and we came ere long to know that it was absolutely needful; for on this journey
southward we all agreed that as life and death might depend on the speed with which we travelled,
we were quite justified in continuing our journey on the Sabbath. But we found ourselves at
the end of the second week so terribly knocked up that we agreed to devote the whole of the next
Sabbath to repose.

This we did accordingly, and found the utmost benefit from it; and we could not avoid remarking,
in reference to this on the care and tenderness of our heavenly Father, who has so arranged
that obedience to His command should not only bring a peculiar blessing to our souls, but, so
to speak, a natural and inevitable advantage to our bodies. These reflections seemed to me to
throw some light on the passage, "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath."
But as this is not the place for theological disquisition, I shall not refer further to that
subject.

Not having, then, to travel on the following day, we made up our minds to spend an hour or
two in a place of concealment near the margin of this pond; and I secretly resolved that I
would spend the whole night there with my note-book (for the moon, we knew, would be bright),
and make a soft pillow of leaves on which I might drop and go to sleep when my eyes refused
any longer to keep open.

The moon had just begun to rise when we finished our suppers and prepared to go to our post of
observation. We took our rifles with us of course, for although we did not intend to shoot,
having more than sufficient food already in camp, we could not tell but that at any moment those
weapons might be required for the defence of our lives. Makarooroo had been too long accustomed
to see wild animals to understand the pleasure we enjoyed in merely
staring at them, so he was left in charge of our camp.

"Now, then," said Peterkin, as we left the encampment, "hurrah, for the menagerie!"

"You may well call it that," said Jack, "for there's no lack of variety."

"Are we to shoot?" inquired Peterkin.

"Better not, I think. We don't require meat, and there is no use in murdering the poor things.
What a splendid scene!"

We halted to enjoy the view for a few seconds.

The forest out of which we had emerged bordered an extensive plain, which was dotted here and
there with scattered groups of trees, which gave to the country an exceedingly rich aspect.
In the midst of these the pond lay glittering in the soft moonlight like a sheet of silver. It
was surrounded on three sides by low bushes and a few trees. On the side next to us it was open
and fully exposed to view. The moonlight was sufficiently bright to render every object distinctly
visible, yet not so bright as to destroy the pleasant feeling of mysterious solemnity that pervaded
the whole scene. It was wonderfully beautiful. I felt almost as if
I had reached a new world.

Continuing our walk we quickly gained the bushes that fringed the margin of the pool, which
was nowhere more than thirty yards broad, and on our arrival heard the hoofs of several animals
that we had scared away clattering on the ground as they retreated.

"There they go already," cried Jack; "now let us look for a hillock of some kind on which to
take up our position."

"We shall not have to look far," said I, "for here seems a suitable spot ready at our hand."

"Your
eyes are sharp to-night, Ralph," observed Peterkin; "the place is splendid, so let's to work."

Laying
down our rifles, we drew our hunting-knives, and began to cut down some of the underwood on
the top of a small hillock that rose a little above the surrounding bushes, and commanded a clear view
of the entire circumference of the pond. We selected this spot for the double reason that it
was a good point of observation and a safe retreat, as animals coming to the pond to drink,
from whatever quarter they might arrive, would never think of ascending a hillock covered
with bushes, if they could pass round it.

Having cleared a space sufficiently large to hold us--leaving, however, a thin screen of shrubs
in front through which we intended to peep--we strewed the ground with leaves, and lay down
to watch with our loaded rifles close beside us. We felt certain of seeing a good many animals,
for even during the process of preparing our unlace of retreat several arrived, and were scared
away by the noise we made.

Presently we heard footsteps approaching.

"There's something," whispered Peterkin.

"Ay," returned Jack. "What I like about this sort o' thing is your uncertainty as to what may
turn up. It's like deep-sea fishing. Hist! look out."

The steps were rapid. Sometimes they clattered over what appeared to be pebbly ground, then they
became muffled as the animal crossed a grassy spot; at last it trotted
out of the shade of the bushes directly opposite to us into the moonlight,
and showed itself to be a beautiful little antelope of the long-horned
kind, with a little fawn by its side.

The two looked timidly round for a few seconds, and snuffed the air as if they feared concealed
enemies, and then, trotting into the water, slaked their thirst together. I felt as great pleasure
in seeing them take a long, satisfactory draught as if I had been swallowing it myself, and
hoped they would continue there for some time; but they had barely finished when the rapid gallop
of several animals was heard, and scared them away instantly.

The newcomers were evidently heavy brutes, for their tread was loud
and quite distinct, as compared with the steps of the antelopes.

A few seconds sufficed to disclose them to our expectant eyes. A large herd of giraffes trotted to
the water's edge and began to drink. It was a splendid sight to behold these graceful creatures
stooping to drink, and then raising their heads haughtily to a towering height as they looked
about from side to side. In the course of a couple of hours we saw elands, springboks, gnus, leopards,
and an immense variety of wild creatures, some of which fawned on and played with each other,
while others fought and bellowed until the woods resounded with the din.

While we were silently enjoying the sight, and I attempting to make a few entries in my note-book,
our attention was attracted to a cracking of the branches close to
the right side of our hillock.

"Look out!" whispered Jack; but the
warning was scarcely needed, for we instinctively seized our rifles.
A moment after our hearts leaped violently as we heard a crashing
step that betokened the approach of some huge creature.

"Are we safe
here?" I whispered to Jack.

"Safe enough if we keep still. But we
shall have to cut and run if an elephant chances to get sight of us."

I
confess that at that moment I felt uneasy. The hillock on the summit
of which we lay was only a place of comparative safety, because no
animal was likely to ascend an elevated spot without an object in
view, and as the purpose of all the nocturnal visitors to that pond
was the procuring of water, we did not think it probable that any
of them would approach unpleasantly near to our citadel; but if any
wild beast should take a fancy to do so, there was nothing to prevent
him, and the slight screen of bushes by which we were surrounded would
certainly have been no obstacle in the way.

A hunter in the African
wilds, however, has not much time to think. Danger is usually upon
him in a moment. We had barely time to full-cock our rifles when the
bushes near us were trodden down, and a huge black rhinoceros sauntered
slowly up to us. So near was he that we could have sprung out from
our hiding-place and have caught hold of him, had we chosen to do
so.

This enormous unwieldy monster seemed to me so large that he
resembled an elephant on short legs, and in the dim, mysterious moonlight
I could almost fancy him to be one of those dreadful monsters of the
antediluvian world of which we read so much in these days of geological
research. I held my breath and glanced at my comrades. They lay perfectly
motionless, with their eyes fixed on the animal, which hesitated on
approaching our hillock. My blood almost stagnated in my veins. I
thought that he must have observed us or smelt us, and was about to
charge. He was only undecided as to which side of the hillock he should
pass by on his way to the pond. Turning to the left, he went down
to the water with a heavy, rolling gait, crushing the shrubs under
his ponderous feet in a way that filled me with an exalted idea of
his tremendous power.

I breathed freely again, and felt as if a mighty
load had been lifted off me. From the suppressed sighs vented by my
comrades, I judge that they also had experienced somewhat similar
relief. We had not, however, had time to utter a whisper before our
ears were assailed by the most tremendous noise that we had yet heard.
It came from the opposite side of the pool, as if a great torrent
were rushing towards us. Presently a black billow seemed to burst
out of the jungle and roll down the sloping bank of the pond.

"Elephants!"
exclaimed Jack.

"Impossible," said I; "they must be buffaloes."

At
that instant they emerged into the full blaze of the moon, and showed
themselves to be a herd of full-grown elephants, with a number of
calves. There could not have been fewer than one hundred on the margin
of the pond; but from the closeness of their ranks and their incessant
movements I found it impossible to count their numbers accurately.
This magnificent army began to drink and throw water about, waving
their trunks and trumpeting shrilly at the same time with the utmost
delight. The young ones especially seemed enjoy themselves immensely,
and I observed that their mothers were very attentive to them, caressing
them with their trunks and otherwise showing great fondness for their
offspring.

"I say," whispered Peterkin, "what a regiment of cavalry
these fellows would make, mounted by gorillas armed with scythe-blades
for swords and Highland claymores for dirks!"

"Ay, and cannon-revolvers
in their pockets!" added Jack. "But, look-- that hideous old rhinoceros.
He has been standing there for the last two minutes like a rock, staring
intently across the water at the elephants."

"Hush!" said I. "Whisper
softly. He may hear us."

"There goes something else on our side,"
whispered Peterkin, pointing to the right of our hillock. "Don't you
see it? There, against the--I do believe it's another giraffe!"

"So
it is! Keep still. His ears are sharp," muttered Jack, examining the
lock of his rifle.

"Come, come!" said I; "no shooting, Jack. You
know we came to see, not to shoot."

"Very true; but it's not every
day one gets such a close shot at a giraffe. I must procure a specimen
for you, Ralph."

Jack smiled as he said this, and raised his rifle.
Peterkin at the same moment quietly raised his, saying, "If that's
your game, my boy, then here goes at the rhinoceros. Don't hurry your
aim; we've lots of time."

As I waited for the reports with breathless
attention, I was much struck at that moment by the singularity of
the circumstances in which we were placed. The parents had, however, the power of selling their
children before they came of age, and where the parents were dead, the same power was possessed—at
any rate in Assyria—by a brother in the case of a sister. Doubtless the power was restricted
by law, but the instances in which we hear of its being exercised are so rare that we do not
know what these restrictions were.

Nor do we know the reasons which were considered sufficient to justify divorce. The language
of the early laws would seem to imply that originally it was quite enough to pronounce the
words: “Thou art not my wife,” “Thou art not my husband.” But the loss of the wife’s dowry
and the penalties attached to divorce must have tended to check it on the part of the husband,
except in exceptional circumstances. Perhaps want of children was held to be a sufficient pretext
for it; certainly adultery must have been so. Another cause of divorce was a legal one: a second
marriage invalidated the first, if the first wife was still alive.

This is a very astonishing fact in a country where polygamy was allowed. It proves that polygamy
was greatly restricted in practice, and that the tendency of the law was to forbid it altogether.
Among the multitudinous contracts of the second Babylonian empire it is difficult to find any
which show that a man had two legitimate wives living at one and the same time. The high position
of the mother of the family, her independence and commercial equality with her husband, were
all against it. It is only where the wife is a bought slave that polygamy can flourish.

In early times, it is true, the rich Babylonian indulged in the possession of more than one
wife. Some contracts of the age of Khammurabi, translated by Mr. Pinches, are particularly
instructive in this respect. We hear in them of a certain Arad-Samas, who first married a lady
called Taram-Sagila and then her adopted sister Iltani. Iltani, it is ordained, shall be under
the orders of her sister, shall prepare her food, carry her chair to the Temple of Merodach,
and obey her in all things. Not a word is said about the divorce of the first wife; it is taken
for granted that she is to remain at the head of the household, the younger and second wife
acting as her servant. The position of Iltani, in fact, is not very different from that of
a slave, and it is significant that neither wife brought a dowry with her.

As we have seen in the case of Dagil-ili, the law and custom of later Babylonia display a complete
change of feeling and practice. Marriage with a second wife came to involve, as a matter of
course, divorce from the first, even where there had been a mésalliance and the first wife
had been without a dowry. The woman had thus gained a second victory; the rule that bound her
in regard to marriage was now applied to the man. The privilege of marrying two husbands at
once had been denied her; usage was now denying a similar privilege to him. It was only when
the first wife was dead or divorced that a second could be taken; the wife might have a successor,
but not a rival.

The divorced wife was regarded by the law as a widow, and could therefore marry again. A deed
of divorce, dated in the reign of the father of Khammurabi, expressly grants her this right.
To the remarriage of the widow there was naturally no bar; but the children by the two marriages
belonged to different families, and were kept carefully distinct. This is illustrated by a
curious deed drawn up at Babylon, in the ninth year of Nabonidos. A certain Bel-Katsir, who
had been adopted by his uncle, married a widow who already had a son. She bore him no children,
however, and he accordingly asked the permission of his uncle to adopt his step-son, thereby
making him the heir of his uncle’s property. To this the uncle objected, and it was finally
agreed that if Bel-Katsir had no child he was to adopt his own brother, and so secure the succession
of the estate to a member of his own family. The property of the mother probably went to her
son; but she had the power to leave it as she liked. This may be gathered from a will, dated
in the seventh year of Cyrus, in which a son leaves property to his father in case of death,
which had come to him from his maternal grandfather and grandmother. The property had been
specially bequeathed to him, doubtless after his mother’s death, the grandmother passing over
the rest of her descendants in his favor.

The marriage ceremony was partly religious, partly civil; no marriage was legally valid without
a contract duly attested and signed. The Babylonians carried their business habits into all
departments of life, and in the eyes of the law matrimony was a legal contract, the forms of
which had to be duly observed. In the later days of Babylonian history the legal and civil
aspect of the rite seems to have been exclusively considered, but at an earlier period it required
also the sanction of religion; and Mr. Pinches has published a fragmentary Sumerian text in
which the religious ceremony is described. Those who officiated at it, first placed their hands
and feet against the hands and feet of the bridegroom, then the bride laid her neck by the
side of his, and he was made to say to her: “Silver and gold shall fill thy lap; thou art my
wife; I am thy husband. Like the fruit of an orchard will I give thee offspring.” Next came
the ceremony of binding the sandals on the feet of the newly wedded pair and of handing them
the latchet wherewith the shoes should be tied, as well as “a purse of silver and gold.” The
purse perhaps symbolized the dowry, which was given by the father of the bride. In the time
of Nebuchadnezzar the ceremony was restricted to joining together the hands of the bride and
bridegroom.

Contact with the Assyrians and Babylonians in the Exilic period introduced the Babylonian conception
of the legal character of marriage among the Israelites, and, contrary to the older custom,
it became necessary that it should be attested by a written contract. Thus, Raguel, when he
gave his daughter “to be wife to Tobias,” “called Edna, his wife, and took paper and did write
an instrument of covenants, and sealed it” (Tobit vii. 14).

According to Herodotus, a gigantic system of public prostitution prevailed in Babylonia. Every
unmarried woman was compelled to remain in the sacred enclosure of Mylitta—by which Istar is
apparently meant—until some stranger had submitted to her embraces, while the sums derived
from the sale of their personal charms by the handsome and good-looking provided portions for
the ugly. Of all this there is not a trace in the mass of native documents which we now possess.
There were the devotees of Istar, certainly—the ukhâtu and kharimâtu—as well as public prostitutes,
who were under the protection of the law; but they formed a class apart, and had nothing to
do with the respectable women of the country. On the contrary, in the age of Khammurabi it
was customary to state in the marriage contracts that no stain whatever rested on the bride.
Thus we read in one of them: “Ana-Â-uzni is the daughter of Salimat. Salimat has given her
a dowry, and has offered her in marriage to Bel-sunu, the son of the artisan. Ana-Â-uzni is
pure; no one has anything against her.” The dowry, as we have seen, was paid by the near relations
of the wife, and where there was none, as in the case of the singing-woman married by Nebo-akhi-iddin,
there was no dowry at all. The dowries provided for the ugly by the prostitution of the rich
must be an invention of the Greeks.

Within what degree of relationship marriage was permitted is uncertain. A man could marry his
sister-in-law, as among the Israelites, and, in one instance, we hear of marriage with a niece.
In the time of Cambyses a brother marries his half-sister by the same father; but this was
probably an imitation of the Persian custom.

The children, as we have seen, whether boys or girls, inherited alike, subject to the provisions
of the parent’s will. The will seems to have been of Babylonian origin. Testamentary devolution
of property went back to an early period in a country in which the legal relations of trade
had been so fully developed. Trade implied private property and the idea of individual possession.
The estate belonging to a person was his absolutely, to deal with pretty much as he would.
He had the same right to alienate it as he had to increase it. In a commercial community there
could be no community of goods.

As far back, therefore, as our materials carry us, the unit in the Babylonian state is the
individual rather than the family. It is he with whom both the law and the government deal,
and the legal code of Babylonia is based upon the doctrine of individual responsibility. Private
ownership is the key-note of Babylonian social life.

But the whole of this social life was fenced about by a written law. No title was valid for
which a written document could not be produced, drawn up and attested in legal forms. The extensive
commercial transactions of the Babylonians made this necessary, and the commercial spirit dominated
Babylonian society. The scribe and the lawyer were needed at almost every juncture of life.

The invention of the will or documentary testament, followed naturally. The same legal powers
that were required to protect a man’s property during his lifetime were even more urgently
required when he was dead. The will was at first the title which gave the heir his father’s
estate. Gradually it developed, until at last it came to be an instrument by means of which
the testator retained control over his property even after his death. As an example of the
form which it usually assumed, we may take one which was drawn up in the seventh year of the
reign of Cyrus as King of Babylon (532 B.C.):

    Nebo-baladan, the son of Samas-palassar, the son of the priest of
    the Sun-god, has, of his own free-will, sealed all his estate,
    which he had inherited from Nebo-balasu-iqbi, the son of Nur-Ea,
    the son of the priest of the Sun-god, the father of his mother,
    and from Kabtâ, the mother of Assat-Belit, his grandmother,
    consisting of a piece of land, a house and the slaves or serfs
    attached to it, in accordance with the will (literally tablet)
    which his maternal grandfather, Nebo-balasu-iqbi, and his maternal
    grandmother, Kabtâ, had sealed and bequeathed to Nebo-baladan, the
    son of their daughter, and has bequeathed them for ever to
    Samas-palassar, the son of Samas-ina-esi-edher, the son of the
    priest of the Sun-god. As long as Nebo-baladan lives the piece of
    ground, the house, the slaves, and all the rest of his property
    shall continue in his own possession, according to the terms of
    this his will. Whoever shall attempt to change them, may Anu, Bel,
    and Ae curse him; may Nebo, the divine scribe of Ê-Saggil, cut off
    his days! This will has been sealed in the presence of Sula, son
    of Bania, son of Epes-ilu; of Bel-iddin, son of Bel-natsir, son of
    the priest of Gula; of Nebo-sum-yukin, son of Sula, son of Sigua;
    of Nebo-natsir, son of Ziria, son of Sumâti; … of Nebo-sum-lisir,
    son of Nebo-sum-iskun, son of the wine-merchant (?), and the
    scribe Samas-zir-yusabsi, son of Zariqu-iddin, son of the
    architect. (Written at) Babylon, the 19th day of Sebat (February),
    the seventh year of Cyrus, king of Babylon and the world.

In this case it is a son who makes over his property to his father should he be the first to
die. The will shows that the son was absolute master of his own possessions even during his
father’s lifetime, and could bequeath it as he chose.

A remarkable instance of the application of the principles underlying testamentary devolution
is to be found in the case of Ninip-Sum-iskun, the son of a land-surveyor who handed over his
property to his daughter Dhabtu, while he was still alive, stipulating only for the usufruct
of it. The text begins by saying that the testator called to his daughter: “Bring me writing
materials, for I am ill. My brother has deserted me; my son has offended me. To you therefore
I turn. Have pity on me, and while I live support me with food, oil, and clothes. The income
from my surveying business, in which I have two-thirds of a share with my brother, do I hand
over to you.” After this preamble the deed is drawn up in due form, attested, dated, and sealed.
The whole of the testator’s property is assigned to his daughter “for ever,” “the usufruct
of his income” only being reserved to himself “as long as he shall live.” He undertakes accordingly
not to “sell” it, not to give it to another, not to pawn it or alienate a portion of it. By
way of doubly securing that the deed shall take effect, the gods are invoked as well as the law.(3)

Another case in which a kind of will seems to have been made which should take effect during
the lifetime of the testator, is a document drawn up by order of the Assyrian King Sennacherib.
We may gather from it that Esar-haddon, though not his eldest, was his favorite son, a fact
which may explain his subsequent assassination by two of his other sons, who took advantage
of their brother’s absence in Armenia at the head of the army, to murder their father and usurp
the throne. In the document in question Sennacherib makes a written statement of his desire
to leave to Esar-haddon certain personal effects, which are enumerated by name. “Gold rings,
quantities of ivory, gold cups, dishes, and necklaces, all these valuable objects in plenty,
as well as three sorts of precious stones, one and one-half maneh and two and one-half shekels
in weight, I bequeath to Esar-haddon, my son, who bears the surname of Assur-etil-kin-pal,
to be deposited in the house of Amuk.” It will be noticed that this document is not attested
by witnesses. Such attestation was dispensed with in the case of the monarch; his own name
was sufficient to create a title. Whether it would have been the same in Babylonia, where the
king was not equally autocratic and the commercial spirit was stronger than in Assyria, may
be questioned. At all events, when Gigitu, the daughter of the Babylonian King Nergal-sharezer,
was married to one of his officials, the contract was made out in the usual form, and the names
of several witnesses were attached to it, while the deeds relating to the trading transactions
of Belshazzar when heir-apparent to the throne differ in nothing from those required from the
ordinary citizen.

Besides possessing the power of making a will, the head of the family was able to increase
it by adoption. The practice of adoption was of long standing in Babylonia. The right to become
King of Babylon and so to claim legitimate rule over the civilized world was conferred through
adoption by the god Bel-Merodach. The claimant to sovereignty “took the hand of Bel,” as it
was termed, and thereby became the adopted son of the god. Until this ceremony was performed,
however much he might be a sovereign de facto, he was not so de jure. The legal title to rule
could be given by Bel, and by Bel alone. As the Pharaohs of Egypt were sons of Ra the Sun-god,
so it was necessary that the kings of Babylon should be the sons of the Babylonian Sun-god
Merodach. Sonship alone made them legitimate.

This theory of adoption by a god must have been derived from a practice that was already well
known. And the power of adopting children was exercised by the Babylonians up to the last.
It has been suggested that it was due to ancestor-worship, and the desire to prevent the customary
offerings from being discontinued through the extinction of the family. But for this there
is no evidence. Indeed, it is questionable whether there was any worship of ancestors in Babylonia
except in the case of the royal family. And even here it had its origin in the deification
of the kings during their lifetime.

The prevalence of adoption in Babylonia had a much less recondite cause. It was one of the
results of the recognition of private property and the principle of individual ownership. The
head of the family naturally did not wish his estate to pass out of it and be transferred to
a stranger. Wherever monogamy is the general rule, the feeling of family relationship is strong,
and such was the case among the Babylonians. The feeling shows itself in the fact that when
inherited land is sold we find other members of the family signing their assent by their presence
at the sale. The father or mother, accordingly, who adopted a child did so with the intention
of making him their heir, and so keeping the estate they had inherited or acquired in the hands
of their own kin.

That this is the true explanation of the Babylonian practice of adoption is clear from the
case mentioned above in which Bel-Katsir was prevented from adopting his step-son, because
his uncle and adoptive father, whose property would then have passed to the latter, objected
to his doing so. It was entirely a question of inheritance. Bel-Katsir had been adopted in
order that he might be his uncle’s heir, and consequently the uncle had the right of deciding
to whom his estate should ultimately go. He preferred that it should be the brother of Bel-Katsir,
and the brother accordingly it was settled to be.

The fact that women could adopt, also points in the same direction. The woman was the equal
of the man as regards the possession and management of property, and like the man, therefore,
she could determine who should inherit it.

A slave could be adopted as well as a free man. It was one of the ways in which a slave obtained
his freedom, and contracts for the sale of slaves generally guarantee that they have not been
adopted into the family of a citizen. A curious suit that was brought before a special court
at Babylon in the tenth year of Nabonidos illustrates the advantage that was sometimes taken
of the fact. The action was brought against a slave who bears the Israelitish name of Barachiel,
and may, therefore, have been a Jew, and it was tried, not only before the ordinary judges,
but before special commissioners and “elders” as well. The following is a translation of the
judgment which was delivered and preserved in the record office:

“Barachiel is the slave of Gagâ, the daughter of … , redeemable with money only. In the thirty-fifth
year of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon (570 B.C.), he was given to Akhi-nuri, son of Nebo-nadin-akhi,
as security for a debt of twenty-eight shekels. Now he claims that he is the adopted son of
Bel-rimanni, who has joined the hands of Samas-mudam-miq, the son of Nebo-nadin-akhi, and Qudasu,
the daughter of Akhi-nuri, in matrimony. The case was pleaded before the commissioners, the
elders, and the judges of Nabonidos, King of Babylon, and the arguments were heard on both
sides. They read the deeds relating to the servile condition of Barachiel, who from the thirty-fifth
year of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, to the seventh year of Nabonidos, King of Babylon,
had been sold for money, had been given as security for a debt, and had been handed over to
Nubtâ, the daughter of Gagâ, as her dowry—Nubtâ, had afterward, by a sealed deed, given him
with a house and other slaves to her son, Zamama-iddin, and her husband, Nadin-abla—and they
said to Barachiel: You have brought an action and called yourself an adopted son. Prove to
us your adoption. Barachiel thereupon confessed: Twice did I run away from the house of my
master and for many days was not seen. Then I was afraid and pretended to be an adopted son.
My adoption is non-existent; I was the slave of Gagâ, redeemable with money. Nubtâ, her daughter,
made a present of me, and by a sealed deed transferred me to her son, Zamama-iddin, and her
husband, Nadin-abla. After the death of Gagâ and Nubtâ, I was sold by sealed contract to Itti-Merodach-baladhu,
the son of Nebo-akhi-iddin, the son of Egibi. I will go and [perform each of my duties.

After a slave had been adopted, it was in the power of the adoptive father to cancel the act
of adoption and reduce him to his former state of servitude if he had not performed his part
of the contract and the parties who had witnessed it were willing that it should be cancelled.
We learn this from a deed that was drawn up in the thirteenth year of Nabonidos. Here we read:

“Iqisa-abla, the son of Kudurru, the son of Nur-Sin, sealed a deed by which he adopted his
servant, Rimanni-Bel, usually called Rimut, in return for his receiving food and clothing from
Rimanni-Bel. But Rimanni-Bel, usually called Rimut, has violated the contract ever since the
deed by which he was adopted was sealed, and has given neither food, oil, nor clothing, whereas
Ê-Saggil-ramat, the daughter of Ziria, the son of Nabâ, the wife of Nadin-Merodach, the son
of Iqisa-abla, the son of Nur-Sin, has taken her father-in-law, has housed him, and has been
kind to him and has provided him with food, oil, and clothing. Iqisa-abla, the son of Kudurru,
the son of Nur-Sin, has, therefore, of his own free will, cancelled the deed of adoption, and
by a sealed deed has given Rimanni-Bel to wait upon Ê-Saggil-ramat and Nubtâ, the daughter
of Ê-Saggil-ramat and Nadin-Merodach, the grandson of Nur-Sin; Ê-Saggil-ramat and Nubtâ, her
daughter, shall he obey. After the death of Ê-Saggil-ramat he shall wait on Nubtâ, her daughter.
Whoever shall change these words and shall destroy the deed which Iqisa-abla has drawn up and
given to Ê-Saggil-ramat and Nubtâ, her daughter, may Merodach and the goddess Zarpanit denounce
judgment upon him!” Then come the names of four witnesses and the clerk, the date and place
of writing, and the statement that the deed was indented in the presence of Bissâ, the daughter
of Iqisa-abla.

It is clear that the testator had little or no property of his own, and that he was too old,
or otherwise incapacitated, to earn anything for himself. It is also clear that the adopted
slave, who is described by the milder term gallu, or “servant,” had acquired some wealth, and
that this was the motive for his adoption. He, however, deserted and neglected his adopted
father after his freedom had been secured to him, and thereby failed to carry out his part
of the contract. Iqisa-abla accordingly had the legal right to break it also on his side.

One of the effects of the system of adoption was to give the privileges of Babylonian citizenship
to a good many foreigners. The foreign origin of Barachiel, as evidenced by his name, was no
obstacle to his claim to be a citizen, and the numerous contracts in which it is certified
of a foreign slave that he has never been adopted prove the fact conclusively. A commercial
community cannot afford to be exclusive on the ground of race and nationality.

Such, then, was the family system in the Babylonia of the historical period. Polygamy was rare,
and the married woman possessed full rights over her property and could employ or bequeath
it as she chose. The dowry she brought from her father or other near relation made her practically
independent of her husband. Sons and daughters alike were able to inherit, and the possessor
of property had the power of making a will. The law seems to have placed but few restrictions
upon the way in which he could bestow his wealth. A family could be increased or prevented
from dying out by means of adoption, and new blood could thus be introduced into it.

The rights and duties of the individual were fully recognized; it was with him alone that the
law had to deal. Nevertheless, a few traces survived of that doctrine of the solidarity of
the family which had preceded the development of individual ownership and freedom of action.
The bride was given in marriage by her parents, or, failing these, by her nearest male relations,
and when an estate was sold which had long been in the possession of a certain family, it was
customary for the rest of the family to signify their consent by attending the sale. We may
gather, however, that the sale was not invalidated if the consent was not obtained. In the
older days of Babylonian history, moreover, it was usual for the property of a deceased citizen
to be divided among his heirs without the intervention of a will. It went in the first instance
to his widow, and was then divided equally among his children, whether body heirs or adopted
ones, the eldest son alone receiving an additional share in return for administering the estate.
But disputes frequently arose over the division, and the members of the family went to law
with one another. In such cases it became the custom to place the whole of the property in
the hands of the priests of the city-temple, who thus corresponded to the English Court of
Chancery, and made the division as they judged best. The results, however, were not always
satisfactory, and it was doubtless in order to avoid both the litigation and the necessity
of appointing executors who were not members of the family, that the will came to play so important
a part in the succession to property. In bequeathing his possessions the head of the family
was expected to observe the usual rule of division, but it ceased to be obligatory to do so.

CHAPTER III. EDUCATION AND DEATH

One of the lesson-books used in the Babylonian nursery contains the beginning of a story, written
in Sumerian and translated into Semitic, which describes the adventures of a foundling who
was picked up in the streets and adopted by the King. We are told that he was taken “from the
mouth of the dogs and ravens,” and was then brought to the asip or “prophet,” who marked the
soles of his feet with his seal. What the precise object of this procedure was it is difficult
to say, but the custom is alluded to in the Old Testament (Job xiii. 27). Certain tribes in
the south of China still brand the soles of a boy’s feet, for the purpose, it is said, of testing
his strength and hardihood.

After the operation was performed the boy was handed over to a “nurse,” to whom his “bread,
food, shirt, and (other) clothing were assured for three years.” At the same time, we may assume,
he received a name. This giving of a name was an important event in the child’s life. Like
other nations of antiquity the Babylonians conformed the name with the person who bore it;
it not only represented him, but in a sense was actually himself. Magical properties were ascribed
to the name, and it thus became of importance to know what names were good or bad, lucky or
unlucky. An unlucky name brought evil fortune to its possessor, a lucky name secured his success
in life. A change of name influenced a man’s career; and the same superstitious belief which
caused the Cape of Storms to become the Cape of Good Hope not unfrequently occasioned a person’s
name to be altered among the nations of the ancient East.

The gods themselves were affected by the names they bore. A knowledge of the secret and ineffable
name of a deity was the key to a knowledge of his inner essence and attributes, and conferred
a power over him upon the fortunate possessor of it. The patron god of the dynasty to which
Khammurabi belonged was spoken of as “the Name,” Sumu or Samu, the Shem of the Old Testament;
his real title was too sacred to be uttered in speech. The name of a thing was the thing itself,
and so too the name of a god or person was the actual god or person to whom it was attached.

A large proportion of Babylonian names includes the name of some divinity. In spite of their
length and unwieldiness they tended to increase in number as time went on. In ordinary life,
however, they were frequently shortened. In the contract given in the last chapter, the slave
Rimanni-Bel is said to have been usually called Rimut, the one name signifying “Love me, O
Bel,” the other “Love.” In other instances we find Samas-musezib contracted into Samsiya and
Suzub, Kabti-ilâni-Merodach into Kabtiya, Nebo-tabni-uzur into Tabniya. The Belesys of Greek
writers is the Babylonian Balasu, which is a shortened form of Merodach-balasu-iqbi, and Baladan,
which is given in the Old Testament as the name of the father of Merodach-baladan, has lost
the name of the god with which it must originally have begun.

Sometimes a change in the form of the name was due to its being of foreign origin and consequently
mispronounced by the Babylonians, who assimilated it to words in their own language. Thus Sargon
of Akkad was properly called Sargani, “The Strong One,” or, more fully, Sargani-sar-ali, “Sargani,
the King of the City,” but his Sumerian subjects turned this into Sar-gina or Sargon, “The
Established King.” The grandson of Khammurabi bore the Canaanitish name of Abesukh, the Abishua
of the Israelites, “The Father of Welfare,” but it was transformed by the Babylonians into
Ebisum, which in their own dialect meant “The Actor.” Eri-Aku or Arioch was an Elamite name
signifying “The Servant of the Moon-god;” the Babylonians changed it into Rim-Sin and perhaps
even Rim-Anu, “Love, O Moon-god,” “Love, O Sky-god.”

At other times the name was changed for political or superstitious reasons. When the successful
general Pul usurped the throne of Assyria he adopted the name of one of the most famous of
the kings of the older dynasty, Tiglath-pileser. His successor, another usurper, called Ululâ,
similarly adopted the name of Shalmaneser, another famous king of the earlier dynasty. It is
probable that Sargon, who was also a usurper, derived his name from Sargon of Akkad, and that
his own name was originally something else. Sennacherib tells us that Esar-haddon had a second
name, or surname, by which he was known to his neighbors. In this respect he was like Solomon
of Israel, who was also called Jedidiah.

It is doubtful whether circumcision was practised in Babylonia. There is no reference to it
in the inscriptions, nor is it mentioned by classical writers as among Babylonian customs.
In fact, the words of the Greek historian Herodotus seem to exclude the practice, as the Babylonians
are not one of the nations of Western Asia who are said by him to have learnt the rite from
the Egyptians. Moreover, Abraham and his family were not circumcised until long after he had
left Babylonia and had established himself in Canaan. Africa, rather than Asia, seems to have
been the original home of the rite.

If the boy were the son of well-to-do parents he was sent to school at an early age. One of
the texts which, in Sumerian days, was written as a head-line in his copy-book declared that
“He who would excel in the school of the scribes must rise like the dawn.” Girls also shared
in the education given to their brothers. Among the Babylonian letters that have been preserved
are some from ladies, and the very fact that women could transact business on their own account
implies that they could read and write. Thus the following letter, written from Babylon by
a lover to his mistress at Sippara, assumes that she could read it and return an answer: “To
the lady Kasbeya thus says Gimil-Merodach: May the Sun-god and Merodach, for my sake, grant
thee everlasting life! I am writing to enquire after your health; please send me news of it.
I am living at Babylon, but have not seen you, which troubles me greatly. Send me news of your
arrival, so that I may be happy. Come in the month Marchesvan. May you live forever, for my
sake!” The Tel-el-Amarna collection actually contains letters from a lady to the Egyptian Pharaoh.
But the king my lord has knowledge of his country, and the king my lord knows that the Bedâwin
have sent to the city of Ajalon and to the city of Zorah, and have made mischief (and have
intrigued with) the two sons of Malchiel; and let the king my lord take knowledge of this fact.”

The oracles delivered to Esar-haddon by the prophetesses of Arbela are in writing, and we have
no grounds for thinking that they were written down by an uninspired pen. Indeed, the “bit
riduti,” or “place of education,” where Assur-bani-pal tells us he had been brought up, was
the woman’s part of the palace. The instructors, however, were men, and part of the boy’s education,
we are informed, consisted in his being taught to shoot with the bow and to practise other
bodily exercises. But the larger part of his time was given to learning how to read and write.
The acquisition of the cuneiform system of writing was a task of labor and difficulty which
demanded years of patient application. A vast number of characters had to be learned by heart.
They were conventional signs, often differing but slightly from one another, with nothing about
them that could assist the memory; moreover, their forms varied in different styles of writing,
as much as Latin, Gothic, and cursive forms of type differ among ourselves, and all these the
pupil was expected to know. Every character had more than one phonetic value; many of them,
indeed, had several, while they could also be used ideographically to express objects and ideas.
But this was not all. A knowledge of the cuneiform syllabary necessitated also a knowledge
of the language of the Sumerians, who had been its inventors, and it frequently happened that
a group of characters which had expressed a Sumerian word was retained in the later script
with the pronunciation of the corresponding Semitic word attached to them, though the latter
had nothing to do with the phonetic values of the several signs, whether pronounced singly
or as a whole.

The children, however, must have been well taught. This is clear from the remarkably good spelling
which we find in the private letters; it is seldom that words are misspelt. The language may
be conversational, or even dialectic, but the words are written correctly. The school-books
that have survived bear testimony to the attention that had been given to improving the educational
system. Every means was adopted for lessening the labor of the student and imprinting the lesson
upon his mind. The cuneiform characters had been classified and named; they had also been arranged
according to the number and position of the separate wedges of which they consisted. Dictionaries
had been compiled of Sumerian words and expressions, as well as lists of Semitic synonyms.
Even grammars had been drawn up, in which the grammatical forms of the old language of Sumer
were interpreted in Semitic Babylonian. There were reading-books filled with extracts from
the standard literature of the country. Most of this was in Sumerian; but the Sumerian text
was provided with a Semitic translation, sometimes interlinear, sometimes in a parallel column.
Commentaries, moreover, had been written upon the works of ancient authors, in which difficult
or obsolete terms were explained. The pupils were trained to write exercises, either from a
copy placed before them or from memory. These exercises served a double purpose—they taught
the pupil how to write and spell, as well as the subject which the exercise illustrated. A
list of the kings of the dynasty to which Khammurabi belonged has come to us, for instance,
in one of them. In this way history and geography were impressed upon the student’s memory,
together with extracts from the poets and prose-writers of the past.

The writing material was clay. Papyrus, it is true, was occasionally used, but it was expensive,
while clay literally lay under the feet of everyone. While the clay was still soft, the cuneiform
or “wedge-shaped” characters were engraved upon it by means of a stylus. They had originally
been pictorial, but when the use of clay was adopted the pictures necessarily degenerated into
groups of wedge-like lines, every curve becoming an angle formed by the junction of two lines.
As time went on, the characters were more and more simplified, the number of wedges of which
they consisted being reduced and only so many left as served to distinguish one sign from another.
The simplification reached its extreme point in the official script of Assyria.

At first the clay tablet after being inscribed was allowed to dry in the sun. But sun-dried
clay easily crumbles, and the fashion accordingly grew up of baking the tablet in a kiln. In
Assyria, where the heat of the sun was not so great as in the southern kingdom of Babylonia,
the tablet was invariably baked, holes being first drilled in it to allow the escape of the
moisture and to prevent it from cracking. Some of the early Babylonian tablets were of great
size, and it is wonderful that they have lasted to our own days. But the larger the tablet,
the more difficult it was to bake it safely, and consequently the most of the tablets are of
small size. As it was often necessary to compress a long text into this limited space, the
writing became more and more minute, and in many cases a magnifying glass is needed to read
it properly. That such glasses were really used by the Assyrians is proved by Layard’s discovery
of a magnifying lens at Nineveh. The lens, which is of crystal, has been turned on a lathe,
and is now in the British Museum. But even with the help of lenses, the study of the cuneiform
tablets encouraged short sight, which must have been common in the Babylonian schools. In the
case of Assur-bani-pal this was counteracted by the out-of-door exercises in which he was trained,
and it is probable that similar exercises were also customary in Babylonia.

A book generally consisted of several tablets, which may consequently be compared with our
chapters. At the end of each tablet was a colophon stating what was its number in the series
to which it belonged, and giving the first line of the next tablet. The series received its
name from the words with which it began; thus the fourth tablet or chapter of the “Epic of
the Creation” states that it contains “one hundred and forty-six lines of the fourth tablet
(of the work beginning) ‘When on high unproclaimed,’ ” and adds the first line of the tablet
which follows. Catalogues were made of the standard books to be found in a library, giving
the name of the author and the first line of each; so that it was easy for the reader or librarian
to find both the work he wanted and the particular chapter in it he wished to consult. The
books were arranged on shelves; M. de Sarzec discovered about 32,000 of them at Tello in Southern
Chaldea still in the order in which they had been put in the age of Gudea (2700 B.C.).

Literature of every kind was represented. History and chronology, geography and law, private
and public correspondence, despatches from generals and proclamations of the king, philology
and mathematics, natural science in the shape of lists of bears and birds, insects and stones,
astronomy and astrology, theology and the pseudo-science of omens, all found a place on the
shelves, as well as poems and purely literary works. Copies of deeds and contracts, of legal
decisions, and even inventories of the property of private individuals, were also stored in
the libraries of Babylonia and Assyria, which were thus libraries and archive-chambers in one.
In Babylonia every great city had its collection of books, and scribes were kept constantly
employed in it, copying and re-editing the older literature, or providing new works for readers.
The re-editing was done with scrupulous care. Where a character was lost in the original text
by a fracture of the tablet, the copyist stated the fact, and added whether the loss was recent
or not. Where the form of the character was uncertain, both the signs which it resembled are
given. Some idea may be formed of the honesty and care with which the Babylonian scribes worked
from the fact that the compiler of the Babylonian Chronicle, which contains a synopsis of later
Babylonian history, frankly states that he does “not know” the date of the battle of Khalulê,
which was fought between the Babylonians and Sennacherib. The materials at his disposal did
not enable him to settle it. It so happens that we are in a more fortunate position, as we
are able to fix it with the help of the annals of the Assyrian King.

New texts were eagerly collected. The most precious spoils sent to Assur-bani-pal after the
capture of the revolted Babylonian cities were tablets containing works which the library of
Nineveh did not possess. The Babylonians and Assyrians made war upon men, not upon books, which
were, moreover, under the protection of the gods. The library was usually within the walls
of a temple; sometimes it was part of the archives of the temple itself. Hence the copying
of a text was often undertaken as a pious work, which brought down upon the scribe the blessing
of heaven and even the remission of his sins. That the library was open to the public we may
infer from the character of some of the literature contained in it. This included private letters
as well as contracts and legal documents which could be interesting only to the parties whom
they concerned.

The school must have been attached to the library, and was probably an adjacent building. This
will explain the existence of the school-exercises which have come from the library of Nineveh,
as well as the reading-books and other scholastic literature which were stored within it. At
the same time, when we remember the din of an oriental school, where the pupils shout their
lessons at the top of their voices, it is impossible to suppose that the scribes and readers
would have been within ear-shot. Nor was it probable that there was only one school in a town
of any size. The practice of herding large numbers of boys or girls together in a single school-house
is European rather than Asiatic.

The school in later times developed into a university. At Borsippa, the suburb of Babylon,
where the library had been established in the temple of Nebo, we learn from Strabo that a university
also existed which had attained great celebrity. From a fragment of a Babylonian medical work,
now in the British Museum, we may perhaps infer that it was chiefly celebrated as a school
of medicine.

In Assyria education was mainly confined to the upper classes. The trading classes were perforce
obliged to learn how to read and write; so also were the officials and all those who looked
forward to a career in the diplomatic service. But learning was regarded as peculiarly the
profession of the scribes, who constituted a special class and occupied an important position
in the bureaucracy. They acted as clerks and secretaries in the various departments of state,
and stereotyped a particular form of cuneiform script, which we may call the chancellor’s hand,
and which, through their influence, was used throughout the country. In Babylonia it was otherwise.
Here a knowledge of writing was far more widely spread, and one of the results was that varieties
of handwriting became as numerous as they are in the modern world. The absence of a professional
class of scribes prevented any one official hand from becoming universal. We find even the
son of an “irrigator,” one of the poorest and lowest members of the community, copying a portion
of the “Epic of the Creation,” and depositing it in the library of Borsippa for the good of
his soul. Indeed, the contract tablets show that the slaves themselves could often read and
write. The literary tendencies of Assur-bani-pal doubtless did much toward the spread of education
in Assyria, but the latter years of his life were troubled by disastrous wars, and the Assyrian
empire and kingdom came to an end soon after his death.

Education, as we have seen, meant a good deal more than merely learning the cuneiform characters.
It meant, in the case of the Semitic Babylonians and Assyrians, learning the ancient agglutinative
language of Sumer as well. In later times this language ceased to be spoken except in learned
society, and consequently bore the same relation to Semitic Babylonian that Latin bears to
English. In learning Sumerian, therefore, the Babylonian learned what was equivalent to Latin
in the modern world. And the mode of teaching it was much the same. There were the same paradigms
to be committed to memory, the same lists of words and phrases to be learned by heart, the
same extracts from the authors of the past to be stored up in the mind. Even the “Hamiltonian”
system of learning a dead language had already been invented. Exercises were set in translation
from Sumerian into Babylonian, and from Babylonian into Sumerian, and the specimens of the
latter which have survived to us show that “dog-Latin” was not unknown.

But the dead language of Sumer was not all that the educated Babylonian or Assyrian gentlemen
of later times was called upon to know. In the eighth century before our era Aramaic had become
the common medium of trade and diplomacy. If Sumerian was the Latin of the Babylonian world,
Aramaic was its French. The Aramaic dialects seem to have been the result of a contact between
the Semitic languages of Arabia and Canaan, and the rising importance of the tribes who spoke
them and who occupied Mesopotamia and Northern Arabia caused them to become the language of
trade. Aramaic merchants were settled on the banks of the Euphrates and Tigris, and conveyed
the products of Babylonia and Phœnicia from one country to the other. Many of the commercial
firms in Babylonia were of Aramaic origin, and it was natural that some part at least of their
business should have been carried on in the language of their fathers.

Hence it was that, when the Rab-shakeh or Vizier of Sennacherib appeared before Jerusalem and
summoned its inhabitants to submit to the Assyrian King, he was asked by the ministers of Hezekiah
to speak in “Aramæan.” It was taken for granted that Aramaic was known to an Assyrian official
and diplomatist just as it was to the Jewish officials themselves. The Rab-shakeh, however,
knew the Hebrew language as well, and found it more to his purpose to use it in addressing
the Jews.

Here, then, we have an Assyrian officer who is acquainted not only with Sumerian, but also
with two of the living languages of Western Asia. And yet he was not a scribe; he did not belong
to the professional class of learned men. Nothing can show more clearly the advanced state
of education even in the military kingdom of Assyria. In Babylonia learning had always been
honored; from the days of Sargon of Akkad onward the sons of the reigning king did not disdain
to be secretaries and librarians.

The linguistic training undergone in the schools gave the Babylonian a taste for philology.
He not only compiled vocabularies of the extinct Sumerian, which were needed for practical
reasons, he also explained the meaning of the names of the foreign kings who had reigned over
Babylonia, and from time to time noted the signification of words belonging to the various
languages by which he was surrounded. Thus one of the tablets we possess contains a list of
Kassite or Kossean words with their signification; in other cases we have Mitannian, Elamite,
and Canaanite words quoted, with their meanings attached to them. Nor did the philological
curiosity of the scribe end here. He busied himself with the etymology of the words in his
own language, and just as a couple of centuries ago our own dictionary-makers endeavored to
find derivations for all English words, whatever their source, in Latin and Greek, so, too,
the Babylonian etymologist believed that the venerable language of Sumer was the key to the
origin of his own. Many of the words in Semitic Babylonian were indeed derived from it, and
accordingly Sumerian etymologies were found for other words which were purely Semitic. The
word Sabattu, “the Sabbath,” for instance, was derived from the Sumerian Sa, “heart,” and bat,
“to cease,” and so interpreted to mean the day on which “the heart ceased” from its labors.

History, too, was a favorite subject of study. Like the Hebrews, the Assyrians were distinguished
by a keen historical sense which stands in curious contrast to the want of it which characterized
the Egyptian. The Babylonians also were distinguished by the same quality, though perhaps to
a less extent than their Assyrian neighbors, whose somewhat pedantic accuracy led them to state
the exact numbers of the slain and captive in every small skirmish, and the name of every petty
prince with whom they came into contact, and who had invented a system of accurately registering
dates at a very early period. Nevertheless, the Babylonian was also a historian; the necessities
of trade had obliged him to date his deeds and contracts from the earliest age of his history,
and to compile lists of kings and dynasties for reference in case of a disputed title to property.
The historical honesty to which he had been trained is illustrated by the author of the Babylonian
Chronicle in the passage relating to the battle of Khalulê, which has been already alluded
to. The last king of Babylonia was himself an antiquarian, and had a passion for excavating
and discovering the records of the monarchs who had built the great temples of Chaldea.

Law, again, must have been much studied, and so, too, was theology. The library of Nineveh,
however, from which so much of our information has come, gives us an exaggerated idea of the
extent to which the pseudo-science of omens and portents was cultivated. Its royal patron was
a believer in them, and apparently more interested in the subject than in any other. Consequently,
the number of books relating to it are out of all proportion to the rest of the literature
in the library. But this was an accident, due to the predilections of Assur-bani-pal himself.

The study of omens and portents was a branch of science and not of theology, false though the
science was. But it was based upon the scientific principle that every antecedent has a consequent,
its fallacy consisting in a confusion between real causes and mere antecedents. Certain events
had been observed to follow certain phenomena; it was accordingly assumed that they were the
results of the phenomena, and that were the phenomena to happen again they would be followed
by the same results. Hence all extraordinary or unusual occurrences were carefully noted, together
with whatever had been observed to come after them. A strange dog, for instance, had been observed
to enter a palace and there lie down on a couch; as no disaster took place subsequently it
was believed that if the occurrence was repeated it would be an omen of good fortune. On the
other hand, the fall of a house had been preceded by the birth of a child without a mouth;
the same result, it was supposed, would again accompany the same presage of evil. These pseudo-scientific
observations had been commenced at a very early period of Babylonian history, and were embodied
in a great work which was compiled for the library of Sargon of Akkad.

Another work compiled for the same library, and containing observations which started from
a similarly fallacious theory, was one in seventy-two books on the pseudo-science of astrology,
which was called “The Illumination of Bel.” But in this case the observations were not wholly
useless. The study of astrology was intermixed with that of astronomy, of which Babylonia may
be considered to be the birthplace. The heavens had been mapped out and the stars named; the
sun’s course along the ecliptic had been divided into the twelve zodiacal signs, and a fairly
accurate calendar had been constructed. Hundreds of observations had been made of the eclipses
of the sun and moon, and the laws regulating them had been so far ascertained that, first,
eclipses of the moon, and then, but with a greater element of uncertainty, eclipses of the
sun, were able to be predicted. One of the chapters or books in the “Illumination of Bel” was
devoted to an account of comets, another dealt with conjunctions of the sun and moon. There
were also tables of observations relating to the synodic revolution of the moon and the synodic
periods of the planet Venus. The year was divided into twelve months of thirty days each, an
intercalary month being inserted from time to time to rectify the resulting error in the length
of the year. The months had been originally called after the signs of the zodiac, whose names
have come down to ourselves with comparatively little change. But by the side of the lunar
year the Babylonians also used a sidereal year, the star Capella being taken as a fixed point
in the sky, from which the distance of the sun could be measured at the beginning of the year,
the moon being used as a mere pointer for the purpose. At a later date, however, this mode
of determining time was abandoned, and the new year was made directly dependent on the vernal
equinox. The month was subdivided into weeks of seven days, each of which was consecrated to
a particular deity.

These deities were further identified with the stars. The fact that the sun and moon, as well
as the evening and morning stars, were already worshipped as divinities doubtless led the way
to this system of astro-theology. Their identification with the gods of the state religion
might be taught in the schools and universities, but it had no meaning for the nation at large.

From the beginning of the Babylonian’s life we now pass to the end. Unlike the Egyptian he
had no desert close at hand in which to bury his dead, no limestone cliffs, as in Palestine,
wherein a tomb might be excavated. It was necessary that the burial should be in the plain
of Babylonia, the same plain as that in which he lived, and with which the overflow of the
rivers was constantly infiltrating. The consequences were twofold. On the one hand, the tomb
had to be constructed of brick, for stone was not procurable; on the other hand, sanitary reasons
made cremation imperative. The Babylonian corpse was burned as well as buried, and the brick
sepulchre that was raised above it adjoined the cities of the living.

The corpse was carried to the grave on a bier, accompanied by the mourners. Among these the
wailing women were prominent, who tore their hair and threw dust upon their heads. The cemetery
to which the dead was carried was a city in itself, to which the Sumerians had given the name
of Ki-makh or “vast place.” It was laid out in streets, the tombs on either side answering
to the houses of a town. Not infrequently gardens were planted before them, while rivulets
of “living water” flowed through the streets and were at times conducted into the tomb. The
water symbolized the life that the pious Babylonian hoped to enjoy in the world to come. It
relieved the thirst of the spirit in the underground world of Hades, where an old myth had
declared that “dust only was its food,” and it was at the same time an emblem of those “waters
of life” which were believed to bubble up beneath the throne of the goddess of the dead.

When the corpse reached the cemetery it was laid upon the ground wrapped in mats of reed and
covered with asphalt. It was still dressed in the clothes and ornaments that had been worn
during life. The man had his seal and his weapons of bronze or stone; the woman her spindle-wheel
and thread; the child his necklace of shells. In earlier times all was then thickly coated
with clay, above which branches of palm, terebinth, and other trees were placed, and the whole
was set on fire. At a more recent period ovens of brick were constructed in which the corpse
was put in its coffin of clay and reeds, but withdrawn before cremation was complete. The skeletons
of the dead are consequently often found in a fair state of preservation, as well as the objects
which were buried with them.

While the body was being burned offerings were made, partly to the gods, partly to the dead
man himself. They consisted of dates, calves and sheep, birds and fish, which were consumed
along with the corpse. Certain words were recited at the same time, derived for the most part
from the sacred books of ancient Sumer.

After the ceremony was over a portion of the ashes was collected and deposited in an urn, if
the cremation had been complete. In the later days, when this was not the case, the half-burnt
body was allowed to remain on the spot where it had been laid, and an aperture was made in
the shell of clay with which it was covered. The aperture was intended to allow a free passage
to the spirit of the dead, so that it might leave its burial-place to enjoy the food and water
that were brought to it. Over the whole a tomb was built of bricks, similar to that in which
the urn was deposited when the body was completely burned.

The tombs of the rich resembled the houses in which they had lived on earth and contained many
chambers. In these their bodies were cremated and interred. Sometimes a house was occupied
by a single corpse only; at other times it became a family burial-place, where the bodies were
laid in separate chambers. Sometimes tombstones were set up commemorating the name and deeds
of the deceased; at other times statues representing them were erected instead.

The tomb had a door, like a house, through which the relatives and friends of the dead man
passed from time to time in order to furnish him with the food and sustenance needed by his
spirit in the world below. Vases were placed in the sepulchre, filled with dates and grain,
wine and oil, while the rivulet which flowed beside it provided water in abundance. All this
was required in that underworld where popular belief pictured the dead as flitting like bats
in the gloom and darkness, and where the heroes of old time sat, strengthless and ghostlike,
on their shadowy thrones.

The kings were allowed to be burned and buried in the palace in which they had lived and ruled.
We read of one of them that he was interred in “the palace of Sargon” of Akkad, of another
that his burial had taken place in the palace he himself had erected. A similar privilege was
granted to their subjects only by royal permission.

Want of space caused the tombs of the dead to be built one upon the other, as generations passed
away and the older sepulchres crumbled into dust. The cemetery thus resembled the city; here,
too, one generation built upon the ruins of its predecessor. The houses and tombs were alike
constructed of sun-dried bricks, which soon disintegrate and form a mound of dust. The age
of a cemetery, like the age of a city, may accordingly be measured by the number of successive
layers of building of which its mound or platform is composed. In Babylonia they are numerous,
for the history of the country goes back to a remote past. Each city clustered round a temple,
venerable for its antiquity as well as for its sanctity, and the cemetery which stood near
it was consequently under the protection of its god. At Cutha the necropolis was so vast that
Nergal, the god of the town, came to be known as the “lord of the dead.” But the cemeteries
of other towns were also of enormous size. Western Asia had received its culture and the elements
of its theology from Babylonia, and Babylonia consequently was a sacred land not only to the
Babylonians themselves, but to all those who shared their civilization. The very soil was holy
ground; Assyrians as well as Babylonians desired that their bodies should rest in it. Here
they were in the charge, as it were, of Bel of Nippur or Merodach of Babylon, and within sight
of the ancient sanctuaries in which those gods were worshipped. To my surprise the great stupid
bird, instead of flying away, as I had expected, quietly resumed his fishing as if nothing
had happened. No doubt he was well pleased to find himself still alive, and it is not improbable
that the hawk made several more meals at the expense of his long-beaked friend after we had
passed by.

We soon put him to flight, however, by landing near the spot where he stood, this being the
place where we were to quit our canoes and pass through the jungle on foot. The hunters now prepared
themselves for action, for the recent tracks of elephants were seen on the bank of the stream,
and the natives said they could not be far off.

Jack and Peterkin were armed with immensely heavy rifles, which carried
balls of the weight of six-ounces.

I carried my trusty, double-barrelled fowling-piece, which is of the largest size, and which
I preferred to a rifle, because, not being a good shot, I resolved, on all occasions, to reserve
my fire until we should come to close quarters with game, leaving my more expert comrades to
take the longer shots. We had also two natives--one being our guide, Makarooroo, who carried Jack
and Peterkin's double-barrelled guns as a reserve. These were loaded, of course, with ball.

"This looks something like business," said Jack, as he leaned on his heavy rifle and looked at the
natives, who were selecting their spears and otherwise making preparations.

"It does," replied Peterkin. "Are you loaded?"

"Ay, and I have just examined the caps to see that they are dry; for it's not like grouse-shooting on
the Scottish hills this African hunting, depend upon it. A snapping cap might cost us our lives,--
Ralph, my boy, you must keep well in rear. I don't want to hurt your feelings, but it won't
do to go in front when you cannot depend on your nerves."

I experienced a feeling of sadness not unmingled with shame as my friend said this, but I could
not question the justness of his remark, and I knew well that he would not have made it at all,
but for his anxiety lest I should run recklessly into danger, which
I might find myself, when too late, unable to cope with.

I was careful, however, to conceal my feelings as I replied with a smile--

"You are right, Jack. I shall act the part of a support, while you and Peterkin skirmish in advance."

"And
be careful," said Peterkin, solemnly, "that you don't fire into us by mistake."

Somewhat of Peterkin's own spirit came over me as I replied, "Indeed, I have been thinking of that,
and I'm not sure that I can restrain myself when I see a chimpanzee monkey and a gorilla walking through
the woods before me."

"I think we'd better take his gun from him," suggested Jack.

At this moment the king gave the signal to advance, so we shouldered our weapons and joined him. As
we walked rapidly along, Jack suggested that we should allow the natives to kill any elephants
we might fall in with in their own way, so as to observe how they managed it, rather than try to
push ourselves forward on this our first expedition. We all agreed to this, and shortly after
we came to the place which elephants were known to frequent.

Here great preparations had evidently been made for them. A space of more than a mile was partially
enclosed by what might be termed a vine wall. The huge, thorny, creeping vines had been torn down
from the trees and woven into a rude sort of network, through which it was almost impossible
for any animal except an elephant to break. This was intended--not to stop the elephant altogether,
but to entangle and retard him in his flight, until the hunters could
kill him with their spears.

The work, we were given to understand, was attended with considerable danger, for some of the natives
were occasionally caught by the thorny vines when flying from the charge of the infuriated animal,
and were instantly stamped to death by his ponderous feet.

I felt a new and powerful excitement creep over me as I saw the natives extend themselves in a
wide semicircle of nearly two miles in extent, and begin to advance with loud shouts and cries,
in order to drive the game towards the vines, and the flashing eyes and compressed lips of
my two companions showed that they were similarly affected. We determined to keep together
and follow close on that part of the line where the king was.

"You no be 'fraid?" said Makarooroo, looking down at Peterkin, who, he evidently supposed, was
neither mentally nor physically adapted for an African hunter.

Peterkin was so tickled with the question that he suddenly began to tremble like an aspen leaf,
and to chatter with his teeth and display all the symptoms of abject terror. Pointing over Makarooroo's
shoulder into the bush behind him, he gasped, "The leopard!"

The negro uttered a hideous yell, and springing nearly his own height into the air, darted behind
a tree with the agility of a wild-cat.

Instantly Peterkin resumed his composure, and turning round with a look of cool surprise, said--

"What!
you're not afraid, Makarooroo?" The good-humoured fellow burst into a loud laugh on perceiving
the practical joke that had been passed on him, and it was evident that the incident, trifling
though it was, had suddenly raised his estimation of Peterkin to a very exalted pitch.

We now began to draw near to the enclosure, and I was beginning to fear that our hunt was to
prove unsuccessful that day. A considerable quantity of small game had passed us, alarmed
by the cries of the natives; but we purposely withheld our fire, although I saw that Jack was sorely
tempted once or twice, when several beautiful gazelles and one or two wild pigs ran past within
shot. Presently we heard a shrill trumpeting sound, which Peterkin, who had hunted in the forests
of Ceylon, told us, in an excited voice, was the cry of the elephant. We hastened forward with
our utmost speed, when suddenly we were brought to a stand by hearing a tremendous roar close
in front of us. Immediately after, a large male lion bounded from among the bushes, and with
one stroke of his enormous paw struck down a negro who stood not twenty yards from us. The
terrible brute stood for an instant or two, lashing his sides with his tail and glaring defiance.
It chanced that I happened to be nearest to him, and that the position of the tangled underwood
prevented my companions from taking good aim; so without waiting
for them, being anxious to save, if possible, the life of the prostrate
negro, I fired both barrels into the lion's side.

Giving utterance to another terrible roar, he bounded away into the bush, scattering the negroes
who came in his way, and made his escape, to our great disappointment.

We found, to our horror, on going up to the fallen hunter, that he was quite dead. His skull had
been literally smashed in, as if it had received a blow from a sledge-hammer.

I cannot describe my feelings on beholding thus, for the first time, the king of beasts in
all the savage majesty of strength and freedom, coupled with the terrible death of a human
being. My brain was in a whirl of excitement; I scarce knew what I was doing. But I had no time
to think, for almost immediately after firing the shots at the lion, two elephants came crashing
through the bushes. One was between ten and eleven feet high, the other could not have been less
than twelve feet. I had never seen anything like this in the menageries of England, and their
appearance, as they burst thus suddenly on my vision, was something absolutely appalling.

Those who have only seen the comparatively small and sluggish animals that are wont to ring
their bells to attract attention, and to feed on gingerbread nuts from the hands of little boys, can
form no idea of the terrible appearance of the gigantic monsters of Africa as they go tearing
in mad fury through the forests with their enormous ears, and tails, and trunks erect, their ponderous
tusks glistening in the sunshine, and their wicked little eyes flashing like balls of fire
as they knock down, rend asunder, and overturn all that comes in their way.

The two that now approached us in full career were flying before a crowd of negroes who had
already fixed a number of spears in their sides, from which the blood was flowing copiously. To say
that the bushes went down before them like grass would not give a
correct idea of the ponderous rush of these creatures.

Trees of three and four inches diameter were run against and snapped off like twigs, without proving
in any degree obstructive.

By this time the negroes had crowded in from all sides, and as the elephants approached the place
where we stood, a perfect cloud of spears and javelins descended on their devoted sides. I observed
that many of the active natives had leaped up into the trees and discharged their spears from
above, while others, crouching behind fallen trees or bushes, threw them from below, so that
in a few seconds dozens of spears entered their bodies at every conceivable
angle, and they appeared as if suddenly transformed into monstrous
porcupines or hedgehogs.

There was something almost ludicrous in this, but the magnitude and aspect of the animals were
too terrible, and our danger was too imminent, to permit anything like comic ideas to enter our
brains. I observed, too, that the natives were perfectly wild with excitement. Their black
faces worked convulsively, and their white eyes and teeth glittered as they leaped and darted about
in a state of almost perfect nudity, so that their aspect was quite demoniacal.

The suddenness and violence of the attack made near to us had the effect of turning the elephants
aside, and the next instant they were tearing and wrenching themselves
through the meshes of the tough and thorny vines.

The natives closed in with wild cries and with redoubled energy. Nothing surprised me so much
as to observe the incredible number of spears that were sticking all over these creatures,
and the amount of blood that they lost, without any apparent diminution of strength resulting.
It seemed as if no human power could kill them, and at that moment I almost doubted Peterkin's assertion
that he had, while in Ceylon, actually killed elephants with a single ball.

While Jack and Peterkin and I were gazing in deep interest and surprise at the curious struggle
going on before us, and holding ourselves in readiness to act, should there be any chance of our
game escaping, the larger of the two elephants succeeded in disentangling himself by backing
out of the snare. He then wheeled round and charged straight at King Jambai, who stood close
to us, with incredible fury. The beast, as it came on with the bristling spears all over it,
the blood spirting from its innumerable wounds, and trumpeting shrill
with rage, seemed to me like some huge unearthly phantom.

It was with difficulty I could believe the whole scene other than a hideous dream. Jambai launched
his javelin into the animal's chest, and then turned and fled. The other natives also darted and scattered
hither and thither, so that the elephant could not make up its mind on which of its enemies to wreak
its vengeance. We, too, turned and took to our heels at once with right good will. All at once
I heard Jack utter a wild shout or yell, very unlike to anything I ever heard from him before.
I looked back, and saw that his foot had got entangled in a thorny shrub, and that the elephant
was making at him.

To this day I have never been able to account for the remarkable condition of mind and body that
ensued on this occasion. Instead of being paralysed as I had been when Peterkin was in imminent
danger, all sensation of fear or hesitancy seemed to vanish on thine instant. I felt my nerves
and muscles strung, as it were, and rendered firm as a rock, and with calm deliberation, yet with
the utmost rapidity of which I was capable, I turned round, sprang between Jack and the enraged
beast, and presented my piece at his head.

"Right in the centre of his forehead," gasped Jack, as he endeavoured
to wrench his foot from the entanglement.

At that moment I observed Peterkin leap to my side; the next instant the report of both our guns
rang through the woods; the elephant bounded completely over Jack, as Peterkin and I leaped to
either side to let it pass, and fell to the ground with such violence that a tree about six inches
thick, against which it struck, went down before it like a willow wand.

We immediately assisted Jack to extricate himself; but we had no time to congratulate ourselves
on our narrow escape, for mingled shouts and yells from the men in the bushes ahead apprised
us that some new danger menaced them in that direction.

Reloading as fast as we could, we hastened forward, and soon gained the new scene of battle. Here
stood the other elephant, trying to break down a small tree up which King Jambai had climbed,
partly for safety and partly in order to dart a javelin down on the brute as it passed.

This was a common custom of the natives; but the king, who was a bold, reckless man, had neglected
to take the very necessary precaution of selecting a strong tree.

The elephant seemed actually to have observed this, for instead of passing on, it suddenly rushed
headlong against the tree and began to break it down. When we came up the beast was heaving and
straining with all its might, the stout tree was cracking and rending fearfully, so that the
king could scarcely retain his position on it. The natives were plying their spears with the
utmost vigour; but although mortally wounded, it was evident that in a few more seconds the
elephant would succeed in throwing down the tree and trample the king to death.

Peterkin instantly sprang forward, but Jack laid his hand on his shoulder.

"It's my turn this time, lad," he cried, and leaping towards the monster, he placed the muzzle of
his rifle close to its shoulder and sent a six-ounce ball right through its heart.

The effect was instantaneous. The elephant fell to the ground, a mountain of dead flesh.

The delight of the negroes at this happy termination of the battle was excessive. They leaped and laughed
and danced like insane men, and we had much ado to prevent them seizing us in their arms and rubbing
noses with us.

As we had not commenced the hunt until well on in the day, evening was now closing in; so the king
gave orders to encamp on a dry rising ground not far distant, where the jungle was less dense,
and thither we all repaired, the natives bringing in all the game, and cutting up the elephants
in a very short space of time.

"Your shot was not such a bad one this time, Ralph," observed Peterkin, as we three stood looking
at the large elephant which the natives were cutting up. "There they
are, just above the proboscis.

But let me warn you never again to venture on such a foolhardy thing as to fire in the face
of a charging elephant unless you are a dead shot."

"Thank you, Peterkin, for your advice, which, however, I will not
take when a comrade's life may depend on my doing so."

"I give you
full credit for the excellence of your intention," rejoined my friend;
"but if Jack's life had depended on those two shots from your double-barrel,
he would have been but a dead man now. There is only one vulnerable
spot in the front of an elephant's head; that is, exactly in the centre
of the forehead. The spot is not bigger than a saucer, and the bone
is comparatively thin there. If you cannot make sure of hitting that,
you simply face certain death. I would not have tried it on any account
whatever, had I not seen that both you and Jack would have been killed
had I not done so."

On examination we found that the heavy ball from
Peterkin's rifle had indeed penetrated the exact spot referred to,
and had been the means of killing the elephant, while my two bullets
were found embedded in the bone.

The tusks of this animal were magnificent.
I do not know what their exact weight was, not having the means wherewith
to weigh them. They were probably worth a considerable sum of money
in the British market. Of course we did not lay claim to any part
of the spoil of that day, with the exception of a few of the beautiful
birds shot on the voyage up the river, which were of no value to the
natives, although priceless to me. Alas! when I came to examine them
next morning, I found that those destructive creatures the white ants
had totally destroyed the greater part of them, and the few that were
worth stuffing were very much damaged.

Experience is a good though
sometimes a severe teacher. Never again did I, after that, put off
the stuffing of any valuable creature till the next day. I always
stuffed it in the evening of the day on which it was killed; and thus,
although the practice cost me many a sleepless night, I preserved,
and ultimately brought home, many specimens of rare and beautiful
birds and beasts, which would otherwise have been destroyed by those
rapacious insects.

That night the scene of our camp was indescribably
romantic and wild. Numerous huge fires were lighted, and round these
the negroes circled and cooked elephant and venison steaks, while
they talked over the events of the day or recounted the adventures
of former hunts with noisy volubility and gesticulation.

The negro
has a particular love for a fire. The nights in his warm climate are
chill to him, though not so to Europeans, and he luxuriates in the
heat of a fire as a cat does in the rays of the sun. The warm blaze
seems to draw out his whole soul, and causes his eyes to sparkle with
delight. A good supper and a warm fire render him almost perfectly
happy. There is but one thing wanting to render him supremely so,
and that is--a pipe! No doubt, under similar circumstances, the white
man also is in a state of enviable felicity, but he does not show
his joy like the negro, who seems to forget his cares and sorrows,
the miseries which his gross superstitions entail on him, the frequency
with which he is exposed to sudden destruction; everything, in short,
is forgotten save the present, and he enjoys himself with unmitigated
fervour.

It really did my heart good as I sat with my comrades beside
our fire and looked around me on their happy faces, which were rendered
still happier by the gift from us of a small quantity of tobacco,
with which we had taken care to provide ourselves for this very purpose.
 He had been intrusted by his master with the conveyance of 480 gur of fruit
to the ships of a Syrian, named Baal-nathan, who undertook to carry it to Babylon, and to be
responsible for loss. On the way part of the fruit was stolen, and Baal-nathan, instead of
replacing it, absconded, but was soon caught. The slave accordingly appeared against him, and
the five judges before whom the case was brought gave a verdict in his favor.

A slave could even own another slave. In the twenty-seventh year of Nebuchadnezzar, for example,
the porter of the temple of the Sun-god at Sippara, who was “the slave of Nebo-baladh-yulid,”
purchased a female slave for two-thirds of a shekel (2s.). The amount was small, but the purchaser
did not possess so much at the moment, and credit was consequently allowed him. The list of
witnesses to the contract is headed by a slave.

The condition of the slave in Assyria was much what it was in Babylonia. The laws and customs
of Assyria were modelled after those of Babylonia, whence, indeed, most of them had been derived.
But there was one cause of difference between the two countries which affected the character
of slavery. Assyria was a military power, and the greater part of its slaves, therefore, were
captives taken in war. In Babylonia, on the contrary, the majority had been born in the country,
and between them and their masters there was thus a bond of union and sympathy which could
not exist between the foreign captive and his conqueror. In the northern kingdom slavery must
have been harsher.

Slaves, moreover, apparently fetched higher prices there, probably on account of their foreign
origin. They cost on the average as much as a maneh (£9) each. A contract, dated in 645 B.C.,
states that one maneh and a half was given for a single female slave. One of the contracting
parties was a Syrian, and an Aramaic docket is accordingly attached to the deed, while among
the witnesses to it we find Ammâ, “the Aramean secretary.” Ammâ means a native of the land
of Ammo, where Pethor was situated. About the same time 3 manehs, “according to the standard
of Carchemis,” were paid for a family of five slaves, which included two children. Under Esar-haddon
a slave was bought for five-sixths of a maneh, or 50 shekels, and in the same year Hoshea,
an Israelite, with his two wives and four children, was sold for 3 manehs. With these prices
it is instructive to compare the sum of 43 shekels given for a female slave in Babylonia only
four years later.

As a specimen of an Assyrian contract for the sale of slaves we may take one which was made
in 709 B.C., thirteen years after the fall of Samaria, and which is noticeable on account of
the Israelitish names which it contains: “The seal of Dagon-melech,” we read, “the owner of
the slaves who are sold. Imannu, the woman U——, and Melchior, in all three persons, have been
approved by Summa-ilâni, the bear-hunter from Kasarin, and he has bought them from Dagon-melech
for three manehs of silver, according to the standard of Carchemish. The money has been fully
paid; the slaves have been marked and taken. There shall be no reclamation, lawsuit, or complaints.
Whoever hereafter shall at any time rise up and bring an action, whether it be Dagon-melech
or his brother or his nephew or any one else belonging to him or a person in authority, and
shall bring an action and charges against Summa-ilâni, his son, or his grandson, shall pay
10 manehs of silver, or 1 maneh of gold (£140), to the goddess Istar of Arbela. The money brings
an interest of 10 (i.e., 60) per cent. to its possessors; but if an action or complaint is
brought it shall not be touched by the seller. In the presence of Addâ the secretary, Akhiramu
the secretary, Pekah the governor of the city, Nadab-Yahu (Nadabiah) the bear-hunter, Bel-kullim-anni,
Ben-dikiri, Dhem-Istar, and Tabnî the secretary, who has drawn up the deed of contract.” The
date is the 20th of Ab, or August, 709 B.C.

The slaves are sold at a maneh each, and bear Syrian names. Addâ, “the man of Hadad,” and Ben-dikiri
are also Syrian; on the other hand, Ahiram, Pekah, and Nadabiah are Israelitish. It is interesting
to find them appearing as free citizens of Assyria, one of them being even governor of a city.
It serves to show why the tribes of Northern Israel so readily mingled with the populations
among whom they were transported; the exiles in Assyria were less harshly treated than those
in Babylonia, and they had no memories of a temple and its services, no strong religious feeling,
to prevent them from being absorbed by the older inhabitants of their new homes.

In Assyria, as in Babylonia, parents could sell their children, brothers their sisters, though
we do not know under what circumstances this was allowed by the law. The sale of a sister by
her brother for half a maneh, which has already been referred to, took place at Nineveh in
668 B.C. In the contract the brother is called “the owner of his sister,” and any infringement
of the agreement was to be punished by a fine of “10 silver manehs, or 1 maneh of gold,” to
the treasury of the temple of Ninip at Calah. About fifteen years later the services of a female
slave “as long as she lived” were given in payment of a debt, one of the witnesses to the deed
being Yavanni “the Greek.” Ninip of Calah received slaves as well as fines for the violation
of contracts relating to the sale of them; about 645 B.C., for instance, we find four men giving
one to the service of the god. Among the titles of the god is that of “the lord of workmen;”
and it is therefore possible that he was regarded as in a special way the patron of the slave-trader.

It seems to have been illegal to sell the mother without the children, at all events as long
as they were young. In the old Sumerian code of laws it was already laid down that if children
were born to slaves whom their owner had sold while still reserving the power of repurchasing
them, he could nevertheless not buy them back unless he bought the children at the same time
at the rate of one and a half shekels each. The contracts show that this law continued in force
down to the latest days of Babylonian independence. Thus the Egyptian woman who was sold in
the sixth year of Cambyses was put up to auction along with her child. We may gather also that
it was not customary to separate the husband and wife.(5) When the Israelite Hoshea, for instance,
was put up for sale in Assyria in the reign of Esar-haddon, both his wives as well as his children
were bought by the purchaser along with him. It may be noted that the slave was “marked,” or
“tattooed,” after purchase, like the Babylonian cattle. This served a double purpose; it indicated
his owner and identified him if he tried to run away.

In a country where slaves were so numerous the wages of the free workmen were necessarily low.
There were, however, two classes of free workmen, the skilled artisan and the agricultural
laborer. The agricultural character of the Babylonian state, and the fact that so many of the
peasantry possessed land of their own, prevented the agriculturist from sinking into that condition
of serfdom and degradation which the existence of slavery would otherwise have brought about.
Moreover, the flocks and cattle were tended by Bedâwin and Arameans, who were proud of their
freedom and independence, like the Bedâwin of modern Egypt. In spite, therefore, of the fact
that so much of the labor of the country was performed by slaves, agriculture was in high esteem
and the free agriculturist was held in honor. Tradition told how Sargon of Akkad, the hero
of ancient Babylonia, had been brought up by Akki the irrigator, and had himself been a gardener,
while the god Tammuz, the bridegroom of Istar, had tended sheep. Indeed, one of the oldest
titles of the Babylonian kings had been that of “shepherd.”

At the same time there was a tendency for the free laborer to degenerate into a serf, attached
to the soil of the farm on which he and his forefathers had been settled for centuries. A contract
dated in the first year of Cyrus is an illustration of the fact. It records the lease of a
farm near Sippara, which belonged to the temple of the Sun-god, and was let to a private individual
by the chief priest and the civil governor of the temple. The farm contained 60 gur of arable
land, and the lease of it included “12 oxen, 8 peasants, 3 iron plough-shares, 4 axes, and
sufficient grain for sowing and for the support of the peasants and the cattle.” Here the peasants
are let along with the land, and presumably would have been sold with it had the farm been
purchased instead of being let. They were, in fact, irremovable from the soil on which they
had been born. It must, however, be remembered that the farm was the property of a temple,
and it is possible that serfdom was confined to land which had been consecrated to the gods.
In that case the Babylonian serfs would have corresponded with the Hebrew Nethinim, and might
have been originally prisoners of war.

We learn some details of early agricultural life in Babylonia from the fragments of an old
Sumerian work on farming which formed one of the text-books in the Babylonian schools. Passages
were extracted from it and translated into Semitic for the use of the students, and difficult
words and expressions were noted and explained. The book seems to have resembled the “Works
and Days” of the Greek poet Hesiod, except that it was not in verse. We gather from it that
the agricultural year began, not with Nisan, or March, but with Tisri, or September, like the
Jewish civil year; at all events, it was then that the tenure of the farmer began and that
his contract was drawn up with the landlord. It was then, too, after the harvest, that he took
possession of the land, paying his tax to the government, repairing or making the fences, and
ploughing the soil.

His tenure was of various kinds. Sometimes he undertook to farm the land, paying half the produce
of it to the landlord or his agent and providing the farming implements, the seeds, and the
manure himself. Sometimes the farm was worked on a co-operative system, the owner of the land
and the tenant-farmer entering into partnership with one another and dividing everything into
equal shares. In this case the landlord was required to furnish carts, oxen, and seeds. At
other times the tenant received only a percentage of the profits—a third, a fourth, a fifth,
or a tenth, according to agreement. He had also to pay the esrâ or tithe.

The most common form of tenure seems to have been that in which a third of the produce went
to the lessor. Two-thirds of the rent, paid either in dates or in their monetary equivalent,
was delivered to the landlord on the last day of the eighth month, Marchesvan, where the dates
had been gathered and had been laid out to dry. By the terms of the lease the tenant was called
upon to keep the farm buildings in order, and even to erect them if they did not exist. His
own house was separate from that in which the farm-servants lived, and it was surrounded by
a garden, planted for the most part with date-palms. If the farm-buildings were not built or
were not kept in proper repair a fine was imposed upon him, which in the case quoted by the
writer of the agricultural work was 10 shekels, or 30s. The tenant was furthermore expected
to pay the laborers their wages, and the landlord had the power of dismissing him if the terms
of the contract were not fulfilled.

The laborers were partly slaves, partly freemen, the freemen hiring themselves out at so much
a month. A contract of the age of Khammurabi, for instance, states that a certain Ubaru, had
thus hired himself out for thirty days for half a shekel of silver, or 1s. 6d., but he had
to offer a guarantee that he would not leave his master’s service before the expiration of
the month. In other cases it was a slave whose services were hired from his owner; thus, in
a document from Sippara, of the same age as the preceding, we read: “Rimmon-bani hires Sumi-izitim
as a laborer for his brother, for three months, at a wage of one shekel and a half, 3 measures
of grain and 1½ qa of oil. There shall be no withdrawal from the agreement. Ibni-A-murru and
Sikni-Ea have confirmed it. Rimmon-bani hires the laborer in the presence of Abum-ilu (Abimael),
the son of Ibni-Samas, Ilisu-ibni, the son of Igas-Rimmon, and Arad-Bel, the son of Akhuwam.
(Dated) the first day of Sivan.” The wages evidently went to the slave, so that he was practically
in the position of a free laborer.

When we come down to a later period, we find in contract, dated at the end of the second year
of a Cyrus, Bunene-sar-uzur, “the son of Sum-yukin,” hired, as a servant for a year, “from
the month Nisan to the month Adar,” for 3 shekels of silver. These were paid beforehand to
a third person, and the payment was duly witnessed and registered. Bunene-sar-uzur was not
a slave, though 9 shillings does not seem much as wages for a whole year. However, three years
later only 1 pi, or about 50 quarts of meal, were given for a month’s supply of food to some
men who were digging a canal. The hours of work doubtless lasted from sunrise to sunset, though
we have a curious document of the Macedonian period, dated in the reign of Seleucus II., in
which certain persons sell the wages they receive for work done in a temple during the “sixth
part” of a day. The sum demanded was as much as 65 shekels.

The Aramean Bedâwin, who acted as shepherds, or cattle-drovers, probably received better wages
than the native Babylonians. They were less numerous and were in more request; moreover, it
was necessary that they should be trustworthy. The herds and flocks were left in their charge
for weeks together, on the west bank of the Euphrates, out of sight of the cultivated fields
of Babylonia and exposed to the attacks of marauders from the desert. These statements summarize the
Wolfian theory. The contrariety in dialect form was thought to be an invulnerable argument
against the unity of authorship; and for a time the epic of the ancient world was declared to be
the work of many hands, the ballads sung by rhapsodists of many names; and the Iliad, with
its astonishing display of genius, was declared to be authorless.

Less than a century has elapsed since the theory was propounded. The subject has received
a wealth of attention and study unknown before. Discoveries have been made in philology which
have practically raised it to the rank of a science; and to-day the atomistic theory of Wolf is
not received. Grote and Mahaffy have theories which vary markedly from the great original; and
the result of a century of investigation is, that scholars do now
generally believe that some one author, or two at most, did give shape
to the great epic of the Greek people.

Wolf, Lachmann, and Bert have shown the follies of men of genius
when pursuing a line of evidence to prove a favorite theory.

Their assumptions are often absurd, and their conclusions, once admitting
their premises, are a logical necessity.

The spirit of iconoclasm rested, not with the authority of the book, but assailed the geographic
and topographical features.

Troy was declared a dream. The Trojan War had never been.

But Schliemann has proven to virtual demonstration the existence
of, not only a Troy, but the Troy about which Hector and Achilles
fought.

This iconoclasm has nowhere more fully displayed itself than in its attitude toward the Bible. That
book comes properly under the head of literature, for the reason that the general line of attack
during this century has been made from a literary standpoint. Of course, there has always been, whether
easily discoverable or not, an undertone of skepticism of the rank
sort.

Oftentimes the battle has been avowedly against the book as a professed inspiration. Strauss
and Rénan made no cloak for their deed. But in many instances the method of procedure has
been to study, as under a calcium light, the literary style, the linguistic peculiarities,
the whole work as a literary composition. In this regard the method of criticism was such as
was used in dissecting Homer's works. Each author laid down canons of criticism by which to
measure the book in question. He cut the work into fragments. He stated such and such parts were
the work of an early writer, while certain others were the additions of men unknown, far removed
in time and place. For the most part these assumptions were wholly arbitrary, as may be seen
by reading the authors on the various books. The thing which is the most observable is their
lack of agreement, while the method used is the dogmatic. They all agree that the book is not
of the date nor authorship usually assigned to it; but what the date and who the author, is very
seldom agreed between any two.

The criticism is largely of the ipse dixit sort, and the grounds
of attack are, though rationalistic, seldom rationally taken.

In the vaunted name of reason, the most monstrous absurdities are perpetrated. The line of argument
professed to be used is inductive; but in reality the inductive element in this criticism stands second,
and the deductive element has the chief seat in the synagogue. The assumption in the case,
the a priori, sine qua non ("without which nothing")--these are the all-important elements in
the discussion. It is the Homeric argument restated. Each man professes to find his hypothesis
in the structure and language of the book. In fact, the author usually began with his hypothesis,
and seeks to find proofs for the staying his assumptions up. The Scriptures are open to investigation.
They challenge it. No one need offer an objection to the most scrutinizing inquiry. The book
is here, and must stand upon its merits. Its high claims need not deter scholarship from its investigation.
Only, to use the language of Bishop Butler in regard to another matter, "Let reason be kept
to." If we are to be regaled with flights of imagination, let them be thus denominated; but
let men not profess to be following the leadership of scholarship
and scientific candor, when they are in reality dealing in imagination
and scientific dogmatism, and appealing to philology to give them
much needed support.

After these years of attack from a literary standpoint, the books of the Bible are less affected
than the Iliad. The Atomist has signally failed to make a single case. Iconoclasm has performed
its task as best it could, and finds its labor lost. The criticism of to-day is, even in Germany,
professedly in favor of the integrity of the Scripture.

But I pass to another part of the literary field. From the Bible to Shakespeare. This, at first
thought, may seem a long journey. There appears but little congruity between the two. The only needed
connection is the similarity of attack. The same spirit has whetted its sword against each;
but the lack of similarity is more apparent than real. The Bible is God's exhibit of human nature
and its relation to the Divine personality and plans. Shakespeare is man's profoundest exhibit
of man in his relation to present and future.

The fields are the same. They differ in extent. The profoundness of Shakespeare seems a shoreward
shallow when viewed alongside the Bible. The Bible and Shakespeare have a further similarity,
not one of character, but of results.

Each has been a potential factor in the stability of the English language. They each present the
noble possibilities of the speech of the Anglo-Saxon. Each has left its indelible impress on speech
and literature. Kossuth's mastery of English is by him attributed to the Bible, Shakespeare,
and Webster's Dictionary. These were his sole masters, and sufficed to give him a command of
language which ranks him among the princes of our English speech. That the authorship of the
Iliad and the books of the Bible should be attacked is cause for little surprise. They were works
of antiquity. It is an observable tendency of the mind to doubt a
thing far removed in time.

We lose sight of evidence. We dispense with the leadership of reason, and let inclination and
imagination guide. This is a bias which antiquity must meet and, if it may, master. If the
Iliad and the Bible were vulnerable in this regard, Shakespeare was not. He was a modern. His
thought is neither ancient nor mediaeval. He has the characteristics of modern life, begotten
of the hot-blooded era in which he lived. The modern Shakespeare is a target for the iconoclast.
It seems but a stone's-cast from our time to the reign of Elizabeth and the day of the English
drama. The time was one of action in every department of society. Conquest, colonization, literature,
were beginning to render the Saxon name illustrious. It was the epoch of chivalry and chivalrous
procedure, such as to create a species of literature and bring it to a perfection which half-wrested
the scepter of supremacy from the hand of the Attic tragedy. In this literature there is a
name which dwarfs all others.

Otway, Ford, Massinger, Webster, Ben Jonson, Green, and Marlowe (some of these men of surprising
genius) must take a lower place, for the master of revels is come. William Shakespeare is
here. His life is not lengthily but plainly writ. He might have said, as did Tennyson's Ulysses,
"I am become a name." It would seem that a man at such a time, with such a reputation, would
have naught to fear from iconoclasm, however fierce. He, in a sense, was known as Raleigh or Essex
were not. He has put himself into human history, and made the world his debtor. The existence
of a man whose personality was admitted by his contemporaries must
be believed in.

Stories concerning him haunted the byways of London and literature. Ben Jonson paid him a tardy
tribute. Men received him as they received Chaucer. But the spirit of the age finds him vulnerable.
Delia Bacon, Smith, O'Connor, Holmes, and Donnelly are leaders who deny Shakespeare's identity. I may
note Donnelly, an American gentleman of research and painstaking which would be creditable to
a German scholar. He must be allowed to be a man of ingenuity. His method of discovering that
Shakespeare was not himself has all the flavor of an invention. It glitters, not with generalities,
but ingenuities. A sample page of his folio, covered with hieroglyphics which mark the progress of
finding the cipher which he thinks the plays contain--such sample page is certainly a marvel,
even to the generation which has read with avidity "Robert Elsmere"
and "Looking Backward."

A peculiarity in it all is, that his explanation makes marvelous doubly so. To believe that a man should
have hidden his authorship of such works as the plays of Shakespeare makes a draft on the credulity
of men too great to be borne. Why Junius should not have revealed himself is not difficult to
discover. His life was at stake. But why the author of "The Tempest," or "King Lear," or "The
Merchant of Venice," should have concealed his personality so carefully that three centuries
have elapsed before men could discover it--this is an enigma no man
can solve.

In general, it is objected by non-believers in Shakespeare that it is impossible to conceive
of a man whose rearing possessed so few advantages as did that of Shakespeare, having written
the plays attributed to him. This is really the strong point in the whole discussion. All other
arguments are subordinate. It is admitted that it does seem impossible for the poacher and
wild country lad to become the poet pre-eminent in English literature. But this question is not
to be decided by a priori reasoning.

The genius displayed in the dramatic works under consideration is little less than miraculous.
This all concede. Now, history has shown that to genius there is a sense in which "all things
are possible." Genius can cross the Alps, can conquer Europe, can dumfound the world. Genius knows
no rules. Once allow genius, and the problem is solved. It is conceded that for a common man,
or even for one of exceptional ability, to have acquired without help the learning which characterizes
the works of Shakespeare is impossible. But the man who wrote Hamlet was no mediocre, be he
Bacon or Shakespeare. He was a superlative genius. This fact admitted, we need have no difficulty
with the problem. It becomes a question a child can answer. The "myriad-minded Shakespeare"
could do what to an ordinary, or even extraordinary, man would be an absolute impossibility. One critic
discovers Shakespeare to be a musician; another, a classical scholar; and so he has been claimed
in almost every field. He was not all. So critics confound us. They also confound themselves.
The genius which could write the plays could master all these, though he squandered his youth.
Let the history of genius guide from this labyrinth. Was not Caesar orator, general, historian?
Was not Napoleon the same? Does not genius destroy all demonstrations with reference to itself?
Do not Pascal, Euler, Da Vinci, and Angelo confound us? How dare we dogmatize as to the doings
of genius? Read Shakespeare, and find you can not discover the characteristic of the man. You can not
in his writings read his interior life. David Copperfield may display Dickens, and Byron's poems
may give us the author's autobiography, and Shelley's writings may give a photograph of his
intellectual self; but Shakespeare's plays give no clew to his character.

He is all. He grovels in Falstaff; he towers in Prospero. He smites all strings that have music
in them. He baffles us like a spirit, hiding himself in darkness. To attribute the authorship
of the plays to Bacon is, to my thought, not to rid us of our difficulty, but rather to increase
difficulty. Bacon we know. He was jurist, statesman, natural philosopher. Add to these the
possibility of his having written Shakespeare, and the magnificence of his achievement would dwarf
that of Shakespeare. Space forbids dwelling on this longer, though the theme is fascinating
to any lover of letters. The thought in this paper (and that goes without the saying) is, not
to discuss thoroughly these various phases of literary iconoclasm, but rather to call attention
to them and to co-ordinate them.

I desire to show that these phases of criticism are not difficult of explanation. These are
natural, and are the outgrowth of an image-making age.

Study the age, understand it thoroughly, and the literature of that period can hardly be a puzzling
question. The nineteenth century will stand in history as the chiefest iconoclast which has arisen
in the world's first six thousand years. And its science, statecraft, art, and literature will
be looked upon as segments of the one circle, and that circle the century.

VII

Tennyson the Dreamer

My earliest recollections of Alfred Tennyson are associated with the old Harper's volume, green-bound,
large-paged, and frontispieced with two pictures of the poet--one of them, a face bearded,
thoughtful, with eyes seeming not to see the near, but the remote; a head well-poised and noble,
with hair tangled as if matted by the wind; the face, as I a lad thought, of a dreamer and
a poet; and my first impressions, I think, were right, since the years are confirmatory of this
first conviction. The second portrait pictured the poet wrapped in his cloak, standing, lost in
thought, alone upon a cliff, gazing solitary at the sea, and listening.

If I do not mistake, these pictures caught the poet's spirit in so far as pictures can portray spirit.
Tennyson was always alone beside a sea, looking, listening, dreaming; and as dreamer this article
purposes portraying him.

Tennyson was, his life through, a recluse. He dwelt apart. He was as one who stands afar oft and
listens to the shock of battle, hears the echo of cannon's roar, and so conceives a remote
picture of the tragedy of onset. English poetry began with Chaucer, outrider to a king, associate
with State affairs, participant in those turbulencies recorded in Froissart's voluble "Chronicles."
He was a courtier. Camp and king's antechamber and embassage and battle made the arsis and thesis
of his poetry, and his poems are a picture of Edward III's age, accurate as if a king's pageant passing
flung shadow in a stream along whose bank it marched.

Spenser was a recluse, looking on the world's movement as an Oriental woman watches the street
from her latticed window. Shakespeare was bon vivant, a player, therefore a brief chronicler
of that time and of all times. He floated in people as birds in air. Dramatists have need
to study men and women as a sculptor does anatomy. Seclusions are not the qualifications for
dramatic art. Dryden was court follower and sycophant and a literary debauchee. Milton was publicist.
Burns, loving and longing for courts and society, was enforced in his seclusion, and therefore
angry at it. Wordsworth dwelt apart from men, as one who lives far from a public thoroughfare,
where neither the dust nor bustle of travel can touch his bower of quiet; in its quality of
isolation, Grasmere was an island in remote seas. Keats was a lad, dreaming in some dim Greek
temple, listening to a fountain's plash at midnight which never whitened into dawn.

Nor does there seem to be reasonable room for doubt that poetry, aside from the drama, gains
by seclusion and solitude. Much of Bayard Taylor's verse has a delicious flavor of poetry. He could
write dreamily, as witness "The Metempsychosis of the Pine" and "Hylas," or he brings us into
an Arab's tent as fellow-guest with him; but he belonged too much to the world. Traveler, newspaper
correspondent, translator, ambassador, he was all these, and his varied exploits and attrition
of the crowded world hindered the cadences of his poetry. William Cullen Bryant lost as poet by
being journalist, his vocation drying up the fountains of his poetry. America's representative
poet, James Russell Lowell, was editor, essayist, diplomat, poet,--in every department distinguished.
His essay on Dante ranks him among the great expositors of that melancholy Florentine. Yet
who of us has not wished he might have consecrated himself to poetry as priest to the altar?
We gained in the publicist and essayist, but lost from the poet. And our ultimate loss out-topped
our gain; for essayists and ambassadors are more numerous than poets. Had Lowell been a man of one
service, and that service poetry, what might he not have left us
as a poet's bequest?

Would he had lived in some forest primeval, from whose shadows mountains climbed to meet the dawns, and
streams stood in silver pools or broke into laughter on the stones, and where winds among the
pines were constant ministrants of melody! Solitudes minister to poets. You can hear a fountain
best at midnight, because then quiet rules.

Tennyson was a solitary.

Hallam Tennyson's biography of the laureate resents the opinion that his father was unsocial,
but really leaves the commonly-received opinion unrefuted. Tennyson's reticence and love of contemplation
and aloneness amounted to a passion. He was not a man of the people. He fled from tourists as
if they brought a plague with them. He did nothing but dream. You might as easily catch the whip-poor-will,
whose habitation changes at an approaching step, as Tennyson. His
was not in the widest sense a companionable nature.

He cared to be alone and to be let dream, and resented intrusion and a disturbance of his solitude.
Some have dreamless sleep, like the princess in "The Sleeping Beauty;" others sleep to dream,
and to wake them by a hand's touch or a voice, however loved, would be to break the sweet continuity
of their dreams. Seeing Tennyson was as he was, his solitude helped him. I think moonlight was wine
to his spirit, and the dim voices of rolling breakers heard afar woke his passion and his poetry.

A
dramatist needs the touching of living hands and sound of living human voices, the uproar of
the human sea; for is he not poet of street and court and market-place and holiday? But there
is a poetry which needs these accessories as little as a lover needs
a throng to keep him company.

Tennyson's poetry was such. We are not to conceive him as Lord Tennyson and inhabitant of the
House of Lords. He did not belong there save as a recognition of splendid ability. If we are
to get a clew to his genius, he must always be conceived as a recluse, who truly heard the world's
words, but at a dim remove. There is remoteness in his poetry. The long ago was the day whose sunlight
flooded his path. The illustrious Greek era and the Mediaeval Age were fields where his hosts
mustered for battle. Consider how little of Tennyson's noblest poetry belongs to his own era.
"The May Queen;" "Locksley Hall," and its complement, "Sixty Years
After;"

"In a Hospital Ward;" "The Grandmother;" his patriotic effusions; "Maud;" and "In Memoriam,"
sum up the modern contributions; nor is all of this impregnated with a genuinely modern spirit.
"Enoch Arden" might have belonged to a lustrum of centuries ago, and "The May Queen" to remote decades.
He writes in the nineteenth century, rarely of it, though, as is inevitable, he colors his thoughts
of long-ago yesterdays with the colors of to-day. He is not strictly a contemporaneous poet.
"Dora," "The Gardener's Daughter," and others of the sort, have no
time ear-marks.

"The Princess" discusses a living problem, but from the artistic background of a knightly
era. "Locksley Hall," earlier and later, "Maud" and "In Memoriam" are about the only genuinely
contemporaneous poems. My suggestion is, Tennyson hugs the shadows of yesterdays; nor need we go
far to find the philosophy of this seizure of the past. Romance gathers in twilights. It is
hard to persuade ourselves that those heroisms which make souls mighty as the gods, belong to
here and now. Imagination fixes this golden age in what Tennyson would call "the underworld" of time.
Greek mythology was the essential poetry of nature, and mediaevalism
the essential poetry of manhood.

Nothing, as appears to me, was more accurate and in keeping with Tennysonian genius than this choosing
Greek antiquity and mediaevalism as the theater for his poetry; for he was the chief romance
poet since Edmund Spenser. Spenser and Tennyson are the poets laureate of chivalry. What Spenser
did in his age, that Tennyson did in his.

So recall the chronological location of Tennyson's poetry. "Tithonus," "Oenone," "Ulysses,"
"Tiresias," "Amphion," "The Hesperides," "The Merman," "Demeter and Persephone." Do we not seem
rather reading titles from some classic poet than from a poet of the nineteenth century?

The historical trilogy belongs to the mediaeval centuries; "Harold," "à Becket," and "Queen Mary"
are of yesterday. Tennyson reached backward, as a child reaches over toward its mother. "Boadicea"
belongs to a still earlier age of English history; and certainly "The Idyls of the King" "Sir
Galahad," "St. Simeon Stylites," "St. Agnes," "The Mystic," "Merlin and the Gleam," belong
to the romantic, half-hidden era of history and of thought. "Sir John Oldcastle" and "Columbus"
belong to the visible historic era, while in his wonderful "Rizpah"
the poet has knit the present to dim centuries of the remotest past;
and the tragic "Lucretius" takes us once more into the classic period.

To the purely romantic belong "Recollections of the Arabian Nights," "The Lotos-Eaters," "The Talking
Oak," "A Dream of Fair Women," and "Godiva." Now subtract these poems and their kin from the bulk of Tennyson's
poetry, and the remainder will appear comparatively small. Certainly we may affirm with safety
that Tennyson was poet of the past.

You can get the poetry of the Alhambra only by moonlight; and to a mind so wholly poetic as Tennyson's
it seemed possible to get the poetry of conduct only by seeing it in the moonlight of departed
years. To-day is matter-of-fact in dress and design; mediaevalism was fanciful, picturesque,
romantic. Chivalry was the poetry of the Christ in civilization; and the knight warring to recover
the tomb of God was the poem among soldiers, and in entire consonance with his nature, Tennyson's
poetic genius flits back into the poetic days, as I have seen birds flit back into a forest.
In Tennyson's poetry two things are clear. They are mediaeval in location; they are modern in temper.
Their geography is yesterday, their spirit is to-day; and so we have
the questions and thoughts of our era as themes for Tennyson's voice
and lute.

His treatment is ancient: his theme is recent. He has given diagnosis and alleviation of present
sickness, but hides face and voice behind morion and shield.

Tennyson celebrates the return to nature. This return "The Poet's Song" voices:

"The rain had fallen, the Poet arose; He passed by the town and out of the street; A light wind
blew from the gates of the sun, And waves of shadow went over the wheat, And he sat him down
in a lonely place, And chanted a melody loud and sweet, That made the wild-swan pause in her
cloud, And the lark drop down at his feet.

The swallow stopt as he hunted the bee, The snake slipt under a spray; The wild hawk stood with
the down on his beak, And stared, with his foot on the prey; And the nightingale thought, 'I
have sung many songs, But never a one so gay; For he sings of what the world will be When the
years have died away.'"

Away from palaces to solitude; out of cities to hedgerows and the woods and wild-flowers,--there
is the secret of perennial poetry. And Tennyson is the climax of this dissent from Pope and Dryden
as elaborated in Goldsmith, Cowper, Burns, Thomson, and Wordsworth. The best of this wine was
reserved for the last of the feast; for Tennyson appears to me the
greatest of the nature poets. And this return to nature, as the phrase
goes, means taking this earth as a whole, which we are to do more
and still more. Thomson's poetry was not pastoral poetry at its best;
seeing inanimate nature is not in itself sufficient theme for poetry,
lacking passion, depth, power. Sunrise, and flowing stream, and tossing
seas are valuable as associates of the soul and helping it to self-understanding.
Tennyson took both men and nature into his interpretation of nature.
His voice it is, saying,

"O would that my tongue could utter The
thoughts that arise in me!"

The sea helps the soul's lack by supplying
words and music. Between the inscription on the cylinder, however,
and the subjects engraved upon it there is seldom, if ever, any connection, except when a portrait
is given of the god or King of whom the owner calls himself the servant.

A hole was drilled through the length of the cylinder, and through this a string was passed.
Instead of the string a rod of metal or ivory was often employed; this was fixed in a frame
of gold or bronze, and the cylinder was thus able to turn upon it. When the seal was used it
was rolled over the soft clay, leaving an indelible impression behind. Among the objects found
at Tello are balls of clay, which were attached to papyrus documents, like the seals of mediæval
deeds, and sealed with the cylinders of the post-masters of Sargon and Naram-Sin. Above the
seal comes the address, in one case to Naram-Sin, in another to the high-priest of Lagas. It
is evident that a postal system had already been established between Lagas and Agade or Akkad,
the capital of Sargon’s empire. The impressions show that the seals must have been very beautiful
specimens of workmanship. They all belonged to high officials; one to Dada, “the seer of the
palace,” another to the high-priest of Lagas himself.

Great attention was paid to the hair of the head and beard. But this was more especially the
case among the Semites, who were a bearded race. The older Sumerian population had but little
hair upon the face, and to the last the typical Babylonian was distinguished from the Assyrian
by the greater absence of beard. The result was that while the Semite encouraged his hair to
grow, the Sumerian shaved it except in the case of old men. Most of the Sumerian heads which
have been discovered in the excavations of Tello have smooth faces and shorn heads. The figures
represented on the so-called Stela of the Vultures, one of the earliest examples of Chaldean
art, are without beards, and on the early seal-cylinders the gods alone, as a rule, are permitted
to wear them. We are reminded of the Egyptian custom which forbade the beard except to the
King and the god. The barber, in fact, occupied an important position in ancient Babylonia,
and the old Sumerian code of laws enjoins that a son who denies his father shall be shorn and
sold as a slave.

With the rise of Semitic supremacy, however, there is a great change. Naram-Sin, in the bas-relief
of Diarbekr, wears beard and whiskers and mustache like the Assyrians of a later day, and like
them also his hair is artificially curled, though to a lesser extent. The same long beard also
distinguishes Khammurabi in a piece of sculpture in which he is entitled “the king of the land
of the Amorites.” The gods, too, now assume a mustache as well as a beard and take upon them
a Semitic character.

The use of cosmetics must have become widely spread, and many of the small stone vases in which
they were kept and which have been found on the sites of Babylonian cities were doubtless intended
for the hair-dresser. The oil that was poured upon the hair made it bright and shining and
it was worn long whether it grew on the head or on the face. The Babylonians had long been
known as “the people of the black heads,” perhaps in contrast to the fairer inhabitants of
the Kurdish mountains to the north, and the black hair, frizzled and curled, was now allowed
to be visible. The working classes bound it with a simple fillet; the wealthier members of
society protected it with caps and tiaras. But all alike were proud of it; the days were past
when a beardless race had held rule in Western Asia.

CHAPTER VI. TRADES, HOUSES, AND LAND; WAGES AND PRICES

Babylonia, as we have seen, was essentially an industrial country. In spite of its agricultural
basis and the vast army of slaves with which it was filled, it was essentially a land of trades
and manufactures. Its manufacturing fame was remembered into classical days. One of the rooms
in the palace of Nero was hung with Babylonian tapestries, which had cost four millions of
sesterces, or more than £32,000, and Cato, it is said, sold a Babylonian mantle because it
was too costly and splendid for a Roman to wear. The wool of which the cloths and rugs of Babylonia
were made was derived from the flocks which fed on the banks of the Euphrates, and a large
body of artisans was employed in weaving it into tapestries and curtains, robes and carpets.
They were woven in bright and vari-colored patterns; the figures of men and animals were depicted
upon them and the bas-relief or fresco could be replaced upon the wall by a picture in tapestry.
The dyes were mainly vegetable, though the kermes or cochineal-insect, out of which the precious
scarlet dye was extracted, was brought from the neighborhood of the Indus. So at least Ktesias
states in the age of the Persian empire; and since teak was found by Mr. Taylor among the ruins
of Ur, it is probable that intercourse with the western coast of India went back to an early
date. Indeed an old bilingual list of clothing gives sindhu as the name of a material which
is explained to be “vegetable wool;” in this we must see the cotton which in the classical
epoch was imported from the island of Tylos, in the Persian Gulf, but which, as its name declares,
must have originally been “the Indian” plant.

The looms and weavers of Babylonia are, as is natural, repeatedly referred to in the contracts,
many of which, moreover, relate to the sale and purchase of wool. One of them even shows us
Belshazzar, the son and heir-apparent of the King Nabonidos, as a wool-merchant on a considerable
scale. “The sum of 20 manehs for wool,” it says, “the property of Belshazzar, the son of the
king, which has been handed over to Iddin-Merodach, the son of Basa, the son of Nur-Sin, through
the agency of Nebo-zabit, the servant of the house of Belshazzar, the son of the king, and
the secretaries of the son of the king. In the month Adar (February) of the eleventh year (of
Nabonidos) the debtor shall pay the money, 20 manehs. The house of —— the Persian and all the
property of Iddin-Merodach in town and country shall be the security of Belshazzar, the son
of the king, until he shall pay in full the money aforesaid. The money which shall (meanwhile)
accrue upon (the wool) he shall pay as interest.” Then follow the names of five witnesses and
a priest, as well as the date and the place of registration. This was Babylon, and the priest,
Bel-akhi-iddin, who helped to witness the deed was a brother of Nabonidos and consequently
the uncle of Belshazzar.

The weight of the wool that was sold is unfortunately not stated. But considering that 20 manehs,
or £180, was paid for it, there must have been a considerable amount of it. In the reign of
Cambyses the amount of wool needed for the robe of the image of the Sun-goddess Â was as much
as 5 manehs 5 shekels in weight. Wealthy land-owners kept large flocks of sheep, chiefly for
the sake of their wool. Their prices varied greatly. Thus in the fourth year of Nabonidos,
6 shekels, or 18s., were given for a sheep, while in the thirteenth year of the same King,
18 sheep fetched only 35 shekels, or less than 6s., each. In the first year of Cyrus, 6 lambs
were sold for 8¼ shekels, and 5 other lambs for 7¼ shekels, while 1 sheep cost only one shekel
and a quarter; in his sixth year the price of a single sheep had risen to 4 shekels (12s.).
Under Cambyses we find sheep selling for 7 and 7¼ shekels apiece. In the eighth year of Nabonidos,
100 sheep were sold for 50 shekels after they had been slaughtered; it is clear, therefore,
that the dead animal was considered less valuable than the living one.

On the other hand, sheep cost a good deal to feed when the grazing season was over, and they
had to be fed “in the stall.” A document dated in the seventh year of Cyrus states that 32
sheep required each day 1 pi 28 qas (or about 95 quarts) of grain, while 160 full-grown animals
consumed daily 4 pi 16 qas, or more than 240 quarts. In the reign of Cambyses 1 pi 4 qas of
fodder were needed daily for 20 old sheep, 100 qas for 100 younger sheep, and the same amount
also for 200 lambs. At this time 2 pi of grain cost 6½ shekels; consequently the cost of keeping
the 20 old sheep alone was about 10s 6d. a day. To this had to be added the wages of the shepherds,
who were free Bedâwin. Hence, it is not wonderful that the owner demanded 7 shekels, or 21s.,
for the sheep he had to sell.

In the Edin or “field,” however, their keep came to but little. The pasturage was common property,
and it was only the wages of the Aramean shepherds who looked after the flock which involved
an outlay. The five shepherds who, in the tenth year of Nabonidos, were paid for their services
by the overseer of the royal flocks in the town of Ruzabu received 30 shekels of silver and
a gur of grain. The gur contained 180 qas, and since in the first year of Cyrus two men received
2 pi 30 qas, or 102 qas, of grain for their support during a month of thirty days, we may,
perhaps, infer that the wages were intended to cover the third part of a month. In this case
each man would have been paid at the rate of 9 shekels, or 37s., a month. It is, however, possible
that the wages were really intended for the full month. The ancient Greeks considered a quart
of wheat a sufficient daily allowance for a grown man, and 180 qas would mean about 1⅗ of a
quart a day for each man.

We may gather from a contract dated the 5th of Sivan in the eighteenth year of Darius that
it was not customary to pay for any sheep that were sold until they had been driven into the
city, the cost of doing so being included in the price. The contract is as follows: “One hundred
sheep of the house of Akhabtum, the mother of Sa-Bel-iddin, the servant of Bel-sunu, that have
been sold to La-Bel, the son of Khabdiya, on the 10th day of the month Ab in the eighteenth
year of Darius the king: The sheep, 200 in number, must be brought into Babylon and delivered
to Supêsu, the servant of Sa-Bel-iddin. If 15 manehs of silver are not paid for the sheep on
the 10th of Ab, they must be paid on 20th of the month. If the money, amounting to 15 manehs,
is not paid, then interest shall be paid according to this agreement at the rate of one shekel
for each maneh per month.” Then come the names of eight witnesses and a priest, the date, and
the place of registration, which was a town called Tsikhu.

The contract is interesting from several points of view. The sheep, it will be seen, belonged
to a woman, and not to her son, who was “the servant” of a Babylonian gentleman and had another
“servant” who acted as his agent at Babylon. The father of the purchaser of the sheep bears
the Hebrew name of ’Abdî, which is transcribed into Babylonian in the usual fashion, and the
name of the purchaser himself, which may be translated “(There is) no Bel,” may imply that
he was a Jew. Akhabtum and her son were doubtless Arameans, and it is noticeable that the latter
is termed a “servant” and not a “slave.”

Before entering the city an octroi duty had to be paid upon the sheep as upon other produce
of the country. The custom-house was at the gate, and the duty is accordingly called “gate-money”
in the contracts. In front of the gate was an open space, the rébit, such as may still be seen
at the entrance to an Oriental town, and which was used as a market-place. The rébit of Nineveh
lay on the north side of the city, in the direction where Sargon built his palace, the ruins
of which are now known as Khorsabad. But besides the market-place outside the walls there were
also open spaces inside them where markets could be held and sheep and cattle sold. Babylon,
it would seem, was full of such public “squares,” and so, too, was Nineveh. The suqi or “streets”
led into them, long, narrow lanes through which a chariot or cart could be driven with difficulty.
Here and there, however, there were streets of a broader and better character, called suli,
which originally denoted the raised and paved ascents which led to a temple. It was along these
that the religious processions were conducted, and the King and his generals passed over them
in triumph after a victory. One of these main streets, called Â-ibur-sabu, intersected Babylon;
it was constructed of brick by Nebuchadnezzar, paved with large slabs of stone, and raised
to a considerable height. It started from the principal gate of the city, and after passing
Ê-Saggil, the great temple of Bel-Merodach, was carried as far as the sanctuary of Istar. When
Assur-bani-pal’s army captured Babylon, after a long siege, the “mercy-seats” of the gods and
the paved roads were “cleansed” by order of the Assyrian King and the advice of “the prophets,”
while the ordinary streets and lanes were left to themselves.

It was in these latter streets, however, that the shops and bazaars were situated. Here the
trade of the country was carried on in shops which possessed no windows, but were sheltered
from the sun by awnings that were stretched across the street. Behind the shops were magazines
and store-houses, as well as the rooms in which the larger industries, like that of weaving,
were carried on. The scavengers of the streets were probably dogs. As early as the time of
Khammurabi, however, there were officers termed rabiani, whose duty it was to look after “the
city, the walls, and the streets.” The streets, moreover, had separate names.

Here and there “beer-houses” were to be found, answering to the public-houses of to-day, as
well as regular inns. The beer-houses are not infrequently alluded to in the texts, and a deed
relating to the purchase of a house in Sippara, of the age of Khammurabi, mentions one that
was in a sort of underground cellar, like some of the beer-houses of modern Germany.

Sippara lay on both sides of the Euphrates, like Babylon, and its two halves were probably
connected by a pontoon-bridge, as we know was the case at Babylon. Tolls were levied for passing
over the latter, and probably also for passing under it in boats. At all events a document
translated by Mr. Pinches shows that the quay-duties were paid into the same department of
the government as the tolls derived from the bridge. The document, which is dated in the twenty-sixth
year of Darius, is so interesting that it may be quoted in full: “The revenue derived from
the bridge and the quays, and the guard-house, which is under the control of Guzanu, the captain
of Babylon, of which Sirku, the son of Iddinâ, has charge, besides the amount derived from
the tolls levied at the bridge of Guzanu, the captain of Babylon, of which Muranu, the son
of Nebo-kin-abli, and Nebo-bullidhsu, the son of Guzanu, have charge: Kharitsanu and Iqubu
(Jacob) and Nergal-ibni are the watchmen of the bridge. Sirku, the son of Iddinâ, the son of
Egibi, and Muranu, the son of Nebo-kin-abli, the son of the watchman of the pontoon, have paid
to Bel-asûa, the son of Nergal-yubal-lidh, the son of Mudammiq-Rimmon, and Ubaru, the son of
Bel-akhi-erba, the son of the watchman of the pontoon, as dues for a month, 15 shekels of white
silver, in one-shekel pieces and coined. Bel-asûa and Ubaru shall guard the ships which are
moored under the bridge. Muranu and his trustees, Bel-asûa and Ubaru, shall not pay the money
derived from the tolls levied at the bridge, which is due each month from Sirku in the absence
of the latter. All the traffic over the bridge shall be reported by Bel-asûa and Ubaru to Sirku
and the watchmen of the bridge.”

House-property was valuable, especially if it included shops. As far back as the reign of Eri-Aku,
or Arisch, 2¼ shekels were given for one which stood on a piece of ground only 1⅚ sar in area,
the sar, if Dr. Reisner is right, being the eighteen-hundredths part of the feddan or acre.
In the twentieth year of Assur-bani-pal, just after a war which had desolated Babylonia, a
house was sold in the provincial town of Erech for 75 shekels (£11 5s.), and in the beginning
of the reign of Nabonidos a carpenter’s shop in Borsippa, the suburb of Babylon, which was
not more than 7 rods, 5 cubits, and 18 inches in length, was bought by the agent of the Syrian
Ben-Hadad-nathan and his wife for 11½ manehs, or £103 10s. On the other hand, in the reign
of Cambyses, we hear of smaller prices being given for houses in Babylon, 4½ manehs for a house
with a piece of land attached to it, and 2 manehs for one that had been the joint property
of a man and his wife; while in the ninth year of Nergal-sharezer a house was sold for only
52½ shekels.

Houses, however, were more frequently let than sold. Already, in the age of Khammurabi, we
have the record of the lease of a house for eight years. At a later date contracts relating
to the renting of houses are numerous. Thus in the sixth year of Cyrus a house was let at a
yearly rent of 10 shekels, part of which was to be paid at the beginning of the year and the
rest in the middle of it. The tenant was to renew the fences when necessary and repair all
dilapidations. He was also expected to send a present to his landlord thrice a year in the
months of Nisan, Tammuz, and Kisleu. Other houses in Babylon in the Persian age were let at
yearly rents of 5 shekels, 5½ shekels, 7½ shekels, 9 shekels, 15 shekels, 20 shekels, 23 shekels,
and 35 shekels, the leases running for two, three, five, and more years. The tenant usually
undertook to keep the property in repair and to make good all dilapidations. Loss in case of
fire or other accidents also fell upon him. Most of the houses seem to have been inhabited
by single families; but there were tenements or flats as well, the rent of which was naturally
lower than that of a whole house. Thus we find a woman paying only 2 shekels, or 6s., a year
for a tenement in the reign of Cambyses.

Any violation of the lease involved a fine, the amount of which was stated in the contract.
A house, for instance, was let at Babylon in the first year of Cambyses for 5 shekels a year,
the rent to be paid in two halves “at the beginning and in the middle of the year.” In this
case a breach of the contract was to be punished by a fine of 10 shekels, or double the amount
of the rent. In other cases the fine was as much as a maneh of silver.

Occasionally the primitive custom was retained of paying the rent in kind instead of in coin.
We even hear of “six overcoats” being taken in lieu of rent. The rent of a house might also
take the place of interest upon a loan, and the property be handed over to the creditor as
security for a debt. Thus in the second and last year of the reign of Evil-Merodach (560 B.C.),
and on the fourth of the month Ab, the following agreement was drawn up at Babylon: “Four manehs
of silver belonging to Nadin-akhi, the son of Nur-Ea, the son of Masdukku, received from Sapik-zeri,
the son of Merodach-nazir, the son of Liu-Merodach. The house of Sapik-zeri, which is in the
street Khuburru, and adjoins the houses of Rimut-Bel, the son of Zeriya, the son of the Egyptian,
and of Zeriya, the son of Bel-edheru, shall be handed over as security to Nadin-akhi. No rent
shall be paid for it, and no interest demanded for the debt. Sapik-zeri shall have it for three
years. He must renew the fences and repair all injuries to the walls. At the end of the three
years Sapik-zeri shall repay the money—namely, four manehs—to Nadin-akhi, and the latter shall
vacate the house. The rent of the warehouse of the eunuch is included, of which Sapik-zeri
enjoys the use. Whatever doors Nadin-akhi may have added to the house during his tenancy he
shall take away.” Then come the names of three witnesses, one of them being the brother of
the creditor, as well as of the clerk who drew up the document.

A few years later, in the fifth year of Nabonidos (551 B.C.), we find the heir-apparent, Belshazzar,
receiving house-property on similar terms. “The house of Nebo-akhi-iddin, the son of Sula,
the son of Egibi,” we read, “which adjoins the house of Bel-iddin, the son of Birrut, the son
of the life-guardsman, is handed over for three years as security for a loan of 1½ manehs to
Nebo-kin-akhi, the agent of Belshazzar, the son of the king, on the following conditions: no
rent shall be paid for the house, and no interest paid on the debt. The tenant shall renew
the fences and make good all dilapidations. At the end of three years the 1½ manehs shall be
paid by Nebo-akhi-iddin to Nebo-kin-akhi, and Nebo-kin-akhi shall vacate the house of Nebo-akhi-iddin.
Witnessed by Kab-tiya, the son of Talnea, the son of Egibi; by Sapik-zeri, the son of Nergal-yukin,
the son of Sin-karab-seme; by Nebo-zer-ibni, the son of Ardia, and the clerk, Bel-akhi-iqisa,
the son of Nebo-balasu-ikbi, at Babylon, the 21st day of Nisam (March) and the fifth year of
Nabonidos, King of Babylon.”

This was not the only transaction of the kind in which Belshazzar appears, though it is true
that his business was carried on by means of agents. Six years later we have another contract
relating to his commercial dealings which has already been quoted above. It illustrates the
intensely commercial spirit of the Babylonians, and we may form some idea of the high estimation
in which trade was held when we see the eldest son of the reigning King acting as a wool merchant
and carrying on business like an ordinary merchant.

An interesting document, drawn up in Babylonia in the eleventh year of Sargon (710 B.C.), shortly
after the overthrow of Merodach-Baladan, contains an account of a lawsuit which resulted from
the purchase of two “ruined houses” in Dur-ilu, a town on the frontier of Elam. They had been
purchased by a certain Nebo-liu for 85 shekels, with the intention of pulling them down and
erecting new buildings on the site. In order to pay the purchase money Nebo-liu demanded back
from “Bel-usatu, the son of Ipunu,” the sum of 30 shekels which he claimed to have lent him.
Bel-usatu at first denied the claim, and the matter was brought into court. There judgment
was given in favor of the plaintiff, and the defendant was ordered to pay him 45 shekels, 15,
or half the amount claimed, being for “costs.” Thereupon Bel-usatu proposed:

“ ‘Instead of the money, take my houses, which are in the town of Der.’ The title-deeds of
these houses, the longer side of which was bounded to the east by the house of Bea, the son
of Sulâ, and to the west by the entrance to a field which partly belonged to the property,
while the shorter side was bounded to the north by the house of Ittabsi, and to the south by
the house of Likimmâ, were signed and sealed by Nebo-usatu, who pledged himself not to retract
the deed or make any subsequent claim, and they were then handed over to Nebo-liu.” The troubles
of the latter, however, were not yet at an end. “Ilu-rabu-bel-sanât, Sennacherib, and Labasu,
the sons of Rakhaz the [priest] of the great god, said to Nebo-liu: ‘Seventy-three shekels
of your money you have received from our father. Give us, therefore, 50 shekels and we will
deliver to you the house and its garden which belonged to our father.’ The house, which was
fit only to be pulled down and rebuilt, along with a grove of forty date-bearing palms, was
situated on the bank of the canal of Dûtu in Dur-ilu, its longer side adjoining on the north
the house of Edheru, the son of Baniya, the priest of Â, and on the south the canal of Dûtu,
while its shorter side was bounded on the east by the house of Nergal-epus, and on the west
by the street Mutaqutu. Nebo-liu agreed, and looked out and gave Rakhaz and his sons 50 shekels
of silver, together with an overcoat and two shekels by way of a bakshish to bind the bargain,
the whole amounting to 52 shekels, paid in full.” The custom of adding a bakshish or “present”
to the purchase-money at the conclusion of a bargain is still characteristic of the East. Other
examples of it are met with in the Babylonian contracts, and prove how immemorially old it
is. Thus in the second year of Darius, when the three sons of a “smith” sold a house near the
Gate of Zamama, at Babylon, to the grandson of another “smith,” besides the purchase money
for the house, which amounted to 67½ shekels, the buyer gave in addition a bakshish of 2½ shekels
(7s. 6d.) as well as “a dress for the lady of the house.” Three shekels were further given
as “a present” for sealing the deed. So too, the negotiations for the sale of some land in
the second year of Evil-Merodach were accompanied by a bakshish of 5 shekels.

Lawsuits connected with the sale or lease of houses do not seem to have been uncommon. One
of the documents which have come down to us from the ancient records of Babylon is a list of
“the judges before whom Sapik-zeri, the son of Zirutu, and Baladhu, the son of Nasikatum, the
slave of the secretary for the Marshlands,” were called upon to appear in a suit relating to
“the house and deed which Zirutu, the father of Sapik-zeri, had sealed and given to Baladhu,”
who had afterward handed both of them over to Sapik-zeri. Among the judges we find the governor
of the Marshlands, who acted as president, the sub-governor, the mayor of Erech, the priest
of Ur, and one of the governors of the district “beyond” the Euphrates. The list is dated the
6th of Nisan or March, in the seventeenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.

The value of land was proportionate to that of house-property. In the early days of Babylonia
its value was fixed by the amount of grain that could be grown upon it, and it was accordingly
in grain that the owner was paid by the purchaser or lessee. Gradually, however, a metal currency
took the place of the grain, and in the later age of Babylonian history even the rent was but
rarely paid in kind. We learn from a lawsuit decided in the reign of Samsu-iluna, the son of
Khammurabi, that it was customary for an estate to be “paced round” by the rabianum or “magistrates”
of the city. The ceremony was equivalent to “beating the bounds” of a parish in modern England,
and it is probable that it was performed every year. Such at least is the custom in Egypt,
where the limits of a piece of property are measured and fixed annually. The Babylonian document
in which the custom is referred to relates to a dispute about a plantation of acacias which
grew in the neighborhood of the modern Tel Sifr. The magistrates, before whom it was brought,
are described as looking after not only the city but also “the walls and streets,” from which
we may gather that municipal commissioners already existed in the Babylonian towns. The plaintiff
made oath before them over the copper libation-bowl of the god of Boundaries, which thus took
the place of the Bible in an English court of law.

A few years later, in the reign of Ammi-zadok, three men rented a field for three years on
terms of partnership, agreeing to give the owner during the first two years 1 gur of grain
upon each feddan or acre. The whole of the third harvest was to go to the lessees, and the
partners were to divide the crop in equal shares “on the day of the harvest.”

When we come to the twelfth century B.C., however, the maneh and shekel have been substituted
for the crops of the field. Thus we hear of 704 shekels and a fraction being paid for a field
which was calculated to produce 3 gur of corn, and of 110 shekels being given for another estate
which contained a grove of date-palms and on which 2 gur of grain were sown. How much grain
could be grown on a piece of land we can gather from the official reports of the cadastral
survey. In the sixth year of Cyrus, for example, the following report was drawn up of the “measurement
of a corn-field and of the corn in the ear” belonging to a Babylonian taxpayer:

Length of      Length of      Amount of      Value in    Tenant.
the field on   the field on   crop.          grain.
its longer     its narrower
side.          side.
1020           395            13 gur, 18   Each 25     Nadbanu.
                              qa, of       gur is
                              which 1        worth 300
                              gur, 18      gur of
                              qa, are      grain.
                              destroyed.
540            550            10 gur, 2    Each 20     Arad-Bel.
                              pi, 29       gur is
                              qa, of       worth 130
                              which 3        gur.
                              gur are
                              destroyed.

The cadastral survey for purposes of taxation went back to an early period of Babylonian history.
It was already at work in the age of Sargon of Akkad. The survey of the district or principality
of Lagas (now Tello) which was drawn up in that remote epoch of history is in our hands, and
is interesting on account of its reference to a “governor” of the land of the Amorites, or
Canaan, who bears the Canaanitish name of Urimelech. The survey states that the district in
question contained 39,694 acres, 1,325 sar, as well as 17 large towns and 8 subdivisions.

Another cadastral survey from Lagas, but of the period of Khammurabi, which has recently been
published by Dr. Scheil, tells us that the towns on the lower banks of “the canal of Lagas”
had to pay the treasury each year 35⅚ shekels of silver according to the assessment of the
tax-collector Sin-mustal. One of the towns was that of the Aramean tribe of Pekod. Another
is called the town of the Brewers, and another is described as “the Copper-Foundry.” Most of
the towns were assessed at half a shekel, though there were some which had to pay a shekel
and more. Among the latter was the town of Ninâ, which gave its name to the more famous Nineveh
on the Tigris. The surveyor, it should be added, was an important personage in Babylonian society,
and the contract tablets of the second Babylonian empire not unfrequently mention him.

Assyria, like Babylonia, has yielded us a good many deeds relating to the sale and lease of
houses and landed estate. We can estimate from them the average value of house-property in
Nineveh in the time of the second Assyrian empire, when the wealth of the Eastern world was
being poured into it and the Assyrian kings were striving to divert the trade of Phœnicia into
their own hands. Thus, in 694 B.C., a house with two doors was sold for 3 manehs 20 shekels,
and two years subsequently another which adjoined it was purchased for 1 maneh “according to
the royal standard.” The contract for the sale is a good example of what an Assyrian deed of
sale in such a case was like. “The nail-marks of Sar-ludari, Akhassuru, and Amat-Suhla, the
wife of Bel-suri, the official, the son of the priest, and owner of the house which is sold.
The house, which is in thorough repair, with its woodwork, doors, and court, situated in the
city of Nineveh and adjoining the houses of Mannu-ki-akhi and Ilu-ittiya and the street Sipru,
has been negotiated for by Zil-Assur, the Egyptian secretary. He has bought it for 1 maneh
of silver according to the royal standard from Sar-ludari, Akhassuru, and Amat-Suhla, the wife
of Bel-duri. The money has been paid in full, and the house received as bought. Withdrawal
from the contract, lawsuits, and claims are hereby excluded. Whoever hereafter at any time,
whether these men or others, shall bring an action and claims against Zil-Assur, shall be fined
10 manehs of silver. Witnessed by Susanqu-khatna-nis, Murmaza the official, Rasuh the sailor,
Nebo-dur-uzur the champion, Murmaza the naval captain, Sin-sar-uzur, and Zidqa (Zedekiah).
The sixteenth of Sivan during the year of office of Zaza, the governor of Arpad (692 B.C.).”
It is noticeable that the first witness has a Syrian name.

One of the characteristics of the Assyrian deeds is that so few of the parties who appear in
them are able to write their names. Nail-marks take the place of seals even in the case of
persons who hold official positions and who are shown by the contracts to have been men of
property. In this respect Assyria offers a striking contrast to Babylonia, where “the nail-mark”
seldom makes its appearance. Closely connected with this inability to write is the absence
of the seal-cylinder, which was part of the ordinary dress of the Babylonian gentleman. In
the Assyrian contracts, on the other hand, it is conspicuous by its absence. The use of it
in Assyria was an imitation of Babylonian manners, and was confined for the most part to the
scribes and higher official class, who had received a literary education.

Land in Assyria was measured by homers rather than by feddans or acres as in Babylonia. In
674 B.C. an estate of 35 homers, in the town of Sairi, was sold for 5 manehs, any infringement
of the contract being punished by a fine of 10 manehs of silver or one of gold, to be paid
into the treasury of the temple of Istar. We learn incidentally from this that the value of
gold to silver at the time was as one to ten. Five years previously 6 homers of land in another
small Assyrian town had been let at an annual rent of 1 maneh of silver “according to the standard
of Carchemish.” In the reign of Assur-bani-pal a homer of corn-land was rented for six years
for 10 shekels a year. The land was calculated to produce 9 qas of grain, and at the end of
the first three years it was stipulated that there should be a rotation of crops. About the
same time two fields, enclosing an area of 3⅔ homers, were leased by a certain Rimu-ana-Bel
of Beth-Abimelech, whose father’s name, Yatanael, shows that he was of Syrian origin. The steward
of “the son of a king” took them for six years at an annual rent of 12 shekels. One of the
fields contained a well, and yielded 15 qas of grain to each homer. It is stated in the contract
that the fields had no mortgage upon them, and that the lessee had a right to the whole of
the crop which they produced.

It was not in Assyria only that plots of ground could be leased and sold in accordance with
the provisions of Assyrian law. Conquest had brought landed property into the hands of Assyrians
in other parts of the Eastern world, and it could be put up to auction at Nineveh, where the
proprietors lived. About 660 B.C., for instance, a considerable estate was thus sold in the
oasis of Singara, in the centre of Mesopotamia. It lay within the precincts of the temple of
Istar, and contained a grove of 1,000 young palms. It included, moreover, a field of 2 homers
planted with terebinths, house-property extending over 6 homers, a house with a corn-field
attached to it, and another house which stood in the grove of Yarkhu, the Moon-god. The whole
was sold for 4 shekels of silver “according to the standard of Carchemish,” and the penalty
for any infringement of the contract was again to be the payment of a maneh of gold (£90) to
the treasury of the goddess Istar. When one of the parties to the contract was of Aramean descent,
it was usual to add an explanatory docket in Aramaic to the deed of sale. Indeed, this seems
to have been sometimes done even where there were no Arameans in the case, so thoroughly had
Aramaic become the common language of trade. Thus in the year of Sennacherib’s office as eponym
(687 B.C.) we hear of the sale of three shops in Nineveh on the part of a certain Dain-kurban,
whose name is written in Aramaic letters on the outer envelope of the deed of sale. Thirty
shekels were paid for them, and a fine of 10 manehs imposed upon anyone who should attempt
to invalidate the sale. The shops seem to have been situated in the Syrian quarter of the city,
as we are told that they were opposite the tenement of Nakharau, “the man of Nahor.”

It will have been noticed how frequently it is stated that a “plantation” or grove of palms
is attached to the house or field which is rented and sold. In Babylonia, in fact, an estate
was not considered complete without its garden, which almost invariably included a clump of
palms. The date-palm was the staple of the country. It was almost the only tree which grew
there, and it grew in marvellous abundance. Stem, leaves, and fruit were all alike turned to
use. The columns and roofing-beams of the temples and houses were made of its stem, which was
also employed for bonding the brick walls of the cities. Its fibres were twisted into ropes,
its leaves woven into baskets. The fruit it bore was utilized in many ways. Sometimes the dates
were eaten fresh, at other times they were dried and exported to foreign lands; out of some
of them wine was made, out of others a rich and luscious sugar. It was little wonder that the
Babylonian regarded the palm as the best gift that Nature had bestowed upon him. Palm-land
necessarily fetched a higher price than corn-land, and we may conclude, from a contract of
the third year of Cyrus, that its valuation was seven and one-half times greater.

Trade partnerships were common, and even commercial companies were not unknown. The great banking
and money-lending firm which was known in Babylonia under the name of its founder, Egibi, and
from which so many of the contract-tablets have been derived, was an example of the latter.
It lasted through several generations and seems to have been but little affected by the political
revolutions and changes which took place at Babylon. It saw the rise and fall of the empire
of Nebuchadnezzar, and flourished quite as much under the Persian as under the native kings.

As far back as the reign of Samsu-iluna we find women entering into partnership with men for
business purposes on a footing of absolute equality. A certain Amat-Samas, for instance, a
devotee of the Sun-god, did so with two men in order to trade with a maneh of silver which
had been borrowed from the treasury of the god. It was stipulated in the deed which was indentured
when the partnership was made that in case of disagreement the capital and interest accruing
from it were to be divided in equal shares among the three partners.

In the later Babylonian period the contract was drawn up in much the same form, though with
a little more detail. In the report of a trial dated the eighth day of Sebat or January, in
the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar II., we have the following reference to one that had
been made twenty-one years before: “A partnership was entered into between Nebo-yukin-abla
and his son Nebo-bel-sunu on the one side and Musezib-Bel on the other, which lasted from the
eighteenth year of Nabopolassar, King of Babylon, to the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar.
The contract was produced before the judge of the judges. Fifty shekels of silver were adjudged
to Nebo-bel-sunu and his father Nebo-yukin-abla. No further agreement or partnership exists
between the two parties.… They have ended their contract with one another. All former obligations
in their names are rescinded.”

One of the latest Babylonian deeds of partnership that have come down to us is dated in the
fifth year of Xerxes. It begins with the statement that “Bel-edheru, son of Nergal-edheru and
Ribâta, son of Kasmani, have entered into partnership with one another, contributing severally
toward it 2½ manehs of silver in stamped shekel-pieces and half a maneh of silver, also in
stamped shekel-pieces. Whatever profits Ribâta shall make on the capital—namely, the 3 manehs
in stamped shekel-pieces—whether in town or country, [he shall divide with] Bel-edheru proportionally
to the share of the latter in the business. When the partnership is dissolved he shall repay
to Bel-edheru the [2½] manehs contributed by him. Ribâta, son of Kasmani, undertakes all responsibility
for the money.” Then come the names of six witnesses.

Money, however, was not the only subject of a deed of partnership. Houses and other property
could be bought and sold and traded with in common. Thus we hear of Itti-Merodach-baladh, the
grandson of “the Egyptian,” and Merodach-sapik-zeri starting as partners with a capital of
5 manehs of silver and 130 empty barrels, two slaves acting as agents, and on another occasion
we find it stipulated that “200 barrels full of good beer, 20 empty barrels, 10 cups and saucers,
90 gur of dates in the storehouse, 15 gur of chickpease (?), and 14 sheep, besides the profits
from the shop and whatever else Bel-sunu has accumulated, shall be shared between him” and
his partner.

The partners usually contributed in equal parts to the business, and the profits were divided
equally among them. Where this was not the case, provision was made for a proportionate distribution
of profit and loss. All profits were included, whether made, to use the language of Babylonian
law, “in town or country.” The partnership was generally entered into for a fixed term of years,
but could be terminated sooner by death or by agreement. One of the partners could be represented
by an agent, who was often a slave; in some instances we hear of the wife taking the place
of her husband or other relation during his absence from home. Thus in a deed dated in the
second year of Nergal-sharezer (559 B.C.) we read: “As long as Pani-Nebo-dhemi, the brother
of Ili-qanua, does not return from his travels, Burasu, the wife of Ili-qanua, shall share
in the business of Ili-qanua, in the place of Pani-Nebo-dhemi. When Pani-Nebo-dhemi returns
she shall leave Ili-qanua and hand over the share to Pani-Nebo-dhemi.” As one of the witnesses
to the document is a “minister of the king” who bears the Syrian name of Salammanu, or Solomon
the son of Baal-tammuh, it is possible that Pani-Nebo-dhemi was a Syrian merchant whose business
obliged him to reside in a foreign country.

That partnerships in Babylonia were originally made for the sake of foreign trade seems probable
from the name given to them. This is kharran, which properly means a “road” or “caravan.” The
earliest partners in trade would have been the members of a caravan, who clubbed together to
travel and traffic in foreign lands and to defend themselves in common from the perils of the
journey.

The products of the Babylonian looms must have been among the first objects which were thus
sent abroad. We have already described the extensive industry which brought wealth into Babylonia
and made it from the earliest ages the centre of the trade in rugs and tapestries, cloths and
clothing. A large part of the industrial population of the country must have been employed
in the factories and shops where the woven and embroidered fabrics were produced and made ready
for sale. Long lists exist giving the names of the various articles of dress which were thus
manufactured. The goodly “Babylonish garment” carried off by Achan from the sack of Jericho
was but one of the many which found their way each year to the shores of the Mediterranean.

The trades of the dyer and the fuller flourished by the side of that of the cloth-maker. So,
too, did the trade of the tanner, leather being much used and finely worked. The shoes of the
Babylonian ladies were famous; and the saddles of the horses were made with elaborate care.

The smith, too, occupied an honorable position. In the earlier period of Babylonian history,
gold, silver, copper, and bronze were the metals which he manufactured into arms, utensils,
and ornaments. At a later date, however, iron also came to be extensively used, though probably
not before the sixteenth century B.C. The use of bronze, moreover, does not seem to go back
much beyond the age of Sargon of Akkad; at all events, the oldest metal tools and weapons found
at Tello are of copper, without any admixture of tin. Most of the copper came from the mines
of the Sinaitic Peninsula, though the metal was also found in Cyprus, to which reference appears
to be made in the annals of Sargon. The tin was brought from a much greater distance. Indeed,
it would seem that the nearest sources for it—at any rate in sufficient quantities for the
bronze of the Oriental world—were India and the Malayan Peninsula on the one hand, and the
southern extremity of Cornwall on the other. It is not surprising, therefore, that it should
have been rare and expensive, and that consequently it was long before copper was superseded
by the harder bronze. Means, however, were found for hardening the copper when it was used,
and copper tools were employed to cut even the hardest of stones.

The metal, after being melted, was run into moulds of stone or clay. It was in this way that
most of the gold and silver ornaments were manufactured which we see represented in the sculptures.
Stone moulds for ear-rings have been found on the site of Nineveh, and the inscriptions contain
many references to jewelry. The gold was also worked by the hand into beaded patterns, or incised
like the silver seals, some of which have come down to us. Most of the gold was originally
brought from the north; in the fifteenth century before our era the gold mines in the desert
on the eastern side of Egypt provided the precious metal for the nations of Western Asia.

A document found among the records of the trading firm of Murasu at Nippur, in the fifth century
B.C., shows that the goldsmith was required to warrant the excellence of his work before handing
it over to the customer, and it may be presumed that the same rule held good for other trades
also. The document in question is a guarantee that an emerald has been so well set in a ring
as not to drop out for twenty years, and has been translated as follows by Professor Hilprecht:
“Bel-akh-iddina and Bel-sunu, the sons of Bel, and Khatin, the son of Bazuzu, have made the
following declaration to Bel-nadin-sumu, the son of Murasu: As to the gold ring set with an
emerald, we guarantee that for twenty years the emerald will not fall out of the ring. If it
should fall out before the end of twenty years, Bel-akh-iddina [and the two others] shall pay
Bel-nadin-sumu an indemnity of ten manehs of silver.” Then come the names of seven witnesses
and of the clerk who drew up the deed, and the artisans add their nail-marks in place of seals.

Many of the articles of daily use in the houses of the people, such as knives, tools of all
kinds, bowls, dishes, and the like, were made of copper or bronze. They were, however, somewhat
expensive, and as late as the reign of Cambyses we find that a copper libation-bowl and cup
cost as much as 4 manehs 9 shekels, (£37 7s.), and about the same time 22 shekels (£3 3s.)
were paid for two copper bowls 7½ manehs in weight. If the weight in this case were equivalent
to that of the silver maneh the cost would have been nearly 4d. per ounce. It must be remembered
that, as in the modern East, the workman expected the metal to be furnished by his customer;
and accordingly we hear of 3 manehs of iron being given to a smith to be made into rods for
bows. Three manehs of iron were also considered sufficient for the manufacture of six swords,
two oboe-rings, and two bolts. All this, of course, belongs to the age of the second Babylonian
empire, when iron had taken the place of bronze.

The carpenter’s trade is another handicraft to which there is frequent allusion in the texts.
Already, before the days of Sargon of Akkad, beams of wood were fetched from distant lands
for the temples and palaces of Chaldea. Cedar was brought from the mountains of Amanus and
Lebanon, and other trees from Elam. The palm could be used for purely architectural purposes,
for boarding the crude bricks of the walls together, or to serve as the rafters of the roof,
but it was unsuitable for doors or for the wooden panels with which the chambers of the temple
or palace were often lined. For such purposes the cedar was considered best, and burnt panels
of it have been found in the sanctuary of Ingurisa at Tello. Down to the latest days panels
of wood were valuable in Babylonia, and we find it stipulated in the leases of houses that
the lessee shall be allowed to remove the doors he has put up at his own expense.

But the carpenter’s trade was not confined to inartistic work. From the earliest age of Babylonian
history he was skilled in making household furniture, which was often of a highly artistic
description. On a seal-cylinder, now in the British Museum, the King is represented as seated
on a chair which, like those of ancient Egypt, rested on the feet of oxen, and similarly artistic
couches and chests, inlaid with ivory or gold, were often to be met with in the houses of the
rich. The Assyrian sculptures show to what perfection the art of the joiner had attained at
the time when Nineveh was the mistress of the civilized world.

The art of the stone-cutter had attained an even higher perfection at a very remote date. Indeed,
the seal-cylinders of the time of Sargon of Akkad display a degree of excellence and finish
which was never surpassed at any subsequent time. The same may be said of the bas-relief of
Naram-Sin discovered at Diarbekr. The combination of realism and artistic finish displayed
in it was never equalled even by the bas-reliefs of Assyria, admirable as they are from many
points of view.

The early stone-cutters of Chaldea tried their skill upon the hardest materials, and engraved
upon them the minutest and most delicate designs. Hæmatite was a favorite material for the
seal-cylinder; the statues of Tello are carved out of diorite, which was brought from the Sinaitic
Peninsula, and stones of similar hardness were manufactured into vases. That such work should
have been attempted in an age when iron and steel were as yet unknown seems to us astonishing.
Even bronze was scarce, and the majority of the tools employed by the workmen were made of
copper, which was artificially hardened when in use. Emery powder or sand was also used, and
the lathe had long been known. When iron was first introduced into the workshops of Babylonia
is doubtful. That the metal had been recognized at a very early period is clear from the fact
that in the primitive picture-writing of the country, out of which the cuneiform syllabary
developed, it was denoted by two characters, representing respectively “heaven” and “metal.”
It would seem, therefore, that the first iron with which the inhabitants of the Babylonian
plain were acquainted was of meteoric origin.

In the age of the Egyptian empire in Asia, at the beginning of the seventeenth century B.C.,
iron was passing into general use. Objects of iron are referred to in the inscriptions, and
a couple of centuries later we hear of iron chariots among the Canaanites, and of ironsmiths
in Palestine, who repair the shattered vehicles of Egyptian travellers in that country. It
must have been at this time that the bronzesmith in Babylonia became transformed into an ironsmith.

Carving in ivory was another trade followed in Babylonia and Assyria. The carved ivories found
on the site of Nineveh are of great beauty, and from a very early epoch ivory was used for
the handles of sceptres, or for the inlaid work of wooden furniture. The “ivory couches” of
Babylonia made their way to the West along with the other products of Babylonian culture, and
Amos (vi. 4) denounces the wealthy nobles of Israel who “lie upon beds of ivory.” Thothmes
III. of Egypt, in the sixteenth century B.C., hunted the elephant on the banks of the Euphrates,
not far from Carchemish, and, as late as about 1100 B.C., Tiglath-pileser I. of Assyria speaks
of doing the same. In the older period of Babylonian history, therefore, the elephant would
have lived on the northern frontier of Babylonian domination, and its tusks would have been
carried down the Euphrates along with other articles of northern trade.

Quite as old as the trade of the carver in ivory was that of the porcelain-maker. The walls
of the palaces and temples of Babylonia and Assyria were adorned with glazed and enamelled
tiles on which figures and other designs were drawn in brilliant colors; they were then covered
with a metallic glaze and fired. Babylonia, in fact, seems to have been the original home of
the enamelled tile and therewith of the manufacture of porcelain. It was a land of clay and
not of stone, and while it thus became necessary to ornament the plain mud wall of the house,
the clay brick itself, when painted and protected by a glaze, was made into the best and most
enduring of ornaments. The enamelled bricks of Chaldea and Assyria are among the most beautiful
relics of Babylonian civilization that have survived to us, and those which adorned the Persian
palace of Susa, and are now in the Museum of the Louvre, are unsurpassed by the most elaborate
productions of modern skill.

Our enumeration of Babylonian trades would not be complete without mention being made of that
of the brick-maker. The manufacture of bricks was indeed one of the chief industries of the
country, and the brick-maker took the position which would be taken by the mason elsewhere.
He erected all the buildings of Babylonia. The walls of the temples themselves were of brick.
Even in Assyria the slavish imitation of Babylonian models caused brick to remain the chief
building material of a kingdom where stone was plentiful and clay comparatively scarce. The
brick-yards stood on the outskirts of the cities, where the ground was low and where a thick
bed of reeds grew in a pond or marsh. These reeds were an important requisite for the brick-maker’s
art; when dried they formed a bed on which the bricks rested while they were being baked by
the sun; cut into small pieces they were mixed with the clay in order to bind it together;
and if the bricks were burnt in a kiln the reeds were used as fuel. They were accordingly artificially
cultivated, and fetched high prices. Thus, in the fourteenth year of Nabonidos, we hear of
2 shekels being given for 200 bundles of reeds for building a bridge across a canal, and a
shekel for 100 bundles to be made into torches. At the same time 55 shekels were paid for 8,000
loads of brick. The possession of a bed of reeds added to the value of an estate, and it is,
therefore, always specified in deeds relating to the sale of property. One, situated at Sippara,
was owned by a scribe, Arad-Bel, who has drawn up several contracts, as we learn incidentally
from a document dated in the seventh year of Cyrus, in which Ardi, the grandson of “the brick-maker,”
agrees to pay two-thirds of the bricks he makes to Arad-Bel, on condition of being allowed
to manufacture them in the reed-bed of the latter. This is described as adjoining “the reed-bed
of Bel-baladan and the plantation of the Sun-god.”

The brick-maker was also a potter, and the manifold products of the potter’s skill, for which
Babylonia was celebrated, were manufactured in the corner of the brick-field. Here also were
made the tablets, which were handed to the professional scribe or the ordinary citizen to be
written upon, and so take the place of the papyrus of ancient Egypt or the paper of to-day.
The brick-maker was thus not only a potter, but the provider of literary materials as well.
He might even be compared with the printer of the modern world, since texts were occasionally
cut in wood and so impressed upon moulds of clay, which, after being hardened, were used as
stamps, by means of which the texts could be multiplied, impressions of them being mechanically
reproduced on other tablets or cylinders of clay.

Another Babylonian trade which must be noticed was that of the vintner. Wine was made from
dates as well as from grapes, while beer, called sikaru, was also manufactured, probably from
some cereal grain. Mention is found of a “wine” that was made from sesame. The vine was not
a native of Babylonia, but must have been introduced into it from the highlands of Armenia
at a very early date, as it was known there long before the days of Sargon of Akkad. Large
quantities of wine and beer were drunk in both Babylonia and Assyria, and reference has already
been made to the bas-relief in which the Assyrian King, Assur-bani-pal, and his Queen are depicted
drinking wine in the gardens of his palace, while the head of his vanquished foe, the King
of Elam, hangs from the branch of a neighboring tree. A receipt, dated the eleventh day of
Iyyar, in the first year of Nabonidos, is for the conveyance of “75 qas of meal and 63 qas
of beer for the sustenance of the artisans;” and in the thirty-eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar
20 shekels were paid for “beer,” the amount of which, however, is unfortunately not stated.
But two “large” casks of new wine cost 11 shekels, and five other smaller casks 10 shekels.
Moreover, the inventory of goods to be handed over to the slave Khunnatu, in the sixth year
of Cambyses, includes fifty casks of “good beer,” which, together with the cup with which it
was drawn, was valued at 60 shekels (£9).

Whether any grape-wine was made in Babylonia itself was questionable; at any rate, the greater
part of that which was drunk there was imported from abroad, more especially from Armenia and
Syria. The wines of the Lebanon were specially prized, the wine of Khilbunu, or Helbon, holding
a chief place among them. The wines, some of which were described as “white,” were distinguished
by the names of the localities where they were made or in which the vines were grown, and Nebuchadnezzar
gives the following list of them: The wine of Izalla, in Armenia; of Tuhimmu, of Zimmini, of
Helbon, of Amabanu, of the Shuhites, of Bit-Kubati, in Elam; of Opis and of Bitati, in Armenia.
To these another list adds: “The wine reserved for the king’s drinking,” and the wines of Nazahzê,
of Lahû, and of the Khabur.

The wine was kept in wine-cellars, and among the Assyrian letters that have come down to us
are some from the cellarers of the King. In one of them it is stated that the wine received
in the month Tebet had been bottled, and that there was no room in the royal cellars in which
it could be stored. The King is therefore asked to allow new cellars to be made.

The various trades formed guilds or corporations, and those who wished to enter one of these
had to be apprenticed for a fixed number of years in order to learn the craft. As we have seen,
slaves could be thus apprenticed by their owners and in this way become members of a guild.
What the exact relation was between the slave and the free members of a trading guild we do
not know, but it is probable that the slave was regarded as the representative of his master
or mistress, who accordingly became, instead of himself, the real member of the corporation.
We perhaps have a parallel in modern England, where a person can be elected a member of one
of the “city companies,” or trade guilds, without being in any way connected with the trade
himself. Through many years penury was his portion. Great events marshaled themselves about him
as if he were their necessary captain. He knew the art of inspiring men, which is, at last, the
mightiest resource of a great soul. He knew how to deal with men,--the finest of the arts. In his
roused moments his eloquence, whether spoken or written, swayed men's judgments and nerved their
hearts. Motley says, "His influence on his auditors was unexampled in the annals of his country
or age." His memory lost nothing; his ability to read men ranks him with Richelieu; he was cautious,
politic, but not slow, though his uniform habit of caution robbed his acts of the fine flavor
of spontaneity; he was painstaking, and as laborious as Philip, which is the last effort of comparison,
seeing Philip's industry was all but without precedent.

If he flooded coasts and inlands by the seas he emptied on them as if the seas were his, he also
inundated courts of kings and assemblies of nobles with appeals, remonstrances, or letters of
instruction or information. He lacked nothing of being ubiquitous, and was the moving spirit of
all occasions where liberty had followers. Nothing eluded nor bewildered him, from which observations
Motley's estimate stands justified; for he called him "The first statesman of his age." Compare
him with Don John of Austria, hero of Lepanto, who was natural son of Emperor Charles V, vivacious,
romantic, brilliant, and conqueror of the Turks at Lepanto, whence his name had risen, like a
star, to flame at the eastern window of every court in Christendom. Made governor of the Netherlands,
he found himself beset by difficulties through which sword and troop
could not cut his way.

Harassed by the distrust, unfaithfulness, and meanness of Philip; hedged by the sagacious
statecraft of his adversary, William of Orange, he attempted the role of war; found himself
defeated by an invisible antagonist, whose name haunted his days and nights--the name was "Father
William"--at last, flared up like an expiring lamp, and died.

Nevertheless, bad seasons sometimes occurred, and there were consequent fluctuations in prices.
This was more especially the case as regards the second staple of Babylonian food and standard
of value—dates. These seem to have been mostly consumed in Babylonia itself, and, though large
quantities of them were accumulated in the royal storehouses, it was upon a smaller scale than
in the case of the grain. Hence we need not be surprised if we find that while in the seventh
year of Nebuchadnezzar a shekel was paid for 1-1/3 ardebs of dates, or about a halfpenny a
quart, in the thirtieth year of the same reign the price had fallen to one-twenty-fifth of
a penny per quart. A little later, in the first year of Cambyses, 100 gur of dates was valued
at 2½ shekels (7s. 6d.), the gur containing 180 qas, which gives 2d. per each qa, and in the
second year of Cyrus a receipt for the payment of “the workmen of the overseer” states that
the following amount of dates had been given from “the royal store-house” for their “food”
during the month Tebet: “Fifty gur for the 50 workmen, 10 gur for 10 shield-bearers, 2 gur
for the overseer, 1 gur for the chief overseer; in all, 63 gurs of dates.” It was consequently
calculated that a workman would consume a gur of dates a month, the month consisting of thirty
days.

About the same period, in the first year of Cyrus, after his conquest of Babylon, we hear of
two men receiving 2 pi 30 qas (102 qas) of grain for the month Tammuz. Each man accordingly
received a little over a qa a day, the wage being practically the same as that paid by Nubtâ
to the slave. On the other hand, a receipt dated in the fifteenth year of Nabonidos is for
2 pi (72 qas) of grain, and 54 qas of dates were paid to the captain of a boat for the conveyance
of mortar, to serve as “food” during the month Tebet. As “salt and vegetables” were also added,
it is probable that the captain was expected to share the food with his crew. A week previously
8 shekels had been given for 91 gur of dates owed by the city of Pallukkatum, on the Pallacopas
canal, to the temple of Uru at Sippara, but the money was probably paid for porterage only.
At all events, five years earlier a shekel and a quarter had been paid for the hire of a boat
which conveyed three oxen and twenty-four sheep, the offering made by Belshazzar “in the month
Nisan to Samas and the gods of Sippara,” while 60 qas of dates were assigned to the two boatmen
for food. This would have been a qa of dates per diem for each boatman, supposing the voyage
was intended to last a month. In the ninth year of Nabonidos 2 gur of dates were given to a
man as his nourishment for two months, which would have been at the rate of 6 qas a day. In
the thirty-second year of the same reign 36 qas of dates were valued at a shekel, or a penny a qa.

In the older period of Babylonian history prices were reckoned in grain, and, as might be expected,
payment was made in kind rather than in coin. A thousand years later, under Merodach-nadin-akhi,
cash had become the necessary medium of exchange. A cart and harness were sold for 100 shekels,
six riding-horses for 300 shekels, one “ass from the West” for 130 shekels, one steer for 30
shekels, 34 gur 56 qas of grain for 137 shekels, 2 homers 40 qas of oil for 16 shekels, two
long-sleeved robes for 12 shekels, and nine shawls for 18 shekels.

From this time forward we hear no more of payment in kind, except where wages were paid in
food, or where tithes and other offerings were made to the temples. Though the current price
of wheat continued to fix the market standard of value, business was conducted by means of
stamped money. The shekel and the maneh were the only medium of exchange.

There are numerous materials for ascertaining the average prices of commodities in the later
days of Babylonian history. We have already seen what prices were given for sheep and wool,
as well as the cost of some of the articles of household use. In the thirty-eighth year of
Nebuchadnezzar 100 gur of wheat were valued at only 1 maneh—that is to say, the qa of wheat
was worth only the hundredth part of a shilling—while at the same time the price of dates was
exactly one-half that amount. I mean that I wonder whether the footprint is old, or if it has been
made recently."

"Him's quite noo," interposed our guide.

"How d'ye know, Mak?"
"'Cause me see."

"Ay; but what do you see that enables you to form
such an opinion?"

"O Ralph, how can you expect a nigger to understand
such a sentence as that?" said Jack, as he turned to Mak and added,
"What do you see?"

"Me see one leetle stick brok in middel. If you
look to him you see him white and clean. If hims was old, hims would
be mark wid rain and dirt." In the twenty-fourth year of Nebuchadnezzar 13 shekels had been
paid for a full-grown ox, and as much as 67 shekels in the fourth year of Nabonidos, while
in the first year of Evil-Merodach a cow was sold for 15 shekels. The ass was in more request,
especially if it was of “Western” breed. In the reign of Merodach-nadin-akhi, it will be remembered,
as much as 130 shekels had been paid for one of these, as compared with 30 shekels given for
an ox, and though at a subsequent period the prices were lower, the animal was still valued
highly. "I say, lads, isn't one of the crew of that canoe a woman?" said Jack, looking over his
shoulder, but not ceasing for an instant to ply his paddle.

"Can't tell," answered Peterkin.--"What say you, Mak?"

"Ye-is, massa,"
replied the guide, with some hesitation. When we consider that only three years later a shekel was considered sufficient
wages for a butcher for a month’s work, we can better estimate what these prices signify. Nevertheless,
the value of the ass seems to have been steadily going down in Babylonia; at all events, in
the fourth year of Nabonidos, 1 maneh, or 60 shekels, was demanded for one, and the animal
does not seem to have been in any way superior to another which was sold for 50 shekels a few
years afterward.

Clothes and woven stuffs were naturally of all prices. In the time of Nebuchadnezzar a cloak
or overcoat used by the mountaineers cost only 4½ shekels, though under Cambyses we hear of
58 shekels being charged for eight of the same articles of dress, which were supplied to the
“bowmen” of the army. Three years earlier 7½ shekels had been paid for two of these cloaks.
About the same time ten sleeved gowns cost 35 shekels.

Metal was more expensive. As has already been noticed, a copper libation-bowl and cup were
sold for 4 manehs 9 shekels (£37 7s.), and two copper dishes, weighing 7½ manehs (19 pounds
8 ounces. troy), were valued at 22 shekels. And on that blank stone, over a nameless grave in
the cemetery of Pere la Chaise, let some angel sculptor chisel, "Here lies Jean Valjean, Hero."

II

Some Words on Loving Shakespeare

What a soul wants is to feel itself
of service.

Life's chances seem drunk up like the dews from morning flowers in
burning summer times. To risk literary adventure after these centuries
of thinking and saying (and such thinking and such saying!), requires
the audacity of a simpleton or the boldness of the old discoverers. Bitumen was more valuable. In the
fourteenth year of Nabonidos a contract was made to supply five hundred loads of it for 50
shekels, while at the same time the wooden handle of an ax was estimated at one shekel. Five
years previously only 2 shekels had been given for three hundred wooden handles, but they were
doubtless intended for knives. In the sixth year of Nabonidos the grandson of the priest of
Sippara undertook to supply “bricks, reeds, beams, doors, and chopped straw for building the
house of Rimut” for 12 manehs of silver, or £108. The wages of the workmen were not included
in the contract.

With these prices it is instructive to compare those recorded on contract-tablets of the age
of the third dynasty of Ur, which preceded that under which Abraham was born. Ages change customs
and costumes, but not characters. Bring Shakespeare down to now, and see how rational his men and
women become; and we, as central to his movement, may begin to reckon
on the periodicity of souls as of comets. We learn from them that bitumen could be
purchased at the time at the rate of half a shekel of silver for each talent of 60 manehs,
and that logs of wood imported from abroad were sold at the rate of eight, ten, twelve, and
sixty logs a shekel, the price varying according to the nature of the wood. Prices, however,
as might be expected, are usually calculated in grain, oil, and the like, and the exact relation
of these to the shekel and maneh has still to be determined.

