There was an uncontrollable break in her voice. She had a dreadful feeling that she might be
going to cry. She made a great effort to be cold and clear.

"I don't think you have a right--just because I am your wife--to control every moment of my
time. In fact you haven't. And I have a right to make engagements.... I want you to know I
am going to an afternoon meeting at Lady Beach-Mandarin's. Next week. And I have promised to
go to Miss Alimony's to tea."

"Go on," he encouraged grimly.

"I am going to Lady Viping's to dinner, too; she asked me and I accepted. Later."

She stopped.

He seemed to deliberate. Then suddenly he thrust out a face of pinched determination.

"You won't, my lady," he said. "You bet your life you won't. No! So now then!"

And then gripping his hands more tightly behind him, he made a step towards her.

"You're losing your bearings, Lady Harman," he said, speaking with much intensity in a low
earnest voice. "You don't seem to be remembering where you are. You come and you tell me you're
going to do this and that. Don't you know, Lady Harman, that it's your wifely duty to obey,
to do as I say, to behave as I wish?" He brought out a lean index finger to emphasize his remarks.
"And I am going to make you do it!" he said.

"I've a perfect right," she repeated.

He went on, regardless of her words. "What do you think you can do, Lady Harman? You're going
to all these places--how? Not in my motor-car, not with my money. You've not a thing that isn't
mine, that I haven't given you. And if you're going to have a lot of friends I haven't got,
where're they coming to see you? Not in my house! I'll chuck 'em out if I find 'em. I won't
have 'em. I'll turn 'em out. See?"

"I'm not a slave."

"You're a wife--and a wife's got to do what her husband wishes. You can't have two heads on
a horse. And in this horse--this house I mean, the head's--me!"

"I'm not a slave and I won't be a slave."

"You're a wife and you'll stick to the bargain you made when you married me. I'm ready in reason
to give you anything you want--if you do your duty as a wife should. Why!--I spoil you. But
this going about on your own, this highty-flighty go-as-you-please,--no man on earth who's
worth calling a man will stand it. I'm not going to begin to stand it.... You try it on. You
try it, Lady Harman.... You'll come to your senses soon enough. See? You start trying it on
now--straight away. We'll make an experiment. We'll watch how it goes. Only don't expect me
to give you any money, don't expect me to help your struggling family, don't expect me to alter
my arrangements because of you. Let's keep apart for a bit and you go your way and I'll go
mine. And we'll see who's sick of it first, we'll see who wants to cry off."

"I came down here," said Lady Harman, "to give you a reasonable notice----"

"And you found I could reason too," interrupted Sir Isaac in a kind of miniature shout, "you
found I could reason too!"

"You think----Reason! I won't," said Lady Harman, and found herself in tears. By an enormous
effort she recovered something of her dignity and withdrew. He made no effort to open the door,
but stood a little hunchbacked and with a sense of rhetorical victory surveying her retreat.

§11

After Lady Harman's maid had left her that night, she sat for some time in a low easy chair
before her fire, trying at first to collect together into one situation all the events of the
day and then lapsing into that state of mind which is not so much thinking as resting in the
attitude of thought. Presently, in a vaguely conceived future, she would go to bed. She was
stunned by the immense dimensions of the row her simple act of defiance had evoked.

And then came an incredible incident, so incredible that next day she still had great difficulty
in deciding whether it was an actuality or a dream. She heard a little very familiar sound.
It was the last sound she would have expected to hear and she turned sharply when she heard
it. The paper-covered door in the wall of her husband's apartment opened softly, paused, opened
some more and his little undignified head appeared. His hair was already tumbled from his pillow.

He regarded her steadfastly for some moments with an expression between shame and curiosity
and smouldering rage, and then allowed his body, clad now in purple-striped pyjamas, to follow
his head into her room. He advanced guiltily.

"Elly," he whispered. "Elly!"

She caught her dressing-gown about her and stood up.

"What is it, Isaac?" she asked, feeling curiously abashed at this invasion.

"Elly," he said, still in that furtive undertone. "Make it up!"

"I want my freedom," she said, after a little pause.

"Don't be silly, Elly," he whispered in a tone of remonstrance and advancing slowly towards
her. "Make it up. Chuck all these ideas."

She shook her head.

"We've got to get along together. You can't go going about just anywhere. We've got--we've
got to be reasonable."

He halted, three paces away from her. His eyes weren't sorrowful eyes, or friendly eyes; they
were just shiftily eager eyes. "Look here," he said. "It's all nonsense.... Elly, old girl;
let's--let's make it up."

She looked at him and it dawned upon her that she had always imagined herself to be afraid
of him and that indeed she wasn't. She shook her head obstinately.

"It isn't reasonable," he said. "Here, we've been the happiest of people----Anything in reason
I'll let you have." He paused with an effect of making an offer.

"I want my autonomy," she said.

"Autonomy!" he echoed. "Autonomy! What's autonomy? Autonomy!"

This strange word seemed first to hold him in distressful suspense and then to infuriate him.

"I come in here to make it up," he said, with a voice charged with griefs, "after all you've
done, and you go and you talk of autonomy!"

His feelings passed beyond words. An extremity of viciousness flashed into his face. He gave
vent to a snarl of exasperation, "Ya-ap!" he said, he raised his clenched fists and seemed
on the verge of assault, and then with a gesture between fury and despair, he wheeled about
and the purple-striped pyjamas danced in passionate retreat from her room.

"Autonomy!..."

A slam, a noise of assaulted furniture, and then silence.

Lady Harman stood for some moments regarding the paper-covered door that had closed behind
him. Then she bared her white forearm and pinched it--hard.

It wasn't a dream! This thing had happened.

§12

At a quarter to three in the morning, Lady Harman was surprised to find herself wide awake.
It was exactly a quarter to three when she touched the stud of the ingenious little silver
apparatus upon the table beside her bed which reflected a luminous clock-face upon the ceiling.
And her mind was no longer resting in the attitude of thought but extraordinarily active. It
was active, but as she presently began to realize it was not progressing. It was spinning violently
round and round the frenzied figure of a little man in purple-striped pyjamas retreating from
her presence, whirling away from her like something blown before a gale. That seemed to her
to symbolize the completeness of the breach the day had made between her husband and herself.

She felt as a statesman might feel who had inadvertently--while conducting some trivial negotiations--declared
war.

She was profoundly alarmed. She perceived ahead of her abundant possibilities of disagreeable
things. And she wasn't by any means as convinced of the righteousness of her cause as a happy
warrior should be. She had a natural disposition towards truthfulness and it worried her mind
that while she was struggling to assert her right to these common social freedoms she should
be tacitly admitting a kind of justice in her husband's objections by concealing the fact that
her afternoon's companion was a man. She tried not to recognize the existence of a doubt, but
deep down in her mind there did indeed lurk a weakening uncertainty about the right of a woman
to free conversation with any man but her own. Her reason disowned that uncertainty with scorn.
But it wouldn't go away for all her reason. She went about in her mind doing her utmost to
cut that doubt dead....

She tried to go back to the beginning and think it all out. And as she was not used to thinking
things out, the effort took the form of an imaginary explanation to Mr. Brumley of the difficulties
of her position. She framed phrases. "You see, Mr. Brumley," she imagined herself to be saying,
"I want to do my duty as a wife, I have to do my duty as a wife. But it's so hard to say just
where duty leaves off and being a mere slave begins. I cannot believe that blind obedience
is any woman's duty. A woman needs--autonomy." Then her mind went off for a time to a wrestle
with the exact meaning of autonomy, an issue that had not arisen hitherto in her mind.... And
as she planned out such elucidations, there grew more and more distinct in her mind a kind
of idealized Mr. Brumley, very grave, very attentive, wonderfully understanding, saying illuminating
helpful tonic things, that made everything clear, everything almost easy. She wanted someone
of that quality so badly. The night would have been unendurable if she could not have imagined
Mr. Brumley of that quality. And imagining him of that quality her heart yearned for him. She
felt that she had been terribly inexpressive that afternoon, she had shirked points, misstated
points, and yet he had been marvellously understanding. Ever and again his words had seemed
to pierce right through what she had been saying to what she had been thinking. And she recalled
with peculiar comfort a kind of abstracted calculating look that had come at times into his
eyes, as though his thoughts were going ever so much deeper and ever so much further than her
blundering questionings could possibly have taken them. He weighed every word, he had a guarded
way of saying "Um...."

Her thoughts came back to the dancing little figure in purple-striped pyjamas. She had a scared
sense of irrevocable breaches. What would he do to-morrow? What should she do to-morrow? Would
he speak to her at breakfast or should she speak first to him?... She wished she had some money.
If she could have foreseen all this she would have got some money before she began....

So her mind went on round and round and the dawn was breaking before she slept again.

§13

Mr. Brumley, also, slept little that night. He was wakefully mournful, recalling each ungraceful
incident of the afternoon's failure in turn and more particularly his dispute with the ticket
clerk, and thinking over all the things he might have done--if only he hadn't done the things
he had done. He had made an atrocious mess of things. He felt he had hopelessly shattered the
fair fabric of impressions of him that Lady Harman had been building up, that image of a wise
humane capable man to whom a woman would gladly turn; he had been flurried, he had been incompetent,
he had been ridiculously incompetent, and it seemed to him that life was a string of desolating
inadequacies and that he would never smile again.

The probable reception of Lady Harman by her husband never came within his imaginative scope.
Nor did the problems of social responsibility that Lady Harman had been trying to put to him
exercise him very greatly. The personal disillusionment was too strong for that.

About half-past four a faint ray of comfort came with the consideration that after all a certain
practical incapacity is part of the ensemble of a literary artist, and then he found himself
wondering what flowers of wisdom Montaigne might not have culled from such a day's experience;
he began an imitative essay in his head and he fell asleep upon this at last at about ten minutes
past five in the morning.

There were better things than this in the composition of Mr. Brumley, we shall have to go deep
into these reserves before we have done with him, but when he had so recently barked the shins
of his self-esteem they had no chance at all.

CHAPTER THE SEVENTH

LADY HARMAN LEARNS ABOUT HERSELF

§1

So it was that the great and long incubated quarrel between Lady Harman and her husband broke
into active hostilities.

In spite of my ill-concealed bias in favour of Lady Harman I have to confess that she began
this conflict rashly, planlessly, with no equipment and no definite end. Particularly I would
emphasize that she had no definite end. She had wanted merely to establish a right to go out
by herself occasionally, exercise a certain choice of friends, take on in fact the privileges
of a grown-up person, and in asserting that she had never anticipated that the participation
of the household would be invoked, or that a general breach might open between herself and
her husband. It had seemed just a definite little point at issue, but at Sir Isaac's angry
touch a dozen other matters that had seemed safely remote, matters she had never yet quite
properly thought about, had been drawn into controversy. It was not only that he drew in things
from outside; he evoked things within herself. She discovered she was disposed to fight not
simply to establish certain liberties for herself but also--which had certainly not been in
her mind before--to keep her husband away from herself. Something latent in the situation had
surprised her with this effect. It had arisen out of the quarrel like a sharpshooter out of
an ambuscade. Her right to go out alone had now only the value of a mere pretext for far more
extensive independence. The ultimate extent of these independences, she still dared not contemplate.

She was more than a little scared. She wasn't prepared for so wide a revision of her life as
this involved. She wasn't at all sure of the rightfulness of her position. Her conception of
the marriage contract at that time was liberal towards her husband. After all, didn't she owe
obedience? Didn't she owe him a subordinate's co-operation? Didn't she in fact owe him the
whole marriage service contract? When she thought of the figure of him in his purple-striped
pyjamas dancing in a paroxysm of exasperation, that sense of responsibility which was one of
her innate characteristics reproached her. She had a curious persuasion that she must be dreadfully
to blame for provoking so ridiculous, so extravagant an outbreak....

§2

She heard him getting up tumultuously and when she came down,--after a brief interview with
her mother who was still keeping her room,--she found him sitting at the breakfast-table eating
toast and marmalade in a greedy malignant manner. The tentative propitiations of his proposal
to make things up had entirely disappeared, he was evidently in a far profounder rage with
her than he had been overnight. Snagsby too, that seemly domestic barometer, looked extraordinarily
hushed and grave. She made a greeting-like noise and Sir Isaac scrunched "morning" up amongst
a crowded fierce mouthful of toast. She helped herself to tea and bacon and looking up presently
discovered his eye fixed upon her with an expression of ferocious hatred....

He went off in the big car, she supposed to London, about ten and she helped her mother to
pack and depart by a train a little after midday. She made a clumsy excuse for not giving that
crisp little trifle of financial assistance she was accustomed to, and Mrs. Sawbridge was anxiously
tactful about the disappointment. They paid a visit of inspection and farewell to the nursery
before the departure. Then Lady Harman was left until lunch to resume her meditation upon this
unprecedented breach that had opened between her husband and herself. She was presently moved
to write a little note to Lady Beach-Mandarin expressing her intention of attending a meeting
of the Social Friends and asking whether the date was the following Wednesday or Thursday.
She found three penny stamps in the bureau at which she wrote and this served to remind her
of her penniless condition. She spent some time thinking out the possible consequences of that.
How after all was she going to do things, with not a penny in the world to do them with?

Lady Harman was not only instinctively truthful but also almost morbidly honourable. In other
words, she was simple-minded. The idea of a community of goods between husband and wife had
never established itself in her mind, she took all Sir Isaac's presents in the spirit in which
he gave them, presents she felt they were on trust, and so it was that with a six-hundred pound
pearl necklace, a diamond tiara, bracelets, lockets, rings, chains and pendants of the most
costly kind--there had been a particularly beautiful bracelet when Millicent was born, a necklace
on account of Florence, a fan painted by Charles Conder for Annette and a richly splendid set
of old Spanish jewellery--yellow sapphires set in gold--to express Sir Isaac's gratitude for
the baby--with all sorts of purses, bags, boxes, trinkets and garments, with a bedroom and
morning-room rich in admirable loot, and with endless tradespeople willing to give her credit
it didn't for some time occur to her that there was any possible means of getting pocket-money
except by direct demand from Sir Isaac. She surveyed her balance of two penny stamps and even
about these she felt a certain lack of negotiable facility.

She thought indeed that she might perhaps borrow money, but there again her paralyzing honesty
made her recoil from the prospect of uncertain repayment. And besides, from whom could she
borrow?...

It was on the evening of the second day that a chance remark from Peters turned her mind to
the extensive possibilities of liquidation that lay close at hand. She was discussing her dinner
dress with Peters, she wanted something very plain and high and unattractive, and Peters, who
disapproved of this tendency and was all for female wiles and propitiations, fell into an admiration
of the pearl necklace. She thought perhaps by so doing she might induce Lady Harman to wear
it, and if she wore it Sir Isaac might be a little propitiated, and if Sir Isaac was a little
propitiated it would be much more comfortable for Snagsby and herself and everyone. She was
reminded of a story of a lady who sold one and substituted imitation pearls, no one the wiser,
and she told this to her mistress out of sheer garrulousness. "But if no one found out," said
Lady Harman, "how do you know?"

"Not till her death, me lady," said Peters, brushing, "when all things are revealed. Her husband,
they say, made it a present of to another lady and the other lady, me lady, had it valued...."

Once the idea had got into Lady Harman's head it stayed there very obstinately. She surveyed
the things on the table before her with a slightly lifted eyebrow. At first she thought the
idea of disposing of them an entirely dishonourable idea, and if she couldn't get it out of
her head again at least she made it stand in a corner. And while it stood in a corner she began
putting a price for the first time in her life first upon this coruscating object and then
that. Then somehow she found herself thinking more and more whether among all these glittering
possessions there wasn't something that she might fairly regard as absolutely her own. There
were for example her engagement ring and, still more debateable, certain other pre-nuptial
trinkets Sir Isaac had given her. Then there were things given her on her successive birthdays.
A birthday present of all presents is surely one's very own? But selling is an extreme exercise
of ownership. Since those early schooldays when she had carried on an unprofitable traffic
in stamps she had never sold anything--unless we are to reckon that for once and for all she
had sold herself.

Concurrently with these insidious speculations Lady Harman found herself trying to imagine
how one sold jewels. She tried to sound Peters by taking up the story of the necklace again.
But Peters was uninforming. "But where," asked Lady Harman, "could such a thing be done?"

"There are places, me lady," said Peters.

"But where?"

"In the West End, me lady. The West End is full of places--for things of that sort. There's
scarcely anything you can't do there, me lady--if only you know how."

That was really all that Peters could impart.

"How does one sell jewels?" Lady Harman became so interested in this side of her perplexities
that she did a little lose sight of those subtler problems of integrity that had at first engaged
her. Do jewellers buy jewels as well as sell them? And then it came into her head that there
were such things as pawnshops. By the time she had thought about pawnshops and tried to imagine
one, her original complete veto upon any idea of selling had got lost to sight altogether.
Instead there was a growing conviction that if ever she sold anything it would be a certain
sapphire and diamond ring which she didn't like and never wore that Sir Isaac had given her
as a birthday present two years ago. But of course she would never dream of selling anything;
at the utmost she need but pawn. She reflected and decided that on the whole it would be wiser
not to ask Peters how one pawned. It occurred to her to consult the Encyclopædia Britannica
on the subject, but though she learnt that the Chinese pawnshops must not charge more than
three per cent. per annum, that King Edward the Third pawned his jewels in 1338 and that Father
Bernardino di Feltre who set up pawnshops in Assisi and Padua and Pavia was afterward canonized,
she failed to get any very clear idea of the exact ritual of the process. And then suddenly
she remembered that she knew a finished expert in pawnshop work in the person of Susan Burnet.
Susan could tell her everything. She found some curtains in the study that needed replacement,
consulted Mrs. Crumble and, with a view to economizing her own resources, made that lady send
off an urgent letter to Susan bidding her come forthwith.

§3

It has been said that Fate is a plagiarist. Lady Harman's Fate at any rate at this juncture
behaved like a benevolent plagiarist who was also a little old-fashioned. This phase of speechless
hostility was complicated by the fact that two of the children fell ill, or at least seemed
for a couple of days to be falling ill. By all the rules of British sentiment, this ought to
have brought about a headlong reconciliation at the tumbled bedside. It did nothing of the
sort; it merely wove fresh perplexities into the tangled skein of her thoughts.

On the day after her participation in that forbidden lunch Millicent, her eldest daughter,
was discovered with a temperature of a hundred and one, and then Annette, the third, followed
suit with a hundred. This carried Lady Harman post haste to the nursery, where to an unprecedented
degree she took command. Latterly she had begun to mistrust the physique of her children and
to doubt whether the trained efficiency of Mrs. Harblow the nurse wasn't becoming a little
blunted at the edges by continual use. And the tremendous quarrel she had afoot made her keenly
resolved not to let anything go wrong in the nursery and less disposed than she usually was
to leave things to her husband's servants. She interviewed the doctor herself, arranged for
the isolation of the two flushed and cross little girls, saw to the toys and amusements which
she discovered had become a little flattened and disused by the servants' imperatives of tidying
up and putting away, and spent the greater part of the next two days between the night and
day nurseries.

She was a little surprised to find how readily she did this and how easily the once entirely
authoritative Mrs. Harblow submitted. It was much the same surprise that growing young people
feel when they reach some shelf that has hitherto been inaccessible. The crisis soon passed.
At his first visit the doctor was a little doubtful whether the Harman nursery wasn't under
the sway of measles, which were then raging in a particularly virulent form in London; the
next day he inclined to the view that the trouble was merely a feverish cold, and before night
this second view was justified by the disappearance of the "temperatures" and a complete return
to normal conditions.

But as for that hushed reconciliation in the fevered presence of the almost sacrificial offspring,
it didn't happen. Sir Isaac merely thrust aside the stiff silences behind which he masked his
rage to remark: "This is what happens when wimmen go gadding about!"

That much and glaring eyes and compressed lips and emphasizing fingers and then he had gone again.

Indeed rather than healing their widening breach this crisis did much to spread it into strange
new regions. It brought Lady Harman to the very verge of realizing how much of instinct and
how much of duty held her the servant of the children she had brought into the world, and how
little there mingled with that any of those factors of pride and admiration that go to the
making of heroic maternal love. She knew what is expected of a mother, the exalted and lyrical
devotion, and it was with something approaching terror that she perceived that certain things
in these children of hers she hated. It was her business she knew to love them blindly; she
lay awake at night in infinite dismay realizing she did nothing of the sort. Their weakness
held her more than anything else, the invincible pathos of their little limbs in discomfort
so that she was ready to die she felt to give them ease. But so she would have been held, she
was assured, by the little children of anybody if they had fallen with sufficient helplessness
into her care.

Just how much she didn't really like her children she presently realized when in the feeble
irascibility of their sickness they fell quarrelling. They became--horrid. Millicent and Annette
being imprisoned in their beds it seemed good to Florence when she came back from the morning's
walk, to annex and hide a selection of their best toys. She didn't take them and play with
them, she hid them with an industrious earnestness in a box window-seat that was regarded as
peculiarly hers, staggering with armfuls across the nursery floor. Then Millicent by some equally
mysterious agency divined what was afoot and set up a clamour for a valued set of doll's furniture,
which immediately provoked a similar outcry from little Annette for her Teddy Bear. Followed
woe and uproar. The invalids insisted upon having every single toy they possessed brought in
and put upon their beds; Florence was first disingenuous and then surrendered her loot with
passionate howlings. The Teddy Bear was rescued from Baby after a violent struggle in which
one furry hind leg was nearly twisted off. It jars upon the philoprogenitive sentiment of our
time to tell of these things and still more to record that all four, stirred by possessive
passion to the profoundest depths of their beings, betrayed to an unprecedented degree in their
little sharp noses, their flushed faces, their earnest eyes, their dutiful likeness to Sir
Isaac. He peeped from under Millicent's daintily knitted brows and gestured with Florence's
dimpled fists. It was as if God had tried to make him into four cherubim and as if in spite
of everything he was working through.

Lady Harman toiled to pacify these disorders, gently, attentively, and with a faint dismay
in her dark eyes. She bribed and entreated and marvelled at mental textures so unlike her own.
Baby was squared with a brand new Teddy Bear, a rare sort, a white one, which Snagsby went
and purchased in the Putney High Street and brought home in his arms, conferring such a lustre
upon the deed that the lower orders, the very street-boys, watched him with reverence as he
passed. Annette went to sleep amidst a discomfort of small treasures and woke stormily when
Mrs. Harblow tried to remove some of the spikier ones. And Lady Harman went back to her large
pink bedroom and meditated for a long time upon these things and tried to remember whether
in her own less crowded childhood with Georgina, either of them had been quite so inhumanly
hard and grasping as these feverish little mites in her nursery. She tried to think she had
been, she tried to think that all children were such little distressed lumps of embittered
individuality, and she did what she could to overcome the queer feeling that this particular
clutch of offspring had been foisted upon her and weren't at all the children she could now
imagine and desire,--gentle children, sweet-spirited children....

§4

Susan Burnet arrived in a gusty mood and brought new matter for Lady Harman's ever broadening
consideration of the wifely position. Susan, led by a newspaper placard, had discovered Sir
Isaac's relations to the International Bread and Cake Stores.

"At first I thought I wouldn't come," said Susan. "I really did. I couldn't hardly believe
it. And then I thought, 'it isn't her. It can't be her!' But I'd never have dreamt before that
I could have been brought to set foot in the house of the man who drove poor father to ruin
and despair.... You've been so kind to me...."

Susan's simple right-down mind stopped for a moment with something very like a sob, baffled
by the contradictions of the situation.

"So I came," she said, with a forced bright smile.

"I'm glad you came," said Lady Harman. "I wanted to see you. And you know, Susan, I know very
little--very little indeed--of Sir Isaac's business."

"I quite believe it, my lady. I've never for one moment thought you----I don't know how to
say it, my lady."

"And indeed I'm not," said Lady Harman, taking it as said.

"I knew you weren't," said Susan, relieved to be so understood.

And the two women looked perplexedly at one another over the neglected curtains Susan had come
to "see to," and shyness just snatched back Lady Harman from her impulse to give Susan a sisterly
kiss. Nevertheless Susan who was full of wise intuitions felt that kiss that was never given,
and in the remote world of unacted deeds returned it with effusion.

"But it's hard," said Susan, "to find one's own second sister mixed up in a strike, and that's
what it's come to last week. They've struck, all the International waitresses have struck,
and last night in Piccadilly they were standing on the kerb and picketing and her among them.
With a crowd cheering.... And me ready to give my right hand to keep that girl respectable!"

And with a volubility that was at once tumultuous and effective, Susan sketched in the broad
outlines of the crisis that threatened the dividends and popularity of the International Bread
and Cake Stores. The unsatisfied demands of that bright journalistic enterprise, The London
Lion, lay near the roots of the trouble. The London Lion had stirred it up. But it was only
too evident that The London Lion had merely given a voice and form and cohesion to long smouldering
discontents.

Susan's account of the matter had that impartiality which comes from intellectual incoherence,
she hadn't so much a judgment upon the whole as a warring mosaic of judgments. It was talking
upon Post Impressionist lines, talking in the manner of Picasso. She had the firmest conviction
that to strike against employment, however ill-paid or badly conditioned, was a disgraceful
combination of folly, ingratitude and general wickedness, and she had an equally strong persuasion
that the treatment of the employees of the International Bread and Cake Stores was such as
no reasonably spirited person ought to stand. She blamed her sister extremely and sympathized
with her profoundly, and she put it all down in turn to The London Lion, to Sir Isaac, and
to a small round-faced person called Babs Wheeler, who appeared to be the strike leader and
seemed always to be standing on tables in the branches, or clambering up to the lions in Trafalgar
Square, or being cheered in the streets.

But there could be no mistaking the quality of Sir Isaac's "International" organization as
Susan's dabs of speech shaped it out. It was indeed what we all of us see everywhere about
us, the work of the base energetic mind, raw and untrained, in possession of the keen instruments
of civilization, the peasant mind allied and blended with the Ghetto mind, grasping and acquisitive,
clever as a Norman peasant or a Jew pedlar is clever, and beyond that outrageously stupid and
ugly. It was a new view and yet the old familiar view of her husband, but now she saw him not
as little eager eyes, a sharp nose, gaunt gestures and a leaden complexion, but as shops and
stores and rules and cash registers and harsh advertisements and a driving merciless hurry
to get--to get anything and everything, money, monopoly, power, prominence, whatever any other
human being seemed to admire or seemed to find desirable, a lust rather than a living soul.
Now that her eyes were at last opened Lady Harman, who had seen too little heretofore, now
saw too much; she saw all that she had not seen, with an excess of vision, monstrous, caricatured.
Susan had already dabbed in the disaster of Sir Isaac's unorganized competitors going to the
wall--for charity or the state to neglect or bandage as it might chance--the figure of that
poor little "Father," moping hopelessly before his "accident" symbolized that; and now she
gave in vivid splotches of allusion, glimpses of the business machine that had replaced those
shattered enterprises and carried Sir Isaac to the squalid glory of a Liberal honours list,--the
carefully balanced antagonisms and jealousies of the girls and the manageresses, those manageresses
who had been obliged to invest little bunches of savings as guarantees and who had to account
for every crumb and particle of food stock that came to the branch, and the hunt for cases
and inefficiency by the inspectors, who had somehow to justify a salary of two hundred a year,
not to mention a percentage of the fines they inflicted.

"There's all that business of the margarine," said Susan. "Every branch gets its butter under
weight,--the water squeezes out,--and every branch has over weight margarine. Of course the
rules say that mixing's forbidden and if they get caught they go, but they got to pay-in for
that butter, and it's setting a snare for their feet. People who've never thought to cheat,
when they get it like that, day after day, they cheat, my lady.... And the girls get left food
for rations. There's always trouble, it's against what the rules say, but they get it. Of course
it's against the rules, but what can a manageress do?--if the waste doesn't fall on them, it
falls on her. She's tied there with her savings.... Such driving, my lady, it's against the
very spirit of God. It makes scoffers point. It makes people despise law and order. There's
Luke, he gets bitterer and bitterer; he says that it's in the Word we mustn't muzzle the ox
that treadeth out the corn, but these Stores, he says, they'd muzzle the ox and keep it hungry
and make it work a little machine, he says, whenever it put down its head in the hope of finding
a scrap...."

So Susan, bright-eyed, flushed and voluble, pleading the cause of that vague greatness in humanity
that would love, that would loiter, that would think, that would if it could give us art, delight
and beauty, that turns blindly and stumblingly towards joy, towards intervals, towards the
mysterious things of the spirit, against all this sordid strenuousness, this driving destructive
association of hardfisted peasant soul and Ghetto greed, this fool's "efficiency," that rules
our world to-day.

Then Susan lunged for a time at the waitress life her sister led. "She has 'er 'ome with us,
but some--they haven't homes."

"They make a fuss about all this White Slave Traffic," said Susan, "but if ever there were
white slaves it's the girls who work for a living and keep themselves respectable. And nobody
wants to make an example of the men who get rich out of them...."

And after some hearsay about the pressure in the bake-houses and the accidents to the van-men,
who worked on a speeding-up system that Sir Isaac had adopted from an American business specialist,
Susan's mental discharge poured out into the particulars of the waitresses' strike and her
sister's share in that. "She would go into it," said Susan, "she let herself be drawn in. I
asked her never to take the place. Better Service, I said, a thousand times. I begged her,
I could have begged her on my bended knees...."

The immediate cause of the strike it seemed was the exceptional disagreeableness of one of
the London district managers. "He takes advantage of his position," repeated Susan with face
aflame, and Lady Harman was already too wise about Susan's possibilities to urge her towards
particulars....

Now as Lady Harman listened to all this confused effective picturing of the great catering
business which was the other side of her husband and which she had taken on trust so long,
she had in her heart a quite unreasonable feeling of shame that she should listen at all, a
shyness, as though she was prying, as though this really did not concern her. She knew she
had to listen and still she felt beyond her proper jurisdiction. It is against instinct, it
is with an enormous reluctance that women are bringing their quick emotions, their flashing
unstable intelligences, their essential romanticism, their inevitable profound generosity into
the world of politics and business. If only they could continue believing that all that side
of life is grave and wise and admirably managed for them they would. It is not in a day or
a generation that we shall un-specialize women. It is a wrench nearly as violent as birth for
them to face out into the bleak realization that the man who goes out for them into business,
into affairs, and returns so comfortably loaded with housings and wrappings and trappings and
toys, isn't, as a matter of fact, engaged in benign creativeness while he is getting these
desirable things.

§5

Lady Harman's mind was so greatly exercised by Susan Burnet's voluminous confidences that it
was only when she returned to her own morning room that she recalled the pawning problem. She
went back to Sir Isaac's study and found Susan with all her measurements taken and on the very
edge of departure.

"Oh Susan!" she said.

She found the matter a little difficult to broach. Susan remained in an attitude of respectful
expectation.

"I wanted to ask you," said Lady Harman and then broke off to shut the door. Susan's interest
increased.

"You know, Susan," said Lady Harman with an air of talking about commonplace things, "Sir Isaac
is very rich and--of course--very generous.... But sometimes one feels, one wants a little
money of one's own."

"I think I can understand that, my lady," said Susan.

"I knew you would," said Lady Harman and then with a brightness that was slightly forced, "I
can't always get money of my own. It's difficult--sometimes."

And then blushing vividly: "I've got lots of things.... Susan, have you ever pawned anything?"

And so she broached it.

"Not since I got fairly into work," said Susan; "I wouldn't have it. But when I was little
we were always pawning things. Why! we've pawned kettles!..."

She flashed three reminiscences.

Meanwhile Lady Harman produced a little glittering object and held it between finger and thumb.
"If I went into a pawnshop near here," she said, "it would seem so odd.... This ring, Susan,
must be worth thirty or forty pounds. And it seems so silly when I have it that I should really
be wanting money...."

Susan displayed a peculiar reluctance to handle the ring. "I've never," she said, "pawned anything
valuable--not valuable like that. Suppose--suppose they wanted to know how I had come by it."

"It's more than Alice earns in a year," she said. "It's----" she eyed the glittering treasure;
"it's a queer thing for me to have."

A certain embarrassment arose between them. Lady Harman's need of money became more apparent.
"I'll do it for you," said Susan, "indeed I'll do it. But----There's one thing----"

Her face flushed hotly. "It isn't that I want to make difficulties. But people in our position--we
aren't like people in your position. It's awkward sometimes to explain things. You've got a
good character, but people don't know it. You can't be too careful. It isn't sufficient--just
to be honest. If I take that----If you were just to give me a little note--in your handwriting--on
your paper--just asking me----I don't suppose I need show it to anyone...."

"I'll write the note," said Lady Harman. A new set of uncomfortable ideas was dawning upon
her. "But Susan----You don't mean that anyone, anyone who's really honest--might get into trouble?"

"You can't be too careful," said Susan, manifestly resolved not to give our highly civilized
state half a chance with her.

§6

The problem of Sir Isaac and just what he was doing and what he thought he was doing and what
he meant to do increased in importance in Lady Harman's mind as the days passed by. He had
an air of being malignantly up to something and she could not imagine what this something could
be. He spoke to her very little but he looked at her a great deal. He had more and more of
the quality of a premeditated imminent explosion....

One morning she was standing quite still in the drawing-room thinking over this now almost
oppressive problem of why the situation did not develop further with him, when she became aware
of a thin flat unusual book upon the small side table near the great armchair at the side of
the fire. He had been reading that overnight and it lay obliquely--it might almost have been
left out for her.

She picked it up. It was The Taming of the Shrew in that excellent folio edition of Henley's
which makes each play a comfortable thin book apart. A curiosity to learn what it was had drawn
her husband to English Literature made her turn over the pages. The Taming of the Shrew was
a play she knew very slightly. For the Harmans, though deeply implicated like most other rich
and striving people in plans for honouring the immortal William, like most other people found
scanty leisure to read him.

As she turned over the pages a pencil mark caught her eye. Thence words were underlined and
further accentuated by a deeply scored line in the margin.

   "But for my bonny Kate, she must with me.
   Nay; look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret;
   I will be master of what is mine own:
   She is my goods, my chattels; she is my house,
   She is my household stuff, my field, my barn,
   My horse, my ox, my ass, my any thing:
   And here she stands, touch her whoever dare;
   I'll bring mine action on the proudest He,
   That stops my way in Padua."

With a slightly heightened colour, Lady Harman read on and presently found another page slashed
with Sir Isaac's approval....

Her face became thoughtful. Did he mean to attempt--Petruchio? He could never dare. There were
servants, there were the people one met, the world.... He would never dare....

What a strange play it was! Shakespear of course was wonderfully wise, the crown of English
wisdom, the culminating English mind,--or else one might almost find something a little stupid
and clumsy.... Did women nowadays really feel like these Elizabethan wives who talked--like
girls, very forward girls indeed, but girls of sixteen?...

She read the culminating speech of Katherine and now she had so
forgotten Sir Isaac she scarcely noted the pencil line that endorsed the
immortal words.
   Such duty as the Subject owes the Prince,
   Even such a woman oweth to her husband;
   And when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour,
   And not obedient to his honest will,
   What is she but a foul contending Rebel
   And graceless traitor to her loving Lord?
   I am ashamed that women are so simple
   To offer war, where they should kneel for peace;

         *       *       *       *       *

   My mind has been as big as one of yours,
   My heat as great; my reason, haply, more,
   To bandy word for word and frown for frown.
   But now I see our lances are but straws;
   Our strength is weak, our weakness past compare,
   Seeming that most which we indeed least are...."

She wasn't indignant. Something in these lines took hold of her protesting imagination.

She knew that so she could have spoken of a man.

But that man,--she apprehended him as vaguely as an Anglican bishop apprehends God. He was
obscured altogether by shadows; he had only one known characteristic, that he was totally unlike
Sir Isaac. And the play was false she felt in giving this speech to a broken woman. Such things
are not said by broken women. Broken women do no more than cheat and lie. But so a woman might
speak out of her unconquered wilfulness, as a queen might give her lover a kingdom out of the
fullness of her heart.

§7

The evening after his wife had had this glimpse into Sir Isaac's mental processes he telephoned
that Charterson and Horatio Blenker were coming home to dinner with him. Neither Lady Charterson
nor Mrs. Blenker were to be present; it was to be a business conversation and not a social
occasion, and Lady Harman he desired should wear her black and gold with just a touch of crimson
in her hair. Charterson wanted a word or two with the flexible Horatio on sugar at the London
docks, and Sir Isaac had some vague ideas that a turn might be given to the public judgment
upon the waitresses' strike, by a couple of Horatio's thoughtful yet gentlemanly articles.
And in addition Charterson seemed to have something else upon his mind; he did not tell as
much to Sir Isaac but he was weighing the possibilities of securing a controlling share in
the Daily Spirit, which simply didn't know at present where it was upon the sugar business,
and of installing Horatio's brother, Adolphus, as its editor. He wanted to form some idea from
Horatio of what Adolphus might expect before he approached Adolphus.

Lady Harman wore the touch of crimson in her hair as her husband had desired, and the table
was decorated simply with a big silver bowl of crimson roses. A slight shade of apprehension
in Sir Isaac's face changed to approval at the sight of her obedience. After all perhaps she
was beginning to see the commonsense of her position.

Charterson struck her as looking larger, but then whenever she saw him he struck her as looking
larger. He enveloped her hand in a large amiable paw for a minute and asked after the children
with gusto. The large teeth beneath his discursive moustache gave him the effect of a perennial
smile to which his asymmetrical ears added a touch of waggery. He always betrayed a fatherly
feeling towards her as became a man who was married to a handsome wife old enough to be her
mother. Even when he asked about the children he did it with something of the amused knowingness
of assured seniority, as if indeed he knew all sorts of things about the children that she
couldn't as yet even begin to imagine. And though he confined his serious conversation to the
two other men, he would ever and again show himself mindful of her and throw her some friendly
enquiry, some quizzically puzzling remark. Blenker as usual treated her as if she were an only
very indistinctly visible presence to whom an effusive yet inattentive politeness was due.
He was clearly nervous almost to the pitch of jumpiness. He knew he was to be spoken to about
the sugar business directly he saw Charterson, and he hated being spoken to about the sugar
business. He had his code of honour. Of course one had to make concessions to one's proprietors,
but he could not help feeling that if only they would consent to see his really quite obvious
gentlemanliness more clearly it would be better for the paper, better for the party, better
for them, far better for himself. He wasn't altogether a fool about that sugar; he knew how
things lay. They ought to trust him more. His nervousness betrayed itself in many little ways.
He crumbled his bread constantly until, thanks to Snagsby's assiduous replacement, he had made
quite a pile of crumbs, he dropped his glasses in the soup--a fine occasion for Snagsby's sang-froid--and
he forgot not to use a fish knife with the fish as Lady Grove directs and tried when he discovered
his error to replace it furtively on the table cloth. Moreover he kept on patting the glasses
on his nose--after Snagsby had whisked his soup plate away, rescued, wiped and returned them
to him--until that feature glowed modestly at such excesses of attention, and the soup and
sauces and things bothered his fine blond moustache unusually. So that Mr. Blenker what with
the glasses, the napkin, the food and the things seemed as restless as a young sparrow. Lady
Harman did her duties as hostess in the quiet key of her sombre dress, and until the conversation
drew her out into unexpected questionings she answered rather than talked, and she did not
look at her husband once throughout the meal.

At first the talk was very largely Charterson. He had no intention of coming to business with
Blenker until Lady Harman had given place to the port and the man's nerves were steadier. He
spoke of this and that in the large discursive way men use in clubs, and it was past the fish
before the conversation settled down upon the topic of business organization and Sir Isaac,
a little warmed by champagne, came out of the uneasily apprehensive taciturnity into which
he had fallen in the presence of his wife. Horatio Blenker was keenly interested in the idealization
of commercial syndication, he had been greatly stirred by a book of Mr. Gerald Stanley Lee's
called Inspired Millionaires which set out to show just what magnificent airs rich men might
give themselves, and he had done his best to catch its tone and to find Inspired Millionaires
in Sir Isaac and Charterson and to bring it to their notice and to the notice of the readers
of the Old Country Gazette. He felt that if only Sir Isaac and Charterson would see getting
rich as a Great Creative Act it would raise their tone and his tone and the tone of the Old
Country Gazette tremendously. It wouldn't of course materially alter the methods or policy
of the paper but it would make them all feel nobler, and Blenker was of that finer clay that
does honestly want to feel nobler. He hated pessimism and all that criticism and self-examination
that makes weak men pessimistic, he wanted to help weak men and be helped himself, he was all
for that school of optimism that would have each dunghill was a well-upholstered throne, and
his nervous, starry contributions to the talk were like patches of water ranunculuses trying
to flower in the overflow of a sewer.

Because you know it is idle to pretend that the talk of Charterson and Sir Isaac wasn't a heavy
flow of base ideas; they hadn't even the wit to sham very much about their social significance.
They cared no more for the growth, the stamina, the spirit of the people whose lives they dominated
than a rat cares for the stability of the house it gnaws. They wanted a broken-spirited people.
They were in such relations wilfully and offensively stupid, and I do not see why we people
who read and write books should pay this stupidity merely because it is prevalent even the
mild tribute of an ironical civility. Charterson talked of the gathering trouble that might
lead to a strike of the transport workers in London docks, and what he had to say, he said,--he
repeated it several times--was, "Let them strike. We're ready. The sooner they strike the better.
Devonport's a Man and this time we'll beat 'em...."

He expanded generally on strikes. "It's a question practically whether we are to manage our
own businesses or whether we're to have them managed for us. Managed I say!..."

"They know nothing of course of the details of organization," said Blenker, shining with intelligence
and looking quickly first to the right and then to the left. "Nothing."

Sir Isaac broke out into confirmatory matter. There was an idea in his head that this talk
might open his wife's eyes to some sense of the magnitude of his commercial life, to the wonder
of its scale and quality. He compared notes with Charterson upon a speeding-up system for delivery
vans invented by an American specialist and it made Blenker flush with admiration and turn
as if for sympathy to Lady Harman to realize how a modification in a tailboard might mean a
yearly saving in wages of many thousand pounds. "The sort of thing they don't understand,"
he said. And then Sir Isaac told of some of his own little devices. He had recently taken to
having the returns of percentage increase and decrease from his various districts printed on
postcards and circulated monthly among the district managers, postcards endorsed with such
stimulating comments in red type as "Well done Cardiff!" or "What ails Portsmouth?"--the results
had been amazingly good; "neck and neck work," he said, "everywhere"--and thence they passed
to the question of confidential reports and surprise inspectors. Thereby they came to the rights
and wrongs of the waitress strike.

And then it was that Lady Harman began to take a share in the conversation.

She interjected a question. "Yes," she said suddenly and her interruption was so unexpected
that all three men turned their eyes to her. "But how much do the girls get a week?"

"I thought," she said to some confused explanations by Blenker and Charterson, "that gratuities
were forbidden."

Blenker further explained that most of the girls of the class Sir Isaac was careful to employ
lived at home. Their income was "supplementary."

"But what happens to the others who don't live at home, Mr. Blenker?" she asked.

"Very small minority," said Mr. Blenker reassuring himself about his glasses.

"But what do they do?"

Charterson couldn't imagine whether she was going on in this way out of sheer ignorance or not.

"Sometimes their fines make big unexpected holes in their week's pay," she said.

Sir Isaac made some indistinct remark about "utter nonsense."

"It seems to me to be driving them straight upon the streets."

The phrase was Susan's. Its full significance wasn't at that time very clear to Lady Harman
and it was only when she had uttered it that she realized from Horatio Blenker's convulsive
start just what a blow she had delivered at that table. His glasses came off again. He caught
them and thrust them back, he seemed to be holding his nose on, holding his face on, preserving
those carefully arranged features of himself from hideous revelations; his free hand made weak
movements with his dinner napkin. He seemed to be holding it in reserve against the ultimate
failure of his face. Charterson surveyed her through an immense pause open-mouthed; then he
turned his large now frozen amiability upon his host. "These are Awful questions," he gasped,
"rather beyond Us don't you think?" and then magnificently; "Harman, things are looking pretty
Queer in the Far East again. I'm told there are chances--of revolution--even in Pekin...."

Lady Harman became aware of Snagsby's arm and his steady well-trained breathing beside her
as, tenderly almost but with a regretful disapproval, he removed her plate....

§8

If Lady Harman had failed to remark at the time the deep impression her words had made upon
her hearers, she would have learnt it later from the extraordinary wrath in which Sir Isaac,
as soon as his guests had departed, visited her. He was so angry he broke the seal of silence
he had set upon his lips. He came raging into the pink bedroom through the paper-covered door
as if they were back upon their old intimate footing. He brought a flavour of cigars and manly
refreshment with him, his shirt front was a little splashed and crumpled and his white face
was variegated with flushed patches.

"What ever d'you mean," he cried, "by making a fool of me in front of those fellers?... What's
my business got to do with you?"

Lady Harman was too unready for a reply.

"I ask you what's my business got to do with you? It's my affair, my side. You got no more
right to go shoving your spoke into that than--anything. See? What do you know of the rights
and wrongs of business? How can you tell what's right and what isn't right? And the things
you came out with--the things you came out with! Why Charterson--after you'd gone Charterson
said, she doesn't know, she can't know what she's talking about! A decent woman! a lady! talking
of driving girls on the street. You ought to be ashamed of yourself! You aren't fit to show
your face.... It's these damned papers and pamphlets, all this blear-eyed stuff, these decadent
novels and things putting narsty thoughts, narsty dirty thoughts into decent women's heads.
It ought to be rammed back down their throats, it ought to be put a stop to!"

Sir Isaac suddenly gave way to woe. "What have I done?" he cried, "what have I done? Here's
everything going so well! We might be the happiest of couples! We're rich, we got everything
we want.... And then you go harbouring these ideas, fooling about with rotten people, taking
up with Socialism----Yes, I tell you--Socialism!"

His moment of pathos ended. "NO?" he shouted in an enormous voice.

He became white and grim. He emphasized his next words with a shaken finger.

"It's got to end, my lady. It's going to end sooner than you expect. That's all!..."

He paused at the papered door. He had a popular craving for a vivid curtain and this he felt
was just a little too mild.

"It's going to end," he repeated and then with great violence, with almost alcoholic violence,
with the round eyes and shouting voice and shaken fist and blaspheming violence of a sordid,
thrifty peasant enraged, "it's going to end a Damned Sight sooner than you expect."

CHAPTER THE EIGHTH

SIR ISAAC AS PETRUCHIO

§1

Twice had Sir Isaac come near to betraying the rapid and extensive preparations for the subjugation
of his wife, that he hid behind his silences. He hoped that their estrangement might be healed
by a certain display of strength and decision. He still refused to let himself believe that
all this trouble that had arisen between them, this sullen insistence upon unbecoming freedoms
of intercourse and movement, this questioning spirit and a gaucherie of manner that might almost
be mistaken for an aversion from his person, were due to any essential evil in her nature;
he clung almost passionately to the alternative that she was the victim of those gathering
forces of discontent, of that interpretation which can only be described as decadent and that
veracity which can only be called immodest, that darken the intellectual skies of our time,
a sweet thing he held her still though touched by corruption, a prey to "idees," "idees" imparted
from the poisoned mind of her sister, imbibed from the carelessly edited columns of newspapers,
from all too laxly censored plays, from "blear-eyed" bookshow he thanked the Archbishop of
York for that clever expressive epithet!--from the careless talk of rashly admitted guests,
from the very atmosphere of London. And it had grown clearer and clearer to him that his duty
to himself and the world and her was to remove her to a purer, simpler air, beyond the range
of these infections, to isolate her and tranquillize her and so win her back again to that
acquiescence, that entirely hopeless submissiveness that had made her so sweet and dear a companion
for him in the earlier years of their married life. Long before Lady Beach-Mandarin's crucial
luncheon, his deliberate foreseeing mind had been planning such a retreat. Black Strand even
at his first visit had appeared to him in the light of a great opportunity, and the crisis
of their quarrel did but release that same torrential energy which had carried him to a position
of Napoleonic predominance in the world of baking, light catering and confectionery, into the
channels of a scheme already very definitely formed in his mind.

His first proceeding after the long hours of sleepless passion that had followed his wife's
Hampton Court escapade, had been to place himself in communication with Mr. Brumley. He learnt
at Mr. Brumley's club that that gentleman had slept there overnight and had started but a quarter
of an hour before, back to Black Strand. Sir Isaac in hot pursuit and gathering force and assistance
in mid flight reached Black Strand by midday.

It was with a certain twinge of the conscience that Mr. Brumley perceived his visitor, but
it speedily became clear that Sir Isaac had no knowledge of the guilty circumstances of the
day before. He had come to buy Black Strand--incontinently, that was all. He was going, it
became clear at once, to buy it with all its fittings and furnishings as it stood, lock, stock
and barrel. Mr. Brumley, concealing that wild elation, that sense of a joyous rebirth, that
only the liquidation of nearly all one's possessions can give, was firm but not excessive.
Sir Isaac haggled as a wave breaks and then gave in and presently they were making a memorandum
upon the pretty writing-desk beneath the traditional rose Euphemia had established there when
Mr. Brumley was young and already successful.

This done, and it was done in less than fifteen minutes, Sir Isaac produced a rather crumpled
young architect from the motor-car as a conjurer might produce a rabbit from a hat, a builder
from Aleham appeared astonishingly in a dog-cart--he had been summoned by telegram--and Sir
Isaac began there and then to discuss alterations, enlargements and, more particularly, with
a view to his nursery requirements, the conversion of the empty barn into a nursery wing and
its connexion with the house by a corridor across the shrubbery.

"It will take you three months," said the builder from Aleham. "And the worst time of the year
coming."

"It won't take three weeks--if I have to bring down a young army from London to do it," said
Sir Isaac.

"But such a thing as plastering----"

"We won't have plastering."

"There's canvas and paper, of course," said the young architect.

"There's canvas and paper," said Sir Isaac. "And those new patent building units, so far as
the corridor goes. I've seen the ads."

"We can whitewash 'em. They won't show much," said the young architect.

"Oh if you do things in that way," said the builder from Aleham with bitter resignation....

§2

The morning dawned at last when the surprise was ripe. It was four days after Susan's visit,
and she was due again on the morrow with the money that would enable her employer to go to
Lady Viping's now imminent dinner. Lady Harman had had to cut the Social Friends' meeting altogether,
but the day before the surprise Agatha Alimony had come to tea in her jobbed car, and they
had gone together to the committee meeting of the Shakespear Dinner Society. Sir Isaac had
ignored that defiance, and it was an unusually confident and quite unsuspicious woman who descended
in a warm October sunshine to the surprise. In the breakfast-room she discovered an awe-stricken
Snagsby standing with his plate-basket before her husband, and her husband wearing strange
unusual tweeds and gaiters,--buttoned gaiters, and standing a-straddle,--unusually a-straddle,
on the hearthrug.

"That's enough, Snagsby," said Sir Isaac, at her entrance. "Bring it all."

She met Snagsby's eye, and it was portentous.

Latterly Snagsby's eye had lost the assurance of his former days. She had noted it before,
she noted it now more than ever; as though he was losing confidence, as though he was beginning
to doubt, as though the world he had once seemed to rule grew insecure beneath his feet. For
a moment she met his eye; it might have been a warning he conveyed, it might have been an appeal
for sympathy, and then he had gone. She looked at the table. Sir Isaac had breakfasted acutely.

In silence, among the wreckage and with a certain wonder growing, Lady Harman attended to her
needs.

Sir Isaac cleared his throat.

She became aware that he had spoken. "What did you say, Isaac?" she asked, looking up. He seemed
to have widened his straddle almost dangerously, and he spoke with a certain conscious forcefulness.

"We're going to move out of this house, Elly," he said. "We're going down into the country
right away."

She sat back in her chair and regarded his pinched and determined visage.

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"I've bought that house of Brumley's,--Black Strand. We're going to move down there--now. I've
told the servants.... When you've done your breakfast, you'd better get Peters to pack your
things. The big car's going to be ready at half-past ten."

Lady Harman reflected.

"To-morrow evening," she said, "I was going out to dinner at Lady Viping's."

"Not my affair--seemingly," said Sir Isaac with irony. "Well, the car's going to be ready at
half-past ten."

"But that dinner----!"

"We'll think about it when the time comes."

Husband and wife regarded each other.

"I've had about enough of London," said Sir Isaac. "So we're going to shift the scenery. See?"

Lady Harman felt that one might adduce good arguments against this course if only one knew of them.

Sir Isaac had a bright idea. He rang.

"Snagsby," he said, "just tell Peters to pack up Lady Harman's things...."

"Well!" said Lady Harman, as the door closed on Snagsby. Her mind was full of confused protest,
but she had again that entirely feminine and demoralizing conviction that if she tried to express
it she would weep or stumble into some such emotional disaster. If now she went upstairs and
told Peters not to pack----!

Sir Isaac walked slowly to the window, and stood for a time staring out into the garden.

Extraordinary bumpings began overhead in Sir Isaac's room. No doubt somebody was packing something....

Lady Harman realized with a deepening humiliation that she dared not dispute before the servants,
and that he could. "But the children----" she said at last.

"I've told Mrs. Harblow," he said, over his shoulder. "Told her it was a bit of a surprise."
He turned, with a momentary lapse into something like humour. "You see," he said, "it is a
bit of a surprise."

"But what are you going to do with this house?"

"Lock it all up for a bit.... I don't see any sense in living where we aren't happy. Perhaps
down there we shall manage better...."

It emerged from the confusion of Lady Harman's mind that perhaps she had better go to the nursery,
and see how things were getting on there. Sir Isaac watched her departure with a slightly dubious
eye, made little noises with his teeth for a time, and then went towards the telephone.

In the hall she found two strange young men in green aprons assisting the under-butler to remove
the hats and overcoats and such-like personal material into a motor-van outside. She heard
two of the housemaids scurrying upstairs. "'Arf an hour," said one, "isn't what I call a proper
time to pack a box in."

In the nursery the children were disputing furiously what toys were to be taken into the country.

Lady Harman was a very greatly astonished woman. The surprise had been entirely successful.

§3

It has been said, I think, by Limburger, in his already cited work, that nothing so excites
and prevails with woman as rapid and extensive violence, sparing and yet centring upon herself,
and certainly it has to be recorded that, so far from being merely indignant, and otherwise
a helplessly pathetic spectacle, Lady Harman found, though perhaps she did not go quite so
far as to admit to herself that she found, this vehement flight from the social, moral, and
intellectual contaminations of London an experience not merely stimulating but entertaining.
It lifted her delicate eyebrows. Something, it may have been a sense of her own comparative
immobility amid this sudden extraordinary bustle of her home, put it into her head that so
it was long ago that Lot must have bundled together his removable domesticities.

She made one attempt at protest. "Isaac," she said, "isn't all this rather ridiculous----"

"Don't speak to me!" he answered, waving her off. "Don't speak to me! You should have spoken
before, Elly. Now,--things are happening."

The image of Black Strand as, after all, a very pleasant place indeed returned to her. She
adjudicated upon the nursery difficulties, and then went in a dreamlike state of mind to preside
over her own more personal packing. She found Peters exercising all that indecisive helplessness
which is characteristic of ladies' maids the whole world over.

It was from Peters she learnt that the entire household, men and maids together, was to be
hurled into Surrey. "Aren't they all rather surprised?" asked Lady Harman.

"Yes, m'm," said Peters on her knees, "but of course if the drains is wrong the sooner we all
go the better."

(So that was what he had told them.)

A vibration and a noise of purring machinery outside drew the lady to the window, and she discovered
that at least four of the large motor-vans from the International Stores were to co-operate
in the trek. There they were waiting, massive and uniform. And then she saw Snagsby in his
alpaca jacket running towards the house from the gates. Of course he was running only very
slightly indeed, but still he was running, and the expression of distress upon his face convinced
her that he was being urged to unusual and indeed unsuitable tasks under the immediate personal
supervision of Sir Isaac.... Then from round the corner appeared the under butler or at least
the legs of him going very fast, under a pile of shirt boxes and things belonging to Sir Isaac.
He dumped them into the nearest van and heaved a deep sigh and returned houseward after a remorseful
glance at the windows.

A violent outcry from baby, who, with more than her customary violence was making her customary
morning protest against being clad, recalled Lady Harman from the contemplation of these exterior
activities....

The journey to Black Strand was not accomplished without misadventure; there was a puncture
near Farnham, and as Clarence with a leisurely assurance entertained himself with the Stepney,
they were passed first by the second car with the nursery contingent, which went by in a shrill
chorus, crying, "We-e-e shall get there first, We-e-e shall get there first," and then by a
large hired car all agog with housemaids and Mrs. Crumble and with Snagsby, as round and distressed
as the full moon, and the under butler, cramped and keen beside the driver. There followed
the leading International Stores car, and then the Stepney was on and they could hasten in
pursuit....

And at last they came to Black Strand, and when they saw Black Strand it seemed to Lady Harman
that the place had blown out a huge inflamed red cheek and lost its pleasant balance altogether.
"Oh!" she cried.

It was the old barn flushed by the strain of adaptation to a new use, its comfortable old wall
ruptured by half a dozen brilliant new windows, a light red chimney stack at one end. From
it a vividly artistic corridor ran to the house and the rest of the shrubbery was all trampled
and littered with sheds, bricks, poles and material generally. Black Strand had left the hands
of the dilettante school and was in the grip of those vigorous moulding forces that are shaping
our civilization to-day.

The jasmine wig over the porch had suffered a strenuous clipping; the door might have just
come out of prison. In the hall the Carpaccio copies still glowed, but there were dust sheets
over most of the furniture and a plumber was moving his things out with that eleventh hour
reluctance so characteristic of plumbers. Mrs. Rabbit, a little tearful, and dressed for departure
very respectably in black was giving the youngest and least experienced housemaid a faithful
history of Mr. Brumley's earlier period. "'Appy we all was," said Mrs. Rabbit, "as Birds in
a Nest."

Through the windows two of the Putney gardeners were busy replacing Mr. Brumley's doubtful
roses by recognized sorts, the right sorts....

"I've been doing all I can to make it ready for you," said Sir Isaac at his wife's ear, bringing
a curious reminiscence of the first home-coming to Putney into her mind.

§4

"And now," said Sir Isaac with evident premeditation and a certain deliberate amiability, "now
we got down here, now we got away a bit from all those London things with nobody to cut in
between us, me and you can have a bit of a talk, Elly, and see what it's all about."

They had lunched together in the little hall-dining room,--the children had had a noisily cheerful
picnic in the kitchen with Mrs. Harblow, and now Lady Harman was standing at the window surveying
the ravages of rose replacement.

She turned towards him. "Yes," she said. "I think--I think we can't go on like this."

"I can't," said Sir Isaac, "anyhow."

He too came and stared at the rose planting.

"If we were to go up there--among the pine woods"--he pointed with his head at the dark background
of Euphemia's herbaceous borders--"we shouldn't hear quite so much of this hammering...."

Husband and wife walked slowly in the afternoon sunlight across the still beautiful garden.
Each was gravely aware of an embarrassed incapacity for the task they had set themselves. They
were going to talk things over. Never in their lives had they really talked to each other clearly
and honestly about anything. Indeed it is scarcely too much to say that neither had ever talked
about anything to anyone. She was too young, her mind was now growing up in her and feeling
its way to conscious expression, and he had never before wanted to express himself. He did
now want to express himself. For behind his rant and fury Sir Isaac had been thinking very
hard indeed during the last three weeks about his life and her life and their relations; he
had never thought so much about anything except his business economics. So far he had either
joked at her, talked "silly" to her, made, as they say, "remarks," or vociferated. That had
been the sum of their mental intercourse, as indeed it is the sum of the intercourse of most
married couples. His attempt to state his case to her had so far always flared into rhetorical
outbreaks. But he was discontented with these rhetorical outbreaks. His dispositions to fall
into them made him rather like a nervous sepia that cannot keep its ink sac quiet while it
is sitting for its portrait. In the earnestness of his attempt at self-display he vanished
in his own outpourings.

He wanted now to reason with her simply and persuasively. He wanted to say quietly impressive
and convincing things in a low tone of voice and make her abandon every possible view except
his view. He walked now slowly meditating the task before him, making a faint thoughtful noise
with his teeth, his head sunken in the collar of the motor overcoat he wore because of a slight
cold he had caught. And he had to be careful about colds because of his constitutional defect.
She too felt she had much to say. Much too she had in her mind that she couldn't say, because
this strange quarrel had opened unanticipated things for her; she had found and considered
repugnances in her nature she had never dared to glance at hitherto....

Sir Isaac began rather haltingly when they had reached a sandy, ant-infested path that ran
slantingly up among the trees. He affected a certain perplexity. He said he did not understand
what it was his wife was "after," what she "thought she was doing" in "making all this trouble";
he wanted to know just what it was she wanted, how she thought they ought to live, just what
she considered his rights were as her husband and just what she considered were her duties
as his wife--if, that is, she considered she had any duties. To these enquiries Lady Harman
made no very definite reply; their estrangement instead of clearing her mind had on the whole
perplexed it more, by making her realize the height and depth and extent of her possible separation
from him. She replied therefore with an unsatisfactory vagueness; she said she wanted to feel
that she possessed herself, that she was no longer a child, that she thought she had a right
to read what she chose, see what people she liked, go out a little by herself, have a certain
independence--she hesitated, "have a certain definite allowance of my own."

"Have I ever refused you money?" cried Sir Isaac protesting.

"It isn't that," said Lady Harman; "it's the feeling----"

"The feeling of being able to--defy--anything I say," said Sir Isaac with a note of bitterness.
"As if I didn't understand!"

It was beyond Lady Harman's powers to express just how that wasn't the precise statement of
the case.

Sir Isaac, reverting to his tone of almost elaborate reasonableness, expanded his view that
it was impossible for husband and wife to have two different sets of friends;--let alone every
other consideration, he explained, it wasn't convenient for them not to be about together,
and as for reading or thinking what she chose he had never made any objection to anything unless
it was "decadent rot" that any decent man would object to his womanfolk seeing, rot she couldn't
understand the drift of--fortunately. Blear-eyed humbug.... He checked himself on the verge
of an almost archiepiscopal outbreak in order to be patiently reasonable again. He was prepared
to concede that it would be very nice if Lady Harman could be a good wife and also an entirely
independent person, very nice, but the point was--his tone verged on the ironical--that she
couldn't be two entirely different people at the same time.

"But you have your friends," she said, "you go away alone----"

"That's different," said Sir Isaac with a momentary note of annoyance. "It's business. It isn't
that I want to."

Lady Harman had a feeling that they were neither of them gaining any ground. She blamed herself
for her lack of lucidity. She began again, taking up the matter at a fresh point. She said
that her life at present wasn't full, that it was only half a life, that it was just home and
marriage and nothing else; he had his business, he went out into the world, he had politics
and--"all sorts of things"; she hadn't these interests; she had nothing in the place of them----

Sir Isaac closed this opening rather abruptly by telling her that she should count herself
lucky she hadn't, and again the conversation was suspended for a time.

"But I want to know about these things," she said.

Sir Isaac took that musingly.

"There's things go on," she said; "outside home. There's social work, there's interests----Am
I never to take any part--in that?"

Sir Isaac still reflected.

"There's one thing," he said at last, "I want to know. We'd better have it out--now."

But he hesitated for a time.

"Elly!" he blundered, "you aren't--you aren't getting somehow--not fond of me?"

She made no immediate reply.

"Look here!" he said in an altered voice. "Elly! there isn't something below all this? There
isn't something been going on that I don't know?"

Her eyes with a certain terror in their depths questioned him.

"Something," he said, and his face was deadly white--"Some other man, Elly?"

She was suddenly crimson, a flaming indignation.

"Isaac!" she said, "what do you mean? How can you ask me such a thing?"

"If it's that!" said Sir Isaac, his face suddenly full of malignant force, "I'll----But I'd
kill you...."

"If it isn't that," he went on searching his mind; "why should a woman get restless? Why should
she want to go away from her husband, go meeting other people, go gadding about? If a woman's
satisfied, she's satisfied. She doesn't harbour fancies.... All this grumbling and unrest.
Natural for your sister, but why should you? You've got everything a woman needs, husband,
children, a perfectly splendid home, clothes, good jewels and plenty of them, respect! Why
should you want to go out after things? It's mere spoilt-childishness. Of course you want to
wander out--and if there isn't a man----"

He caught her wrist suddenly. "There isn't a man?" he demanded.

"Isaac!" she protested in horror.

"Then there'll be one. You think I'm a fool, you think I don't know anything all these literary
and society people know. I do know. I know that a man and a woman have got to stick together,
and if you go straying--you may think you're straying after the moon or social work or anything--but
there's a strange man waiting round the corner for every woman and a strange woman for every
man. Think I've had no temptations?... Oh! I know, I know. What's life or anything but that?
and it's just because we've not gone on having more children, just because we listened to all
those fools who said you were overdoing it, that all this fretting and grumbling began. We've
got on to the wrong track, Elly, and we've got to get back to plain wholesome ways of living.
See? That's what I've come down here for and what I mean to do. We've got to save ourselves.
I've been too--too modern and all that. I'm going to be a husband as a husband should. I'm
going to protect you from these idees--protect you from your own self.... And that's about
where we stand, Elly, as I make it out."

He paused with the effect of having delivered himself of long premeditated things.

Lady Harman essayed to speak. But she found that directly she set herself to speak she sobbed
and began weeping. She choked for a moment. Then she determined she would go on, and if she
must cry, she must cry. She couldn't let a disposition to tears seal her in silence for ever.

"It isn't," she said, "what I expected--of life. It isn't----"

"It's what life is," Sir Isaac cut in.

"When I think," she sobbed, "of what I've lost----"

"Lost!" cried Sir Isaac. "Lost! Oh come now, Elly, I like that. What!--lost. Hang it! You got
to look facts in the face. You can't deny----Marrying like this,--you made a jolly good thing
of it."

"But the beautiful things, the noble things!"

"What's beautiful?" cried Sir Isaac in protesting scorn. "What's noble? ROT! Doing your duty
if you like and being sensible, that's noble and beautiful, but not fretting about and running
yourself into danger. You've got to have a sense of humour, Elly, in this life----" He created
a quotation. "As you make your bed--so shall you lie."

For an interval neither of them spoke. They crested the hill, and came into view of that advertisement
board she had first seen in Mr. Brumley's company. She halted, and he went a step further and
halted too. He recalled his ideas about the board. He had meant to have them all altered but
other things had driven it from his mind....

"Then you mean to imprison me here," said Lady Harman to his back. He turned about.

"It isn't much like a prison. I'm asking you to stay here--and be what a wife should be."

"I'm to have no money."

"That's--that depends entirely on yourself. You know that well enough."

She looked at him gravely.

"I won't stand it," she said at last with a gentle deliberation.

She spoke so softly that he doubted his hearing. "What?" he asked sharply.

"I won't stand it," she repeated. "No."

"But--what can you do?"

"I don't know," she said, after a moment of grave consideration.

For some moments his mind hunted among possibilities.

"It's me that's standing it," he said. He came closely up to her. He seemed on the verge of
rhetoric. He pressed his thin white lips together. "Standing it! when we might be so happy,"
he snapped, and shrugged his shoulders and turned with an expression of mournful resolution
towards the house again. She followed slowly.

He felt that he had done all that a patient and reasonable husband could do. Now--things must
take their course.

§5

The imprisonment of Lady Harman at Black Strand lasted just one day short of a fortnight.

For all that time except for such interludes as the urgent needs of the strike demanded, Sir
Isaac devoted himself to the siege. He did all he could to make her realize how restrainedly
he used the powers the law vests in a husband, how little he forced upon her the facts of marital
authority and wifely duty. At times he sulked, at times he affected a cold dignity, and at
times a virile anger swayed him at her unsubmissive silences. He gave her little peace in that
struggle, a struggle that came to the edge of physical conflict. There were moments when it
seemed to her that nothing remained but that good old-fashioned connubial institution, the
tussle for the upper hand, when with a feminine horror she felt violence shouldering her shoulder
or contracting ready to grip her wrist. Against violence she doubted her strength, was filled
with a desolating sense of yielding nerve and domitable muscle. But just short of violence
Sir Isaac's spirit failed him. He would glower and bluster, half threaten, and retreat. It
might come to that at last but at present it had not come to that.

She could not understand why she had neither message nor sign from Susan Burnet, but she hid
that anxiety and disappointment under her general dignity.

She spent as much time with the children as she could, and until Sir Isaac locked up the piano
she played, and was surprised to find far more in Chopin than she had ever suspected in the
days when she had acquired a passable dexterity of execution. She found, indeed, the most curious
things in Chopin, emotional phrases, that stirred and perplexed and yet pleased her....

The weather was very fine and open that year. A golden sunshine from October passed on into
November and Lady Harman spent many of these days amidst the pretty things the builder from
Aleham had been too hurried to desecrate, dump, burn upon, and flatten into indistinguishable
mire, after the established custom of builders in gardens since the world began. She would
sit in the rockery where she had sat with Mr. Brumley and recall that momentous conversation,
and she would wander up the pine-wood slopes behind, and she would spend long musing intervals
among Euphemia's perennials, thinking sometimes, and sometimes not so much thinking as feeling
the warm tendernesses of nature and the perplexing difficulties of human life. With an amused
amazement Lady Harman reflected as she walked about the pretty borders and the little patches
of lawn and orchard that in this very place she was to have realized an imitation of the immortal
"Elizabeth" and have been wise, witty, gay, defiant, gallant and entirely successful with her
"Man of Wrath." Evidently there was some temperamental difference, or something in her situation,
that altered the values of the affair. It was clearly a different sort of man for one thing.
She didn't feel a bit gay, and her profound and deepening indignation with the alternative
to this stagnation was tainted by a sense of weakness and incapacity.

She came very near surrender several times. There were afternoons of belated ripened warmth,
a kind of summer that had been long in the bottle, with a certain lassitude in the air and
a blue haze among the trees, that made her feel the folly of all resistances to fate. Why,
after all, shouldn't she take life as she found it, that is to say, as Sir Isaac was prepared
to give it to her? He wasn't really so bad, she told herself. The children--their noses were
certainly a little sharp, but there might be worse children. The next might take after herself
more. Who was she to turn upon her appointed life and declare it wasn't good enough? Whatever
happened the world was still full of generous and beautiful things, trees, flowers, sunset
and sunrise, music and mist and morning dew.... And as for this matter of the sweated workers,
the harshness of the business, the ungracious competition, suppose if instead of fighting her
husband with her weak powers, she persuaded him. She tried to imagine just exactly how he might
be persuaded....

She looked up and discovered with an extraordinary amazement Mr. Brumley with eager gestures
and a flushed and excited visage hurrying towards her across the croquet lawn.

§6

Lady Viping's dinner-party had been kept waiting exactly thirty-five minutes for Lady Harman.
Sir Isaac, with a certain excess of zeal, had intercepted the hasty note his wife had written
to account for her probable absence. The party was to have centred entirely upon Lady Harman,
it consisted either of people who knew her already, or of people who were to have been specially
privileged to know her, and Lady Viping telephoned twice to Putney before she abandoned hope.
"It's disconnected," she said, returning in despair from her second struggle with the great
public service. "They can't get a reply."

"It's that little wretch," said Lady Beach-Mandarin. "He hasn't let her come. I know him."

"It's like losing a front tooth," said Lady Viping, surveying her table as she entered the
dining-room.

"But surely--she would have written," said Mr. Brumley, troubled and disappointed, regarding
an aching gap to the left of his chair, a gap upon which a pathetic little card bearing Lady
Harman's name still lay obliquely.

Naturally the talk tended to centre upon the Harmans. And naturally Lady Beach-Mandarin was
very bold and outspoken and called Sir Isaac quite a number of vivid things. She also aired
her views of the marriage of the future, which involved a very stringent treatment of husbands
indeed. "Half his property and half his income," said Lady Beach-Mandarin, "paid into her separate
banking account."

"But," protested Mr. Brumley, "would men marry under those conditions?"

"Men will marry anyhow," said Lady Beach-Mandarin, "under any conditions."

"Exactly Sir Joshua's opinion," said Lady Viping.

All the ladies at the table concurred and only one cheerful bachelor barrister dissented. The
other men became gloomy and betrayed a distaste for this general question. Even Mr. Brumley
felt a curious faint terror and had for a moment a glimpse of the possibilities that might
lie behind the Vote. Lady Beach-Mandarin went bouncing back to the particular instance. At
present, she said, witness Lady Harman, women were slaves, pampered slaves if you will, but
slaves. As things were now there was nothing to keep a man from locking up his wife, opening
all her letters, dressing her in sack-cloth, separating her from her children. Most men, of
course, didn't do such things, they were amenable to public opinion, but Sir Isaac was a jealous
little Ogre. He was a gnome who had carried off a princess....

She threw out projects for assailing the Ogre. She would descend to-morrow morning upon the
Putney house, a living flamboyant writ of Habeas Corpus. Mr. Brumley, who had been putting
two and two together, was abruptly moved to tell of the sale of Black Strand. "They may be
there," he said.

"He's carried her off," cried Lady Beach-Mandarin on a top note. "It might be the eighteenth
century for all he cares. But if it's Black Strand,--I'll go to Black Strand...."

But she had to talk about it for a week before she actually made her raid, and then, with an
instinctive need for an audience, she took with her a certain Miss Garradice, one of those
mute, emotional nervous spinsters who drift detachedly, with quick sudden movements, glittering
eyeglasses, and a pent-up imminent look, about our social system. There is something about
this type of womanhood--it is hard to say--almost as though they were the bottled souls of
departed buccaneers grown somehow virginal. She came with Lady Beach-Mandarin quietly, almost
humorously, and yet it was as if the pirate glittered dimly visible through the polished glass
of her erect exterior.

"Here we are!" said Lady Beach-Mandarin, staring astonished at the once familiar porch. "Now
for it!"

She descended and assailed the bell herself and Miss Garradice stood beside her with the light
of combat in her eyes and glasses and cheeks.

"Shall I offer to take her for a drive!"

"Let's," said Miss Garradice in an enthusiastic whisper. "Right away! For ever."

"I will," said Lady Beach-Mandarin, and nodded desperately.

She was on the point of ringing again when Snagsby appeared.

He stood with a large obstructiveness in the doorway. "Lady 'Arman, my lady" he said with a
well-trained deliberation, "is not a Tome."

"Not at home!" queried Lady Beach-Mandarin.

"Not a Tome, my lady," repeated Snagsby invincibly.

"But--when will she be at home?"

"I can't say, my lady."

"Is Sir Isaac----?"

"Sir Isaac, my lady, is not a Tome. Nobody is a Tome, my lady."

"But we've come from London!" said Lady Beach-Mandarin.

"I'm very sorry, my lady."

"You see, I want my friend to see this house and garden."

Snagsby was visibly disconcerted. "I 'ave no instructions, my lady," he tried.

"Oh, but Lady Harman would never object----"

Snagsby's confusion increased. He seemed to be wanting to keep his face to the visitors and
at the same time glance over his shoulder. "I will," he considered, "I will enquire, my lady."
He backed a little, and seemed inclined to close the door upon them. Lady Beach-Mandarin was
too quick for him. She got herself well into the open doorway. "And of whom are you going to
enquire?"

A large distress betrayed itself in Snagsby's eye. "The 'ousekeeper," he attempted. "It falls
to the 'ousekeeper, my lady."

Lady Beach-Mandarin turned her face to Miss Garradice, shining in support. "Stuff and nonsense,"
she said, "of course we shall come in." And with a wonderful movement that was at once powerful
and perfectly lady-like this intrepid woman--"butted" is not the word--collided herself with
Snagsby and hurled him backward into the hall. Miss Garradice followed closely behind and at
once extended herself in open order on Lady Beach-Mandarin's right. "Go and enquire," said
Lady Beach-Mandarin with a sweeping gesture of her arm. "Go and enquire."

For a moment Snagsby surveyed the invasion with horror and then fled precipitately into the
recesses of the house.

"Of course they're at home!" said Lady Beach-Mandarin. "Fancy that--that--that navigable--trying
to shut the door on us!"

For a moment the two brightly excited ladies surveyed each other and then Lady Beach-Mandarin,
with a quickness of movement wonderful in one so abundant, began to open first one and then
another of the various doors that opened into the long hall-living room. At a peculiar little
cry from Miss Garradice she turned from a contemplation of the long low study in which so much
of the Euphemia books had been written, to discover Sir Isaac behind her, closely followed
by an agonized Snagsby.

"A-a-a-a-h!" she cried, with both hands extended, "and so you've come in, Sir Isaac! That's
perfectly delightful. This is my friend Miss Garradice, who's dying to see anything you've
left of poor Euphemia's garden. And how is dear Lady Harman?"

For some crucial moments Sir Isaac was unable to speak and regarded his visitors with an expression
that was unpretendingly criminal.

Then he found speech. "You can't," he said. "It--can't be managed." He shook his head; his
lips were whitely compressed.

"But all the way from London, Sir Isaac!"

"Lady Harman's ill," lied Sir Isaac. "She mustn't be disturbed. Everything has to be kept quiet.
See? Not even shouting. Not even ordinarily raised voices. A voice like yours--might kill her.
That's why Snagsby here said we were not at home. We aren't at home--not to anyone."

Lady Beach-Mandarin was baffled.

"Snagsby," said Sir Isaac, "open that door."

"But can't I see her--just for a moment?"

Sir Isaac's malignity had softened a little at the prospect of victory. "Absolutely impossible,"
he said. "Everything disturbs her, every tiny thing. You----You'd be certain to."

Lady Beach-Mandarin looked at her companion and it was manifest that she was at the end of
her resources. Miss Garradice after the fashion of highly strung spinsters suddenly felt disappointed
in her leader. It wasn't, her silence intimated, for her to offer suggestions.

The ladies were defeated. When at last that stiff interval ended their dresses rustled doorward,
and Sir Isaac broke out into the civilities of a victor....

It was only when they were a mile away from Black Strand that fluent speech returned to Lady
Beach-Mandarin. "The little--Crippen," she said. "He's got her locked up in some cellar....
Horrid little face he has! He looked like a rat at bay."

"I think perhaps if we'd done differently," said Miss Garradice in a tone of critical irresponsibility.

"I'll write to her. That's what I'll do," said Lady Beach-Mandarin contemplating her next step.
"I'm really--concerned. And didn't you feel--something sinister. That butler-man's expression--a
kind of round horror."

That very evening she told it all--it was almost the trial trip of the story--to Mr. Brumley....

Sir Isaac watched their departure furtively from the study window and then ran out to the garden.
He went right through into the pine woods beyond and presently, far away up the slopes, he
saw his wife loitering down towards him, a gracious white tallness touched by a ray of sunlight--and
without a suspicion of how nearly rescue had come to her.

§7

So you see under what excitement Mr. Brumley came down to Black Strand.

Luck was with him at first and he forced the defence with ridiculous ease.

"Lady Harman, sir, is not a Tome," said Snagsby.

"Ah!" said Mr. Brumley, with all the assurance of a former proprietor, "then I'll just have
a look round the garden," and was through the green door in the wall and round the barn end
before Snagsby's mind could function. That unfortunate man went as far as the green door in
pursuit and then with a gesture of despair retreated to the pantry and began cleaning all his
silver to calm his agonized spirit. He could pretend perhaps that Mr. Brumley had never rung
at the front door at all. If not----

Moreover Mr. Brumley had the good fortune to find Lady Harman quite unattended and pensive
upon the little seat that Euphemia had placed for the better seeing of her herbaceous borders.

"Lady Harman!" he said rather breathlessly, taking both her hands with an unwonted assurance
and then sitting down beside her, "I am so glad to see you. I came down to see you--to see
if I couldn't be of any service to you."

"It's so kind of you to come," she said, and her dark eyes said as much or more. She glanced
round and he too glanced round for Sir Isaac.

"You see," he said. "I don't know.... I don't want to be impertinent.... But I feel--if I can
be of any service to you.... I feel perhaps you want help here. I don't want to seem to be
taking advantage of a situation. Or making unwarrantable assumptions. But I want to assure
you--I would willingly die--if only I could do anything.... Ever since I first saw you."

He said all this in a distracted way, with his eyes going about the garden for the possible
apparition of Sir Isaac, and all the time his sense of possible observers made him assume an
attitude as though he was engaged in the smallest of small talk. Her colour quickened at the
import of his words, and emotion, very rich and abundant emotion, its various factors not altogether
untouched perhaps by the spirit of laughter, lit her eyes. She doubted a little what he was
saying and yet she had anticipated that somehow, some day, in quite other circumstances, Mr.
Brumley might break into some such strain.

"You see," he went on with a quality of appeal in his eyes, "there's so little time to say
things--without possible interruption. I feel you are in difficulties and I want to make you
understand----We----Every beautiful woman, I suppose, has a sort of right to a certain sort
of man. I want to tell you--I'm not really presuming to make love to you--but I want to tell
you I am altogether yours, altogether at your service. I've had sleepless nights. All this
time I've been thinking about you. I'm quite clear, I haven't a doubt, I'll do anything for
you, without reward, without return, I'll be your devoted brother, anything, if only you'll
make use of me...."

Her colour quickened. She looked around and still no one appeared. "It's so kind of you to
come like this," she said. "You say things--But I have felt that you wanted to be brotherly...."

"Whatever I can be," assured Mr. Brumley.

"My situation here," she said, her dark frankness of gaze meeting his troubled eyes. "It's
so strange and difficult. I don't know what to do. I don't know--what I want to do...."

"In London," said Mr. Brumley, "they think--they say--you have been taken off--brought down
here--to a sort of captivity."

"I have," admitted Lady Harman with a note of recalled astonishment in her voice.

"If I can help you to escape----!"

"But where can I escape?"

And one must admit that it is a little difficult to indicate a correct refuge for a lady who
finds her home intolerable. Of course there was Mrs. Sawbridge, but Lady Harman felt that her
mother's disposition to lock herself into her bedroom at the slightest provocation made her
a weak support for a defensive fight, and in addition that boarding-house at Bournemouth did
not attract her. Yet what other wall in all the world was there for Lady Harman to set her
back against? During the last few days Mr. Brumley's mind had been busy with the details of
impassioned elopements conducted in the most exalted spirit, but now in the actual presence
of the lady these projects did in the most remarkable manner vanish.

"Couldn't you," he said at last, "go somewhere?" And then with an air of being meticulously
explicit, "I mean, isn't there somewhere, where you might safely go?"

(And in his dreams he had been crossing high passes with her; he had halted suddenly and stayed
her mule. In his dream because he was a man of letters and a poet it was always a mule, never
a train de luxe. "Look," he had said, "below there,--Italy!--the country you have never seen
before.")

"There's nowhere," she answered.

"Now where?" asked Mr. Brumley, "and how?" with the tone and something of the gesture of one
who racks his mind. "If you only trust yourself to me----Oh! Lady Harman, if I dared ask it----"

He became aware of Sir Isaac walking across the lawn towards them....

The two men greeted each other with a reasonable cordiality. "I wanted to see how you were
getting on down here," said Mr. Brumley, "and whether there was anything I could do for you."

"We're getting on all right," said Sir Isaac with no manifest glow of gratitude.

"You've altered the old barn--tremendously."

"Come and see it," said Sir Isaac. "It's a wing."

Mr. Brumley remained seated. "It was the first thing that struck me, Lady Harman. This evidence
of Sir Isaac's energy."

"Come and look over it," Sir Isaac persisted.

Mr. Brumley and Lady Harman rose together.

"One's enough to show him that," said Sir Isaac.

"I was telling Lady Harman how much we missed her at Lady Viping's, Sir Isaac."

"It was on account of the drains," Sir Isaac explained. "You can't--it's foolhardy to stay
a day when the drains are wrong, dinners or no dinners."

"You know I was extremely sorry not to come to Lady Viping's. I hope you'll tell her. I wrote."

But Mr. Brumley didn't remember clearly enough to make any use of that.

"Everybody naturally is sorry on an occasion of that sort," said Sir Isaac. "But you come and
see what we've done in that barn. In three weeks. They couldn't have got it together in three
months ten years ago. It's--system."

Mr. Brumley still tried to cling to Lady Harman.

"Have you been interested in this building?" he asked.

"I still don't understand the system of the corridor," she said, rising a little belatedly
to the occasion. "I will come."

Sir Isaac regarded her for a moment with a dubious expression and then began to explain the
new method of building with large prepared units and shaped pieces of reinforced concrete instead
of separate bricks that Messrs. Prothero & Cuthbertson had organized and which had enabled
him to create this artistic corridor so simply. It was a rather uncomfortable three-cornered
conversation. Sir Isaac addressed his exposition exclusively to Mr. Brumley and Mr. Brumley
made repeated ineffectual attempts to bring Lady Harman, and Lady Harman made repeated ineffectual
attempts to bring herself, into a position in the conversation.

Their eyes met, the glow of Mr. Brumley's declarations remained with them, but neither dared
risk any phrase that might arouse Sir Isaac's suspicions or escape his acuteness. And when
they had gone through the new additions pretty thoroughly--the plumbers were still busy with
the barn bathroom--Sir Isaac asked Mr. Brumley if there was anything more he would like to
see. In the slight pause that ensued Lady Harman suggested tea. But tea gave them no opportunity
of resuming their interrupted conversation, and as Sir Isaac's invincible determination to
shadow his visitor until he was well off the premises became more and more unmistakable,--he
made it quite ungraciously unmistakable,--Mr. Brumley's inventiveness failed. One thing came
to him suddenly, but it led to nothing of any service to him.

"But I heard you were dangerously ill, Lady Harman!" he cried. "Lady Beach-Mandarin called
here----"

"But when?" asked Lady Harman, astonished over the tea-things.

"But you know she called!" said Mr. Brumley and looked in affected reproach at Sir Isaac.

"I've not been ill at all!"

"Sir Isaac told her."

"Told her I was ill!"

"Dangerously ill. That you couldn't bear to be disturbed."

"But when, Mr. Brumley?"

"Three days ago."

They both looked at Sir Isaac who was sitting on the music stool and eating a piece of tea-cake
with a preoccupied air. He swallowed and then spoke thoughtfully--in a tone of detached observation.
Nothing but a slight reddening of the eyes betrayed any unusual feeling in him.

"It's my opinion," he said, "that that old lady--Lady Beach-Mandarin I mean--doesn't know what
she's saying half the time. She says--oh! remarkable things. Saying that for example!"

"But did she call on me?"

"She called. I'm surprised you didn't hear. And she was all in a flurry for going on.... Did
you come down, Mr. Brumley, to see if Lady Harman was ill?"

"That weighed with me."

"Well,--you see she isn't," said Sir Isaac and brushed a stray crumb from his coat....

Mr. Brumley was at last impelled gateward and Sir Isaac saw him as far as the high-road.

"Good-bye!" cried Mr. Brumley with excessive amiability.

Sir Isaac with soundless lips made a good-bye like gesture.

"And now," said Sir Isaac to himself with extreme bitterness, "now to see about getting a dog."

"Bull mastiff?" said Sir Isaac developing his idea as he went back to Lady Harman. "Or perhaps
a Thoroughly Vicious collie?"

"How did that chap get in?" he demanded. "What had he got to say to you?"

"He came in--to look at the garden," said Lady Harman. "And of course he wanted to know if
I had been well--because of Lady Viping's party. And I suppose because of what you told Lady
Beach-Mandarin."

Sir Isaac grunted doubtfully. He thought of Snagsby and of all the instructions he had given
Snagsby. He turned about and went off swiftly and earnestly to find Snagsby....

Snagsby lied. But Sir Isaac was able to tell from the agitated way in which he was cleaning
his perfectly clean silver at that unseasonable hour that the wretched man was lying.

§8

Quite a number of words came to the lips of Mr. Brumley as he went unwillingly along the pleasant
country road that led from Black Strand to the railway station. But the word he ultimately
said showed how strongly the habits of the gentlemanly littérateur prevailed in him. It was
the one inevitable word for his mood,--"Baffled!"

Close upon its utterance came the weak irritation of the impotent man. "What the devil?" cried
Mr. Brumley.

Some critical spirit within him asked him urgently why he was going to the station, what he
thought he was doing, what he thought he had done, and what he thought he was going to do.
To all of which questions Mr. Brumley perceived he had no adequate reply.

Earlier in the day he had been inspired by a vague yet splendid dream of large masterful liberations
achieved. He had intended to be very disinterested, very noble, very firm, and so far as Sir
Isaac was concerned, a trifle overbearing. You know now what he said and did. "Of course if
we could have talked for a little longer," he said. From the stormy dissatisfaction of his
retreat this one small idea crystallized, that he had not talked enough without disturbance
to Lady Harman. The thing he had to do was to talk to her some more. To go on with what he
had been saying. That thought arrested his steps. On that hypothesis there was no reason whatever
why he should go on to the station and London. Instead----He stopped short, saw a convenient
gate ahead, went to it, seated himself upon its topmost rail and attempted a calm survey of
the situation. He had somehow to continue that conversation with Lady Harman.

Was it impossible to do that by going back to the front door of Black Strand? His instinct
was against that course. He knew that if he went back now openly he would see nobody but Sir
Isaac or his butler. He must therefore not go back openly. He must go round now and into the
pine-woods at the back of Black Strand; thence he must watch the garden and find his opportunity
of speaking to the imprisoned lady. There was something at once attractively romantic and repellently
youthful about this course of action. Mr. Brumley looked at his watch, then he surveyed the
blue clear sky overhead, with just one warm tinted wisp of cloud. It would be dark in an hour
and it was probable that Lady Harman had already gone indoors for the day. Might it be possible
after dark to approach the house? No one surely knew the garden so well as he.

Of course this sort of thing is always going on in romances; in the stories of that last great
survivor of the Stevensonian tradition, H.B. Marriot Watson, the heroes are always creeping
through woods, tapping at windows, and scaling house-walls, but Mr. Brumley as he sat on his
gate became very sensible of his own extreme inexperience in such adventures. And yet anything
seemed in his present mood better than going back to London.

Suppose he tried his luck!

He knew of course the lie of the land about Black Strand very well indeed and his harmless
literary social standing gave him a certain freedom of trespass. He dropped from his gate on
the inner side and taking a bridle path through a pine-wood was presently out upon the moorland
behind his former home. He struck the high-road that led past the Staminal Bread Board and
was just about to clamber over the barbed wire on his left and make his way through the trees
to the crest that commanded the Black Strand garden when he perceived a man in a velveteen
coat and gaiters strolling towards him. He decided not to leave the road until he was free
from observation. The man was a stranger, an almost conventional gamekeeper, and he endorsed
Mr. Brumley's remark upon the charmingness of the day with guarded want of enthusiasm. Mr.
Brumley went on for some few minutes, then halted, assured himself that the stranger was well
out of sight and returned at once towards the point where high-roads were to be left and adventure
begun. But he was still some yards away when he became aware of that velveteen-coated figure
approaching again. "Damn!" said Mr. Brumley and slacked his eager paces. This time he expressed
a view that the weather was extremely mild. "Very," said the man in velveteen with a certain
lack of respect in his manner.

It was no good turning back again. Mr. Brumley went on slowly, affected to botanize, watched
the man out of sight and immediately made a dash for the pine-woods, taking the barbed wire
in a manner extremely detrimental to his left trouser leg. He made his way obliquely up through
the trees to the crest from which he had so often surveyed the shining ponds of Aleham. There
he paused to peer back for that gamekeeper--whom he supposed in spite of reason to be stalking
him--to recover his breath and to consider his further plans. The sunset was very fine that
night, a great red sun was sinking towards acutely outlined hill-crests, the lower nearer distances
were veiled in lavender mists and three of the ponds shone like the fragments of a shattered
pink topaz. But Mr. Brumley had no eye for landscape....

About two hours after nightfall Mr. Brumley reached the railway station. His trousers and the
elbow of his coat bore witness to a second transit of the barbed-wire fence in the darkness,
he had manifestly walked into a boggy place and had some difficulty in recovering firm ground
and he had also been sliding in a recumbent position down a bank of moist ferruginous sand.
Moreover he had cut the palm of his left hand. There was a new strange stationmaster who regarded
him without that respect to which he had grown accustomed. He received the information that
the winter train service had been altered and that he would have to wait forty-five minutes
for the next train to London with the resignation of a man already chastened by misfortune
and fatigue. He went into the waiting-room and after a vain search for the poker--the new stationmaster
evidently kept it in a different place--sat down in front of an irritatingly dull fire banked
up with slack, and nursed his damaged hand and meditated on his future plans.

His plans were still exactly in the state in which they had been when Sir Isaac parted from
him at the gate of Black Strand. They remained in the same state for two whole days. Throughout
all that distressing period his general intention of some magnificent intervention on behalf
of Lady Harman remained unchanged, it produced a number of moving visions of flights at incredible
speeds in (recklessly hired) motor-cars of colossal power,--most of the purchase money for
Black Strand was still uninvested at his bank--of impassioned interviews with various people,
of a divorce court with a hardened judge congratulating the manifestly quite formal co-respondent
on the moral beauty of his behaviour, but it evolved no sort of concrete practicable detail
upon which any kind of action might be taken. And during this period of indecision Mr. Brumley
was hunted through London by a feverish unrest. When he was in his little flat in Pont Street
he was urged to go to his club, when he got to his club he was urged to go anywhere else, he
called on the most improbable people and as soon as possible fled forth again, he even went
to the British Museum and ordered out a lot of books on matrimonial law. Long before that great
machine had disgorged them for him he absconded and this neglected, this widowed pile of volumes
still standing to his account only came back to his mind in the middle of the night suddenly
and disturbingly while he was trying to remember the exact words he had used in his brief conversation
with Lady Harman....

§9

Two days after Mr. Brumley's visit Susan Burnet reached Black Strand. She too had been baffled
for a while. For some week or more she couldn't discover the whereabouts of Lady Harman and
lived in the profoundest perplexity. She had brought back her curtains to the Putney house
in a large but luggable bundle, they were all made and ready to put up, and she found the place
closed and locked, in the charge of a caretaker whose primary duty it was to answer no questions.
It needed several days of thought and amazement, and a vast amount of "I wonder," and "I just
would like to know," before it occurred to Susan that if she wrote to Lady Harman at the Putney
address the letter might be forwarded. And even then she almost wrecked the entire enterprise
by mentioning the money, and it was by a quite exceptional inspiration that she thought after
all it was wiser not to say that but to state that she had finished the curtains and done everything
(underlined) that Lady Harman had desired. Sir Isaac read it and tossed it over to his wife.
"Make her send her bill," he remarked.

Whereupon Lady Harman set Mrs. Crumble in motion to bring Susan down to Black Strand. This
wasn't quite easy because as Mrs. Crumble pointed out they hadn't the slightest use for Susan's
curtains there, and Lady Harman had to find the morning light quite intolerable in her bedroom--she
always slept with window wide open and curtains drawn back--to create a suitable demand for
Susan's services. But at last Susan came, too humbly invisible for Sir Isaac's attention, and
directly she found Lady Harman alone in the room with her, she produced a pawn ticket and twenty
pounds. "I 'ad to give all sorts of particulars," she said. "It was a job. But I did it...."

The day was big with opportunity, for Sir Isaac had been unable to conceal the fact that he
had to spend the morning in London. He had gone up in the big car and his wife was alone, and
so, with Susan upstairs still deftly measuring for totally unnecessary hangings, Lady Harman
was able to add a fur stole and a muff and some gloves to her tweed gardening costume, walk
unchallenged into the garden and from the garden into the wood and up the hillside and over
the crest and down to the high-road and past that great advertisement of Staminal Bread and
so for four palpitating miles, to the railway station and the outer world.

She had the good fortune to find a train imminent,--the twelve-seventeen. She took a first-class
ticket for London and got into a compartment with another woman because she felt it would be safer.

§10

Lady Harman reached Miss Alimony's flat at half-past three in the afternoon. She had lunched
rather belatedly and uncomfortably in the Waterloo Refreshment Room and she had found out that
Miss Alimony was at home through the telephone. "I want to see you urgently," she said, and
Miss Alimony received her in that spirit. She was hatless but she had a great cloud of dark
fuzzy hair above the grey profundity of her eyes and she wore an artistic tea-gown that in
spite of a certain looseness at neck and sleeve emphasized the fine lines of her admirable
figure. Her flat was furnished chiefly with books and rich oriental hangings and vast cushions
and great bowls of scented flowers. On the mantel-shelf was the crystal that amused her lighter
moments and above it hung a circular allegory by Florence Swinstead, very rich in colour, the
Awakening of Woman, in a heavy gold frame. Miss Alimony conducted her guest to an armchair,
knelt flexibly on the hearthrug before her, took up a small and elegant poker with a brass
handle and a spear-shaped service end of iron and poked the fire.

The service end came out from the handle and fell into the grate. "It always does that," said
Miss Alimony charmingly. "But never mind." She warmed both hands at the blaze. "Tell me all
about it," she said, softly.

Lady Harman felt she would rather have been told all about it. But perhaps that would follow.

"You see," she said, "I find----My married life----"

She halted. It was very difficult to tell.

"Everyone," said Agatha, giving a fine firelit profile, and remaining gravely thoughtful through
a little pause.

"Do you mind," she asked abruptly, "if I smoke?"

When she had completed her effect with a delicately flavoured cigarette, she encouraged Lady
Harman to proceed.

This Lady Harman did in a manner do. She said her husband left her no freedom of mind or movement,
gave her no possession of herself, wanted to control her reading and thinking. "He insists----"
she said.

"Yes," said Miss Agatha sternly blowing aside her cigarette smoke. "They all insist."

"He insists," said Lady Harman, "on seeing all my letters, choosing all my friends. I have
no control over my house or my servants, no money except what he gives me."

"In fact you are property."

"I'm simply property."

"A harem of one. And all that is within the provisions of the law!"

"How any woman can marry!" said Miss Agatha, after a little interval. "I sometimes think that
is where the true strike of the sex ought to begin. If none of us married! If we said all of
us, 'No,--definitely--we refuse this bargain! It is a man-made contract. We have had no voice
in it. We decline.' Perhaps it will come to that. And I knew that you, you with that quiet
beautiful penetration in your eyes would come to see it like that. The first task, after the
vote is won, will be the revision of that contract. The very first task of our Women Statesmen...."

She ceased and revived her smouldering cigarette and mused blinking through the smoke. She
seemed for a time almost lost to the presence of her guest in a great daydream of womanstatecraft.

"And so," she said, "you've come, as they all come,--to join us."

"Well," said Lady Harman in a tone that made Agatha turn eyes of surprise upon her.

"Of course," continued Lady Harman, "I suppose--I shall join you; but as a matter of fact you
see, what I've done to-day has been to come right away.... You see I am still in my garden
tweeds.... There it was down there, a sort of stale mate...."

Agatha sat up on her heels.

"But my dear!" she said, "you don't mean you've run away?"

"Yes,--I've run away."

"But--run away!"

"I sold a ring and got some money and here I am!"

"But--what are you going to do?"

"I don't know. I thought you perhaps--might advise."

"But--a man like your husband! He'll pursue you!"

"If he knows where I am, he will," said Lady Harman.

"He'll make a scandal. My dear! are you wise? Tell me, tell me exactly, why have you run away?
I didn't understand at all--that you had run away."

"Because," began Lady Harman and flushed hotly. "It was impossible," she said.

Miss Alimony regarded her deeply. "I wonder," she said.

"I feel," said Lady Harman, "if I stayed, if I gave in----I mean after--after I had once--rebelled.
Then I should just be--a wife--ruled, ordered----"

"It wasn't your place to give in," said Miss Alimony and added one of those parliament touches
that creep more and more into feminine phraseology; "I agree to that--nemine contradicente.
But--I wonder...."

She began a second cigarette and thought in profile again.

"I think, perhaps, I haven't explained, clearly, how things are," said Lady Harman, and commenced
a rather more explicit statement of her case. She felt she had not conveyed and she wanted
to convey to Miss Alimony that her rebellion was not simply a desire for personal freedom and
autonomy, that she desired these things because she was becoming more and more aware of large
affairs outside her home life in which she ought to be not simply interested but concerned,
that she had been not merely watching the workings of the business that made her wealthy, but
reading books about socialism, about social welfare that had stirred her profoundly.... "But
he won't even allow me to know of such things," she said....

Miss Alimony listened a little abstractedly.

Suddenly she interrupted. "Tell me," she said, "one thing.... I confess," she explained, "I've
no business to ask. But if I'm to advise----If my advice is to be worth anything...."

"Yes?" asked Lady Harman.

"Is there----Is there someone else?"

"Someone else?" Lady Harman was crimson.

"On your side!"

"Someone else on my side?"

"I mean--someone. A man perhaps? Some man that you care for? More than you do for your husband?..."

"I can't imagine," whispered Lady Harman, "anything----" And left her sentence unfinished.
Her breath had gone. Her indignation was profound.

"Then I can't understand why you should find it so important to come away."

Lady Harman could offer no elucidation.

"You see," said Miss Alimony, with an air of expert knowledge, "our case against our opponents
is just exactly their great case against us. They say to us when we ask for the Vote, 'the
Woman's Place is the Home.' 'Precisely,' we answer, 'the Woman's Place is the Home. Give us
our Homes!' Now your place is your home--with your children. That's where you have to fight
your battle. Running away--for you it's simply running away."

"But----If I stay I shall be beaten." Lady Harman surveyed her hostess with a certain dismay.
"Do you understand, Agatha? I can't go back."

"But my dear! What else can you do? What had you thought?"

"You see," said Lady Harman, after a little struggle with that childish quality in her nerves
that might, if it wasn't controlled, make her eyes brim. "You see, I didn't expect you quite
to take this view. I thought perhaps you might be disposed----If I could have stayed with you
here, only for a little time, I could have got some work or something----"

"It's so dreadful," said Miss Alimony, sitting far back with the relaxation of infinite regrets.
"It's dreadful."

"Of course if you don't see it as I do----"

"I can't," said Miss Alimony. "I can't."

She turned suddenly upon her visitor and grasped her knees with her shapely hands. "Oh let
me implore you! Don't run away. Please for my sake, for all our sakes, for the sake of Womanhood,
don't run away! Stay at your post. You mustn't run away. You must not. If you do, you admit
everything. Everything. You must fight in your home. It's your home. That is the great principle
you must grasp,--it's not his. It's there your duty lies. And there are your children--your
children, your little ones! Think if you go--there may be a fearful fuss--proceedings. Lawyers--a
search. Very probably he will take all sorts of proceedings. It will be a Matrimonial Case.
How can I be associated with that? We mustn't mix up Women's Freedom with Matrimonial Cases.
Impossible! We dare not! A woman leaving her husband! Think of the weapon it gives our enemies.
If once other things complicate the Vote,--the Vote is lost. After all our self-denial, after
all our sacrifices.... You see! Don't you see?...

"Fight!" she summarized after an eloquent interval.

"You mean," said Lady Harman,--"you think I ought to go back."

Miss Alimony paused to get her full effect. "Yes," she said in a profound whisper and endorsed
it, "Oh so much so!--yes."

"Now?"

"Instantly."

For an interval neither lady spoke. It was the visitor at last who broke the tension.

"Do you think," she asked in a small voice and with the hesitation of one whom no refusal can
surprise; "you could give me a cup of tea?"

Miss Alimony rose with a sigh and a slow unfolding rustle. "I forgot," she said. "My little
maid is out."

Lady Harman left alone sat for a time staring at the fire with her eyes rather wide and her
eyebrows raised as though she mutely confided to it her infinite astonishment. This was the
last thing she had expected. She would have to go to some hotel. Can a woman stay alone at
an hotel? Her heart sank. Inflexible forces seemed to be pointing her back to home--and Sir
Isaac. He would be a very triumphant Sir Isaac, and she'd not have much heart left in her....
"I won't go back," she whispered to herself. "Whatever happens I won't go back...."

Then she became aware of the evening newspaper Miss Alimony had been reading. The headline,
"Suffrage Raid on Regent Street," caught her eye. A queer little idea came into her head. It
grew with tremendous rapidity. She put out a hand and took up the paper and read.

She had plenty of time to read because her hostess not only got the tea herself but went during
that process to her bedroom and put on one of those hats that have contributed so much to remove
the stigma of dowdiness from the suffrage cause, as an outward and visible sign that she was
presently ceasing to be at home....

Lady Harman found an odd fact in the report before her. "One of the most difficult things to
buy at the present time in the West End of London," it ran, "is a hammer...."

Then a little further: "The magistrate said it was impossible to make discriminations in this
affair. All the defendants must have a month's imprisonment...."

When Miss Alimony returned Lady Harman put down the paper almost guiltily.

Afterwards Miss Alimony recalled that guilty start, and the still more guilty start that had
happened, when presently she went out of the room again and returned with a lamp, for the winter
twilight was upon them. Afterwards, too, she was to learn what had become of the service end
of her small poker, the little iron club, which she missed almost as soon as Lady Harman had
gone....

Lady Harman had taken that grubby but convenient little instrument and hidden it in her muff,
and she had gone straight out of Miss Alimony's flat to the Post Office at the corner of Jago
Street, and there, with one simple effective impact, had smashed a ground-glass window, the
property of His Majesty King George the Fifth. And having done so, she had called the attention
of a youthful policeman, fresh from Yorkshire, to her offence, and after a slight struggle
with his incredulity and a visit to the window in question, had escorted him to the South Hampsmith
police-station, and had there made him charge her. And on the way she explained to him with
a newfound lucidity why it was that women should have votes.

And all this she did from the moment of percussion onward, in a mood of exaltation entirely
strange to her, but, as she was astonished to find, by no means disagreeable. She found afterwards
that she only remembered very indistinctly her selection of the window and her preparations
for the fatal blow, but that the effect of the actual breakage remained extraordinarily vivid
upon her memory. She saw with extreme distinctness both as it was before and after the breakage,
first as a rather irregular grey surface, shining in the oblique light of a street lamp, and
giving pale phantom reflections of things in the street, and then as it was after her blow.
It was all visual impression in her memory; she could not recollect afterwards if there had
been any noise at all. Where there had been nothing but a milky dinginess a thin-armed, irregular
star had flashed into being, and a large triangular piece at its centre, after what seemed
an interminable indecision, had slid, first covertly downward, and then fallen forward at her
feet and shivered into a hundred fragments....

Lady Harman realized that a tremendous thing had been done--irrevocably. She stared at her
achievement open-mouthed. The creative lump of iron dropped from her hand. She had a momentary
doubt whether she had really wanted to break that window at all; and then she understood that
this business had to be seen through, and seen through with neatness and dignity; and that
wisp of regret vanished absolutely in her concentration upon these immediate needs.

§11

Some day, when the arts of the writer and illustrator are more closely blended than they are
to-day, it will be possible to tell of all that followed this blow, with an approach to its
actual effect. Here there should stand a page showing simply and plainly the lower half of
the window of the Jago Street Post Office, a dark, rather grimy pane, reflecting the light
of a street lamp--and broken. Below the pane would come a band of evilly painted woodwork,
a corner of letter-box, a foot or so of brickwork, and then the pavement with a dropped lump
of iron. That would be the sole content of this page, and the next page would be the same,
but very slightly fainter, and across it would be printed a dim sentence or so of explanation.
The page following that would show the same picture again, but now several lines of type would
be visible, and then, as one turned over, the smashed window would fade a little, and the printed
narrative, still darkened and dominated by it, would nevertheless resume. One would read on
how Lady Harman returned to convince the incredulous young Yorkshireman of her feat, how a
man with a barrow-load of bananas volunteered comments, and how she went in custody, but with
the extremest dignity, to the police-station. Then, with some difficulty, because that imposed
picture would still prevail over the letterpress, and because it would be in small type, one
would learn how she was bailed out by Lady Beach-Mandarin, who was clearly the woman she ought
to have gone to in the first place, and who gave up a dinner with a duchess to entertain her,
and how Sir Isaac, being too torn by his feelings to come near her spent the evening in a frantic
attempt to keep the whole business out of the papers. He could not manage it. The magistrate
was friendly next morning, but inelegant in his friendly expedients; he remanded Lady Harman
until her mental condition could be inquired into, but among her fellow-defendants--there had
been quite an epidemic of window-smashing that evening--Lady Harman shone pre-eminently sane.
She said she had broken this window because she was assured that nothing would convince people
of the great dissatisfaction of women with their conditions except such desperate acts, and
when she was reminded of her four daughters she said it was precisely the thought of how they
too would grow up to womanhood that had made her strike her blow. The statements were rather
the outcome of her evening with Lady Beach-Mandarin than her own unaided discoveries, but she
had honestly assimilated them, and she expressed them with a certain simple dignity.

Sir Isaac made a pathetic appearance before the court, and Lady Harman was shocked to see how
worn he was with distress at her scandalous behaviour. He looked a broken man. That curious
sense of personal responsibility, which had slumbered throughout the Black Strand struggle,
came back to her in a flood, and she had to grip the edge of the dock tightly to maintain her
self-control. Unaccustomed as he was to public speaking, Sir Isaac said in a low, sorrow-laden
voice, he had provided himself with a written statement dissociating himself from the views
his wife's rash action might seem to imply, and expressing his own opinions upon woman's suffrage
and the relations of the sexes generally, with especial reference to contemporary literature.
He had been writing it most of the night. He was not, however, permitted to read this, and
he then made an unstudied appeal for the consideration and mercy of the court. He said Lady
Harman had always been a good mother and a faithful wife; she had been influenced by misleading
people and bad books and publications, the true significance of which she did not understand,
and if only the court would regard this first offence leniently he was ready to take his wife
away and give any guarantee that might be specified that it should not recur. The magistrate
was sympathetic and kindly, but he pointed out that this window-breaking had to be stamped
out, and that it could only be stamped out by refusing any such exception as Sir Isaac desired.
And so Sir Isaac left the court widowed for a month, a married man without a wife, and terribly
distressed.

All this and more one might tell in detail, and how she went to her cell, and the long tedium
of her imprisonment, and how deeply Snagsby felt the disgrace, and how Miss Alimony claimed
her as a convert to the magic of her persuasions, and many such matters--there is no real restraint
upon a novelist fully resolved to be English and Gothic and unclassical except obscure and
inexplicable instincts. But these obscure and inexplicable instincts are at times imperative,
and on this occasion they insist that here must come a break, a pause, in the presence of this
radiating gap in the Postmaster-General's glass, and the phenomenon of this gentle and beautiful
lady, the mother of four children, grasping in her gloved hand, and with a certain amateurishness,
a lumpish poker-end of iron.

We make the pause by ending the chapter here and by resuming the story at a fresh point--with
an account of various curious phases in the mental development of Mr. Brumley.

CHAPTER THE NINTH

MR. BRUMLEY IS TROUBLED BY DIFFICULT IDEAS

§1

Then as that picture of a post office pane, smashed and with a large hole knocked clean through
it, fades at last upon the reader's consciousness, let another and a kindred spectacle replace
it. It is the carefully cleaned and cherished window of Mr. Brumley's mind, square and tidy
and as it were "frosted" against an excess of light, and in that also we have now to record
the most jagged all and devastating fractures.

Little did Mr. Brumley reckon when first he looked up from his laces at Black Strand, how completely
that pretty young woman in the dark furs was destined to shatter all the assumptions that had
served his life.

But you have already had occasion to remark a change in Mr. Brumley's bearing and attitude
that carries him far from the kindly and humorous conservatism of his earlier work. You have
shared Lady Harman's astonishment at the ardour of his few stolen words in the garden, an astonishment
that not only grew but flowered in the silences of her captivity, and you know something of
the romantic impulses, more at least than she did, that gave his appearance at the little local
railway station so belated and so disreputable a flavour. In the chilly ill-flavoured solitude
of her prison cell and with a mind quickened by meagre and distasteful fare, Lady Harman had
ample leisure to reflect upon many things, she had already fully acquainted herself with the
greater proportion of Mr. Brumley's published works, and she found the utmost difficulty in
reconciling the flushed impassioned quality of his few words of appeal, with the moral assumptions
of his published opinions. On the whole she was inclined to think that her memory had a little
distorted what he had said. In this however she was mistaken; Mr. Brumley had really been proposing
an elopement and he was now entirely preoccupied with the idea of rescuing, obtaining and possessing
Lady Harman for himself as soon as the law released her.

One may doubt whether this extensive change from a humorous conservatism to a primitive and
dangerous romanticism is to be ascribed entirely to the personal charm, great as it no doubt
was, of Lady Harman; rather did her tall soft dark presence come to release a long accumulating
store of discontent and unrest beneath the polished surfaces of Mr. Brumley's mind. Things
had been stirring in him for some time; the latter Euphemia books had lacked much of the freshness
of their precursors and he had found it increasingly hard, he knew not why, to keep up the
lightness, the geniality, the friendly badinage of successful and accepted things, the sunny
disregard of the grim and unamiable aspects of existence, that were the essential merits of
that Optimistic Period of our literature in which Mr. Brumley had begun his career. With every
justification in the world Mr. Brumley had set out to be an optimist, even in the Granta his
work had been distinguished by its gay yet steadfast superficiality, and his early success,
his rapid popularity, had done much to turn this early disposition into a professional attitude.
He had determined that for all his life he would write for comfortable untroubled people in
the character of a light-spirited, comfortable, untroubled person, and that each year should
have its book of connubial humour, its travel in picturesque places, its fun and its sunshine,
like roses budding in succession on a stem. He did his utmost to conceal from himself the melancholy
realization that the third and the fourth roses were far less wonderful than the first and
the second, and that by continuing the descending series a rose might be attained at last that
was almost unattractive, but he was already beginning to suspect that he was getting less animated
and a little irritable when Euphemia very gently and gracefully but very firmly and rather
enigmatically died, and after an interval of tender and tenderly expressed regrets he found
himself, in spite of the most strenuous efforts to keep bright and kindly and optimistic in
the best style, dull and getting duller--he could disguise the thing no longer. And he weighed
more. Six--eight--eleven pounds more. He took a flat in London, dined and lunched out lightly
but frequently, sought the sympathetic friendship of several charming ladies, and involved
himself deeply in the affairs of the Academic Committee. Indeed he made a quite valiant struggle
to feel that optimism was just where it always had been and everything all right and very bright
with him and with the world about him. He did not go under without a struggle. But as Max Beerbohm's
caricature--the 1908 one I mean--brought out all too plainly, there was in his very animation,
something of the alert liveliness of the hunted man. Do what he would he had a terrible irrational
feeling that things, as yet scarce imagined things, were after him and would have him. Even
as he makes his point, even as he gesticulates airily, with his rather distinctively North
European nose Beerbohmically enlarged and his sensitive nostril in the air, he seems to be
looking at something he does not want to look at, something conceivably pursuing, out of the
corner of his eye.

The thing that was assailing Mr. Brumley and making his old established humour and tenderness
seem dull and opaque and giving this new uneasy quality to his expression was of course precisely
the thing that Sir Isaac meant when he talked about "idees" and their disturbing influence
upon all the once assured tranquillities and predominances of Putney life. It was criticism
breaking bounds.

As a basis and substance for the tissue of whimsically expressed happiness and confident appreciation
of the good things of life, which Mr. Brumley had set before himself as his agreeable--and
it was to be hoped popular and profitable--life-task, certain assumptions had been necessary.
They were assumptions he had been very willing to make and which were being made in the most
exemplary way by the writers who were succeeding all about him at the commencement of his career.
And these assumptions had had such an air then of being quite trustworthy, as being certain
to wash and wear! Already nowadays it is difficult to get them stated; they have become incredible
while still too near to justify the incredibility that attaches to history. It was assumed,
for example, that in the institutions, customs and culture of the middle Victorian period,
humanity had, so far as the broad lines of things are concerned, achieved its goal. There were
of course still bad men and women--individually--and classes one had to recognize as "lower,"
but all the main things were right, general ideas were right; the law was right, institutions
were right, Consols and British Railway Debentures were right and were going to keep right
for ever. The Abolition of Slavery in America had been the last great act which had inaugurated
this millennium. Except for individual instances the tragic intensities of life were over now
and done with; there was no more need for heroes and martyrs; for the generality of humanity
the phase of genial comedy had begun. There might be improvements and refinements ahead, but
social, political and economic arrangement were now in their main outlines settled for good
and all; nothing better was possible and it was the agreeable task of the artist and the man
of letters to assist and celebrate this establishment. There was to be much editing of Shakespear
and Charles Lamb, much delightful humour and costume romance, and an Academy of refined Fine
Writers would presently establish belles-lettres on the reputable official basis, write finis
to creative force and undertake the task of stereotyping the language. Literature was to have
its once terrible ferments reduced to the quality of a helpful pepsin. Ideas were dead--or
domesticated. The last wild idea, in an impoverished and pitiful condition, had been hunted
down and killed in the mobbing of, "The Woman Who Did." For a little time the world did actually
watch a phase of English writing that dared nothing, penetrated nothing, suppressed everything
and aspired at most to Charm, creep like a transitory patch of sunlight across a storm-rent
universe. And vanish....

At no time was it a perfectly easy task to pretend that the crazy makeshifts of our legal and
political systems, the staggering accidents of economic relationship, the festering disorder
of contemporary philosophy and religious teaching, the cruel and stupid bed of King Og that
is our last word in sexual adjustment, really constituted a noble and enduring sanity, and
it became less and less so with the acute disillusionments that arose out of the Boer War.
The first decade of the twentieth century was for the English a decade of badly sprained optimism.
Our Empire was nearly beaten by a handful of farmers amidst the jeering contempt of the whole
world--and we felt it acutely for several years. We began to question ourselves. Mr. Brumley
found his gay but entirely respectable irresponsibility harder and harder to keep up as that
decade wore on. And close upon the South African trouble came that extraordinary new discontent
of women with a woman's lot which we have been observing as it reached and troubled the life
of Lady Harman. Women who had hitherto so passively made the bulk of that reading public which
sustained Mr. Brumley and his kind--they wanted something else!

And behind and beneath these immediately disconcerting things still more sinister hintings
and questioning were beginning to pluck at contentment. In 1899 nobody would have dreamt of
asking and in 1909 even Mr. Brumley was asking, "Are things going on much longer?" A hundred
little incidents conspired to suggest that a Christianity that had, to put it mildly, shirked
the Darwinian challenge, had no longer the palliating influence demanded of a national religion,
and that down there in the deep levels of labour where they built railways to carry Mr. Brumley's
food and earn him dividends, where they made engines and instruments and textiles and drains
for his little needs, there was a new, less bounded discontent, a grimmer spirit, something
that one tried in vain to believe was only the work of "agitators," something that was to be
pacified no longer by the thin pretences of liberalism, something that might lead ultimately--optimism
scarcely dared to ask whither....

Mr. Brumley did his best to resist the influence of these darkening ideas. He tried to keep
it up that everything was going well and that most of these shadows and complaints were the
mischief of a few incurably restless personalities. He tried to keep it up that to belong to
the working class was a thoroughly jolly thing--for those who were used to it. He declared
that all who wanted to alter our laws or our ideas about property or our methods of production
were envious and base and all who wanted any change between the sexes, foolish or vicious.
He tried to go on disposing of socialists, agitators, feminists, women's suffragists, educationists
and every sort of reformer with a good-humoured contempt. And he found an increasing difficulty
in keeping his contempt sufficiently good-humoured. Instead of laughing down at folly and failure,
he had moments when he felt that he was rather laughing up--a little wryly--at monstrous things
impending. And since ideas are things of atmosphere and the spirit, insidious wolves of the
soul, they crept up to him and gnawed the insides out of him even as he posed as their manful
antagonist.

Insensibly Mr. Brumley moved with his times. It is the necessary first phase in the break-up
of any system of unsound assumptions that a number of its votaries should presently set about
padding its cutting corners and relieving the harsh pressure of its injustices by exuberances
of humour and sentimentality. Mr. Brumley became charitable and romantic,--orthodox still but
charitable and romantic. He was all for smashing with the generalization, but now in the particular
instance he was more and more for forgiveness. One finds creeping into the later Euphemia books
a Bret-Harte-like doctrine that a great number of bad women are really good and a persuasion
in the 'Raffles' key that a large proportion of criminals are really very picturesque and admirable
fellows. One wonders how far Mr. Brumley's less ostensible life was softening in harmony with
this exterior change, this tender twilight of principle. He wouldn't as yet face the sterner
fact that most people who are condemned by society, whether they are condemned justly or not,
are by the very gregariousness of man's nature debased, and that a law or custom that stamps
you as bad makes you bad. A great state should have high and humane and considerate laws nobly
planned, nobly administered and needing none of these shabby little qualifications sotto voce.
To find goodness in the sinner and justification in the outcast is to condemn the law, but
as yet Mr. Brumley's heart failed where his intelligence pointed towards that conclusion. He
hadn't the courage to revise his assumptions about right and wrong to that extent; he just
allowed them to get soft and sloppy. He waded, where there should be firm ground. He waded
toward wallowing. This is a perilous way of living and the sad little end of Euphemia, flushed
and coughing, left him no doubt in many ways still more exposed to the temptations of the sentimental
byway and the emotional gloss. Happily this is a book about Lady Harman and not an exhaustive
monograph upon Mr. Brumley. We will at least leave him the refuge of a few shadows.

Occasionally he would write an important signed review for the Twentieth Century or the Hebdomadal
Review, and on one such occasion he took in hand several studies of contemporary conditions
by various 'New Witnesses,' 'Young Liberals,' New Age rebels and associated insurgent authors.
He intended to be rather kindly with them, rather disillusioned, quite sympathetic but essentially
conventional and conservative and sane. He sat at a little desk near the drooping Venus, under
the benediction of Euphemia's posthumous rose, and turned over the pages of one of the least
familiar of the group. The stuff was written with a crude force that at times became almost
distinguished, but with a bitterness that he felt he must reprove. And suddenly he came upon
a passionate tirade against the present period. It made him nibble softly with his lips at
the top of his fountain pen as he read.

"We live," said the writer, "in a second Byzantine age, in one of those multitudinous accumulations
of secondary interests, of secondary activities and conventions and colossal intricate insignificances,
that lie like dust heaps in the path of the historian. The true history of such periods is
written in bank books and cheque counterfoils and burnt to save individual reputations; it
sneaks along under a thousand pretences, it finds its molelike food and safety in the dirt;
its outer forms remain for posterity, a huge débris of unfathomable riddles."

"Hm!" said Mr. Brumley. "He slings it out. And what's this?"

"A civilization arrested and decayed, waiting through long inglorious ages of unscheduled crime,
unchallenged social injustice, senseless luxury, mercenary politics and universal vulgarity
and weakness, for the long overdue scavenging of the Turk."

"I wonder where the children pick up such language," whispered Mr. Brumley with a smile.

But presently he had pushed the book away and was thinking over this novel and unpleasant idea
that perhaps after all his age didn't matter as some ages have mattered and as he had hitherto
always supposed it did matter. Byzantine, with the gold of life stolen and the swans changed
to geese? Of course always there had been a certain qualification upon heroes, even Cæsar had
needed a wreath, but at any rate the age of Cæsar had mattered. Kings no doubt might be more
kingly and the issues of life plainer and nobler, but this had been true of every age. He tried
to weigh values against values, our past against our present, temperately and sanely. Our art
might perhaps be keener for beauty than it seemed to be, but still--it flourished. And our
science at least was wonderful--wonderful. There certainly this young detractor of existing
things went astray. What was there in Byzantium to parallel with the electric light, the electric
tram, wireless telegraphy, aseptic surgery? Of course this about "unchallenged social injustice"
was nonsense. Rant. Why! we were challenging social injustice at every general election--plainly
and openly. And crime! What could the man mean about unscheduled crime? Mere words! There was
of course a good deal of luxury, but not wicked luxury, and to compare our high-minded and
constructive politics with the mere conflict of unscrupulous adventurers about that semi-oriental
throne! It was nonsense!

"This young man must be spanked," said Mr. Brumley and, throwing aside an open illustrated
paper in which a full-length portrait of Sir Edward Carson faced a picture of the King and
Queen in their robes sitting side by side under a canopy at the Coronation Durbar, he prepared
himself to write in an extremely salutary manner about the follies of the younger generation,
and incidentally to justify his period and his professional contentment.

§2

One is reminded of those houses into which the white ants have eaten their way; outwardly still
fair and solid, they crumble at the touch of a hand. And now you will begin to understand those
changes of bearing that so perplexed Lady Harman, that sudden insurgence of flushed half-furtive
passion in the garden, through the thin pretences of a liberal friendship. His hollow honour
had been gripped and had given way.

He had begun so well. At first Lady Harman had occupied his mind in the properest way. She
was another man's wife and sacred--according to all honourable standards, and what he wanted
was merely to see more of her, talk to her, interest her in himself, share whatever was available
outside her connubial obligations,--and think as little of Sir Isaac as possible.

How quickly the imaginative temperament of Mr. Brumley enlarged that to include a critical
hostility to Sir Isaac, we have already recorded. Lady Harman was no longer simply a charming,
suppressed young wife, crying out for attentive development; she became an ill-treated beautiful
woman--misunderstood. Still scrupulously respecting his own standards, Mr. Brumley embarked
upon the dangerous business of inventing just how Sir Isaac might be outraging them, and once
his imagination had started to hunt in that field, it speedily brought in enough matter for
a fine state of moral indignation, a white heat of not altogether justifiable chivalry. Assisted
by Lady Beach-Mandarin Mr. Brumley had soon converted the little millionaire into a matrimonial
ogre to keep an anxious lover very painfully awake at nights. Because by that time and quite
insensibly he had become an anxious lover--with all the gaps in the thread of realities that
would have made him that, quite generously filled up from the world of reverie.

Moral indignation is jealousy with a halo. It is the peculiar snare of the perplexed orthodox,
and soon Mr. Brumley was in a state of nearly unendurable moral indignation with Sir Isaac
for a hundred exaggerations of what he was and of what conceivably he might have done to his
silent yet manifestly unsuitably mated wife. And now that romantic streak which is as I have
said the first certain symptom of decay in a system of moral assumptions began to show itself
in Mr. Brumley's thoughts and conversation. "A marriage like that," said Mr. Brumley to Lady
Beach-Mandarin, "isn't a marriage. It flouts the True Ideal of Marriage. It's slavery--following
a kidnapping...."

But this is a wide step from the happy optimism of the Cambridge days. What becomes of the
sanctity of marriage and the institution of the family when respectable gentlemen talk of something
called "True Marriage," as non-existent in relation to a lady who is already the mother of
four children? I record this lapsing of Mr. Brumley into romanticism without either sympathy
or mitigation. The children, it presently became apparent, were not "true" children. "Forced
upon her," said Mr. Brumley. "It makes one ill to think of it!" It certainly very nearly made
him ill. And as if these exercises in distinction had inflamed his conscience Mr. Brumley wrote
two articles in the Hebdomadal denouncing impure literature, decadence, immorality, various
recent scandalous instances, and the suffragettes, declaring that woman's place was the home
and that "in a pure and exalted monogamy lies the sole unitary basis for a civilized state."
The most remarkable thing about this article is an omission. That Sir Isaac's monogamy with
any other instances that might be akin to it was not pure and exalted, and that it needed--shall
we call it readjustment? is a view that in this article Mr. Brumley conspicuously doesn't display.
It's as if for a moment, pen in hand, he had eddied back to his old absolute positions....

In a very little while Mr. Brumley and Lady Beach-Mandarin had almost persuaded each other
that Sir Isaac was applying physical torture to his proudly silent wife, and Mr. Brumley was
no longer dreaming and glancing at but steadily facing the possibility of a pure-minded and
handsomely done elopement to "free" Lady Harman, that would be followed in due course by a
marriage, a "true marriage" on a level of understanding far above any ordinary respectable
wedding, amidst universal sympathy and admiration and the presence of all the very best people.
In these anticipations he did rather remarkably overlook the absence of any sign of participation
on the part of Lady Harman in his own impassioned personal feelings, and he overlooked still
more remarkably as possible objections to his line of conduct, Millicent, Florence, Annette
and Baby. These omissions no doubt simplified but also greatly falsified his outlook.

This proposal that all the best people shall applaud the higher rightness that was to be revealed
in his projected elopement, is in the very essence of the romantic attitude. All other people
are still to remain under the law. There is to be nothing revolutionary. But with exceptional
persons under exceptional conditions----

Mr. Brumley stated his case over and over again to his utmost satisfaction, and always at great
moral altitudes and with a kind of transcendent orthodoxy. The more difficult any aspect of
the affair appeared from the orthodox standpoint the more valiantly Mr. Brumley soared; if
it came to his living with Lady Harman for a time before they could be properly married amidst
picturesque foreign scenery in a little casa by the side of a stream, then the water in that
stream was to be quite the purest water conceivable and the scenery and associations as morally
faultless as a view that had passed the exacting requirements of Mr. John Ruskin. And Mr. Brumley
was very clear in his mind that what he proposed to do was entirely different in quality even
if it was similar in form from anything that anyone else had ever done who had ever before
made a scandal or appeared in the divorce court. This is always the way in such cases--always.
The scandal was to be a noble scandal, a proud scandal, one of those instances of heroical
love that turn aside misdemeanours--admittedly misdemeanours--into edifying marvels.

This was the state of mind to which Mr. Brumley had attained when he made his ineffectual raid
upon Black Strand, and you will remark about it, if you are interested in the changes in people's
ideas that are going on to-day, that although he was prepared to make the most extensive glosses
in this particular instance upon the commonly accepted rules of what is right and proper, he
was not for a moment prepared to accord the terrible gift of an independent responsibility
to Lady Harman. In that direction lay regions that Mr. Brumley had still to explore. Lady Harman
he considered was married wrongly and disastrously and this he held to be essentially the fault
of Sir Isaac--with perhaps some slight blame attaching to Lady Harman's mother. The only path
of escape he could conceive as yet for Lady Harman lay through the chivalry of some other man.
That a woman could possibly rebel against one man without the sympathy and moral maintenance
of another was still outside the range of Mr. Brumley's understanding. It is still outside
the range of most men's understandings--and of a great many women's. If he generalized at all
from these persuasions it was in the direction that in the interest of "true marriage" there
should be greater facilities for divorce and also a kind of respectable-ization of divorce.
Then these "false marriages" might be rectified without suffering. The reasons for divorce
he felt should be extended to include things not generally reprehensible, and chivalrous people
coming into court should be protected from the indelicate publicity of free reporting....

§3

Mr. Brumley was still contemplating rather inconclusively the possibility of a long and intimate
talk leading up to and preparing for an elopement with Lady Harman, when he read of her Jago
Street escapade and of her impending appearance at the South Hampsmith police court. He was
astonished. The more he contemplated the thing the greater became his astonishment.

Even at the first impact he realized that the line she had taken wasn't quite in the picture
with the line he had proposed for her. He felt--left out. He felt as though a door had slammed
between himself and affairs to which he had supposed himself essential. He could not understand
why she had done this thing instead of coming straight to his flat and making use of all that
chivalrous service she surely knew was at her disposal. This self-reliance, this direct dealing
with the world, seemed to him, even in the height of his concern, unwomanly, a deeper injury
to his own abandoned assumptions than any he had contemplated. He felt it needed explanation,
and he hurried to secure an elbowed unsavoury corner in the back of the court in order to hear
her defence. He had to wait through long stuffy spaces of time before she appeared. There were
half a dozen other window smashers,--plain or at least untidy-looking young women. There are moments
in the history of the heart when the lesser claim must yield to the greater. For the Son of Man
Himself, there were interests higher even than those of the family.

Some men, perhaps even most, are able to fulfil their vocation without a surrender of the joys
of kinship. But others are called to a wider sphere and a harder task. For the sake of the
larger brotherhood of man, Jesus found it necessary to renounce the intimacies of home. What
it cost Him to do so we, who cannot fathom the depth of His love, know not. Even such an abandonment
did He demand of His first disciples. And for the follower of Christ still there must be the
same willingness to make the complete sacrifice of everything, even of home and kindred, if they
stand in the way of devotion to the kingdom of God.[8]

(1) Our Lord's direct statements regarding the nature of the family leave us in no doubt as to
the high place it holds in His conception of life. Marriage, upon which the family rests, is, according
to Jesus, the divinely ordained life-union of a man and woman. In His quotation from Genesis
He makes reference to that mysterious attraction, deeply founded in the very nature of man, by
which members of the opposite sex are drawn to each other. But while acknowledging the sensuous
element in marriage, He lifts it up into the spiritual realm and
transmutes it into a symbol of soul-communion.

Our Lord does not derive the sanction of wedded life from Mosaic
legislation.

Still less does He permit it as a concession to human frailty. It has its ground in creation
itself, and while therefore it is the most natural of earthly relationships
it is of God's making.

To the true ideal of marriage there are several features which our Lord regards as indispensable.
(a) It must be monogamous, the fusion of two distinct personalities.

'They two shall be one flesh.' Mutual self-impartation demands that the union should be an exclusive
one. (b) It is a union of equality. Neither {224} personality is to be suppressed. The wedded
are partners who share one another's inmost thoughts and most cherished
purposes.

But this claim of equality does not exclude but rather include the different functions which,
by reason of sex and constitution, each is enabled to exercise. 'Woman is not undeveloped man
but diverse.' And it is in diversity that true unity consists. Both will best realise their personality
in seeking the perfection of one another. (c) It is a permanent union,
indissoluble till the parting of death.

The only exception which Christ acknowledges is that form of infidelity which ipso facto has
already ruptured the sacred bond.[9] According to Jesus marriage is clearly intended by God to
involve sacred and permanent obligations, a covenant with God, as well as with one another, which
dare not be set aside at the dictate of a whim or passion.

The positive principle underlying this declaration against divorce is the spirit of universal love that
forbids that the wife should be treated, as was the case among the
dissolute of our Lord's time, as a chattel or slave.

Nothing could be more abhorrent to Christian sentiment than the modern
doctrine of 'leasehold marriage' advocated by some.[10] It has been
ingeniously suggested that the record of marital unrest and divorce
in America, shameful as it is, may not be in many cases altogether
an evil.

The very demand to annul a union in which reverence and affection have been forfeited may spring
from a growing desire to realise the true ideal of marriage.[11]
(d) Finally, it is a spiritual union.

It is something more than a legal contract, or even an ecclesiastical ordinance. The State must indeed
safeguard the civil rights of the parties to the compact, and the
Church's ceremony ought to be sought as the expression of divine blessing
and approval.

But of themselves these do not constitute the inner tie which makes
the twain one, and binds them together amid all the chances and changes
of this earthly life.[12] In the teaching of both Christ and {225}
the apostles marriage is presented as a high vocation, ordained by
God for the enrichment of character, and invested with a holy symbolism.

According to St. Paul it is the emblem of the mystic union of Christ
and His Church, and is overshadowed by the presence of God, who is
the archetype of those sacred ideas which we associate with the name
of fatherhood.

(2) Though marriage is the most personal of all forms of social intercourse, there are many varied and
intricate interests involved which require legal recognition and adjustment. Questions as to
the legitimacy of offspring, the inheritance of property, the status and rights of the contracting
parties, come within the domain of law. The State punishes bigamy, and forbids marriage within
certain degrees of consanguinity. Many contend that the State should go further, and prevent all
unions which endanger the physical vigour and efficiency of the coming generation. It is undoubtedly
true that the government has a right to protect its people against actions which tend to the
deterioration of the race. To permit those to marry who are suffering from certain maladies of mind
or body is to commit a grave crime against society. But care must be taken lest we unduly interfere
with the deeper spiritual sympathies and affections upon which a true union is founded. In agitating
for State control in the mating of the physically fit, the champions of eugenics are apt to
exaggerate the materialistic side of marriage, and overlook those qualities of heart and mind which
are not less important for the well-being of the race. In the discipline of humanity weakness
and suffering are assets which the world could ill afford to lose.[13]

(3) In modern times the institution of marriage is menaced by two opposite forces; on the one hand,
by a revolutionary type of socialism, and on the other, by the reactionary influence of self-interested
individualism. (a) It is contended by some advanced socialists that among {226} the poor and
the toiling home life is practically non-existent; indeed, under
present industrial conditions, impossible.

Marriage and separate family life are insuperable barriers, it is said, to corporate unity
and social progress. It is but fair to add that this extreme view is now largely repudiated
by the most enlightened advocates of a new social order, who are contending, they tell us, not
for the abolition, but for the betterment, of domestic conditions.[14]
(b) The stability of social life is being threatened even more seriously
by a self-centred individualism.

Marriage is considered as a merely temporary arrangement which may be terminated at will. It is contended
that divorce should be granted on the easiest terms, and the most trifling reasons are seriously
put forward as legitimate grounds for the annulling of the holiest of vows. Without discussing
these disintegrating influences, it is enough to say that the trend of history is against
any radical tampering with the institution of marriage, and any attempt to disparage the sanctity
of the home or belittle domestic obligations would be to poison at
its springs the moral life of man.

3. The duties of the various members of the family are explicitly, if briefly, stated in the apostolic
epistles. They are valid for all times and conditions. Though they may be easily elaborated they
cannot well be improved. All home obligations are to be fulfilled in and unto the Lord. The
fear of God is to inspire the nurture of children, and to sanctify the lowliest services of the household.
Authority is to be blended with affection. (1) Parents are not to provoke their children by
harsh and despotic rule, nor yet to spoil them by soft indulgence. Children are to render obedience,
and, when able, to contribute to the support of their parents.[15]
Masters are to treat their servants with equity and respect.

Servants are exhorted to show fidelity.

In short all the relationships of the household are to be hallowed by the spirit of Christian
love.

Many questions relative to the family arise, over which {227} we may
not linger.

One might speak of the effect of industrial conditions upon domestic
life, the employment of women and children in factories, the evil
of sweating, the problem of our city slums, and, generally, of the
need of improved environment in order that our labouring classes may
have a chance of a healthier and purer home existence.

Legislation can do much. But even law is ineffective to achieve the highest ends if it is not
backed by the public conscience.

The final solution of the problem of the family rests not in conditions
but in character, not in environment but in education, in the kind
of men we are rearing.

(2) This century has been called the woman's century.

And certainly there is an obvious trend to-day towards acknowledgment, in all departments of
life, of women's equality with men. There is, however, a difference of opinion as to what that equality
should mean; and there seems to be a danger in some quarters of overlooking the essential
difference of the sexes. No people can achieve what it ought while its wives and mothers are
degraded or denied their rights. For her own sake, as well as for the weal of the race, whatever
is needful to enable woman to attain to her noblest womanhood must be unhesitatingly granted.[16]

(3)
But this is even more the children's era. A new sense of reverence for the child is one of
the most promising notes of our age, and the problems arising out of the care and education
of the young have created the new sciences of pedagogy and child-psychology. Regard for child-life
owes its inspiration directly to the teaching of Christ. The child in the simplicity of its
nature and innocence of its dependence is, according to the Master, the perfect pattern of
those who seek after God. It is true that in the art of antiquity child-life was frequently represented.
But as Burckhardt says it was the drollery and playfulness, even the quarrelsomeness and stealth,
and above all the lusty health and animal vigour of young life that was depicted. Ancient art did
not behold in the child the prophecy of a new and purer world. Moreover, it was aesthetic {228}
feeling and not real sympathy with childhood which animated this movement. As time went on the teaching
of Christ on this subject was strangely neglected, and the history of the treatment of the
young is a tragic tale of neglect and suffering.

Only now are we recovering the lost message of Jesus in regard to the child, and we are beginning
to realise that infancy and youth have their rights, and demand of the world both care and affection.
Ours sons and daughters are the nation's assets. Yet it is a parent's question even more than the State's.
In a deeper sense than we imagine children are the creation of their parents. It is the effect
of soul upon soul, the mother's touch and look, the father's words and ways, that kindle into
flame the dull material of humanity, and begin that second birth
which should be the anxiety and glory of parenthood.

But if the parent makes the child, scarcely less true is it that the child makes the parent.
In the give and take of home life a new world is created. When a father really looks into his
child's eye he is not as he was before.[17] Indispensable as is the State's education of the
young, there is an important part which the community cannot undertake, and there is a danger in curbing
individuality by a stereotyped method of instruction. 'All social enactments,' says Harnack,
'have a tendency to circumscribe the activities of the individual. If we unduly fetter the
free play of individual effort we break the mainspring of progress
and enterprise, and create a state of social immobility which is the
antecedent of national decay.'[18] Youth ought to be taught self-reliance
and strenuousness of will; and this is a work which can only be done
in the home by the firm yet kindly influence of the parents.

But there is another aspect of the home problem not less pressing. The want of training in working-class
families is largely answerable for the waifs and strays with which our cities team. Even in middle-class
households there are indications of a lack not only of discipline, but of {229} that kindly
sympathy and affectionate counsel on the part of parents, and of reverence and frankness in the
children; with the result that the young people, missing the attachment and interest which
the home should supply, seek their satisfaction outside the domestic circle, often with the most
disastrous results. The problem of the family is thus the problem of nurturing the very seeds of
the moral life. Within the precincts of the nation's homes the future of the commonwealth
is being determined.

II

1. The State is the supreme controller of social relationships. As distinguished from the family
and the Church, it is the realm of organised force working for social ends. Its purpose is to
secure the conditions of life essential to order and progress, and
it can fulfil its function only as it is endowed with power to enforce
its authority.

The interference of the State with the liberty of the individual has created a reaction in
two opposite quarters towards complete abrogation of all State compulsion. On the one side Tolstoy
pleads for the removal of force, because it violates the principle of love and subverts the teaching
of Jesus--'Resist not evil.' Militant anarchism as the other extreme demands the abrogation of authority,
because it believes that restraint hinders progress and happiness,
and that if governmental force were abolished individuals would be
best able to take care of themselves.

The aim of anarchism is to destroy force by force; the aim of Tolstoy is to allow force to
do its worst. Such a spirit of non-resistance would mean the overthrow of all security, and
the reversion to wild lawlessness. It is an utter travesty of Christ's teaching. Extremes meet.
Violence and servility join hands. Anarchism and Tolstoyism reveal the total bankruptcy of
unrestricted individualism.

The social order for which the State stands is not so much an interference with the freedom of
the subject as the condition under which alone individual liberty can be preserved. {230} The
view, however, that the State is an artificial relationship into which men voluntarily enter
in order to limit their selfish instincts and to secure their mutual advantages--the theory
of the 'social contract'--has been discarded in modern times as a fiction of the imagination. It
is not of his own choice that the individual becomes a member of society. He is born into it.
Man is not a whole in himself.

He is only complete in his fellows.

As he serves others he serves himself. But men are not the unconscious functions of a mechanical
system. They are free, living personalities, united by a sense of human obligation and kindredship.
The State is more than a physical organism. It is a community of moral aims and ideals. Even
law, which is the soul of the State, is itself the embodiment of a moral principle; and the commonwealth
stands for a great ethical idea, to the fulfilment of which all its citizens are called upon to contribute.

2.
The reciprocal duties of the State and its citizens receive comparatively
little prominence in the New Testament.

But they are never treated with disparagement or contempt. During our Lord's earthly life the
supreme power belonged to the Roman Empire. Though Jesus had to suffer much at the hands of
those in authority, His habitual attitude was one of respect. He lived in obedience to the
government of the country, and acknowledged the right of Caesar to legislate and levy taxes in
his own province. While giving all deference to the State officials before whom He was brought,
He did not hesitate to remind them of the ideal of truth and justice of which they were the
chosen representatives.[19] St. Paul's teaching is in harmony with
his Master's, and is indeed an expansion of it.[20] 'The powers that
be are ordained of God.

Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute.' Beyond, however, enjoining the
necessity of work as a means of independence, and recommending that each should remain in the
sphere in which he has been placed, and perform conscientiously the duties of his calling, we
{231} find little direct reference in the Epistles to the matter of citizenship. But as has been
truly said 'the citizen has but to stand in his station, and perform its duties, in order
to fulfil the demands of citizenship.'[21] St. Paul's insistence
therefore upon the personal fidelity of every man to the duties of
his sphere goes far to recognise that spirit of reciprocal service
which is the fundamental idea of the commonwealth.

3. Of the two extreme views as to the meaning of the State between which the verdict of history
has wavered--that of Augustine, who regarded the State as the result of man's sinful condition
and as the direct antithesis of the kingdom of God; and that of Hegel, who saw in it the highest
ethical form of society, the realisation of the moral ideal--the view of St. Paul may be said
to have approximated more nearly to the latter

.
 With
an almost impulsive movement she held out both her hands to him, and with an inspiration as
sudden he took them and kissed them. When he had done so he was ashamed of his temerity; he
looked up to meet in her dark eyes the scared shyness of a fallow deer. She suddenly remembered
to withdraw her hands, and it became manifest to both of them that the incident must never
have happened. She went to the window, stood almost awkwardly for a moment looking out of it,
then turned. She put her hands on the back of the chair and stood holding it.

"I knew you would come to see me," she said.

"I've been very anxious about you," he said, and on that their minds rested through a little
silence.

"You see," he explained, "I didn't know what was happening to you. Or what you were doing."

"After asking your advice," she said.

"Exactly."

"I don't know why I broke that window. Except I think that I wanted to get away."

"But why didn't you come to me?"

"I didn't know where you were. And besides--I didn't somehow want to come to you."

"But wasn't it wretched in prison? Wasn't it miserably cold? I used to think of you of nights
in some wretched ill-aired cell.... You...."

"It was cold," she admitted. "But it was very good for me. It was quiet. The first few days
seemed endless; then they began to go by quickly. Quite quickly at last. And I came to think.
In the day there was a little stool where one sat. I used to sit on that and brood and try
to think things out--all sorts of things I've never had the chance to think about before."

"Yes," said Mr. Brumley.

"All this," she said.

"And it has brought you back here!" he said, with something of the tone of one who has a right
to enquire, with some flavour too of reproach.

"You see," she said after a little pause, "during that time it was possible to come to understandings.
Neither I nor my husband had understood the other. In that interval it was possible--to explain.

"Yes. You see, Mr. Brumley, we--we both misunderstood. It was just because of that and because
I had no one who seemed able to advise me that I turned to you. A novelist always seems so
wise in these things. He seems to know so many lives. One can talk to you as one can scarcely
talk to anyone; you are a sort of doctor--in these matters. And it was necessary--that my husband
should realize that I had grown up and that I should have time to think just how one's duty
and one's--freedom have to be fitted together.... And my husband is ill. He has been ill, rather
short of breath--the doctor thinks it is asthma--for some time, and all the agitation of this
business has upset him and made him worse. He is upstairs now--asleep. Of course if I had thought
I should make him ill I could never have done any of this. But it's done now and here I am,
Mr. Brumley, back in my place. With all sorts of things changed. Put right...."

"I see," said Mr. Brumley stupidly.

Her speech was like the falling of an opaque curtain upon some romantic spectacle. She stood
there, almost defensively behind her chair as she made it. There was a quality of premeditation
in her words, yet something in her voice and bearing made him feel that she knew just how it
covered up and extinguished his dreams and impulses. He heard her out and then suddenly his
spirit rebelled against her decision. "No!" he cried.

She waited for him to go on.

"You see," he said, "I thought that it was just that you wanted to get away----That this life
was intolerable----That you were----Forgive me if I seem to be going beyond--going beyond what
I ought to be thinking about you. Only, why should I pretend? I care, I care for you tremendously.
And it seemed to me that you didn't love your husband, that you were enslaved and miserable.
I would have done anything to help you--anything in the world, Lady Harman. I know--it may
sound ridiculous--there have been times when I would have faced death to feel you were happy
and free. I thought all that, I felt all that,--and then--then you come back here. You seem
not to have minded. As though I had misunderstood...."

He paused and his face was alive with an unwonted sincerity. His self-consciousness had for
a moment fallen from him.

"I know," she said, "it was like that. I knew you cared. That is why I have so wanted to talk
to you. It looked like that...."

She pressed her lips together in that old familiar hunt for words and phrases.

"I didn't understand, Mr. Brumley, all there was in my husband or all there was in myself.
I just saw his hardness and his--his hardness in business. It's become so different now. You
see, I forgot he has bad health. He's ill; I suppose he was getting ill then. Instead of explaining
himself--he was--excited and--unwise. And now----"

"Now I suppose he has--explained," said Mr. Brumley slowly and with infinite distaste. "Lady
Harman, what has he explained?"

"It isn't so much that he has explained, Mr. Brumley," said Lady Harman, "as that things have
explained themselves."

"But how, Lady Harman? How?"

"I mean about my being a mere girl, almost a child when I married him. Naturally he wanted
to take charge of everything and leave nothing to me. And quite as naturally he didn't notice
that now I am a woman, grown up altogether. And it's been necessary to do things. And naturally,
Mr. Brumley, they shocked and upset him. But he sees now so clearly, he wrote to me, such a
fair letter--an unusual letter--quite different from when he talks--it surprised me, telling
me he wanted me to feel free, that he meant to make me--to arrange things that is, so that
I should feel free and more able to go about as I pleased. It was a generous letter, Mr. Brumley.
Generous about all sorts of affairs that there had been between us. He said things, quite kind
things, not like the things he has ever said before----"

She stopped short and then began again.

"You know, Mr. Brumley, it's so hard to tell things without telling other things that somehow
are difficult to tell. Yet if I don't tell you them, you won't know them and then you won't
be able to understand in the least how things are with us."

Her eyes appealed to him.

"Tell me," he said, "whatever you think fit."

"When one has been afraid of anyone and felt they were ever so much stronger and cruel and
hard than one is and one suddenly finds they aren't. It alters everything."

He nodded, watching her.

Her voice fell nearly to a whisper. "Mr. Brumley," she said, "when I came back to him--you
know he was in bed here--instead of scolding me--he cried. He cried like a vexed child. He
put his face into the pillow--just misery.... I'd never seen him cry--at least only once--long
ago...."

Mr. Brumley looked at her flushed and tender face and it seemed to him that indeed he could
die for her quite easily.

"I saw how hard I had been," she said. "In prison I'd thought of that, I'd thought women mustn't
be hard, whatever happens to them. And when I saw him like that I knew at once how true that
was.... He begged me to be a good wife to him. No!--he just said, 'Be a wife to me,' not even
a good wife--and then he cried...."

For a moment or so Mr. Brumley didn't respond. "I see," he said at last. "Yes."

"And there were the children--such helpless little things. In the prison I worried about them.
I thought of things for them. I've come to feel--they are left too much to nurses and strangers....
And then you see he has agreed to nearly everything I had wanted. It wasn't only the personal
things--I was anxious about those silly girls--the strikers. I didn't want them to be badly
treated. It distressed me to think of them. I don't think you know how it distressed me. And
he--he gave way upon all that. He says I may talk to him about the business, about the way
we do our business--the kindness of it I mean. And this is why I am back here. Where else could
I be?"

"No," said Mr. Brumley still with the utmost reluctance. "I see. Only----"

He paused downcast and she waited for him to speak.

"Only it isn't what I expected, Lady Harman. I didn't think that matters could be settled by
such arrangements. It's sane, I know, it's comfortable and kindly. But I thought--Oh! I thought
of different things, quite different things from all this. I thought of you who are so beautiful
caught in a loveless passionless world. I thought of the things there might be for you, the
beautiful and wonderful things of which you are deprived.... Never mind what I thought! Never
mind! You've made your choice. But I thought that you didn't love, that you couldn't love--this
man. It seemed to me that you felt too--that to live as you are doing--with him--was a profanity.
Something--I'd give everything I have, everything I am, to save you from. Because--because
I care.... I misunderstood you. I suppose you can--do what you are doing."

He jumped to his feet as he spoke and walked three paces away and turned to utter his last
sentences. She too stood up.

"Mr. Brumley," she said weakly, "I don't understand. What do you mean? I have to do what I
am doing. He--he is my husband."

He made a gesture of impatience. "Do you understand nothing of love?" he cried.

She pressed her lips together and remained still and silent, dark against the casement window.

There came a sound of tapping from the room above. Three taps and again three taps.

Lady Harman made a little gesture as though she would put this sound aside.

"Love," she said at last. "It comes to some people. It happens. It happens to young people....
But when one is married----"

Her voice fell almost to a whisper. "One must not think of it," she said. "One must think of
one's husband and one's duty. Life cannot begin again, Mr. Brumley."

The taps were repeated, a little more urgently.

"That is my husband," she said.

She hesitated through a little pause. "Mr. Brumley," she said, "I want friendship so badly,
I want some one to be my friend. I don't want to think of things--disturbing things--things
I have lost--things that are spoilt. That--that which you spoke of; what has it to do with me?"

She interrupted him as he was about to speak.

"Be my friend. Don't talk to me of impossible things. Love! Mr. Brumley, what has a married
woman to do with love? I never think of it. I never read of it. I want to do my duty. I want
to do my duty by him and by my children and by all the people I am bound to. I want to help
people, weak people, people who suffer. I want to help him to help them. I want to stop being
an idle, useless, spending woman...."

She made a little gesture of appeal with her hands.

"Oh!" he sighed, and then, "You know if I can help you----Rather than distress you----"

Her manner changed. It became confidential and urgent.

"Mr. Brumley," she said, "I must go up to my husband. He will be impatient. And when I tell
him you are here he will want to see you.... You will come up and see him?"

Mr. Brumley sought to convey the struggle within him by his pose.

"I will do what you wish, Lady Harman," he said, with an almost theatrical sigh.

He closed the door after her and was alone in his former study once more. He walked slowly
to his old writing-desk and sat down in his familiar seat. Presently he heard her footfalls
across the room above. Mr. Brumley's mind under the stress of the unfamiliar and the unexpected
was now lapsing rapidly towards the theatrical. "My God!" said Mr. Brumley.

He addressed that friendly memorable room in tones that mingled amazement and wrong. "He is
her husband!" he said, and then: "The power of words!" ...

§7

It seemed to Mr. Brumley's now entirely disordered mind that Sir Isaac, propped up with cushions
upon a sofa in the upstairs sitting-room, white-faced, wary and very short of breath, was like
Proprietorship enthroned. Everything about him referred deferentially to him. Even his wife
dropped at once into the position of a beautiful satellite. His illness, he assured his visitor
with a thin-lipped emphasis, was "quite temporary, quite the sort of thing that might happen
to anyone." He had had a queer little benumbing of one leg, "just a trifle of nerve fag did
it," and the slight asthma that came and went in his life had taken advantage of his condition
to come again with a little beyond its usual aggressiveness. "Elly is going to take me off
to Marienbad next week or the week after," he said. "I shall have a cure and she'll have a
treat, and we shall come back as fit as fiddles." The incidents of the past month were to be
put on a facetious footing it appeared. "It's a mercy they didn't crop her hair," he said,
apropos of nothing and with an air of dry humour. No further allusion was made to Lady Harman's
incarceration.

He was dressed in a lama wool bedroom suit and his resting leg was covered by a very splendid
and beautiful fur rug. All Euphemia's best and gayest cushions sustained his back. The furniture
had been completely rearranged for his comfort and convenience. Close to his hand was a little
table with carefully selected remedies and aids and helps and stimulants, and the latest and
best of the light fiction of the day was tossed about between the table, the couch and the
floor. At the foot of the couch Euphemia's bedroom writing-table had been placed, and over
this there were scattered traces of the stenographer who had assisted him to wipe off the day's
correspondence. Three black cylinders and other appliances in the corner witnessed that his
slight difficulty in breathing could be relieved by oxygen, and his eyes were regaled by a
great abundance of London flowers at every available point in the room. Of course there were
grapes, fabulous looking grapes.

Everything conspired to give Sir Isaac and his ownership the centre of the picture. Mr. Brumley
had been brought upstairs to him, and the tea table, with scarcely a reference to anyone else,
was arranged by Snagsby conveniently to his hand. And Sir Isaac himself had a confidence--the
assurance of a man who has been shaken and has recovered. Whatever tears he had ever shed had
served their purpose and were forgotten. "Elly" was his and the house was his and everything
about him was his--he laid his hand upon her once when she came near him, his possessiveness
was so gross--and the strained suspicion of his last meeting with Mr. Brumley was replaced
now by a sage and wizened triumph over anticipated and arrested dangers.

Their party was joined by Sir Isaac's mother, and the sight of her sturdy, swarthy, and rather
dignified presence flashed the thought into Mr. Brumley's mind that Sir Isaac's father must
have been a very blond and very nosey person indeed. She was homely and practical and contributed
very usefully to a conversation that remained a trifle fragmentary and faintly uncomfortable
to the end.

Mr. Brumley avoided as much as he could looking at Lady Harman, because he knew Sir Isaac was
alert for that, but he was acutely aware of her presence dispensing the tea and moving about
the room, being a good wife. It was his first impression of Lady Harman as a good wife and
he disliked the spectacle extremely. The conversation hovered chiefly about Marienbad, drifted
away and came back again. Mrs. Harman made several confidences that provoked the betrayal of
a strain of irritability in Sir Isaac's condition. "We're all looking forward to this Marienbad
expedition," she said. "I do hope it will turn out well. Neither of them have ever been abroad
before--and there's the difficulty of the languages."

"Ow," snarled Sir Isaac, with a glance at his mother that was almost vicious and a lapse into
Cockney intonations and phrases that witnessed how her presence recalled his youth, "It'll
go all right, mother. You needn't fret."

"Of course they'll have a courier to see to their things, and go train de luxe and all that,"
Mrs. Harman explained with a certain gusto. "But still it's an adventure, with him not well,
and both as I say more like children than grown-up people."

Sir Isaac intervened with a crushing clumsiness to divert this strain of explanation, with
questions about the quality of the soil in the wood where the ground was to be cleared and
levelled for his tennis lawns.

Mr. Brumley did his best to behave as a man of the world should. He made intelligent replies
about the sand, he threw out obvious but serviceable advice upon travel upon the continent
of Europe, and he tried not to think that this was the way of living into which the sweetest,
tenderest, most beautiful woman in the world had been trapped. He avoided looking at her until
he felt it was becoming conspicuous, a negative stare. Why had she come back again? Fragmentary
phrases she had used downstairs came drifting through his mind. "I never think of it. I never
read of it." And she so made for beautiful love and a beautiful life! He recalled Lady Beach-Mandarin's
absurdly apt, absurdly inept, "like Godiva," and was suddenly impelled to raise the question
of those strikers.

"Your trouble with your waitresses is over, Sir Isaac?"

Sir Isaac finished a cup of tea audibly and glanced at his wife. "I never meant to be hard
on them," he said, putting down his cup. "Never. The trouble blew up suddenly. One can't be
all over a big business everywhere all at once, more particularly if one is worried about other
things. As soon as I had time to look into it I put things right. There was misunderstandings
on both sides."

He glanced up again at Lady Harman. (She was standing behind Mr. Brumley so that he could not
see her but--did their eyes meet?)

"As soon as we are back from Marienbad," Sir Isaac volunteered, "Lady Harman and I are going
into all that business thoroughly."

Mr. Brumley concealed his intense aversion for this association under a tone of intelligent
interest. "Into--I don't quite understand--what business?"

"Women employees in London--Hostels--all that kind of thing. Bit more sensible than suffragetting,
eh, Elly?"

"Very interesting," said Mr. Brumley with a hollow cordiality, "very."

"Done on business lines, mind you," said Sir Isaac, looking suddenly very sharp and keen, "done
on proper business lines, there's no end of a change possible. And it's a perfectly legitimate
outgrowth from such popular catering as ours. It interests me."

He made a little whistling noise with his teeth at the end of this speech.

"I didn't know Lady Harman was disposed to take up such things," he said. "Or I'd have gone
into them before."

"He's going into them now," said Mrs. Harman, "heart and soul. Why! we have to take his temperature
over it, to see he doesn't work himself up into a fever." Her manner became reasonable and
confidential. She spoke to Mr. Brumley as if her son was slightly deaf. "It's better than his
fretting," she said....

§8

Mr. Brumley returned to London in a state of extreme mental and emotional unrest. The sight
of Lady Harman had restored all his passion for her, the all too manifest fact that she was
receding beyond his reach stirred him with unavailing impulses towards some impossible extremity
of effort. She had filled his mind so much that he could not endure the thought of living without
hope of her. But what hope was there of her? And he was jealous, detestably jealous, so jealous
that in that direction he did not dare to let his mind go. He sawed at the bit and brought
it back, or he would have had to writhe about the carriage. His thoughts ran furiously all
over the place to avoid that pit. And now he found himself flashing at moments into wild and
hopeless rebellion against the institution of marriage, of which he had hitherto sought always
to be the dignified and smiling champion against the innovator, the over-critical and the young.
He had never rebelled before. He was so astonished at the violence of his own objection that
he lapsed from defiance to an incredulous examination of his own novel attitude. "It's not
true marriage I object to," he told himself. "It's this marriage like a rat trap, alluring
and scarcely unavoidable, so that in we all go, and then with no escape--unless you tear yourself
to rags. No escape...."

It came to him that there was at least one way out for Lady Harman: Sir Isaac might die! ...

He pulled himself up presently, astonished and dismayed at the activities of his own imagination.
Among other things he had wondered if by any chance Lady Harman had ever allowed her mind to
travel in this same post-mortem direction. At times surely the thing must have shone upon her
as a possibility, a hope. From that he had branched off to a more general speculation. How
many people were there in the world, nice people, kind people, moral and delicate-minded people,
to whom the death of another person means release from that inflexible barrier--possibilities
of secretly desired happiness, the realization of crushed and forbidden dreams? He had a vision
of human society, like the vision of a night landscape seen suddenly in a lightning flash,
as of people caught by couples in traps and quietly hoping for one another's deaths. "Good
Heavens!" said Mr. Brumley, "what are we coming to," and got up in his railway compartment--he
had it to himself--and walked up and down its narrow limits until a jolt over a point made
him suddenly sit down again. "Most marriages are happy," said Mr. Brumley, like a man who has
fallen into a river and scrambles back to safety. "One mustn't judge by the exceptional cases....

"Though of course there are--a good many--exceptional cases." ...

He folded his arms, crossed his legs, frowned and reasoned with himself,--resolved to dismiss
post-mortem speculations--absolutely.

He was not going to quarrel with the institution of marriage. That was going too far. He had
never been able to see the beginnings of reason in sexual anarchy, never. It is against the
very order of things. Man is a marrying animal just as much as he was a fire-making animal;
he goes in pairs like mantel ornaments; it is as natural for him to marry and to exact and
keep good faith--if need be with a savage jealousy, as it is for him to have lobes to his ears
and hair under his armpits. These things jar with the dream perhaps; the gods on painted ceilings
have no such ties, acting beautifully by their very nature; and here on the floor of the world
one had them and one had to make the best of them.... Are we making the best of them? Mr. Brumley
was off again. That last thought opened the way to speculative wildernesses, and into these
Mr. Brumley went wandering with a novel desperate enterprise to find a kind of marriage that
would suit him.

He began to reform the marriage laws. He did his utmost not to think especially of Lady Harman
and himself while he was doing so. He would just take up the whole question and deal with it
in a temperate reasonable way. It was so necessary to be reasonable and temperate in these
questions--and not to think of death as a solution. Marriages to begin with were too easy to
make and too difficult to break; countless girls--Lady Harman was only a type--were married
long before they could know the beginnings of their own minds. We wanted to delay marriage--until
the middle twenties, say. Why not? Or if by the infirmities of humanity one must have marriage
before then, there ought to be some especial opportunity of rescinding it later. (Lady Harman
ought to have been able to rescind her marriage.) What ought to be the marriageable age in
a civilized community? When the mind was settled into its general system of opinions Mr. Brumley
thought, and then lapsed into a speculation whether the mind didn't keep changing and developing
all through life; Lady Harman's was certainly still doing so.... This pointed to logical consequences
of an undesirable sort....

(Some little mind-slide occurred just at this point and he found himself thinking that perhaps
Sir Isaac might last for years and years, might even outlive a wife exhausted by nursing. And
anyhow to wait for death! To leave the thing one loved in the embrace of the moribund!)

He wrenched his thoughts back as quickly as possible to a disinterested reform of the marriage
laws. What had he decided so far? Only for more deliberation and a riper age in marrying. Surely
that should appeal even to the most orthodox. But that alone would not eliminate mistakes and
deceptions altogether. (Sir Isaac's skin had a peculiar, unhealthy look.) There ought in addition
to be the widest facilities for divorce possible. Mr. Brumley tried to draw up a schedule in
his head of the grounds for divorce that a really civilized community would entertain. But
there are practical difficulties. Marriage is not simply a sexual union, it is an economic
one of a peculiarly inseparable sort,--and there are the children. And jealousy! Of course
so far as economics went, a kind of marriage settlement might meet most of the difficulties,
and as for the children, Mr. Brumley was no longer in that mood of enthusiastic devotion to
children that had made the birth of George Edmund so tremendous an event. Children, alone,
afforded no reason for indissoluble lifelong union. Face the thing frankly. How long was it
absolutely necessary for people to keep a home together for their children? The prosperous
classes, the best classes in the community, packed the little creatures off to school at the
age of nine or ten. One might overdo--we were overdoing in our writing nowadays this--philoprogenitive
enthusiasm....

He found himself thinking of George Meredith's idea of Ten Year Marriages....

His mind recoiled to Sir Isaac's pillowed-up possession. What flimsy stuff all this talk of
altered marriage was! These things did not even touch the essentials of the matter. He thought
of Sir Isaac's thin lips and wary knowing eyes. What possible divorce law could the wit of
man devise that would release a desired woman from that--grip? Marriage was covetousness made
law. As well ask such a man to sell all his goods and give to the poor as expect the Sir Isaacs
of this world to relax the matrimonial subjugation of the wife. Our social order is built on
jealousy, sustained by jealousy, and those brave schemes we evolve in our studies for the release
of women from ownership,--and for that matter for the release of men too,--they will not stand
the dusty heat of the market-place for a moment, they wilt under the first fierce breath of
reality. Marriage and property are the twin children of man's individualistic nature; only
on these terms can he be drawn into societies....

Mr. Brumley found his little scheme for novelties in marriage and divorce lying dead and for
the most part still-born in his mind; himself in despair. To set to work to alter marriage
in any essential point was, he realized, as if an ant should start to climb a thousand feet
of cliff. This great institution rose upon his imagination like some insurmountable sierra,
blue and sombre, between himself and the life of Lady Harman and all that he desired. There
might be a certain amount of tinkering with matrimonial law in the next few years, of petty
tinkering that would abolish a few pretences and give ease to a few amiable people, but if
he were to come back to life a thousand years hence he felt he would still find the ancient
gigantic barrier, crossed perhaps by a dangerous road, pierced perhaps by a narrow tunnel or
so, but in all its great essentials the same, between himself and Lady Harman. It wasn't that
it was rational, it wasn't that it was justifiable, but it was one with the blood in one's
veins and the rain-cloud in the sky, a necessity in the nature of present things. Before mankind
emerged from the valley of these restraints--if ever they did emerge--thousands of generations
must follow one another, there must be tens of thousands of years of struggle and thought and
trial, in the teeth of prevalent habit and opinion--and primordial instincts. A new humanity....

His heart sank to hopelessness.

Meanwhile? Meanwhile we had to live our lives.

He began to see a certain justification for the hidden cults that run beneath the fair appearances
of life, those social secrecies by which people--how could one put it?--people who do not agree
with established institutions, people, at any rate not merely egoistic and jealous as the crowd
is egoistic and jealous, hide and help one another to mitigate the inflexible austerities of
the great unreason.

Yes, Mr. Brumley had got to a phrase of that quality for the undiscriminating imperatives of
the fundamental social institution. You see how a particular situation may undermine the assumptions
of a mind originally devoted to uncritical acceptances. He still insisted it was a necessary
great unreason, absolutely necessary--for the mass of people, a part of them, a natural expression
of them, but he could imagine the possibility--of 'understandings.' ... Mr. Brumley was very
vague about those understandings, those mysteries of the exalted that were to filch happiness
from the destroying grasp of the crude and jealous. He had to be vague. For secret and noble
are ideas like oil and water; you may fling them together with all the force of your will but
in a little while they will separate again.

For a time this dream of an impossible secrecy was uppermost in Mr. Brumley's meditations.
It came into his head with the effect of a discovery that always among the unclimbable barriers
of this supreme institution there had been,--caves. He had been reading Anatole France recently
and the lady of Le Lys Rouge came into his thoughts. There was something in common between
Lady Harman and the Countess Martin, they were tall and dark and dignified, and Lady Harman
was one of those rare women who could have carried the magnificent name of Thérèse. And there
in the setting of Paris and Florence was a whole microcosm of love, real but illicit, carried
out as it were secretly and tactfully, beneath the great shadow of the cliff. But he found
it difficult to imagine Lady Harman in that. Or Sir Isaac playing Count Martin's part....

How different were those Frenchwomen, with their afternoons vacant except for love, their detachment,
their lovers, those secret, convenient, romantically furnished flats, that compact explicit
business of l'amour! He had indeed some moments of regret that Lady Harman wouldn't go into
that picture. She was different--if only in her simplicity. There was something about these
others that put them whole worlds apart from her, who was held so tethered from all furtive
adventure by her filmy tentacles of responsibility, her ties and strands of relationship, her
essential delicacy. That momentary vision of Ellen as the Countess Martin broke up into absurdities
directly he looked at it fully and steadfastly. From thinking of the two women as similar types
he passed into thinking of them as opposites; Thérèse, hard, clear, sensuous, secretive, trained
by a brilliant tradition in the technique of connubial betrayal, was the very antithesis of
Ellen's vague but invincible veracity and openness. Not for nothing had Anatole France made
his heroine the daughter of a grasping financial adventurer....

Of course the cave is a part of the mountain....

His mind drifted away to still more general speculations, and always he was trying not to see
the figure of Sir Isaac, grimly and yet meanly resolute--in possession. Always too like some
open-mouthed yokel at a fair who knows nothing of the insult chalked upon his back, he disregarded
how he himself coveted and desired and would if he could have gripped. He forgot his own watchful
attention to Euphemia in the past, nor did he think what he might have been if Lady Harman
had been his wife. It needed the chill veracities of the small hours to bring him to that.
He thought now of crude egotism as having Sir Isaac's hands and Sir Isaac's eyes and Sir Isaac's
position. He forgot any egotism he himself was betraying.

All the paths of enlightenment he thought of, led to Lady Harman.

§9

That evening George Edmund, who had come home with his mind aglitter with cinematograph impressions,
found his father a patient but inattentive listener. For indeed Mr. Brumley was not listening
at all; he was thinking and thinking. He made noises like "Ah!" and "Um," at George Edmund
and patted the boy's shoulder kindly and repeated words unintelligently, such as, "Red Indians,
eh!" or "Came out of the water backwards! My eye!"

Sometimes he made what George Edmund regarded as quite footling comments. Still George Edmund
had to tell someone and there was no one else to tell. So George Edmund went on talking and
Mr. Brumley went on thinking.

§10

Mr Brumley could not sleep at all until it was nearly five. His intelligence seemed to be making
up at last for years of speculative restraint. In a world for the most part given up to slumber
Mr. Brumley may be imagined as clambering hand over fist in the silences, feverishly and wonderfully
overtaking his age. In the morning he got up pallid and he shaved badly, but he was a generation
ahead of his own Euphemia series, and the school of charm and quiet humour and of letting things
slide with a kind of elegant donnishness, had lost him for ever....

And among all sorts of things that had come to him in that vast gulf of nocturnal thinking
was some vivid self-examination. At last he got to that. He had been dragged down to very elemental
things indeed by the manifest completeness of Lady Harman's return to her husband. He had had
at last to look at himself starkly for the male he was, to go beneath the gentlemanly airs,
the refined and elegant virilities of his habitual poses. Either this thing was unendurable--there
were certainly moments when it came near to being unendurable--or it was not. On the whole
and excepting mere momentary paroxysms it was not, and so he had to recognize and he did recognize
with the greatest amazement that there could be something else besides sexual attraction and
manoeuvring and possession between a beautiful woman and a man like himself. He loved Lady
Harman, he loved her, he now began to realize just how much, and she could defeat him and reject
him as a conceivable lover, turn that aside as a thing impossible, shame him as the romantic
school would count shame and still command him with her confident eyes and her friendly extended
hands. He admitted he suffered, let us rather say he claimed to suffer the heated torments
of a passionate nature, but he perceived like fresh air and sunrise coming by blind updrawn
and opened window into a foetid chamber, that also he loved her with a clean and bodiless love,
was anxious to help her, was anxious now--it was a new thing--to understand her, to reassure
her, to give unrequited what once he had sought rather to seem to give in view of an imagined
exchange.

He perceived too in these still hours how little he had understood her hitherto. He had been
blinded,--obsessed. He had been seeing her and himself and the whole world far too much as
a display of the eternal dualism of sex, the incessant pursuit. Now with his sexual imaginings
newly humbled and hopeless, with a realization of her own tremendous minimization of that fundamental
of romance, he began to see all that there was in her personality and their possible relations
outside that. He saw how gravely and deeply serious was her fine philanthropy, how honest and
simple and impersonal her desire for knowledge and understandings. There is the brain of her
at least, he thought, far out of Sir Isaac's reach. She wasn't abased by her surrenders, their
simplicity exalted her, showed her innocent and himself a flushed and congested soul. He perceived
now with the astonishment of a man newly awakened just how the great obsession of sex had dominated
him--for how many years? Since his early undergraduate days. Had he anything to put beside
her own fine detachment? Had he ever since his manhood touched philosophy, touched a social
question, thought of anything human, thought of art, or literature or belief, without a glancing
reference of the whole question to the uses of this eternal hunt? During that time had he ever
talked to a girl or woman with an unembarrassed sincerity? He stripped his pretences bare;
the answer was no. His very refinements had been no more than indicative fig-leaves. His conservatism
and morality had been a mere dalliance with interests that too brutal a simplicity might have
exhausted prematurely. And indeed hadn't the whole period of literature that had produced him
been, in its straining purity and refinement, as it were one glowing, one illuminated fig-leaf,
a vast conspiracy to keep certain matters always in mind by conspicuously covering them away?
But this wonderful woman--it seemed--she hadn't them in mind! She shamed him if only by her
trustful unsuspiciousness of the ancient selfish game of Him and Her that he had been so ardently
playing.... He idealized and worshipped this clean blindness. He abased himself before it.

"No," cried Mr. Brumley suddenly in the silence of the night, "I will rise again. I will rise
again by love out of these morasses.... She shall be my goddess and by virtue of her I will
end this incessant irrational craving for women.... I will be her friend and her faithful friend."

He lay still for a time and then he said in a whisper very humbly: "God help me."

He set himself in those still hours which are so endless and so profitable to men in their
middle years, to think how he might make himself the perfect lover instead of a mere plotter
for desire, and how he might purge himself from covetousness and possessiveness and learn to serve.

And if very speedily his initial sincerity was tinged again with egotism and if he drowsed
at last into a portrait of himself as beautifully and admirably self-sacrificial, you must
not sneer too readily at him, for so God has made the soul of Mr. Brumley and otherwise it
could not do.

CHAPTER THE TENTH

LADY HARMAN COMES OUT

§1

The treaty between Lady Harman and her husband which was to be her Great Charter, the constitutional
basis of her freedoms throughout the rest of her married life, had many practical defects.
The chief of these was that it was largely undocumented; it had been made piecemeal, in various
ways, at different times and for the most part indirectly through diverse intermediaries. Charterson
had introduced large vaguenesses by simply displaying more of his teeth at crucial moments,
Mrs. Harman had conveyed things by hugging and weeping that were afterwards discovered to be
indistinct; Sir Isaac writing from a bed of sickness had frequently been totally illegible.
One cannot therefore detail the clauses of this agreement or give its provisions with any great
precision; one can simply intimate the kind of understanding that had had an air of being arrived
at. The working interpretations were still to come.

Before anything else it was manifestly conceded by Lady Harman that she would not run away
again, and still more manifest that she undertook to break no more windows or do anything that
might lead to a second police court scandal. And she was to be a true and faithful wife and
comfort, as a wife should be, to Sir Isaac. In return for that consideration and to ensure
its continuance Sir Isaac came great distances from his former assumption of a matrimonial
absolutism. She was to be granted all sorts of small autonomies,--the word autonomy was carefully
avoided throughout but its spirit was omnipresent.

She was in particular to have a banking account for her dress and personal expenditure into
which Sir Isaac would cause to be paid a hundred pounds monthly and it was to be private to
herself alone until he chose to go through the cashed cheques and counterfoils. She was to
be free to come and go as she saw fit, subject to a punctual appearance at meals, the comfort
and dignity of Sir Isaac and such specific engagements as she might make with him. She might
have her own friends, but there the contract became a little misty; a time was to come when
Sir Isaac was to betray a conviction that the only proper friends that a woman can have are
women. There were also non-corroborated assurances as to the privacy of her correspondence.
The second Rolls-Royce car was to be entirely at her service, and Clarence was to be immediately
supplemented by a new and more deferential man, and as soon as possible assisted to another
situation and replaced. She was to have a voice in the further furnishing of Black Strand and
in the arrangement of its garden. She was to read what she chose and think what she liked within
her head without too minute or suspicious an examination by Sir Isaac, and short of flat contradiction
at his own table she was to be free to express her own opinions in any manner becoming a lady.
But more particularly if she found her ideas infringing upon the management or influence of
the International Bread and Cake Stores, she was to convey her objections and ideas in the
first instance privately and confidentially to Sir Isaac.

Upon this point he displayed a remarkable and creditable sensitiveness. His pride in that organization
was if possible greater than his original pride in his wife, and probably nothing in all the
jarring of their relationship had hurt him more than her accessibility to hostile criticism
and the dinner-table conversation with Charterson and Blenker that had betrayed this fact.
He began to talk about it directly she returned to him. His protestations and explanations
were copious and heart-felt. It was perhaps the chief discovery made by Lady Harman at this
period of reconstruction that her husband's business side was not to be explained completely
as a highly energetic and elaborate avarice. He was no doubt acquisitive and retentive and
mean-spirited, but these were merely the ugly aspects of a disposition that involved many other
factors. He was also incurably a schemer. He liked to fit things together, to dove-tail arrangements,
to devise economies, to spread ingeniously into new fields, he had a love of organization and
contrivance as disinterested as an artist's love for the possibilities of his medium. He would
rather have made a profit of ten per cent. out of a subtly planned shop than thirty by an unforeseen
accident. He wouldn't have cheated to get money for the world. He knew he was better at figuring
out expenditures and receipts than most people and he was as touchy about his reputation for
this kind of cleverness as any poet or painter for his fame. Now that he had awakened to the
idea that his wife was capable of looking into and possibly even understanding his business,
he was passionately anxious to show her just how wonderfully he had done it all, and when he
perceived she was in her large, unskilled, helpless way, intensely concerned for all the vast
multitude of incompetent or partially competent young women who floundered about in badly paid
employment in our great cities, he grasped at once at the opportunity of recovering her lost
interest and respect by doing some brilliant feats of contrivance in that direction. Why shouldn't
he? He had long observed with a certain envy the admirable advertisement such firms as Lever
and Cadbury and Burroughs & Wellcome gained from their ostentatiously able and generous treatment
of their workpeople, and it seemed to him conceivable that in the end it might not be at all
detrimental to his prosperity to put his hand to this long neglected piece of social work.
The Babs Wheeler business had been a real injury in every way to the International Bread and
Cake Stores and even if he didn't ultimately go to all the lengths his wife seemed to contemplate,
he was resolved at any rate that an affair of that kind should not occur again. The expedition
to Marienbad took with it a secretary who was also a stenographer. A particularly smart young
inspector and Graper, the staff manager, had brisk four-day holidays once or twice for consultation
purposes; Sir Isaac's rabbit-like architect was in attendance for a week and the Harmans returned
to Putney with the first vivid greens of late March,--for the Putney Hill house was to be reopened
and Black Strand reserved now for week-end and summer use--with plans already drawn out for
four residential Hostels in London primarily for the girl waitresses of the International Stores
who might have no homes or homes at an inconvenient distance, and, secondarily, if any vacant
accommodation remained over, for any other employed young women of the same class....

§2

Lady Harman came back to England from the pine-woods and bright order and regimen and foreign
novelty of their Bohemian Kur-Ort, in a state of renewed perplexity. Already that undocumented
Magna Charta was manifestly not working upon the lines she had anticipated. The glosses Sir
Isaac put upon it were extensive and remarkable and invariably in the direction of restricting
her liberties and resuming controls she had supposed abandoned.

Marienbad had done wonders for him; his slight limp had disappeared, his nervous energy was
all restored; except for a certain increase in his natural irritability and occasional panting
fits, he seemed as well as he had ever been. At the end of their time at the Kur he was even
going for walks. Once he went halfway up the Podhorn on foot. And with every increment in his
strength his aggressiveness increased, his recognition of her new freedoms was less cordial
and her sense of contrition and responsibility diminished. Moreover, as the scheme of those
Hostels, which had played so large a part in her conception of their reconciliation, grew more
and more definite, she perceived more and more that it was not certainly that fine and humanizing
thing she had presumed it would be. She began to feel more and more that it might be merely
an extension of Harman methods to cheap boarding-houses for young people. But faced with a
mass of detailed concrete projects and invited to suggest modifications she was able to realize
for the first time how vague, how ignorant and incompetent her wishes had been, how much she
had to understand and how much she had to discover before she could meet Sir Isaac with his
"I'm doing it all for you, Elly. If you don't like it, you tell me what you don't like and
I'll alter it. But just vague doubting! One can't do anything with vague doubting."

She felt that once back in England out of this picturesque toylike German world she would be
able to grasp realities again and deal with these things. She wanted advice, she wanted to
hear what people said of her ideas. She would also, she imagined, begin to avail herself of
those conceded liberties which their isolation together abroad and her husband's constant need
of her presence had so far prevented her from tasting. She had an idea that Susan Burnet might
prove suggestive about the Hostels.

And moreover, if now and then she could have a good talk with someone understanding and intelligent,
someone she could trust, someone who cared enough for her to think with her and for her....

§3

We have traced thus far the emergence of Lady Harman from that state of dutiful subjection
and social irresponsibility which was the lot of woman in the past to that limited, ill-defined
and quite unsecured freedom which is her present condition. (2) Obedience follows acknowledgment.
It is partly passive and partly active.

(a) As passive, it takes the form of habitual trust or acquiescence, the submissive acceptance of trials
which are ultimately, we believe, not really evils, because ordained by God and overruled
for good.[30] This spirit of obedience can be maintained by constant vigilance alone.[31] While connected
with the anticipated coming of the Son of Man, the obligation had a more general application,
and may be regarded as the duty of all in the face of the unknown
and unexpected in life.

We are therefore to watch for any intimation of the divine will, and commit ourselves trustfully
to the absolute disposal of Him in whose hands are the issues of our lives.

(b) But obedience has also an active side. Faithfulness is the complement of faith. The believer
must exercise fidelity, and go forward with energy and purpose to the tasks committed to him.
As stewards of Christ we are {217} to occupy till He come, employing every talent entrusted to
us in His service. Work may be worship, and we can glorify God in our daily tasks. No finer tribute
can a man give than simply himself.

(3) Worship.--The special duties of worship belong to the religious rather than the ethical side
of life, and do not demand here more than a passing reference. The essence of religion lies in the subordination
of the finite self to the infinite; and worship is the conscious outgoing of the man in his weakness
and imperfection to his Maker, and it attains its fullest exercise in (a) reverence, humility,
and devotion. The feeling of dependence and sense of need, together with the consciousness
of utter demerit and inability which man realises as he gazes upon the majesty and grace of God,
awaken the (b) instinct of prayer. 'It is the sublime significance of prayer,' says Wuttke,
'that it brings into prominence man's great and high destiny, that it heightens his consciousness
of his true moral nature in relation to God; and as morality depends on our relation to God,
prayer is the very life-blood of morality.'[32] The steadfast aspiration
of the soul to God, whose will is our law and whose blessing is granted
to whatsoever is done in His name, is the habitual temper of the Christian
life.

But prayer must also be particular, definite, and expectant. By a law of our nature, and apart from all
supernatural intervention, prayer exercises a reflex influence of a very beneficial character
upon the mind of the worshippers. But he who offers his petitions expecting nothing more will not
even attain this. 'If prayers,' says Mr. Lecky, 'were offered up solely with a view to this
benefit, they would be absolutely sterile and would speedily cease.'[33] The purely subjective
view of prayer as consisting solely in 'beneficent self-suggestion' empties the term of significance.
Even Frederick Meyers, who lays so much stress upon the importance of self-suggestion in other
aspects of experience, admits that prayer is something more than a subjective {218} phenomenon.
'It is not only a calling up of one's own private resources; it must derive its ultimate efficacy
from the increased flow from the infinite life into the life of the suppliant.'[34]

(c) Prayer attains its highest expression in Thanksgiving and Joy.

Gratitude is the responsive feeling which wells up in the heart of those who have experienced
the goodness of God, and recognise Him as the great Benefactor. Christians are to abound in
thankfulness. We live in a world where everything speaks to us of divine love. Praise is the
complement of prayer. The grateful heart sees life transfigured. It discovers everywhere tokens
of grace and hope,

'Making the springs of time and sense Sweet with eternal good.'

Peace, trust, joy, hope are the ultimate notes of the Christian life. 'Rejoice always, pray
without ceasing, in everything give thanks.' Thanksgiving, says St. Bernard, 'is the return of
the heart to God in perpetual benediction.'

In the kingdom of love duty is swallowed up in joy. Life is nothing
but the growing realisation of God. With God man's life begins, and
to Him turns back at last in the wrapt contemplation of His perfect
being. In fellowship with God man finds in the end both himself and
his brother. III. chap. i. Cf. also Wundt, Ethik, p. 148. But see
also W. Wallace, Lectures and Essays, p. 325, on their confusion.

[2]
Mackintosh, Chr. ethics, p. 114.

[3] Cf. Haering, Ethics of Chr.
Life, p. 230. Quite early she had an
illness that ended in a miscarriage, an accident for which she was by no means inconsolable,
and before she had completely recovered from that Sir Isaac fell ill again, the first of a
series of relapses that necessitated further foreign travel--always in elaborately comfortable
trains with maid, courier, valet, and secretary, to some warm and indolent southward place.
And few people knew how uncertain her liberties were. Sir Isaac was the victim of an increasing
irritability, at times he had irrational outbursts of distrust that would culminate in passionate
outbreaks and scenes that were truncated by an almost suffocating breathlessness. On several
occasions he was on the verge of quarrelling violently with her visitors, and he would suddenly
oblige her to break engagements, pour abuse upon her and bring matters back to the very verge
of her first revolt. And then he would break her down by pitiful appeals. The cylinders of
oxygen would be resorted to, and he would emerge from the crisis, rather rueful, tamed and
quiet for the time.

He was her chief disturbance. Her children were healthy children and fell in with the routines
of governess and tutor that their wealth provided. She saw them often, she noted their increasing
resemblance to their father, she did her best to soften the natural secretiveness and aggressiveness
of their manners, she watched their teachers and intervened whenever the influences about them
seemed to her to need intervention, she dressed them and gave them presents and tried to believe
she loved them, and as Sir Isaac's illness increased she took a larger and larger share in
the direction of the household....

Through all these occupations and interruptions and immediacies she went trying to comprehend
and at times almost believing she comprehended life, and then the whole spectacle of this modern
world of which she was a part would seem to break up again into a multitude of warring and
discordant fragments having no conceivable common aim or solution. Those moments of unifying
faith and confidence, that glowed so bravely and never endured, were at once tantalizing and
sustaining. She could never believe but that ultimately she would not grasp and hold--something....

Many people met her and liked her and sought to know more of her; Lady Beach-Mandarin and Lady
Viping were happy to be her social sponsors, the Blenkers and the Chartersons met her out and
woke up cautiously to this new possibility; her emergence was rapid in spite of the various
delays and interruptions I have mentioned and she was soon in a position to realize just how
little one meets when one meets a number of people and how little one hears when one has much
conversation. Her mind was presently crowded with confused impressions of pleasant men evading
her agreeably and making out of her gravities an opportunity for bright sayings, and of women
being vaguely solemn and quite indefinite.

She went into the circle of movements, was tried over by Mrs. Hubert Plessington, she questioned
this and that promoter of constructive schemes, and instead of mental meat she was asked to
come upon committees and sounded for subscriptions. On several occasions, escorted by Mr. Brumley--some
instinct made her conceal or minimize his share in these expeditions to her husband--she went
as inconspicuously as possible to the backs of public meetings in which she understood great
questions were being discussed or great changes inaugurated. Some public figures she even followed
up for a time, distrusting her first impressions.

She became familiar with the manners and bearing of our platform class, with the solemn dummy-like
chairman or chairwoman, saying a few words, the alert secretary or organizer, the prominent
figures sitting with an air of grave responsibility, generously acting an intelligent attention
to others until the moment came for them themselves to deliver. Then with an ill-concealed
relief some would come to the footlights, some leap up in their places with a tenoring eagerness,
some would be facetious and some speak with neuralgic effort, some were impertinent, some propitiatory,
some dull, but all were--disappointing, disappointing. God was not in any of them. A platform
is no setting for the shy processes of an honest human mind,--we are all strained to artificiality
in the excessive glare of attention that beats upon us there. One does not exhibit opinions
at a meeting, one acts them, the very truth must rouge its cheeks and blacken its eyebrows
to tell, and to Lady Harman it was the acting chiefly and the make-up that was visible. They
didn't grip her, they didn't lift her, they failed to convince her even of their own belief
in what they supported.

§4

But occasionally among the multitude of conversations that gave her nothing, there would come
some talk that illuminated and for the time almost reconciled her to the effort and the loss
of time and distraction her social expeditions involved. One evening at one of Lady Tarvrille's
carelessly compiled parties she encountered Edgar Wilkins the novelist and got the most suggestive
glimpses of his attitude towards himself and towards the world of intellectual ferment to which
he belonged. She had been taken down by an amiable but entirely uninteresting permanent official
who when the time came turned his stereotyped talk over to the other side of him with a quiet
mechanical indifference, and she was left for a little while in silence until Wilkins had disengaged
himself.

He was a flushed man with untidy hair, and he opened at once with an appeal to her sympathies.

"Oh! Bother!" he said. "I say,--I've eaten that mutton. I didn't notice. One eats too much
at these affairs. One doesn't notice at the time and then afterwards one finds out."

She was a little surprised at his gambit and could think of nothing but a kindly murmur.

"Detestable thing," he said; "my body."

"But surely not," she tried and felt as she said it that was a trifle bold.

"You're all right," he said making her aware he saw her. "But I've this thing that wheezes
and fattens at the slightest excuse and--it encumbers me--bothers me to take exercise.... But
I can hardly expect you to be interested in my troubles, can I?"

He made an all too manifest attempt to read her name on the slip of card that lay before her
among the flowers and as manifestly succeeded. "We people who write and paint and all that
sort of thing are a breed of insatiable egotists, Lady Harman. With the least excuse. Don't
you think so?"

"Not--not exceptionally," she said.

"Exceptionally," he insisted.

"It isn't my impression," she said. "You're--franker."

"But someone was telling me--you've been taking impressions of us lately. I mean all of us
people who go flapping ideas about in the air. Somebody--was it Lady Beach-Mandarin?--was saying
you'd come out looking for Intellectual Heroes--and found Bernard Shaw.... But what could you
have expected?"

"I've been trying to find out and understand what people are thinking. I want ideas."

"It's disheartening, isn't it?"

"It's--perplexing sometimes."

"You go to meetings, and try to get to the bottom of Movements, and you want to meet and know
the people who write the wonderful things? Get at the wonderful core of it?"

"One feels there are things going on."

"Great illuminating things."

"Well--yes."

"And when you see those great Thinkers and Teachers and Guides and Brave Spirits and High Brows
generally----"

He laughed and stopped just in time on the very verge of taking pheasant.

"Oh, take it away," he cried sharply.

"We've all been through that illusion, Lady Harman," he went on.

"But I don't like to think----Aren't Great Men after all--great?"

"In their ways, in their places--Yes. But not if you go up to them and look at them. Not at
the dinner table, not in their beds.... What a time of disillusionment you must have had!

"You see, Lady Harman," he said, leaning back from his empty plate, inclining himself confidentially
to her ear and speaking in a privy tone; "it's in the very nature of things that we--if I may
put myself into the list--we ideologists, should be rather exceptionally loose and untrustworthy
and disappointing men. Rotters--to speak plain contemporary English. If you come to think of
it, it has to be so."

"But----" she protested.

He met her eye firmly. "It has to be."

"Why?"

"The very qualities that make literature entertaining, vigorous, inspiring, revealing, wonderful,
beautiful and--all that sort of thing, make its producers--if you will forgive the word again--rotters."

She smiled and lifted her eyebrows protestingly.

"Sensitive nervous tissue," he said with a finger up to emphasize his words. "Quick responsiveness
to stimulus, a vivid, almost uncontrollable, expressiveness; that's what you want in your literary
man."

"Yes," said Lady Harman following cautiously. "Yes, I suppose it is."

"Can you suppose for a moment that these things conduce to self-control, to reserve, to consistency,
to any of the qualities of a trustworthy man?... Of course you can't. And so we aren't trustworthy,
we aren't consistent. Our virtues are our vices.... My life," said Mr. Wilkins still more confidentially,
"won't bear examination. But that's by the way. It need not concern us now."

"But Mr. Brumley?" she asked on the spur of the moment.

"I'm not talking of him," said Wilkins with careless cruelty. "He's restrained. I mean the
really imaginative people, the people with vision, the people who let themselves go. You see
now why they are rotten, why they must be rotten. (No! No! take it away. I'm talking.) I feel
so strongly about this, about the natural and necessary disreputableness of everybody who produces
reputable writing--and for the matter of that, art generally--that I set my face steadily against
all these attempts that keep on cropping up to make Figures of us. We aren't Figures, Lady
Harman; it isn't our line. Of all the detestable aspects of the Victorian period surely that
disposition to make Figures of its artists and literary men was the most detestable. Respectable
Figures--Examples to the young. The suppressions, the coverings up that had to go on, the white-washing
of Dickens,--who was more than a bit of a rip, you know, the concealment of Thackeray's mistresses.
Did you know he had mistresses? Oh rather! And so on. It's like that bust of Jove--or Bacchus
was it?--they pass off as Plato, who probably looked like any other literary Grub. That's why
I won't have anything to do with these Academic developments that my friend Brumley--Do you
know him by the way?--goes in for. He's the third man down----You do know him. And he's giving
up the Academic Committee, is he? I'm glad he's seen it at last. What is the good of trying
to have an Academy and all that, and put us in uniform and make out we are Somebodies, and
respectable enough to be shaken hands with by George and Mary, when as a matter of fact we
are, by our very nature, a collection of miscellaneous scandals----We must be. Bacon, Shakespear,
Byron, Shelley--all the stars.... No, Johnson wasn't a star, he was a character by Boswell....
Oh! great things come out of us, no doubt, our arts are the vehicles of wonder and hope, the
world is dead without these things we produce, but that's no reason why--why the mushroom-bed
should follow the mushrooms into the soup, is it? Perfectly fair image. (No, take it away.)"

He paused and then jumped in again as she was on the point of speaking.

"And you see even if our temperaments didn't lead inevitably to our--dipping rather, we should
still have to--dip. Asking a writer or a poet to be seemly and Academic and so on, is like
asking an eminent surgeon to be stringently decent. It's--you see, it's incompatible. Now a
king or a butler or a family solicitor--if you like."

He paused again.

Lady Harman had been following him with an attentive reluctance.

"But what are we to do," she asked, "we people who are puzzled by life, who want guidance and
ideas and--help, if--if all the people we look to for ideas are----"

"Bad characters."

"Well,--it's your theory, you know--bad characters?"

Wilkins answered with the air of one who carefully disentangles a complex but quite solvable
problem. "It doesn't follow," he said, "that because a man is a bad character he's not to be
trusted in matters where character--as we commonly use the word--doesn't come in. These sensitives,
these--would you mind if I were to call myself an Æolian Harp?--these Æolian Harps; they can't
help responding to the winds of heaven. Well,--listen to them. Don't follow them, don't worship
them, don't even honour them, but listen to them. Don't let anyone stop them from saying and
painting and writing and singing what they want to. Freedom, canvas and attention, those are
the proper honours for the artist, the poet and the philosopher. Listen to the noise they make,
watch the stuff they produce, and presently you will find certain things among the multitude
of things that are said and shown and put out and published, something--light in your darkness--a
writer for you, something for you. Nobody can have a greater contempt for artists and writers
and poets and philosophers than I, oh! a squalid crew they are, mean, jealous, pugnacious,
disgraceful in love, disgraceful--but out of it all comes the greatest serenest thing, the
mind of the world, Literature. Nasty little midges, yes,--but fireflies--carrying light for
the darkness."

His face was suddenly lit by enthusiasm and she wondered that she could have thought it rather
heavy and commonplace. He stopped abruptly and glanced beyond her at her other neighbour who
seemed on the verge of turning to them again. "If I go on," he said with a voice suddenly dropped,
"I shall talk loud."

"You know," said Lady Harman, in a halty undertone, "you--you are too hard upon--upon clever
people, but it is true. I mean it is true in a way...."

"Go on, I understand exactly what you are saying."

"I mean, there are ideas. It's just that, that is so--so----I mean they seem never to be just
there and always to be present."

"Like God. Never in the flesh--now. A spirit everywhere. You think exactly as I do, Lady Harman.
It is just that. This is a great time, so great that there is no chance for great men. Every
chance for great work. And we're doing it. There is a wind--blowing out of heaven. And when
beautiful people like yourself come into things----"

"I try to understand," she said. "I want to understand. I want--I want not to miss life."

He was on the verge of saying something further and then his eyes wandered down the table and
he stopped short.

He ended his talk as he had begun it with "Bother! Lady Tarvrille, Lady Harman, is trying to
catch your eye."

Lady Harman turned her face to her hostess and answered her smile. Wilkins caught at his chair
and stood up.

"It would have been jolly to have talked some more," he said.

"I hope we shall."

"Well!" said Wilkins, with a sudden hardness in his eyes and she was swept away from him.

She found no chance of talking to him upstairs, Sir Isaac came for her early; but she went
in hope of another meeting.

It did not come. For a time that expectation gave dinners and luncheon parties a quite appreciable
attraction. Then she told Agatha Alimony. "I've never met him but that once," she said.

"One doesn't meet him now," said Agatha, deeply.

"But why?"

Deep significance came into Miss Alimony's eyes. "My dear," she whispered, and glanced about
them. "Don't you know?"

Lady Harman was a radiant innocence.

And then Miss Alimony began in impressive undertones, with awful omissions like pits of darkness
and with such richly embroidered details as serious spinsters enjoy, adding, indeed, two quite
new things that came to her mind as the tale unfolded, and, naming no names and giving no chances
of verification or reply, handed on the fearful and at that time extremely popular story of
the awful wickedness of Wilkins the author.

Upon reflection Lady Harman perceived that this explained all sorts of things in their conversation
and particularly the flash of hardness at the end.

Even then, things must have been hanging over him....

§5

And while Lady Harman was making these meritorious and industrious attempts to grasp the significance
of life and to get some clear idea of her social duty, the developments of those Hostels she
had started--she now felt so prematurely--was going on. There were times when she tried not
to think of them, turned her back on them, fled from them, and times when they and what she
ought to do about them and what they ought to be and what they ought not to be, filled her
mind to the exclusion of every other topic. Rigorously and persistently Sir Isaac insisted
they were hers, asked her counsel, demanded her appreciation, presented as it were his recurring
bill for them.

Five of them were being built, not four but five. There was to be one, the largest, in a conspicuous
position in Bloomsbury near the British Museum, one in a conspicuous position looking out upon
Parliament Hill, one conspicuously placed upon the Waterloo Road near St. George's Circus,
one at Sydenham, and one in the Kensington Road which was designed to catch the eye of people
going to and fro to the various exhibitions at Olympia.

In Sir Isaac's study at Putney there was a huge and rather splendid-looking morocco portfolio
on a stand, and this portfolio bore in excellent gold lettering the words, International Bread
and Cake Hostels. It was her husband's peculiar pleasure after dinner to take her to turn over
this with him; he would sit pencil in hand, while she, poised at his request upon the arm of
his chair, would endorse a multitude of admirable modifications and suggestions. These hostels
were to be done--indeed they were being done--by Sir Isaac's tame architect, and the interlacing
yellow and mauve tiles, and the Doulton ware mouldings that were already familiar to the public
as the uniform of the Stores, were to be used upon the façades of the new institutions. They
were to be boldly labelled

INTERNATIONAL HOSTELS

right across the front.

The plans revealed in every case a site depth as great as the frontage, and the utmost ingenuity
had been used to utilize as much space as possible.

"Every room we get in," said Sir Isaac, "adds one to the denominator in the cost;" and carried
his wife back to her schooldays. At last she had found sense in fractions. There was to be
a series of convenient and spacious rooms on the ground floor, a refectory, which might be
cleared and used for meetings--"dances," said Lady Harman. "Hardly the sort of thing we want
'em to get up to," said Sir Isaac--various offices, the matron's apartments--"We ought to begin
thinking about matrons," said Sir Isaac;--a bureau, a reading-room and a library--"We can pick
good, serious stuff for them," said Sir Isaac, "instead of their filling their heads with trash"--one
or two workrooms with tables for cutting out and sewing; this last was an idea of Susan Burnet's.
Upstairs there was to be a beehive of bedrooms, floor above floor, and each floor as low as
the building regulations permitted. There were to be long dormitories with cubicles at three-and-sixpence
a week--make your own beds--and separate rooms at prices ranging from four-and-sixpence to
seven-and-sixpence. Every three cubicles and every bedroom had lavatory basins with hot and
cold water; there were pull-out drawers under the beds and a built-in chest of drawers, a hanging
cupboard, a looking-glass and a radiator in each cubicle, and each floor had a box-room. It
was ship-shape.

"A girl can get this cubicle for three-and-six a week," said Sir Isaac, tapping the drawing
before him with his pencil. "She can get her breakfast with a bit of bacon or a sausage for
two shillings a week, and she can get her high tea, with cold meat, good potted salmon, shrimp
paste, jam and cetera, for three-and-six a week. Say her bus fares and lunch out mean another
four shillings. That means she can get along on about twelve-and-six a week, comfortable, read
the papers, have a book out of the library.... There's nothing like it to be got now for twice
the money. The sort of thing they have now is one room, dingy, badly fitted, extra for coals.

"That's the answer to your problem, Elly," he said. "There we are. Every girl who doesn't live
at home can live here--with a matron to keep her eye on her.... And properly run, Elly, properly
run the thing's going to pay two or three per cent,--let alone the advertisement for the Stores.

"We can easily make these Hostels obligatory on all our girls who don't live at their own homes,"
he said. "That ought to keep them off the streets, if anything can. I don't see how even Miss
Babs Wheeler can have the face to strike against that.

"And then we can arrange with some of the big firms, drapers' shops and all that sort of thing
near each hostel, to take over most of our other cubicle space. A lot of them--overflow.

"Of course we'll have to make sure the girls get in at night." He reached out for a ground
floor plan of the Bloomsbury establishment which was to be the first built. "If," he said,
"we were to have a sort of porter's lodge with a book--and make 'em ring a bell after eleven
say--just here...."

He took out a silver pencil case and got to work.

Lady Harman's expression as she leant over him became thoughtful.

There were points about this project that gave her the greatest misgivings; that matron, keeping
her eye on the girls, that carefully selected library, the porter's bell, these casual allusions
to "discipline" that set her thinking of scraps of the Babs Wheeler controversy. There was
a regularity, an austerity about this project that chilled her, she hardly knew why. Her own
vague intentions had been an amiable, hospitable, agreeably cheap establishment to which the
homeless feminine employees in London could resort freely and cheerfully, and it was only very
slowly that she perceived that her husband was by no means convinced of the spontaneity of
their coming. He seemed always glancing at methods for compelling them to come in and oppressions
when that compulsion had succeeded. There had already hovered over several of these anticipatory
evenings, his very manifest intention to have very carefully planned "Rules." She felt there
lay ahead of them much possibility for divergence of opinion about these "Rules." She foresaw
a certain narrowness and hardness. She herself had made her fight against the characteristics
of Sir Isaac and--perhaps she was lacking in that aristocratic feeling which comes so naturally
to most successful middle-class people in England--she could not believe that what she had
found bad and suffocating for herself could be agreeable and helpful for her poorer sisters.

It occurred to her to try the effect of the scheme upon Susan Burnet. Susan had such a knack
of seeing things from unexpected angles. She contrived certain operations upon the study blinds,
and then broached the business to Susan casually in the course of an enquiry into the welfare
of the Burnet family.

Susan was evidently prejudiced against the idea.

"Yes," said Susan after various explanations and exhibitions, "but where's the home in it?"

"The whole thing is a home."

"Barracks I call it," said Susan. "Nobody ever felt at home in a room coloured up like that--and
no curtains, nor vallances, nor toilet covers, nor anywhere where a girl can hang a photograph
or anything. What girl's going to feel at home in a strange place like that?"

"They ought to be able to hang up photographs," said Lady Harman, making a mental note of it.

"And of course there'll be all sorts of Rules."

"Some rules."

"Homes, real homes don't have Rules. And I daresay--Fines."

"No, there shan't be any Fines," said Lady Harman quickly. "I'll see to that."

"You got to back up rules somehow--once you got 'em," said Susan. "And when you get a crowd,
and no father and mother, and no proper family feeling, I suppose there's got to be Rules."

Lady Harman pointed out various advantages of the project.

"I'm not saying it isn't cheap and healthy and social," said Susan, "and if it isn't too strict
I expect you'll get plenty of girls to come to it, but at the best it's an Institution, Lady
Harman. It's going to be an Institution. That's what it's going to be."

She held the front elevation of the Bloomsbury Hostel in her hand and reflected.

"Of course for my part, I'd rather lodge with nice struggling believing Christian people anywhere
than go into a place like that. It's the feeling of freedom, of being yourself and on your
own. Even if the water wasn't laid on and I had to fetch it myself.... If girls were paid properly
there wouldn't be any need of such places, none at all. It's the poverty makes 'em what they
are.... And after all, somebody's got to lose the lodgers if this place gets them. Suppose
this sort of thing grows up all over the place, it'll just be the story of the little bakers
and little grocers and all those people over again. Why in London there are thousands of people
just keep a home together by letting two or three rooms or boarding someone--and it stands
to reason, they'll have to take less or lose the lodgers if this kind of thing's going to be
done. Nobody isn't going to build a Hostel for them."

"No," said Lady Harman, "I never thought of them."

"Lots of 'em haven't anything in the world but their bits of furniture and their lease and
there they are stuck and tied. There's Aunt Hannah, Father's sister, she's like that. Sleeps
in the basement and works and slaves, and often I've had to lend her ten shillings to pay the
rent with, through her not being full. This sort of place isn't going to do much good to her."

Lady Harman surveyed the plan rather blankly. "I suppose it isn't."

"And then if you manage this sort of place easy and attractive, it's going to draw girls away
from their homes. There's girls like Alice who'd do anything to get a bit of extra money to
put on their backs and seem to think of nothing but chattering and laughing and going about.
Such a place like this would be fine fun for Alice; in when she liked and out when she liked,
and none of us to ask her questions. She'd be just the sort to go, and mother, who's had the
upbringing of her, how's she to make up for Alice's ten shillings what she pays in every week?
There's lots like Alice. She's not bad isn't Alice, she's a good girl and a good-hearted girl;
I will say that for her, but she's shallow, say what you like she's shallow, she's got no thought
and she's wild for pleasure, and sometimes it seems to me that that's as bad as being bad for
all the good it does to anyone else in the world, and so I tell her. But of course she hasn't
seen things as I've seen them and doesn't feel as I do about all these things...."

Thus Susan.

Her discourse so puzzled Lady Harman that she bethought herself of Mr. Brumley and called in
his only too readily accorded advice. She asked him to tea on a day when she knew unofficially
that Sir Isaac would be away, she showed him the plans and sketched their probable development.
Then with that charming confidence of hers in his knowledge and ability she put her doubts
and fears before him. What did he really think of these places? What did he think of Susan
Burnet's idea of ruined lodging-house keepers? "I used to think our stores were good things,"
she said. "Is this likely to be a good thing at all?"

Mr. Brumley said "Um" a great number of times and realized that he was a humbug. He fenced
with her and affected sagacity for a time and suddenly he threw down his defences and confessed
he knew as little of the business as she did. "But I see it is a complex question and--it's
an interesting one too. May I enquire into it for you? I think I might be able to hunt up a
few particulars...."

He went away in a glow of resolution.

Georgina was about the only intimate who regarded the new development without misgiving.

"You think you're going to do all sorts of things with these Hostels, Ella," she said, "but
as a matter of fact they're bound to become just exactly what we've always wanted."

"And what may that be?" asked Mrs. Sawbridge over her macramé work.

"Strongholds for a garrison of suffragettes," said Georgina with the light of the Great Insane
Movement in her eyes and a ringing note in her voice. "Fort Chabrols for women."

§6

For some months in a negative and occasionally almost negligent fashion Mr. Brumley had been
living up to his impassioned resolve to be an unselfish lover of Lady Harman. He had been rather
at loose ends intellectually, deprived of his old assumptions and habitual attitudes and rather
chaotic in the matter of his new convictions. He had given most of his productive hours to
the writing of a novel which was to be an entire departure from the Euphemia tradition. The
more he got on with this, the more clearly he realized that it was essentially insignificant.
When he re-read what he had written he was surprised by crudities where he had intended sincerities
and rhetoric where the scheme had demanded passion. What was the matter with him? He was stirred
that Lady Harman should send for him, and his inability to deal with her perplexities deepened
his realization of the ignorance and superficiality he had so long masked even from himself
beneath the tricks and pretensions of a gay scepticism. He went away fully resolved to grapple
with the entire Hostel question, and he put the patched and tortured manuscript of the new
novel aside with a certain satisfaction to do this.

The more he reflected upon the nature of this study he proposed for himself the more it attracted
him. It was some such reality as this he had been wanting. He could presently doubt whether
he would ever go back to his novel-writing again, or at least to the sort of novel-writing
he had been doing hitherto. To invent stories to save middle-aged prosperous middle-class people
from the distresses of thinking, is surely no work for a self-respecting man. Stevenson in
the very deeps of that dishonourable traffic had realized as much and likened himself to a
fille de joie, and Haggard, of the same school and period, had abandoned blood and thunder
at the climax of his success for the honest study of agricultural conditions. The newer successes
were turning out work, less and less conventional and agreeable and more and more stiffened
with facts and sincerities.... He would show Lady Harman that a certain debonair quality he
had always affected, wasn't incompatible with a powerful grasp of general conditions.... And
she wanted this done. Suppose he did it in a way that made him necessary to her. Suppose he
did it very well.

He set to work, and understanding as you do a certain quality of the chameleon in Mr. Brumley's
moral nature, you will understand that he worked through a considerable variety of moods. Sometimes
he worked with disinterested passion and sometimes he was greatly sustained by this thought
that here was something that would weave him in with the gravities of her life and give him
perhaps a new inlet to intimacy. And presently a third thing came to his help, and that was
the discovery that the questions arising out of this attempt to realize the importance of those
Hostels, were in themselves very fascinating questions for an intelligent person.

Because before you have done with the business of the modern employé, you must, if you are
an intelligent person, have taken a view of the whole vast process of social reorganization
that began with the development of factory labour and big towns, and which is even now scarcely
advanced enough for us to see its general trend. For a time Mr. Brumley did not realize the
magnitude of the thing he was looking at; when he did, theories sprouted in his mind like mushrooms
and he babbled with mental excitement. He came in a state of the utmost lucidity to explain
his theories to Lady Harman, and they struck that lady at the time as being the most illuminating
suggestions she had ever encountered. They threw an appearance of order, of process, over a
world of trade and employment and competition that had hitherto seemed too complex and mysterious
for any understanding.

"You see," said Mr. Brumley--they had met that day in Kensington Gardens and they were sitting
side by side upon green chairs near the frozen writings of Physical Energy--"You see, if I
may lecture a little, putting the thing as simply as possible, the world has been filling up
new spaces ever since the discovery of America; all the period from then to about 1870, let
us say, was a period of rapid increase of population in response to new opportunities of living
and new fulnesses of life in every direction. During that time, four hundred years of it roughly,
there was a huge development of family life; to marry and rear a quite considerable family
became the chief business of everybody, celibacy grew rare, monasteries and nunneries which
had abounded vanished like things dissolving in a flood and even the priests became Protestant
against celibacy and took unto themselves wives and had huge families. The natural checks upon
increase, famine and pestilence, were lifted by more systematized communication and by scientific
discovery; and altogether and as a consequence the world now has probably three or four times
the human population it ever carried before. Everywhere in that period the family prevailed
again, the prospering multiplying household; it was a return to the family, to the reproductive
social grouping of early barbaric life, and naturally all the thought of the modern world which
has emerged since the fifteenth century falls into this form. So I see it, Lady Harman. The
generation of our grandfathers in the opening nineteenth century had two shaping ideas, two
forms of thought, the family and progress, not realizing that that very progress which had
suddenly reopened the doors of opportunity for the family that had revived the ancient injunction
to increase and multiply and replenish the earth, might presently close that door again and
declare the world was filled. But that is what is happening now. The doors close. That immense
swarming and multiplying of little people is over, and the forces of social organization have
been coming into play now, more and more for a century and a half, to produce new wholesale
ways of doing things, new great organizations, organizations that invade the autonomous family
more and more, and are perhaps destined ultimately to destroy it altogether and supersede it.
At least it is so I make my reading of history in these matters."

"Yes," said Lady Harman, with knitted brows, "Yes," and wondered privately whether it would
be possible to get from that opening to the matter of her Hostels before it was time for her
to return for Sir Isaac's tea.

Mr. Brumley continued to talk with his eyes fixed as it were upon his thoughts. "These things,
Lady Harman, go on at different paces in different regions. I will not trouble you with a discussion
of that, or of emigration, of any of the details of the vast proliferation that preceded the
present phase. Suffice it, that now all the tendency is back towards restraints upon increase,
to an increasing celibacy, to a fall in the birth-rate and in the average size of families,
to--to a release of women from an entire devotion to a numerous offspring, and so at last to
the supersession of those little family units that for four centuries have made up the substance
of social life and determined nearly all our moral and sentimental attitudes. The autonomy
of the family is being steadily destroyed, and it is being replaced by the autonomy of the
individual in relation to some syndicated economic effort."

"I think," said Lady Harman slowly, arresting him by a gesture, "if you could make that about
autonomy a little clearer...."

Mr. Brumley did. He went on to point out with the lucidity of a University Extension lecturer
what he meant by these singular phrases. She listened intelligently but with effort. He was
much too intent upon getting the thing expressed to his own satisfaction to notice any absurdity
in his preoccupation with these theories about the population of the world in the face of her
immediate practical difficulties. He declared that the onset of this new phase in human life,
the modern phase, wherein there was apparently to be no more "proliferating," but instead a
settling down of population towards a stable equilibrium, became apparent first with the expropriation
of the English peasantry and the birth of the factory system and machine production. "Since
that time one can trace a steady substitution of wholesale and collective methods for household
and family methods. It has gone far with us now. Instead of the woman drawing water from a
well, the pipes and taps of the water company. Instead of the home-made rushlight, the electric
lamp. Instead of home-spun, ready-made clothes. Instead of home-brewed, the brewer's cask.
Instead of home-baked, first the little baker and then, clean and punctual, the International
Bread and Cake Stores. Instead of the child learning at its mother's knee, the compulsory elementary
school. Flats take the place of separate houses. Instead of the little holding, the big farm,
and instead of the children working at home, the factory. Everywhere synthesis. Everywhere
the little independent proprietor gives place to the company and the company to the trust.
You follow all this, Lady Harman?"

"Go on," she said, encouraged by that transitory glimpse of the Stores in his discourse.

"Now London--and England generally--had its period of expansion and got on to the beginnings
at least of this period of synthesis that is following it, sooner than any other country in
the world; and because it was the first to reach the new stage it developed the characteristics
of the new stage with a stronger flavour of the old than did such later growths of civilization
as New York or Bombay or Berlin. That is why London and our British big cities generally are
congestions of little houses, little homes, while the newer great cities run to apartments
and flats. We hadn't grasped the logical consequences of what we were in for so completely
as the people abroad did who caught it later, and that is why, as we began to develop our new
floating population of mainly celibate employees and childless people, they had mostly to go
into lodgings, they went into the homes that were intended for families as accessories to the
family, and they were able to go in because the families were no longer so numerous as they
used to be. London is still largely a city of landladies and lodgings, and in no other part
of the world is there so big a population of lodgers. And this business of your Hostels is
nothing more nor less than the beginning of the end of that. Just as the great refreshment
caterers have mopped up the ancient multitude of coffee-houses and squalid little special feeding
arrangements of the days of Tittlebat Titmouse and Dick Swiveller, so now your Hostels are
going to mop up the lodging-house system of London. Of course there are other and kindred movements.
Naturally. The Y.W.C.A., the Y.M.C.A., the London Girls Club Union and so forth are all doing
kindred work."

"But what, Mr. Brumley, what is to become of the landladies?" asked Lady Harman.

Mr. Brumley was checked in mid theory.

"I hadn't thought of the landladies," he said, after a short pause.

"They worry me," said Lady Harman.

"Um," said Mr. Brumley, thrown out.

"Do you know the other day I went into Chelsea, where there are whole streets of lodgings,
and--I suppose it was wrong of me, but I went and pretended to be looking for rooms for a girl
clerk I knew, and I saw--Oh! no end of rooms. And such poor old women, such dingy, worked-out,
broken old women, with a kind of fearful sharpness, so eager, so dreadfully eager to get that
girl clerk who didn't exist...."

She looked at him with an expression of pained enquiry.

"That," said Mr. Brumley, "that I think is a question, so to speak, for the social ambulance.
If perhaps I might go on----That particular difficulty we might consider later. I think I was
talking of the general synthesis."

"Yes," said Lady Harman. "And what is it exactly that is to take the place of these isolated
little homes and these dreary little lodgings? Here are we, my husband and I, rushing in with
this new thing, just as he rushed in with his stores thirty years ago and overset little bakers
and confectioners and refreshment dealers by the hundred. Some of them--poor dears--they----I
don't like to think. And it wasn't a good thing he made after all,--only a hard sort of thing.
He made all those shops of his--with the girls who strike and say they are sweated and driven....
And now here we are making a kind of barrack place for people to live in!"

She expressed the rest of her ideas with a gesture of the hands.

"I admit the process has its dangers," said Mr. Brumley. "It's like the supersession of the
small holdings by the latifundia in Italy. But that's just where our great opportunity comes
in. These synthetic phases have occurred before in the world's history and their history is
a history of lost opportunities.... But need ours be?"

She had a feeling as though something had slipped through her fingers.

"I feel," she said, "that it is more important to me than anything else in life, that these
Hostels, anyhow, which are springing so rapidly from a chance suggestion of mine, shouldn't
be lost opportunities."

"Exactly," said Mr. Brumley, with the gesture of one who recovers a thread. "That is just what
I am driving at."

The fingers of his extended hand felt in the warm afternoon air for a moment, and then he said
"Ah!" in a tone of recovery while she waited respectfully for the resumed thread.

"You see," he said, "I regard this process of synthesis, this substitution of wholesale and
collective methods for homely and individual ones as, under existing conditions, inevitable--inevitable.
It's the phase we live in, it's to this we have to adapt ourselves. It is as little under your
control or mine as the movement of the sun through the zodiac. Practically, that is. And what
we have to do is not, I think, to sigh for lost homes and the age of gold and spade husbandry,
and pigs and hens in the home, and so on, but to make this new synthetic life tolerable for
the mass of men and women, hopeful for the mass of men and women, a thing developing and ascending.
That's where your Hostels come in, Lady Harman; that's where they're so important. They're
a pioneer movement. If they succeed--and things in Sir Isaac's hands have a way of succeeding
at any rate to the paying point--then there'll be a headlong rush of imitations, imitating
your good features, imitating your bad features, deepening a groove.... You see my point?"

"Yes," she said. "It makes me--more afraid than ever."

"But hopeful," said Mr. Brumley, presuming to lay his hand for an instant on her arm. "It's
big enough to be inspiring."

"But I'm afraid," she said.

"It's laying down the lines of a new social life--no less. And what makes it so strange, so
typical, too, of the way social forces work nowadays, is that your husband, who has all the
instinctive insistence upon every right and restriction of the family relation in his private
life, who is narrowly, passionately for the home in his own case, who hates all books and discussion
that seem to touch it, should in his business activities be striking this tremendous new blow
at the ancient organization. For that, you see, is what it amounts to."

"Yes," said Lady Harman slowly. "Yes. Of course, he doesn't know...."

Mr. Brumley was silent for a little while. "You see," he resumed, "at the worst this new social
life may become a sort of slavery in barracks; at the best--it might become something very
wonderful. My mind's been busy now for days thinking just how wonderful the new life might
be. Instead of the old bickering, crowded family home, a new home of comrades...."

He made another pause, and his thoughts ran off upon a fresh track.

"In looking up all these things I came upon a queer little literature of pamphlets and so forth,
dealing with the case of the shop assistants. They have a great grievance in what they call
the living-in system. The employers herd them in dormitories over the shops, and usually feed
them by gaslight in the basements; they fine them and keep an almost intolerable grip upon
them; make them go to bed at half-past ten, make them go to church on Sundays,--all sorts of
petty tyrannies. The assistants are passionately against this, but they've got no power to
strike. Where could they go if they struck? Into the street. Only people who live out and have
homes of their own to sulk in can strike. Naturally, therefore, as a preliminary to any other
improvement in the shop assistant's life, these young people want to live out. Practically
that's an impossible demand at present, because they couldn't get lodgings and live out with
any decency at all on what it costs their employers to lodge and feed them in. Well, here you
see a curious possibility for your Hostels. You open the prospect of a living-out system for
shop assistants. But just in the degree in which you choose to interfere with them, regulate
them, bully and deal with them wholesale through their employers, do you make the new living-out
method approximate to the living-in. That's a curious side development, isn't it?"

Lady Harman appreciated that.

"That's only the beginning of the business. There's something more these Hostels might touch...."

Mr. Brumley gathered himself together for the new aspect. "There's marriage," he said.

"One of the most interesting and unsatisfactory aspects of the life of the employee to-day--and
you know the employee is now in the majority in the adult population--is this. You see, we
hold them celibate. We hold them celibate for a longer and longer period; the average age at
marriage rises steadily; and so long as they remain celibate we are prepared with some sort
of ideas about the future development of their social life, clubs, hostels, living-in, and
so forth. But at present we haven't any ideas at all about the adaptation of the natural pairing
instinct to the new state of affairs. Ultimately the employee marries; they hold out as long
as they possibly can, but ultimately they have to. They have to, even in the face of an economic
system that holds out no prospects of anything but insecurity and an increasing chance of trouble
and disaster to the employee's family group. What happens is that they drop back into a distressful,
crippled, insecure imitation of the old family life as one had it in what I might call the
multiplying periods of history. They start a home,--they dream of a cottage, but they drift
to a lodging, and usually it isn't the best sort of lodging, for landladies hate wives and
the other lodgers detest babies. Often the young couple doesn't have babies. You see, they
are more intelligent than peasants, and intelligence and fecundity vary reciprocally," said
Mr. Brumley.

"You mean?" interrupted Lady Harman softly.

"There is a world-wide fall in the birth-rate. People don't have the families they did."

"Yes," said Lady Harman. "I understand now."

"And the more prosperous or the more sanguine take these suburban little houses, these hutches
that make such places as Hendon nightmares of monotony, or go into ridiculous jerry-built sham
cottages in some Garden Suburb, where each young wife does her own housework and pretends to
like it. They have a sort of happiness for a time, I suppose; the woman stops all outside work,
the man, very much handicapped, goes on competing against single men. Then--nothing more happens.
Except difficulties. The world goes dull and grey for them. They look about for a lodger, perhaps.
Have you read Gissing's Paying Guest?..."

"I suppose," said Lady Harman, "I suppose it is like that. One tries not to think it is so."

"One needn't let oneself believe that dullness is unhappiness," said Mr. Brumley. "I don't
want to paint things sadder than they are. But it's not a fine life, it's not a full life,
that life in a Neo-Malthusian suburban hutch."

"Neo----?" asked Lady Harman.

"A mere phrase," said Mr. Brumley hastily. "The extraordinary thing is that, until you set
me looking into these things with your questions, I've always taken this sort of thing for
granted, as though it couldn't be otherwise. Now I seem to see with a kind of freshness. I'm
astounded at the muddle of it, the waste and aimlessness of it. And here again it is, Lady
Harman, that I think your opportunity comes in. With these Hostels as they might be projected
now, you seem to have the possibility of a modernized, more collective and civilized family
life than the old close congestion of the single home, and I see no reason at all why you shouldn't
carry that collective life on to the married stage. As things are now these little communities
don't go beyond the pairing--and out they drift to find the homestead they will never possess.
What has been borne in upon me more and more forcibly as I have gone through your--your nest
of problems, is the idea that the new social--association, that has so extensively replaced
the old family group, might be carried on right through life, that it might work in with all
sorts of other discontents and bad adjustments.... The life of the women in these little childless
or one-or-two-child homes is more unsatisfactory even than the man's."

Mr. Brumley's face flushed with enthusiasm and he wagged a finger to emphasize his words. "Why
not make Hostels, Lady Harman, for married couples? Why not try that experiment so many people
have talked about of the conjoint kitchen and refectory, the conjoint nursery, the collective
social life, so that the children who are single children or at best children in small families
of two or three, may have the advantages of playfellows, and the young mothers still, if they
choose, continue to have a social existence and go on with their professional or business,
work? That's the next step your Hostels might take ... Incidentally you see this opens a way
to a life of relative freedom for the woman who is married.... I don't know if you have read
Mrs. Stetson. Yes, Charlotte Perkins Gilman Stetson.... Yes, Woman and Economics, that's the book.

"I know," Mr. Brumley went on, "I seem to be opening out your project like a concertina, but
I want you to see just how my thoughts have been going about all this. I want you to realize
I haven't been idle during these last few weeks. I know it's a far cry from what the Hostels
are to all these ideas of what they might begin to be, I know the difficulties in your way--all
sorts of difficulties. But when I think just how you stand at the very centre of the moulding
forces in these changes...."

He dropped into an eloquent silence.

Lady Harman looked thoughtfully at the sunlight under the trees.

"You think," she said, "that it comes to as much as all this."

"More," said Mr. Brumley.

"I was frightened before. Now----You make me feel as though someone had put the wheel of a
motor car in my hand, started it and told me to steer...."

§7

Lady Harman went home from that talk in a taxi, and on the way she passed the building operations
in Kensington Road. A few weeks ago it had been a mere dusty field of operation for the house-wreckers;
now its walls were already rising to the second storey. She realized how swiftly nowadays the
search for wisdom can be outstripped by reinforced concrete.

§8

It was only by slow degrees and rather in the absence of a more commanding interest than through
any invincible quality in their appeal to her mind that these Hostels became in the next three
years the grave occupation of Lady Harman's thoughts and energies. She yielded to them reluctantly.
For a long time she wanted to look over them and past them and discover something--she did
not know what--something high and domineering to which it would be easy to give herself. It
was difficult to give herself to the Hostels. In that Mr. Brumley, actuated by a mixture of
more or less admirable motives, did his best to assist her. These Hostels alone he thought
could give them something upon which they could meet, give them a common interest and him a
method of service and companionship. It threw the qualities of duty and justification over
their more or less furtive meetings, their little expeditions together, their quiet frequent
association.

Together they made studies of the Girls' Clubs which are scattered about London, supplementary
homes that have in such places as Walworth and Soho worked small miracles of civilization.
These institutions appealed to a lower social level than the one their Hostels were to touch,
but they had been organized by capable and understanding minds and Lady Harman found in one
or two of their evening dances and in the lunch she shared one morning with a row of cheerful
young factory girls from Soho just that quality of concrete realization for which her mind
hungered. Strictly speaking, there is no room for a personal God in this mechanical theory of
the universe. The world becomes inevitably 'the Be all and the End all.' Hence, as might be expected,
while evolutionary Ethics claims to cover the whole range of this present life, it does not
pretend to extend into the regions of the hereafter. It is concerned only with what it conceives to be
the highest earthly good--the material and social well-being of mankind. But no theory of life
can be pronounced satisfactory which explains man in terms of this earth alone. The 'Great Unknown'
which Mr. Spencer posits[9] as the ultimate source of all power, is a force to be reckoned
with; and, known or unknown, is the mightiest factor in all life's experiences. Man's spiritual
nature in its whole range cannot be treated as of no account. 'The powers of the world to come'
have an essential bearing upon human {105} conduct in this world. They shape our thoughts and
determine our ideals. Hence any view of life which excludes from consideration the spiritual
side of man, and limits his horizon by the things of this earth must of necessity be inadequate
and unsatisfactory.

4. Closely connected with, and, indeed, arising out of, the evolutionary theory, another type
of thought, prevalent to-day, falls to be noted--the socialistic tendency. It is now universally
recognised that the individual cannot be treated as an isolated being, but only in relation to
society of which he is a part. The emphasis is laid upon the solidarity of mankind, and man is explained
by such social facts as heredity and environment. Marx and Engels, the pioneers of the socialistic
movement, accepted in the fullest sense the scientific doctrine of evolution. So far from being
a mere Utopian dream, Marx contends that Socialism is the inevitable
outcome of the movement of modern society.

The aim of the agitation is to bring men to a clear consciousness of a process which is going
forward in all countries where the modern industrial methods prevail. Democracy must come to
itself and assume its rights. The keynote of the past has been the exploitation of man by man in the
three forms of slavery, serfdom, and wage-labour. The keynote of the future must be the exploitation
of the earth by man associated to man. The practical aim of Socialism is that industry is to
be carried on by associated labourers jointly owning the means of production. Here, again,
the all-pervading ideal is--the general good of society--the happiness of the greatest number.
The reduction of all aims to a common level, the equalising of social conditions, the direction
and control of all private interests and personal endeavours, are
to be means to one end--the material good of the community.

Socialism is not, however, confined to an agitation for material welfare. The industrial aspect
of it is only a phase of a larger movement. On its ethical side it is the outcome of a strong
aspiration after a higher life.[10] The world is awakening to {106}
the fact that the majority of the human family has been virtually
excluded from all participation in man's inheritance of knowledge
and culture.

 Apart from fresh aspects
of Susan's character in the capacity of a hostess she gained little light from that. She had
never felt so completely outside a home in her life as she did when she was in the Burnets'
parlour. The very tablecloth on which the tea was spread had an air of being new and protective
of familiar things; the tea was manifestly quite unlike their customary tea, it was no more
intimate than the confectioner's shop window from which it mostly came; the whole room was
full of the muffled cries of things hastily covered up and specially put away. Vivid oblongs
on the faded wallpaper betrayed even a rearrangement of the pictures. Susan's mother was a
little dingy woman, wearing a very smart new cap to the best of her ability; she had an air
of having been severely shaken up and admonished, and her general bearing confessed only too
plainly how shattered those preparations had left her. She watched her capable daughter for
cues. Susan's sisters displayed a disposition to keep their backs against something and at
the earliest opportunity to get into the passage and leave Susan and her tremendous visitor
alone but within earshot. They started convulsively when they were addressed and insisted on
"your ladyship." Susan had told them not to but they would. When they supposed themselves to
be unobserved they gave themselves up to the impassioned inspection of Lady Harman's costume.
Luke had fled into the street, and in spite of various messages conveyed to him by the youngest
sister he refused to enter until Lady Harman had gone again and was well out of the way. And
Susan was no longer garrulous and at her ease; she had no pins in her mouth and that perhaps
hampered her speech; she presided flushed and bright-eyed in a state of infectious nervous
tension. Her politeness was awful. Never in all her life had Lady Harman felt her own lack
of real conversational power so acutely. She couldn't think of a thing that mightn't be construed
as an impertinence and that didn't remind her of district visiting. Yet perhaps she succeeded
better than she supposed.

"What a family you have had!" she said to Mrs. Burnet. "I have four little girls, and I find
them as much as we can manage."

"You're young yet, my ladyship," said Mrs. Burnet, "and they aren't always the blessings they
seem to be. It's the rearing's the difficulty."

"They're all such healthy-looking--people."

"I wish we could get hold of Luke, my ladyship, and show you 'im. He's that sturdy. And yet
when 'e was a little feller----"

She was launched for a time on those details that were always so dear to the mothers of the
past order of things. Her little spate of reminiscences was the only interlude of naturalness
in an afternoon of painfully constrained behaviour....

Lady Harman returned a trifle shamefacedly from this abortive dip into realities to Mr. Brumley's
speculative assurance.

§9

While Lady Harman was slowly accustoming her mind to this idea that the development of those
Hostels was her appointed career in life, so far as a wife may have a career outside her connubial
duties, and while she was getting insensibly to believe in Mr. Brumley's theory of their exemplary
social importance, the Hostels themselves with a haste that she felt constantly was premature,
were achieving a concrete existence. They were developing upon lines that here and there disregarded
Mr. Brumley's ideas very widely; they gained in practicality what perhaps they lost in social
value, through the entirely indirect relations between Mr. Brumley on the one hand and Sir
Isaac on the other. For Sir Isaac manifestly did not consider and would have been altogether
indisposed to consider Mr. Brumley as entitled to plan or suggest anything of the slightest
importance in this affair, and whatever of Mr. Brumley reached that gentleman reached him in
a very carefully transmitted form as Lady Harman's own unaided idea. Sir Isaac had sound Victorian
ideas about the place of literature in life. If anyone had suggested to him that literature
could supply ideas to practical men he would have had a choking fit, and he regarded Mr. Brumley's
sedulous attentions to these hostel schemes with feelings, the kindlier elements of whose admixture
was a belief that ultimately he would write some elegant and respectful approval of the established
undertaking.

The entire admixture of Sir Isaac's feelings towards Mr. Brumley was by no means kindly. He
disliked any man to come near Lady Harman, any man at all; he had a faint uneasiness even about
waiters and hotel porters and the clergy. Of course he had agreed she should have friends of
her own and he couldn't very well rescind that without something definite to go upon. But still
this persistent follower kept him uneasy. He kept this uneasiness within bounds by reassuring
himself upon the point of Lady Harman's virtuous obedience, and so reassured he was able to
temper his distrust with a certain contempt. The man was in love with his wife; that was manifest
enough, and dangled after her.... Let him dangle. What after all did he get for it?...

But occasionally he broke through this complacency, betrayed a fitful ingenious jealousy, interfered
so that she missed appointments and had to break engagements. He was now more and more a being
of pathological moods. The subtle changes of secretion that were hardening his arteries, tightening
his breath and poisoning his blood, reflected themselves upon his spirit in an uncertainty
of temper and exasperating fatigues and led to startling outbreaks. Then for a time he would
readjust himself, become in his manner reasonable again, become accessible.

He was the medium through which this vision that was growing up in her mind of a reorganized
social life, had to translate itself, as much as it could ever translate itself, into reality.
He called these hostels her hostels, made her the approver of all he did, but he kept every
particle of control in his own hands. All her ideas and desires had to be realized by him.
And his attitudes varied with his moods; sometimes he was keenly interested in the work of
organization and then he terrified her by his bias towards acute economies, sometimes he was
resentful at the burthen of the whole thing, sometimes he seemed to scent Brumley or at least
some moral influence behind her mind and met her suggestions with a bitter resentment as though
any suggestion must needs be a disloyalty to him. There was a remarkable outbreak upon her
first tentative proposal that the hostel system might ultimately be extended to married couples.

He heard her with his lips pressing tighter and tighter together until they were yellow white
and creased with a hundred wicked little horizontal creases. Then he interrupted her with silent
gesticulations. Then words came.

"I never did, Elly," he said. "I never did. Reely--there are times when you ain't rational.
Married couples who're assistants in shops and places!"

For a little while he sought some adequate expression of his point of view.

"Nice thing to go keeping a place for these chaps to have their cheap bits of skirt in," he
said at last.

Then further: "If a man wants a girl let him work himself up until he can keep her. Married
couples indeed!"

He began to expand the possibilities of the case with a quite unusual vividness. "Double beds
in each cubicle, I suppose," he said, and played for a time about this fancy.... "Well, to
hear such an idea from you of all people, Elly. I never did."

He couldn't leave it alone. He had to go on to the bitter end with the vision she had evoked
in his mind. He was jealous, passionately jealous, it was only too manifest, of the possible
happinesses of these young people. He was possessed by that instinctive hatred for the realized
love of others which lies at the base of so much of our moral legislation. The bare thought--whole
corridors of bridal chambers!--made his face white and his hand quiver. His young men and young
women! The fires of a hundred Vigilance Committees blazed suddenly in his reddened eyes. He
might have been a concentrated society for preventing the rapid multiplication of the unfit.
The idea of facilitating early marriages was manifestly shameful to him, a disgraceful service
to render, a job for Pandarus. What was she thinking of? Elly of all people! Elly who had been
as innocent as driven snow before Georgina came interfering!

It ended in a fit of abuse and a panting seizure, and for a day or so he was too ill to resume
the discussion, to do more than indicate a disgusted aloofness....

And then it may be the obscure chemicals at work within him changed their phase of reaction.
At any rate he mended, became gentler, was more loving to his wife than he had been for some
time and astonished her by saying that if she wanted Hostels for married couples, it wasn't
perhaps so entirely unreasonable. Selected cases, he stipulated, it would have to be and above
a certain age limit, sober people. "It might even be a check on immorality," he said, "properly
managed...."

But that was as far as his acquiescence went and Lady Harman was destined to be a widow before
she saw the foundation of any Hostel for young married couples in London.

§10

The reinforced concrete rose steadily amidst Lady Harman's questionings and Mr. Brumley's speculations.
The Harmans returned from a recuperative visit to Kissingen, to which Sir Isaac had gone because
of a suspicion that his Marienbad specialist had failed to cure him completely in order to
get him back again, to find the first of the five hostels nearly ripe for its opening. There
had to be a manageress and a staff organized and neither Lady Harman nor Mr. Brumley were prepared
for that sort of business. A number of abler people however had become aware of the opportunities
of the new development and Mrs. Hubert Plessington, that busy publicist, got the Harmans to
a helpful little dinner, before Lady Harman had the slightest suspicion of the needs that were
now so urgent. There shone a neat compact widow, a Mrs. Pembrose, who had buried her husband
some eighteen months ago after studying social questions with him with great éclat for ten
happy years, and she had done settlement work and Girls' Club work and had perhaps more power
of organization--given a suitable director to provide for her lack of creativeness, Mrs. Plessington
told Sir Isaac, than any other woman in London. Afterwards Sir Isaac had an opportunity of
talking to her; he discussed the suffrage movement with her and was pleased to find her views
remarkably sympathetic with his own. She was, he declared, a sensible woman, anxious to hear
a man out and capable, it was evident, of a detachment from feminist particularism rare in
her sex at the present time. Lady Harman had seen less of the lady that evening, she was chiefly
struck by her pallor, by a kind of animated silence about her, and by the deep impression her
capabilities had made on Mr. Plessington, who had hitherto seemed to her to be altogether too
overworked in admiring his wife to perceive the points of any other human being. Afterwards
Lady Harman was surprised to hear from one or two quite separate people that Mrs. Pembrose
was the only possible person to act as general director of the new hostels. Lady Beach-Mandarin
was so enthusiastic in the matter that she made a special call. "You've known her a long time?"
said Lady Harman.

"Long enough to see what a chance she is!" said Lady Beach-Mandarin.

Lady Harman perceived equivocation. "Now how long is that really?" she said.

"Count not in years, nor yet in moments on a dial," said Lady Beach-Mandarin with a fine air
of quotation. "I'm thinking of her quiet strength of character. Mrs. Plessington brought her
round to see me the other afternoon."

"Did she talk to you?"

"I saw, my dear, I saw."

A vague aversion from Mrs. Pembrose was in some mysterious way strengthened in Lady Harman
by this extraordinary convergence of testimony. When Sir Isaac mentioned the lady with a kind
of forced casualness at breakfast as the only conceivable person for the work of initiation
and organization that lay before them, Lady Harman determined to see more of her. With a quickened
subtlety she asked her to tea. "I have heard so much of your knowledge of social questions
and I want you to advise me about my work," she wrote, and then scribbled a note to Mr. Brumley
to call and help her judgments.

Mrs. Pembrose appeared dressed in dove colour with a near bonnetesque straw hat to match. She
had a pale slightly freckled complexion, little hard blue-grey eyes with that sort of nose
which redeems a squarish shape by a certain delicacy of structure; her chin was long and protruding
and her voice had a wooden resonance and a ghost of a lisp. Her talk had a false consecutiveness
due to the frequent use of the word "Yes." Her bearing was erect and her manner guardedly alert.

From the first she betrayed a conviction that Mr. Brumley was incidental and unnecessary and
that her real interest lay with Sir Isaac. She might almost have been in possession of special
information upon that point.

"Yes," she said, "I'm rather specially up in this sort of question. I worked side by side with
my poor Frederick all his life, we were collaborators, and this question of the urban distributive
employee was one of his special studies. Yes, he would have been tremendously interested in
Sir Isaac's project."

"You know what we are doing?"

"Every one is interested in Sir Isaac's enterprise. Naturally. Yes, I think I have a fairly
good idea of what you mean to do. It's a great experiment."

"You think it is likely to answer?" said Mr. Brumley.

"In Sir Isaac's hands it is very likely to answer," said Mrs. Pembrose with her eye steadily
on Lady Harman.

There was a little pause. "Yes, now you wrote of difficulties and drawing upon my experience.
Of course just now I'm quite at Sir Isaac's disposal."

Lady Harman found herself thrust perforce into the rôle of her husband's spokeswoman. She asked
Mrs. Pembrose if she knew the exact nature of the experiment they contemplated.

Mrs. Pembrose hadn't a doubt she knew. Of course for a long time and more especially in the
Metropolis where the distances were so great and increasing so rapidly, there had been a gathering
feeling not only in the catering trade, but in very many factory industries, against the daily
journey to employment and home again. It was irksome and wasteful to everyone concerned, there
was a great loss in control, later hours of beginning, uncertain service. "Yes, my husband
calculated the hours lost in London every week, hours that are neither work nor play, mere
tiresome stuffy journeying. It made an enormous sum. It worked out at hundreds of working lives
per week." "I am sure," said Ben Gile, "that some very exciting and interesting conversations are
carried on by these fellows."

"Back of the head," continued Jack, "is the thorax, with the six
legs, then a very narrow piece joining the thorax and abdomen."

"There's an agitation against it on the part of a small Trade Union of Shop Assistants," said
Mrs. Pembrose. "But they have no real alternative to propose."

"And this isn't Living In," said Mr. Brumley.

"Yes, I think you'll find it is," said Mrs. Pembrose with a nice little expert smile.

"Living-in isn't quite what we want," said Lady Harman slowly and with knitted brows, seeking
a method of saying just what the difference was to be.

"Yes, not perhaps in the strictest sense," said Mrs. Pembrose giving her no chance, and went
on to make fine distinctions. Strictly speaking, living-in meant sleeping over the shop and
eating underneath it, and this hostel idea was an affair of a separate house and of occupants
who would be assistants from a number of shops. "Yes, collectivism, if you like," said Mrs.
Pembrose. But the word collectivism, she assured them, wouldn't frighten her, she was a collectivist,
a socialist, as her husband had always been. The day was past when socialist could be used
as a term of reproach. "Yes, instead of the individual employer of labour, we already begin
to have the collective employer of labour, with a labour bureau--and so on. We share them.
We no longer compete for them. It's the keynote of the time."

Mr. Brumley followed this with a lifted eyebrow. He was still new to these modern developments
of collectivist ideas, this socialism of the employer.

The whole thing Mrs. Pembrose declared was a step forward in civilization, it was a step in
the organization and discipline of labour. Of course the unruly and the insubordinate would
cry out. But the benefits were plain enough, space, light, baths, association, reasonable recreations,
opportunities for improvement----

"But freedom?" said Mr. Brumley. 

His own story, Hard Times, first appeared in this, with the earliest work of more than one writer
who later became celebrated. Dickens loved to encourage young writers, and would just as quickly
accept a good story or poem from an unknown author as from the most
famous.

"But--it's the very substance of the soul!"

"You must permit me to differ," said Mrs. Pembrose, and for weeks afterwards Mr. Brumley was
still seeking a proper polite retort to that difficult counterstroke. It was such a featureless
reply. It was like having your nose punched suddenly by a man without a face.

They descended to a more particular treatment of the problems ahead. Mrs. Pembrose quoted certain
precedents from the Girls' Club Union.

"The people Lady Harman contemplates--entertaining," said Mr. Brumley, "are of a slightly more
self-respecting type than those young women."

"It's largely veneer," said Mrs. Pembrose....

"Detestable little wretch," said Mr. Brumley when at last she had departed. He was very uncomfortable.
"She's just the quintessence of all one fears and dreads about these new developments, she's
perfect--in that way--self-confident, arrogant, instinctively aggressive, with a tremendous
class contempt. There's a multitude of such people about who hate the employed classes, who
want to see them broken in and subjugated. I suppose that kind of thing is in humanity. Every
boy's school has louts of that kind, who love to torment fags for their own good, who spring
upon a chance smut on the face of a little boy to scrub him painfully, who have a kind of lust
to dominate under the pretence of improving. I remember----But never mind that now. Keep that
woman out of things or your hostels work for the devil."

"Yes," said Lady Harman. "Certainly she shall not----. No."

But there she reckoned without her husband.

"I've settled it," he said to her at dinner two nights later.

"What?"

"Mrs. Pembrose."

"You've not made her----?"

"Yes, I have. And I think we're very lucky to get her."

"But--Isaac! I don't want her!"

"You should have told me that before, Elly. I've made an agreement."

She suddenly wanted to cry. "But----You said I should manage these Hostels myself."

"So you shall, Elly. But we must have somebody. When we go abroad and all that and for all
the sort of business stuff and looking after things that you can't do. We've got to have her.
She's the only thing going of her sort."

"But--I don't like her."

"Well," cried Sir Isaac, "why in goodness couldn't you tell me that before, Elly? I've been
and engaged her."

She sat pale-faced staring at him with wide open eyes in which tears of acute disappointment
were shining. She did not dare another word because of her trick of weeping.

"It's all right, Elly," said Sir Isaac. "How touchy you are! Anything you want about these
Hostels of yours, you've only got to tell me and it's done."

§11

Lady Harman was still in a state of amazement at the altered prospects of her hostels when
the day arrived for the formal opening of the first of these in Bloomsbury. On its ethical side
naturalism is closely associated with the theory of life which bears the name of utilitarianism--the
theory which regards pleasure or profit as the aim of man. In its most independent form Hedonism
can hardly be said to exist now as a reasoned theory. Mrs. Pembrose was modestly conspicuous, like the unexpected in all human schemes.
There were several reporters present, and Horatio Blenker who was going to make a loyal leader
about it, to be followed by one or two special articles for the Old Country Gazette.

Horatio had procured Mrs. Blapton for the opening after some ineffectual angling for the Princess
Adeline, and the thing was done at half-past three in the afternoon. In the bright early July
sunshine outside the new building there was a crimson carpet down on the pavement and an awning
above it, there was a great display of dog-daisies at the windows and on the steps leading
up to the locked portals, an increasing number of invited people lurked shyly in the ground-floor
rooms ready to come out by the back way and cluster expectantly when Mrs. Blapton arrived,
Graper the staff manager and two assistants in dazzling silk hats seemed everywhere, the rabbit-like
architect had tried to look doggish in a huge black silk tie and only looked more like a rabbit
than ever, and there was a steady driftage of small boys and girls, nurses with perambulators,
cab touts, airing grandfathers and similar unemployed people towards the promise of the awning,
the carpet and the flowers. The square building in all its bravery of Doulton ware and yellow
and mauve tiles and its great gilt inscription

INTERNATIONAL HOSTELS

above the windows of the second storey seemed typical of all those modern forces that are now
invading and dispelling the ancient residential peace of Bloomsbury.

Mrs. Blapton appeared only five minutes late, escorted by Bertie Trevor and her husband's spare
secretary. Graper became so active at the sight of her that he seemed more like some beast
out of the Apocalypse with seven hands and ten hats than a normal human being; he marshalled
the significant figures into their places, the door was unlocked without serious difficulty,
and Lady Harman found herself in the main corridor beside Mr. Trevor and a little behind Mrs.
Blapton, engaged in being shown over the new creation. Sir Isaac (driven by Graper at his elbow)
was in immediate attendance on the great political lady, and Mrs. Pembrose, already with an
air of proprietorship, explained glibly on her other hand. Close behind Lady Harman came Lady
Beach-Mandarin, expanding like an appreciative gas in a fine endeavour to nestle happily into
the whole big place, and with her were Mrs. Hubert Plessington and Mr. Pope, one of those odd
people who are called publicists because one must call them something, and who take chairs
and political sides and are vice-presidents of everything and organize philanthropies, write
letters to the papers and cannot let the occasion pass without saying a few words and generally
prevent the institutions of this country from falling out of human attention. He was a little
abstracted in his manner, every now and then his lips moved as he imagined a fresh turn to
some classic platitude; anyone who knew him might have foretold the speech into which he presently
broke. He did this in the refectory where there was a convenient step up at the end. Beginning
with the customary confession of incontinence, "could not let the occasion pass," he declared
that he would not detain them long, but he felt that everyone there would agree with him that
they shared that day in no slight occasion, no mean enterprise, that here was one of the most
promising, one of the most momentous, nay! he would go further and add with due deference to
them all, one of the most pregnant of social experiments in modern social work. In the past
he had himself--if he might for a moment allow a personal note to creep into his observations,
he himself had not been unconnected with industrial development.--(Querulous voice, "Who the
devil is that?" and whispered explanations on the part of Horatio Blenker; "Pope--very good
man--East Purblow Experiment--Payment in Kind instead of Wages--Yes.")....

Lady Harman ceased to listen to Mr. Pope's strained but not unhappy tenor. She had heard him
before, and she had heard his like endlessly. He was the larger moiety of every public meeting
she had ever attended. More than all, it made people acquainted with a new company of characters, none
of whom had ever existed, or could ever exist, and yet whose manners
and appearance were pictured so really that they seemed to be actual
persons whom one might meet and laugh with anywhere. To-day her capacity for marvelling was entirely taken up by the details of this extraordinary
reality which had sprung from her dream of simple, kindly, beautiful homes for distressed and
overworked young women; nothing in the whole of life had been so amazing since that lurid occasion
when she had been the agonized vehicle for the entry of Miss Millicent Harman upon this terrestrial
scene. It was all so entirely what she could never have thought possible. A few words from
other speakers followed, Mrs. Blapton, with the young secretary at hand to prompt, said something,
and Sir Isaac was poked forwards to say, "Thank you very much. It's all my wife's doing, really....
Oh dash it! Thank you very much." It had the effect of being the last vestige of some more
elaborate piece of eloquence that had suddenly disintegrated in his mind.

"And now, Elly," he said, as their landaulette took them home, "you're beginning to have your
hostels."

"Then they are my hostels?" she asked abruptly.

"Didn't I say they were?" The satisfaction of his face was qualified by that fatigued irritability
that nowadays always followed any exertion or excitement.

"If I want things done? If I want things altered?"

