These were busy times just now. In spite of the whippings and the lynchings and the jailings--or
perhaps because of these very things--the radical movement was seething. The I. W. Ws. had
reorganized secretly, and were accumulating a defense fund for their prisoners; also, the Socialists
of all shades of red and pink were busy, and the labor men had never ceased their agitation
over the Goober case. Just now they were redoubling their activities, because Mrs. Goober was
being tried for her life. Over in Russia a mob of Anarchists had made a demonstration in front
of the American Legation, because of the mistreatment of a man they called "Guba." At any rate,
that was the way the news came over the cables, and the news-distributing associations of the
country had been so successful in keeping the Goober case from becoming known that the editors
of the New York papers really did not know any better, and printed the name as it came, "Guba!"
which of course gave the radicals a fine chance to laugh at them, and say, how much they cared
about labor!

The extreme Reds seemed to have everything their own way in Russia. Late in the fall they overthrew
the Russian government, and took control of the country, and proceeded to make peace with Germany;
which put the Allies in a frightful predicament, and introduced a new word into the popular
vocabulary, the dread word "Bolshevik." After that, if a man suggested municipal ownership
of ice-wagons, all you had to do was to call him a "Bolshevik" and he was done for.

However, the extremists replied to this campaign of abuse by taking up the name and wearing
it as a badge. The Socialist local of American City adopted amid a storm of applause a resolution
to call itself the "Bolshevik local," and the "left-wingers" had everything their own way for
a time. The leader in this wing was a man named Herbert Ashton, editor of the American City
"Clarion," the party's paper. A newspaper-man, lean, sallow, and incredibly bitter, Ashton
apparently had spent all his life studying the intrigues of international capital, and one
never heard an argument advanced that he was not ready with an answer. He saw the war as a
struggle between the old established commercialism of Great Britain, whose government he described
as "a gigantic trading corporation," and the newly arisen and more aggressive commercialism
of Germany.

Ashton would take the formulas of the war propagandists and treat them as a terrier treats
a rat. So this was a war for democracy! The bankers of Paris had for the last twenty years
been subsidizing the Russian Tsars, who had shipped a hundred thousand exiles to Siberia to
make the world safe for democracy! The British Empire also had gone to war for democracy--first
in Ireland, then in India and Egypt, then in the Whitechapel slums! No, said Ashton, the workers
were not to be fooled with such bunk. Wall Street had loaned some billions of dollars to the
Allied bankers, and now the American people were asked to shed their blood to make the world
safe for those loans!

Peter had been urging McGivney to put an end to this sort of agitation, and now the rat-faced
man told him that the time for action had come. There was to be a big mass meeting to celebrate
the Bolshevik revolution, and McGivney warned Peter to keep out of sight at that meeting, because
there might be some clubbing. Peter left off his red badge, and the button with the clasped
hands and went up into the gallery and lost himself in the crowd. He saw a great many "bulls"
whom he knew scattered thru the audience, and also he saw the Chief of Police and the head
of the city's detective bureau. When Herbert Ashton was half way thru his tirade, the Chief
strode up to the platform and ordered him under arrest, and a score of policemen put themselves
between the prisoner and the howling audience.

Altogether they arrested seven people; and next morning, when they saw how much enthusiasm
their action had awakened in the newspapers, they decided to go farther yet. A dozen of Guffey's
men, with another dozen from the District Attorney's office, raided the office of Ashton's
paper, the "Clarion," kicked the editorial staff downstairs or threw them out of the windows,
and proceeded to smash the typewriters and the printing presses, and to carry off the subscription
lists and burn a ton or two of "literature" in the back yard. Also they raided the headquarters
of the "Bolshevik local," and placed the seven members of the executive committee under arrest,
and the judge fixed the bail of each of them at twenty-five thousand dollars, and every day
for a week or two the American City "Times" would send a man around to Guffey's office, and
Guffey would furnish him with a mass of material which Peter had prepared, showing that the
Socialist program was one of terrorism and murder.

Almost every day now Peter rendered some such service to his country. He discovered where the
I. W. W. had hidden a printing press with which they were getting out circulars and leaflets,
and this place was raided, and the press confiscated, and half a dozen more agitators thrown
into jail. These men declared a hunger strike, and tried to starve themselves to death as a
protest against the beatings they got; and then some hysterical women met in the home of Ada
Ruth, and drew up a circular of protest, and Peter kept track of the mailing of this circular,
and all the copies were confiscated in the post-office, and so one more conspiracy was foiled.
They now had several men at work in the post-office, secretly opening the mail of the agitators;
and every now and then they would issue an order forbidding mail to be delivered to persons
whose ideas were not sound.

Also the post-office department cancelled the second class mailing privileges of the "Clarion,"
and later it barred the paper from the mails entirely. A couple of "comrades" with automobiles
then took up the work of delivering the paper in the nearby towns; so Peter was sent to get
acquainted with these fellows, and in the night time some of Guffey's men entered the garage,
and fixed one of the cars so that its steering gear went wrong and very nearly broke the driver's
neck. So yet another conspiracy was foiled!

Section 69

Peter was really happy now, because the authorities were thoroughly roused, and when he brought
them new facts, he had the satisfaction of seeing something done about it. Ostensibly the action
was taken by the Federal agents, or by the District Attorney's office, or by the city police
and detectives; but Peter knew that it was always himself and the rest of Guffey's agents,
pulling the wires behind the scenes. Guffey had the money, he was working for the men who really
counted in American City; Guffey was the real boss. And all over the country it was the same;
the Reds were being put out of business by the secret agents of the Chambers of Commerce and
the Merchants' and Manufacturers' Associations, and the "Improve America League," and such
like camouflaged organizations.

They had everything their own way, because the country was at war, the war excitement was blazing
like a prairie fire all over the land, and all you had to do was to call a man a pro-German
or a Bolshevik, and to be sufficiently excited about it, and you could get a mob together and
go to his home and horsewhip him or tar and feather him or lynch him. For years the big business
men had been hating the agitators, and now at last they had their chance, and in every town,
in every shop and mill and mine they had some Peter Gudge at work, a "Jimmie Higgins" of the
"Whites," engaged in spying and "snooping" upon the "Jimmie Higgins" of the "Reds." Everywhere
they had Guffeys and McGivneys to direct these activities, and they had "strong arm men," with
guns on their hips and deputy sheriffs' and other badges inside their coats, giving them unlimited
right to protect the country from traitors.

There were three or four million men in the training camps, and every week great convoys were
sent out from the Eastern ports, loaded with troops for "over there." Billions of dollars worth
of munitions and supplies were going, and all the yearnings and patriotic fervors of the country
were likewise going "over there." Peter read more speeches and sermons and editorials, and
was proud and glad, knowing that he was taking his humble part in the great adventure. When
he read that the biggest captains of industry and finance were selling their services to the
government for the sum of one dollar a year, how could he complain, who was getting twenty
dollars every week? When some of the Reds in their meetings or in their "literature" declared
that these captains of industry and finance were the heads of companies which were charging
the government enormous prices and making anywhere from three to ten times the profits they
had made before the war--then Peter would know that he was listening to an extremely dangerous
Bolshevik; he would take the name of the man to McGivney, and McGivney would pull his secret
wires, and the man would suddenly find himself out of a job--or maybe being prosecuted by the
health department of the city for having set out a garbage can without a cover.

After persistent agitation, the radicals had succeeded in persuading a judge to let out McCormick
and the rest of the conspirators on fifty thousand dollars bail apiece. That was most exasperating
to Peter, because it was obvious that when you put a Red into jail, you made him a martyr to
the rest of the Reds you made him conspicuous to the whole community, and then if you let him
out again, his speaking and agitating were ten times as effective as before. Either you ought
to keep an agitator in jail for good, or else you ought not put him in at all. But the judges
didn't see that--their heads were full of a lot of legal bunk, and they let David Andrews and
the other Red lawyers hood-wink them. Herbert Ashton and his Socialist crowd also got out on
bail, and the "Clarion" was still published and openly sold on the news-stands. While it didn't
dare oppose the war any more, it printed every impolite thing it could possibly collect about
the "gigantic trading corporation" known as the British Government, and also about the "French
bankers" and the "Italian imperialists." It clamored for democracy for Ireland and Egypt and
India, and shamelessly defended the Bolsheviki, those pro-German conspirators and nationalizers
of women.

