FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS

By Heman White Chaplin

1887

First published in the "Century Magazine."

I.

Captain Philo's sail-loft was a pleasant place to sit in, and it was much frequented. At one
end was a wide, sliding door, that opened on the water, and through it you saw the little harbor
and the low, glistening sand-bar at its entrance, and whitecaps in the sea beyond, and shining
sails. At the other end another wide door led, by a gently descending cleated platform, to
the ground.

It was a pleasant place to rest and refresh the mind in, whether you chose to look in or out.
You could rock in the hair-cloth chair by the water door, and join in conversation with more
active persons mending seines upon the wharf; or you could dangle your heels from the work-bench,
and listen to stories and debates inside, and look on Captain Philo sewing upon a mainsail.

It was a summer afternoon: warm under the silver poplars, hot in the store, and hotter in the
open street; but in the sail-loft it was cool.

"More than once," Captain Bennett was remarking from the rocking-chair, while his prunella
shoes went up and down,--"more than once I've wished that I could freight this loft to Calcutta
on speculation, and let it out, so much a head, for so long a time, to set in and cool off." 

Henry Neild left home on the 12th of 9th month, 1849, for the purpose of attending his Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings, at Nantwich; but he was taken ill in the
former meeting, and though relieved by medical aid, it failed to remove
disease, which continued daily to waste his frame, and in little more
than three weeks terminated his earthly pilgrimage; and we thankfully
believe, through redeeming mercy, translated the immortal spirit to
"an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away."



"You 'd hev to hev a man to take tickets, to the door," said Uncle Silas, who had been looking
for an easy job for forty years.

"That's Si all over." said Captain Bennett, with a wink; "that berth would be just his size."

"Well," said Uncle Silas, faintly smiling, "'t is no use rubbin' the fur the wrong way; stroke
the world from head to tail is my rule."

"Speaking of folks being easy," said Captain Bennett, "it seems there 's quite a little story
about David Prince's voyage on the 'Viola.'" "I thought he went off whaling rather in a hurry,"
said Captain Philo, "and if it had been 'most anybody else, I should have thought there was
something up."

"It seems," said Captain Bennett, "it was like this: You know, Delia was n't much over ten
years old when her mother died, along a piece after her father, and she come to live with us.
And you know how she was almost like one of the family. Well, about eight years ago, when she
'd got to be towards nineteen, it was then that David first set out to shine up to her; and
when he begun to come home from singing-school with her that winter, and got to coming to the
house quite often the next spring along, I begun to feel a little shaky. Finally, one Sunday
afternoon I was sitting out on the porch and she was singing hymns inside,--you know she was
always singing,--and I called to her to quit and come out, and sit down alongside of me, and
says I,--"'Delia, it can't be you 're thinking of taking up with David Prince?'

"Well, she flared a little, but finally says she:

"'Why should n't I, or anybody that has the chance, take David Prince?'

"'Well,' says I, 'I don't think you need to ask why; I should say that a smart girl wouldn't
want more than to travel once along the Lower Road and see those two run-down houses,--one
deserted, and the other, handy by, about as bad,--and the barn across the road, that was raised
and boarded in over forty years ago, and never shingled, and stood so till it's all rotted
and sunk in.'

"'What's that got to do with David?' says she.

"'It's got this to do with David,' says I, 'that his father and his Uncle Ezekiel and their
father before 'em--good, kindly men--all seemed to settle, settle, somehow; and it was all
to-morrow, and to-morrow, with 'em; 'and then I told Delia how they sold off their wood and
then their land, piecemeal, all but the spot where the old buildings stand,--and that's worth
nothing.

"'And that's the way,' says I, 'it 'll be with David when he gets over being a boy and settles
down; it's in the blood; and I don't want to see you, Delia, keel-hauled there--'"

"Like David's mother,--Prudence Frost, that was," said Uncle Silas; "originally she was a good,
smart girl, and full of jingle; but finally she give up and come to it,--lef sweepin'-day out
o' the almanic, washed dishes in cold water, and made up beds at bedtime; and when she ironed
a shirt, jes' 's like's not she 'd iron a hoss-fly right into the bosom."

"And lived a dog's life generally," said Captain Bennett. "So I laid the whole thing out to
Delia, the best way I knew how.

"'Well,' says she, 'I know you mean my good, Captain Bennett,--but I shall take my chances.'
And so she did. Well--"

"Speakin' o' the barn," said Uncle Silas, "do you remember that high shay that David's father
hed? I was up to the Widow Pope's vendue the day he bid it off. He managed to spunk up so fur's
to hitch the shaffs under his team and fetch the vehicle home, and then he hed n't no place
to put it up out o' the weather,--and so he druv it along under that big Bald'n apple-tree
that used to stand by the pantry window, on the north side o' the house, and left it there,
with the shaffs clawin' down in the ground. Then the talk was, he was goin' to build him a
sort of a little tabernacle for it before winter set in; and he hed down a load of lumber from
Uncle Joe's mill and hed it dumped down alongside o' the shay. But the shay was n't never once
hitched up, nor the tabernacle built; and the timber and the shay jes' set there, side by side,
seein' who 'd speak first, for twenty year, to my cer-ting knowledge; and you go by there when
it was blowin' fresh, and the old curtings would be flappin' in and out, black and white, till
finally the whole arrangement sunk out o' sight. I guess there 's more or less wrack there
now, 'f you sh'd go poke in the grass."

"It was thirty-one year ago, come October, that he bought the shay," said Captain Philo; "it
was the fall I was cast away on the Tombstones, and lost every dollar I had. I remember it
because the old man came down to the house of his own accord, when I got home, and let me have
two hundred dollars. He 'd just been selling the West New Field; and when he 'd sold land and
had money on hand, it was anybody's that wanted it. But what was it about David's going off
so sudden on the 'Viola'?"

"Oh, yes, I forgot my errand," said Captain Bennett; "and now I 've got adrift in my story,
and I shall have to take an observation; let's see, where was I?"

"Delia allowed she 'd take her chances," said Uncle Silas.

"Oh, yes," said Captain Bennett. "Well, you know how it was when they got married: David fixed
the old house up a little, and mother put in some furniture and things for her, and all went
on first-rate awhile; and then you know how David begun to settle, settle, just the old way;
could n't seem to keep up to the wind; appeared to carry a lee helm, somehow; and Delia begun
to take in work and go out to work, and quit singing. She never said a word, even to my wife;
but I could see 't it cut her a good deal--"

"But all this time," said Uncle Silas, "she 's kep' up smart,--allers hed a high crower's-feather
'n her bunnet, and kep' her little boys a-lookin' like nine-shillin' dolls."

"I should n't have ever called David lazy," said Captain Philo. "He could n't seem to make
up his mind what to do next, that 's all; but get him going--you remember how he worked at
Jason's fire; and I know of my own knowledge he was in the surf for sixteen hours, when that
Norwegian bark was on the Bar."

"I think there's some folks," said Uncle Silas, "that their mind works all the time--runs a
day gang and runs a night gang. You know how a hard sum 'll shake itself out in your head overnight;
and I think it's the most natural thing that a man with a A No. I active mind always should
feel sort of tired and not know what ails him. George, won't you jes' git up and hand me that
pipe--you ain't doin' nothin'."

"However it was," said Captain Bennett, "Delia saw that he was drifting to leeward, and she
was worried. Well, you know when the reformation set in, that winter, and run crowded houses,--one
night in the West Church and the next in the other. One night David surprised his wife by going;
and he set in a back seat, and come away and said nothing; and the same the next night; and
the same for seven or eight nights right along. Finally, one night, they had a pretty searching
sermon,--'Choose ye this day,' et cetera,--and I suppose the Deacon, here, was rather expecting
David to rise for prayers; but, instead of that, as soon as Amen was said, he gets right up,
and off he goes, and leaves Delia there, without saying a word to her or to anybody, and goes
right up to Captain Westcott's house and agrees to ship. And glad enough Captain W. was to
have him, and next day off he went. Now here he is, gone two years and over, and comes home
night before last; his lay 'll figure out five hundred dollars; and the biggest thing is"--here
the Captain brought down his heavy hand, for emphasis, on Uncle Silas's knee--"that Delia 's
kept herself and the children, and never drawn one cent against the voyage; so they've got
the whole clear, and they 've been up this morning early and traded for the Callender place,
and they 're going to move in to-morrow. And I guess he means business now."

"But they don't git paid off till Monday," said Uncle Silas. "They 're all goin' up to town
to be paid off then."

"Well, he moves in to-morrow, anyway," said Captain Bennett. "Monday night, I believe, he's
going to pay down what he has, and take a deed, and give a mortgage back for the balance."

But Uncle Silas gravely shook his head.

"I can't indorse this runnin' in haste," he said. "I never, in all my experience, knew a man
before to buy real estate without sort of goin' up street and talkin' it over, and comparin'
notes 'round generally. Now, we could have given him points down here about the Callender place."

"Oh, he's made a good trade there," said Captain Bennett.

"That all may be," said Uncle Silas, "but it 's the principle, not the five cents, I 'm lookin'
at. I should have hed more faith in his holdin' out if he hed n't jumped quite so quick. 'Slow
bind, fast find,' I say."

Captain Bennett rose, and drew on a grass-cloth coat that showed his suspenders through.

"I must be on my winding way," he said. "But did you hear how close he came to never coming
back? No? Well, it was like this: It was blowing a gale, and considerable sea on, one night
when they were rounding Cape Horn on the home voyage, and she was pitching pretty bad, and
David was out on the jib-boom taking in jib, and somehow she pitched with a jerk, so he lost
his hold and went off, and, as he fell in the dark, naturally he struck out both hands, blind,
like this; and he just happened to catch, by sheer accident, a gasket that was hanging from
the jib-boom, and so he saved himself by a hair's breadth. And when he came up they thought
it was his ghost."

"Well, I always make it a point to look on the bright side, without exception," said Uncle
Silas; "nevertheless, I prophesy it won't be two years before he 'll have the place all eat
up, and sold out under the mortgage. This jumpin' so quick,--looks as if he was sca't to trust
himself for a day."

"Well, we shall see," said Captain Bennett; "time will tell."

*****

There are many little farms along the New England sea-board, which the currents of life, diverted
from ancient channels, have left one side, pleasant and homelike often, but of small money
value. The Callender place was such a farm.

It lay a mile from the village, in a hamlet of half-a-dozen dwellings. There was a substantial
house, with four large rooms below, besides an L kitchen, and above, two sunny chambers, each
with a dormer and a gable window. From the front fence projected, for a hitching-post, a Minerva,
carved from wood,--a figure-head washed up years before from the wreck of a brig with the bodies
of the crew.

The house was on a little elevation, and looked across the road, near which it stood, and over
a sloping field or two, to sea. From the windows you could count the sail in the North Channel,
and look down the coast and follow with the eye the long, low curving line of shore until at
Indian Point it vanished; or look up shore ten miles to where the coast-line ended in a bold,
wooded headland, which seemed, by a perpetual mirage, to bear foliage so lofty as to show daylight
through beneath the branches. At night you could see the flash of the revolving light on Windmill
Rock, and the constant rays from the lightship on the Rips. So that by day or night you could
never be lonesome, unless, perhaps, on some thick night, when you could see no light, and could
only hear a grating knell from the bell-buoy, and could seem to see, through the white darkness,
the waters washing over its swaying barrel.

There was a good-sized boarded barn, well shingled on the roof, with hay-mows, and with room
for two or three cows and a horse and a wagon, and with wide doors "fore and aft," as the neighbors
put it; through its big front door you could look out to sea. Then there were twenty acres
of land, including a wood-lot which could be thinned out every year to give one all his fire-wood,
and what was cut would hardly be missed.

Such was the place which, on the death of the Widow Callender, had been offered for sale for
eight hundred dollars. For months it had stood empty, stormed by all the sea-winds, lit up
by the sun, when at last an unexpected buyer had turned up in David Prince.

*****

It was a happy Sunday that he passed with his little family at the new home. They went all
over the house again and again, and looked from every window, and planned where flower-frames
should be put, to take the sun. Then, going out of doors, they inspected the revolving clothes-dryer,
which David, with a seaman's instinct, had already rigged with four little sloops to sail about
on the ends of the projecting arms, on Mondays, tacking after shirts and stockings. In the summer
of last year, she entered into an engagement of marriage with a friend residing in England.
Having considered the subject with earnest and sincere desires to act in accordance with best
wisdom, she looked forward to the completion of the prospect with a pleasing and hopeful confidence,
yet even at an early period of the engagement, there was something that seemed to whisper to
her, the uncertainty of its completion.

At this time she appeared in her usual health and full of spirits; but whilst on a visit to her
aunt, at Kingstown, her health became affected, and from this time,
symptoms exhibited themselves, which baffled all medical skill.

She was still, however, hopeful respecting her own recovery, and very often expressed in her
correspondence, how much she was pained by the thought of being the cause of so much anxiety
to others,--that her own sufferings were trifling, and the comforts surrounding her so numerous,
she felt that she had every thing to be thankful for. It was, however, evident to those around
her, that there was little ground for hope, and a dear friend intimated to her, that her medical
advisers considered her end might possibly be very near. This intelligence greatly startled her,
but she afterward expressed, how thankful she felt that she had been
honestly apprized of her danger.

The solemn impression then made on her mind, never left her, and her constant desire was, that
she might, through divine mercy, be made meet for the kingdom of heaven, repeating emphatically,
"I have much to do."

She often expressed her great sorrow, that she had not yielded to the serious impressions with
which she had been favoured, saving, "They were soon scattered;" and regretted much that she
had not lived a more devoted life. She felt herself to be a great sinner, needing a Saviour's
gracious pardon; and for a long time feared she never should obtain
that forgiveness, she so earnestly longed for.

But though her faith was feeble, she endeavoured to lay hold of encouragement from the mercy
extended to the Prodigal Son, and to the Thief upon the cross, hoping that the same mercy might
be extended to herself; but for a long time, her poor tossed and
tried mind "could find nothing to lean upon."

She remarked, she could not feel that she had sinned against her fellow-creatures, but that
she could adopt the words of the Psalmist: "Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned," saying,
"I feel that I have nothing to build upon, and that I want every
thing; I am not prepared to die, I want all my sins to be forgiven;
I hope I shall not be taken till the work be fully accomplished."

     
     
     Thus did the Spirit of Truth search
     all things, and bring this beloved friend sensibly to feel, as she
weightily expressed, "that at such a solemn hour, it will not do to
build upon having led a spotless and innocent life, something more
is then wanted to lean upon."

She often observed, how well it was for those who had given up their
hearts to serve their Saviour in the time of health,--that had she
done so, she should not now, in the hour of trial, have had to feel
such deep sorrow of heart,--that she could only hope for mercy and
forgiveness, adding, "If I perish, let it be at Thy footstool."

As her bodily weakness increased, she remarked, "I often feel unable
to read, or even to think; but I can cling; this is about as much
as I am able to do."

Though this beloved friend took these low views of her own state, her company was deeply instructive
and edifying to those around her, and a heavenly sweetness marked
her deportment.

Her heart was often filled with gratitude to her heavenly Father for the extension of his
love and mercy, and she remarked many times, "I have indeed been
mercifully dealt with."

The dear sufferer rapidly declined; yet her mind continued bright, and she was preserved in
a patient, waiting state, fully conscious of the approach of death, she queried how long it was
thought likely she might live? praying,--"Oh! dear Saviour, may it please thee not to take me
till the work be fully accomplished." She often said, "It is a solemn thing to die;" and the evening
preceding her death, when her friends were watching around her, she remarked that, believing
her end was near, "It felt very, very solemn to her." At this deeply interesting season, He who
is indeed Love, condescended in great mercy to draw near, so that she seemed lifted above terrestrial
things, and permitted a foretaste of those joys, of which we consolingly
believe, she now fully participates.

"So help me gracious!" Mr. Isaacs used to say, raising his shoulders and opening wide his palms;
"when you find a man so ungrateful that he cannot be fitted out with somethings from my stock,
I really suppose you could not fit that man out in Paradise."

Mr. Isaacs was looking nervous. But it was not by the images which his ordinary stock in trade
would naturally cause to arise that he was disturbed,--images though they were of folly, improvidence,
and distress. There was indeed hardly an article in the shop, except the new plated jewelry
in the window, that was not suggestive of misery or of sin. But in Mr. Isaacs's well-poised
mind no morbid fancies arose. "Those hard winters makes me cheerful," he was wont to say in
the fall; "they makes the business lifely."

Still, Mr. Isaacs was a little troubled this afternoon, and, singularly enough, about a most
happy purchase that he had just made, at ninety per cent below value. There the articles lay
upon the counter,--a silk hat, a long surtout, a gold-headed cane and a pair of large rubbers;
a young man's Derby hat and overcoat and rattan cane, and a pair of arctics; a lady's bonnet
and dolman and arctics; a young girl's hat with a soft bird's-breast, and her seal-skin sack
and arctics; besides four small boys' hats and coats and arctics. It seemed as if some modern
Elijah, a family man, expectant of translation, had made with thrifty forethought an "arrangement"
that Mr. Isaacs's shop should be the point of departure, and flying off in joyous haste, with
wife and children, had left the general raiment on the counter. You would naturally have looked
for a sky-lit hole in the ceiling.

"So help me gracious!" said Mr. Isaacs, turning the articles over; "I suppose there 's some
policemen just so wicked and soospicious to say I must know those garments are stolen--scooped
off some hat-tree, the last winter, at one grab."

"Why do you enter dose on de book to-gedder?" said Mrs. Isaacs. "If you put dose separate on
de book, how de policeman know dey came in togedder?"

"That is a great danger, Sarah. That's just the way they fix our good friend Greenbaum. When
they caught the thief, and he tell them where he sell some things, and Greenbaum had put down
those earrings and those bracelets and that Balmoral skirt for three different times, they
say he must know those things was stolen,--if not, why did he put those things down different
from each other?

"But so help me gracious!" he added, presently, "I have not the least soospicions, like the
babes unborn, those goods are stolen. The man that brought them in was very frank, and very
much of a gentleman; and he lay his hand upon his bosom-pin, and swear he sell those things
because he has no more use for them,--his family all sick of tyvoid fever, and cannot live
the week out. But I suppose there's some policemen just so soospicious to say I must know those
things are stolen."

"And so cruel soospicions," said Mrs. Isaacs,--"and your heart so pure and white like your
shirt-bosom." She meant his ideal shirt-bosom.

"Just like those evil-minded policemen," he said. "You remember how they lock up our old friend
Abrahamson? So help me gracious! sent that good old man to prison, just because he buy two
gold watches and two pairs of gold spectacles and an ivory-handled knife and two empty pocket-books
and two silk umbrellas and a seal ring and two bunches of keys and two black wigs from a red-headed
laboring man; they say he must know that two old gentlemen were robbed of that personal property."

But here his attention was diverted by the sight of two men, seamen to appearance, who were
looking into the show-window.

"I like so much," he said, "to see the public enjoying themselves in my window; it give them
so happy pleasure to see those lovely things; and often they comes in and buy somethings. This
young man," he added, after a pause, "seem to admire those broad neck-wear; he look at both
those two,--the Four-in-hand and the Frolic."

"I think he look most at de Frolic," said Mrs. Isaacs; "I think he would come in if you go
outside and take him by de arm like a true frient, and bring him in. My broder Moses walk outside
de whole day long, and take each man when he go by and talk to him like his own broder, wid
tears in his eyes, and make dem come in and buy somedings."

But Mr. Isaacs only wrapped the long coat more closely about his linen garments, and watched
the younger man as he turned his eyes away from the Four-in-hand and the Frolic and bent them
on the trays in which were glittering tiers of rings and pins, and rows of watches labelled
"Warranted genuine, $14;" "Dirt-cheap, $8.75;" "Doct's Watch, Puls-counting, $19.50."

"He look like he had some money," said Mrs. Isaacs. "Perhaps he would come in and buy a watch
if you go out and pull him in. How can he buy someding through de glass? My broder Moses say,
'So many folks is bashful.'"

But at last the men, after talking awhile, apparently of the goods in the window, came in.

"What's the price of some of those ear-rings in the window?" said the younger. "Let's see what
you've got for a couple of dollars or so." 

And again: "Oh, how kind you are to wait upon me so; the Lord will reward you!" At another time,
he said, "I had not thought to have been taken at this time of my life, but I am in such a critical
state, that life hangs on a thread;--the pains of the body are what I seem most to dread."

On
inquiring one day, where that line was to be found, "At ease in his
possessions," he remarked, "I do not think I have been at ease in
mine, I have endeavoured to live loose to them."

A hope being expressed that his illness would be sanctified to him, he quickly replied, "Yes,
and not to me only, but to all of you." He gave some directions, in the event of his death,
with much composure, observing: "It seems an awful thing for me to say thus much, but a great
favour to be so free from anxiety."

In the night he was heard to say: "No merit of mine, it is all of mercy, free unmerited mercy!"
On a young man in his employment coming to assist him, previous to going to his own place of
worship, when about to leave the room, he thus addressed him: "Mind
and make a good use of the time, and do not be afraid of looking into
thy own heart, but suffer the witness to come in and speak, whether
it be in the language of encouragement or reproof.

Many persons go to their places of worship, where much of the time is spent in singing and in
music, which please the outward ear, but this is not religion!

It is when we are brought to see ourselves as we really are, sinners in the sight of a holy God,
that we are led to seek a Saviour, and to cry, in sincerity, 'A Saviour,
or I die!

A Redeemer, or I perish for ever!'"

On its being remarked to him, that it was consolingly believed, he
was one of those who had endeavoured to occupy with his talent, which,
if only one, it was hoped, had gained an increase, he replied,--"That
will only be known at the great day of account, when weighed in the
balance."

On Seventh-day evening preceding his decease, he remarked to a beloved relative, that it seemed
the safest for him to say but little in regard to his own attainments,
adding,--"My desire is, for a continuance of kind preservation."

And on the day before his death, he remarked with gratitude, that his intellects had been preserved
clear throughout his illness. During the night, he was much engaged in prayer; his bodily
powers were fast sinking, but his mind appeared preserved in peaceful
serenity.



"Well, I guess I shall have to take them," said David, "and you 'll have to wrap them right
up: we have n't got more than about time to get the train, have we, Calvin?"

"So help me gracious!" said Mr. Isaacs, "is there no time to sell our friend Calvin a pair?
He will repent not to secure those other pair, until his dying day; so sorry like he lose his
ship some day upon those rocks. I suppose there is no others like those in the whole creation."

But he wrapped the purchase up in a bit of white paper and gave David Prince four trade dollars
in change for a ten-dollar bill, and the two men went out, leaving Mr. Isaacs free to attend
to a timid woman in black who had just come in to raise fifty cents upon a ring, while Mrs.
Isaacs looked after a carpenter who proposed to pawn his edge-tools for rent-money.

Mr. Isaacs waved his hand and smiled as the men went out of the door. "You will find they are
a success, to surprise yourself," he called out: "her most bosom friends will writhe and scream
with envy."

*****

The winding line of the long New England coast faces the sea, in its sweeping curves, in every
direction. From the Callender place, the ocean lay to the south. Though elsewhere east winds
might be blowing harsh upon the coast, here, almost every day, and all day long, in summer,
the southwest wind came pouring in from the expanse of waters, fresh and cool, boisterous often,
but never chill; and even winds from the east lost edge in crossing miles of pitch-pine woods,
of planted fields, of sandy ponds, of pastures, and came in softened down and friendly.

A gentle breeze was drifting in from sea. All day long it had been blowing, salt and strong
and riotous, tossing the pine-tops, bending the corn, swaying the trees in the orchards, but
now it was preparing to die away, as was its wont, at sundown, to give to the woods, the cornfields
and the orchards a little space of rest and peace before it should rise again in the early
evening to toss them all night long. The blue of the sky was blue in the water. Every object
stood out sharp and clear. Down the low, curving shore-line, curls of smoke rose from distant
roofs, and on the headland, up the coast, the fairy forest in the air was outlined with precision.
Distant ships were moving, like still pictures, on the horizon, as if that spell were laid
on them which hushed the enchanted palace. There was just sea enough to roll the bell-buoy
gently, and now and then was rung an idle note of warning. Three fishing-boats lay anchored
off the Spindle, rising and falling, and every now and then a sea broke on the rock. On the
white sand beach, waves were rolling in, dying softly away along the shore, or heavily breaking,
with a long, flying line of foam.

The sun was fast descending. Delia Prince went out to the corner of the house and shaded her
eyes to look at the sunset. The white clouds turned to a flaming red, and the reflection dyed
to crimson the surface of the creeks; the sun descended toward the wooded bluff that flanked
the bay, sent a thousand shattered, dazzling rays through the trees, and disappeared.

The red of the clouds and the red of the water gave place to gray. The wind died down. The
silence was intense,--all the more marked because of the few sharp sounds that broke it now
and then. Across the bay, near shore, a man was raking oysters; he stood in the stern of his
skiff, and the bow was up in the air. Near by a girl was driving sluggish cows along the beach,
and her shrill cries came over the water; by a cottage on the bank a boy was chopping brush
upon a block, and Delia watched the silent blows, and heard the sound come after. He smiled
as she looked; for every night she saw the boy's mother stand at the door to call him, and
saw him come reluctant to his task.

There was a sense of friendly companionship in all these homely sights and sounds. It was different
from the old house, shut in close by a second growth of birch and oak.

The table was standing ready for a late supper. The children had gone for berries to the Island,
and they would soon come home, and David was due, too, with his money.

She smiled as he appeared. The ascent to the brow of the hill was so sharp that first you saw
a hat in movement, then a head, then shoulders, body, legs, and feet. She ran quickly down
the road to meet him, and took his arm.

"You couldn't catch the noon train?" she said. "Captain Wells stopped at the door a little
while ago to see what time we should be down to get the deed, and luckily I told him that we
might not be down until into the evening. He said he 'd stay at home and wait till we came."

"Delia," said David, when he had seated himself in the house, "I 've got bad news to tell you,
and I may as well out with it first as last."

"You have n't shipped for another whaling voyage?"

"No; that would be nothing," he said.

Delia stood and looked at him.

"Well," she said, "didn't you get as much as you counted on?"

"Yes,--twenty more."

"It isn't anything about the children? I expect them home every minute."

"No."

"Delia," he said, "you was a great fool ever to have me. You ought to have taken advice."

"What is the matter?" she said. "Why don't you tell me?"

"I 've lost the money," he said. "The Captain warned me how apt a seafaring man is to lose
money; but I did n't take any heed, and I went off with Calvin Green--"

"With Calvin Green! What did I tell you!" she said.

"Wait a minute--and I stopped into a jewelry store and bought you a pair of ear-rings, and
I came off and left my wallet on the counter, the way that fool Joe Bassett did, to Gloucester.
When I went back, the rascal claimed he never saw me before--said he didn't know me from the
Prophet Samuel, as if I was born that minute. And now they'll all say--and it's true--that
I'm a chip of the old block, and that I 'm bound to come out at the little end. There!" he
said, as he opened a little parcel and took out the earrings. "There 's what 's left of five
hundred and twenty dollars, and you must make the most of 'em. Hold 'em up to the light and
see how handsome they are. I don't know, after all, but they are worth while for a man to pitch
overboard off Cape Horn and harpoon whales two years for. All is, just tell folks they cost
five hundred dollars, and they 'll be just as good as hen's-egg diamonds.

"In fact, I don't know but I sort o' like the situation," he went on, in a moment. "It seems
sort of natural and home-like. I should have felt homesick if I 'd really succeeded in getting
this place paid for. 'T would have seemed like getting proud, and going back on my own relations.
And then it 'll please everybody to say, 'I told you so.' There 'll be high sport round town,
when it gets out, and we back water down to the old place.

"Come, say something, Delia!" he said, in a moment. "Why don't you say something about it?
Don't you care that the money's lost, that you stand there and don't say a word, and look at
nothing?"

"I don't want to say anything now," she said, "I want to think."

*****

"Well!" said Captain Bennett, the next day, to his wife, "Delia 's got more spunk! I should
have felt like laying right down in the shafts, in her place; but instead of that, to actually
go and talk them into letting her keep the Cal-lender place and pay for it so much a month!
And David's signed a paper to do it."

"I guess if the truth was known," said Mrs. Bennett, knitting on, "that, come to think it over,
she was more scared of David's settling back than she was for losing the money."

"She 's got a pull on him now," said the Captain, "anyway, for if he once agrees to a thing
he always does it."

III.

No one fully knows the New England autumn who has not seen its colors on the extreme Old Colony
sea-board. There are no mountain ranges, opening out far reaches of burning maples; but there
are miles of salt-marsh, spreading as far as the eye can reach, cut by countless creeks, displaying
a vast expanse of soft, rich shades of brown; there are cranberry-meadows of twenty, thirty,
or fifty level acres, covered with matted vines and crimson with berries; there are deserted
pastures, bright with golden-rod and asters. And everywhere along the shores, against the dark
pine woods, are the varied reds of oaks, of blackberry vines, of woodbine, and of sumach.

It was a bright fall afternoon; most of the boats were in, and lay near, shore before the sail-loft
door; the sails were up to dry,--for it had been wet outside,--looking doubly white against
the colors of the shore.

In the sail-loft they were telling stories.

"No, I don't think myself," said Deacon Luce, from the rocking-chair, "that ministers always
show what we call horse sense. They used to tell a story of Parson Allen, that preached in
the Old Town, in my father's time, that pleased me. One spring the parson took a notion to
raise a pig. So he went down to Jim Barrows, that lived there handy by, and says he, 'Mr. Barrows,
I hear you have a litter of young pigs, and I should like to have one to raise.' So Jim he
got his stilyards and weighed him out one, and the minister paid him, and Jim he sent it up.
Well, the minister kep' it some three months, and he used to go out every day and put on his
spectacles and take his scythe down from the apple-tree and mow pig-weed for him, and he bought
corn-meal to feed him up with, and one way and another he laid out a good deal on him. The
pig fattened well, but the whole incessant time he was either rooting out and gitting into
the garden, or he'd ketch his foot in behind the trough and squeal like mad, or something else,
so that the minister had to keep leaving his sermon-writing to straighten him out, and the
minister's wife complained of the squealing when she had company. And so the parson decided
to heave the enterprise up, and Jim sent up and took the pig back. Come to settle, 'How do
we stand?' says the minister. 'Oh, just as you say,' says Jim, 'I'll leave it to you.' 'Well,'
says the minister, 'on the one hand you've got back a pig that you've been paid for; but, on
the other hand, I 've had the use of him for some three months,--and so I guess we 're square.'"
"Talking of preachers," said Caleb Parker, "reminds me of a story they tell of Uncle Cephas
Bascom, of Northhaven. Uncle Cephas was a shoemaker, and he never went to sea much, only to
anchor his skift in the Narrows abreast of his house, and catch a mess of scup, or to pole
a load of salt-hay from San-quitt Island. But he used to visit his married daughter, in Vermont,
and up there they knew he come from the sea-board, and they used to call him 'Captain Bascom.'
So, one time when he was there, they had a Sabbath-school concert, and nothing would do but
'Captain Bascom' must talk to the boys, and tell a sea-yarn, and draw a moral, the way the
Deacon, here, does." The Deacon gravely smiled, and stroked his beard. "Well, Uncle Cephas
was ruther pleased with his name of 'Captain Bascom,' and he did n't like to go back on it,
and so he flaxed round to git up something. It seems he had heard a summer boarder talk in
Sabbath-school, at Northhaven; he told how a poor boy minded his mother, and then got to tend
store, and then kep' store himself, and then he jumped it on them. The dales no doubt are gorgeous
places, but under this grey humid sky anyone who wanted it could have had my share of Billsdale
(as I believe it was). Scenery had become an outrage. There was no joy, no beauty; nothing was
worth living for but that inn. As we laboured forward we cheered each other by word-pictures
of its parlour, its larder and its cellar. A pork-pie ("porch-peen" I fancy the Yorkshiremen
call it) would probably be there. Eggs, of course. A ham, surely. Bacon, no doubt. Yellow butter,
crusty new bread, and beer. Indeed, let the rest go, so long as there was beer. But beer, of
course, was beyond any question; an inn without beer was unthinkable.

Thus the miles wore away until, footsore, sticky and faint, we came upon the hostelry itself--only
to find, instead of any grateful sign and the promise of delight, the frigid words, "Friends'
Meeting House," painted on the board....

That was one experience, over which a veil may well be drawn.

The other was not so long ago, in Sussex, a little before the War. This time we had not walked,
but had done that much more hungrifying thing--we had been for hours
in a motor-car, exceedingly engaged on the task of looking at houses
to let.

At last, utterly worn out, in the way that motoring can wear out body, soul and nerves, and filled
with a ravening desire to tear meat limb from limb, we came to an inn of which our host had
the highest opinion--so high, indeed, that, empty though we were, he had forced the car at full-speed
past at least half-a-dozen admirable but less pretentious houses, where I, in my small way,
had more than once been nourished and sustained.

When, however, at last we did arrive at his desired haven, late in the afternoon, when dusk was
beginning to fall and blur with her gentle hand the sharp lines of hill and tree, we acknowledged
his wisdom, for in the window beside the door, where we creakingly but joyfully alighted, were
visible, although no longer distinctly, a vast ham as yet uncut and two richly-browned cold fowls.
"There," said he, with a pardonable triumph, "didn't I tell you?" and so, our lips trembling
with the anticipation of nutriment, we entered, flung off our wraps, and prepared, on the evidence,
for such bliss as earth too rarely affords. But alas for hopes raised only to be shattered, for the
host had nothing to offer us but bread and cheese. The ham and chickens were of papier-mâché.

* * * * *

* * * * *

"HOTEL. ---- Sitting Waiter required, good experience."--Bournemouth Daily Echo.

The inclusion of the functions of a waiter among "sedentary occupations" explains a good deal.

*
* * * *

* * * * *

FROM LORD DEVONPORT'S LETTER-BAG.
I.--From Professor Tripewell.

MY LORD,--You will, no doubt, forgive
me for drawing your attention to the fact that the rationing system,
to which you have lent the credit of your name, will bring us to the
end of our food supplies in something considerably less than a month
from now. I am far from wishing to be an alarmist, but it is as well
that we should face the facts, especially when they are supported
by statistics so irrefutable as those which I am willing to produce
to you at any moment on receiving your request to do so.

Fortunately
it is not yet too late to apply a simple and adequate remedy to this
condition of affairs. All you have to do is to issue and enforce an
Order in the following terms:--

(1) Every occasion on which food,
no matter how small the amount, is eaten shall count as a meal. And how
the man that stole the money can stand it I can't figure out."

"Perhaps he 's calloused," said the Deacon, "by what the paper said the other night about his
buying a parcel of clothes hooked out of some man's entry. We concluded 'twas the same man--by
the name."

"Can't believe all that's in the paper," said Perez Todd; "you know the paper had me to be
married, once; the boys put it in for fun; they made up the name for the female, I guess, for
I 've been kind of shyin' round for her this ten year, and have n't seen no such woman."

"Yes, sir, he's a hard ticket," said Green; "that's so, every time. Well, I must be going;
I agreed to go and help Elbridge over at half flood."

"Half flood about five," said Captain Bennett; "you have n't any great time to spare."

Green went to the shore, rattled a skiff down over the beach to the water, and pulled away,
with quick, short strokes. First the skiff was cut off from sight by the marsh-bank; then the
rower's head alone was seen above the tall brown grasses; and then he pulled around the bend
and was lost to view behind a mass of flaming woodbine; and still, in the distance, could be
heard across the water the rattle of his oars in the thole-pins.

"Well, Silas?" said Captain Bennett.

"Well?" said Uncle Silas.

"Oh! I 've nothing to say," said Captain Bennett

"Nor I," said Uncle Silas.

"Calvin's always seemed to be a good-hearted fellow," said Captain Philo, "since he's lived here."

"Oh, yes," said Captain Bennett; "seems to feel for David surprisingly. Told me all about the
losing of the money, told my wife, told my boy, told Uncle Joe, told our minister, told the
Doctor, told Zimri Cobb, told Cyrus Bass, told Captain John Wells, told Patrick Coan; and proves
it out to 'em all that 't was the Jew that did it."

"Kind of zealous, like the Apostle Paul supplying the pulpit to the Gentiles," said the Deacon;
"won't let alone of a man, till he gives in 't the Hebrew's in the wrong."

"But I 've nothing to say," said Captain Bennett.

"Oh, no, nor I," said Uncle Silas.

From the distance, borne on the gentle breeze, a click as even as a pulse-beat came faintly
over the water.

"He may be a good-hearted fellow," said the Deacon, "but I don't know as I hanker to be the
man that's pulling that skiff. But then,--that may be simply and solely because I prefer a
hair-cloth rocker to a skiff."

"Delia," said David Prince to his wife, one afternoon, "Calvin Green has bought four tickets
to that stereopticon show that's going to be in the West Church to-night, and he gave me two,
for you and me."

"I don't want his tickets," she replied, ironing away at the sunny window.

"Now, what's the use of talking that way?" said her husband, "as much as to say--"

"I have my opinion," she said.

"Well," said her husband, "I think it's a hard way to use a man, just because he happened to
be by when I lost my money."

"I 'll tell you," said Delia, stopping her work; "we will go, and all I 'll say is this--you
see if after the lecture's over he does n't find a text in it to talk about our money. Now,
you just wait and see--that's all."

*****

"Ladies and gentlemen," said the lecturer, standing by a great circle of light thrown on the
wall, behind the pulpit, "I have now, with a feeling of awe befitting this sacred place, thus
given you, in the first part of my lecture, a succinct view of the origin, rise, and growth
of the globe on which, as the poet has justly said, 'we dwell.' I have shown you--corroborating
Scripture--the earth, without form and void, the awful monsters of the Silurian age, and Man
in the Garden of Eden.

"I now invite you to journey with me--as one has said--'across the continent.'

"Travelling has ever been viewed as a means of education. Thus Athenian sages sought the learning
of the Orient. Thus may we this evening, without toil or peril, or expense beyond the fifteen
cents already incurred for the admission-fee, journey in spirit from the wild Atlantic to the
sunset coast. In the words of the sacred lyrist, Edgar A. Poe, 'My country, 't is of thee,'
that I shall now display some views.

"Of course we start from Boston. On the way to New York, we will first pause to view the scene
where Putnam galloped down a flight of steps, beneath the hostile fire. See both mane and coat-tails
flying in the wind, and the eyes of steed and rider wildly dilated with excitement.

"Next we pause in Brooklyn. And from my immense variety of scenes in the City of Churches,
I choose the firemen's monument in Greenwood Cemetery.

     'Here they lie low who raised their ladders high;
     Here they still live,--for heroes cannot die!'

[A voice: "How many are buried there?"]

"I should say, at a venture, eighteen. [A rustle of sympathy among the women.]

"Passing on, and coming thence to the metropolis of New York, I am greatly embarrassed, so
vast is the richness and variety of views. But I will show first the 'Five Points.' [Great
eagerness, and cries, "Down front!"] Of late, philanthropy and religion, walking in sweet converse,
hand in hand, have relieved the horrors of this region, and now one may walk there comparatively
safe. [Sudden cessation of interest]

"I will give even another view of the metropolis: a charming scene in Central Park. [Here wavered
dimly on the screen five bushes, and a nursery-maid with a baby-carriage.] From this exquisite
picture you may gain some faint idea of the charms of that Paradise raised by the wand of taste
and skill in a waste of arid sands. 

At another time, he said, "I am very gently and mercifully dealt with, I feel that I am a poor
unfaithful creature, but I consider it a favour to be made sensible of this, for it is only of divine
mercy that we can rightly feel our need." Thus the humblest may guide the highest; and I love
to recall, in this connection, that the lamented Lincoln, some years before signing the Emancipation
Proclamation, heard me lecture on slavery, in Peoria.

"Next we come to Cleveland; and our attention is seized by three cannons taken in the famous
naval battle on the lake. Every visitor pauses here, and with uncovered head and eyes suffused
with tears recalls the sacrifices of the Fathers. 

87 9mo. 18 1849

RICHARD IVEY HOCKING, Truro. 49 10mo. 5 1849

MARY HODGKIN, Shipston-on-Stour. 78 12mo. 8 1849

JAMES HOGG, Portadown Grange, Ireland. 51 1mo. 2 1850

ANN HOLMES, Huddersfield. 31 5mo. 21 1850

SARAH HOOWE, Edenderry. 67 8mo. 30 1850

MARTHA HORNE, Tottenham. An Elder.

85 9mo. 2 1850

ELIZABETH HORSFALL, Leeds. 50 1mo. 17 1850

RICHARD HORSNAILL, Dover. 48 7mo. He was of a very diffident disposition, and cautious in giving
expression to his religious feelings, lest he should thereby make a profession beyond what he
thought his attainments warranted.

For many years he laboured under a disease, which was attended with
much suffering; but this proved a means of weaning him from the world
and its pursuits, and of inducing him more earnestly to "seek first
the kingdom of God and his righteousness," with the unshaken belief
that all things necessary would be added.

He manifested a deep interest
in the prosperity of our religious Society, and according to his measure,
especially in the latter part of his life, willingly devoted himself
to its service. He likewise took great delight in promoting the best
interests of the juvenile portion of the population in the neighbourhood
in which he resided; and the counsel he gave to those of this class,
often gained their good will and respectful attention. He also exhibited
a very humane disposition toward the animal creation, and rarely allowed
a case of ill-treatment or oppression to pass without attempting to
redress the wrongs inflicted. For some years, he took great interest
in supplying the crews of foreign vessels, resorting to the port of
Dover, with copies of the holy Scriptures and religious tracts; and
from his kind and unassuming manners, his efforts were almost universally
well received.

"First is Napoleon's grave. He who held Europe struggling in his hand, died a prisoner in solitudes
remote, far from home endearments.

"Next you see Daniel Lambert, whose greatness was of a more solid cast. Less grasping in his
pretensions than Napoleon, he lived an honored life, and died, I understand, among his relatives.

"Next is a picture of the guillotine, calling up thoughts of severed heads from memory's cloisters.
On the left you see a ghastly head; on the right the decapitated trunk. By the victim stand
the bloody actors in the tragedy. Ladies and gentlemen! When I review the awful guilt of Marat
and Robespierre, humbly do I give thanks that I have been kept from yielding, like them, to
fierce ambition and lust of power, and that I can lay my head upon a peaceful pillow at my
home in Fall River.

"Next is the Serenade. Part one: The Spanish lover with bow-knot shoes, pointed hat, and mantle
over shoulder, stands, with his lute, on the covered water-butt, while at the casement above
is his lady's charming face. Part two: The head of the water-butt has given way, and the angry
father, from his window, beholds a scene of luckless misery.

"I turn now to a more pleasing view,--the Village Blacksmith. The mighty man is at his work,
and by a triumph of art I am enabled to show his fine physique in action: now you see his arm
uplifted,--and now the hammer is on the iron. Up--down--up--down. [A voice: "There are two
right arms!"] That arises from some slight defect in the arrangement of the light; the uplifted
arm does not entirely vanish when the lowered arm appears. But to the thoughtful observer,
such slight contrasts only heighten enjoyment.

"Ladies and gentlemen! A single word in closing. Our transcontinental journey this evening
ended at the Golden Gate. When life's journey ends, may we not so pause, but, as the poet Judson
Backus sweetly sings:--

          'May we find an angel wait
     To lead us through the "golden gate."'

"Meanwhile, adieu."

*****

David Prince and his wife walked slowly home in the clear, cold moonlight.

"Did you notice," said Delia, "how the man kept saying that he didn't know just what to pick
out, to show? Well, I heard the Kelley boy, that helped at the lamps, say that they showed
every identical picture there was. I suppose they are a lot of odds and ends he picked up at
an auction."

"I think he was a kind of a humbug," said Calvin Green, who, with his wife, had come up close
behind. "See how he kept dragging in his morals, jes like overhauling a trawl and taking off
a haddock, every once in so often."

"What away to travel," said his wife; "to go ker-jump from New York City to Niagara, and from
there to Cleveland. He must have thought we had long stilts."

"The pictures were rather here and there and everywhere, to be sure,", said David; "but I have
a good deal of charity for these men; I s'pose they 're put to it for bread and butter."

"Well, I don't know," said Green; "I don't think it has a good influence on young people to
show such a picture as that man that they murdered by slicing his head off with that machine.
I don't like such things to be brought up."

"I should think the opposite," said his wife, laughing, "by the way you 've told every man
in town about David's money, and the way he blanched when he missed it. I think you 'd better
take a lesson yourself about bringing up dreadful things."

When they reached Green's house, a low, black cottage, they stopped a moment for the women
to finish a discussion about croup.

"How did that look to you now, David?" said Green. "Did n't you think it would have been a
good deal better to have left that picture out?"

"Which one?" said David.

"Why, the one where they'd chopped the man's head off with that machine, and were standing
by, looking at the corpse. I don't like to see such things, for my part."

"I don't know," said David. "I did n't think about it particularly. I understood it was in
the French Revolution."

"Well, see all that flummer-diddle he got off about it," said Green; "just as if any fool did
n't know that a man could n't sleep that was haunted by a thing like that."

"Well, some can stomach anything, and I suppose some can sleep on anything," said David. "I
guess it would take more than slicing one man's head off to make that Jew lie awake nights.
If he 'd only admitted that I 'd been there! But as soon as I said I 'd left something, then
for him and his wife to claim they never saw me! They 're cool ones!"

"Well, right here,--about what my wife flung out," said Green, glancing over his shoulder to
where the women were talking, both at once, woman-fashion; "you know my wife's way,--you haven't
ever heard any such talk going round, have you, as that I was hounding folks about your bad
luck? I say an honest man speaks right out,--no fear, no favor. Ain't that so?"

*****

It was a bitterly cold, clear night, a few weeks later. Runners squeaked and boot-heels crunched
in the road. David had passed Green's house at seven o'clock, going to the store; he always
went by there at that time, Saturdays, and passed again, returning home, at about eight.

When he reached the gate, on his return, Green was standing there, apparently waiting.

"Come into the house a minute, David," he said; "I want to see you."

He led him into the kitchen.

"My wife's gone over to Aunt Nathan's for the evening," he said.

He shut the door, and locked it.

"There!" he said; "I can't stand it any longer;" and he laid upon a table at David's side a
wallet. David took it up and opened it; it held a great roll of bills.

"What does this mean?" he said; "why--this is mine! You don't mean--"

"I mean I stole it," said Green.

David sat down. "I wish you had put it in the fire," he said, "and never told me."

"There 's just one thing I want to say," said Green. He is a man of singularly placid demeanour,
but he has been seriously ill, so possibly his nerves are shaken--at any rate I never saw him so
much moved. 'Have you read the latter part of Lord J. Russell's speech?'
he said to me. You know how
I come home,--all my voyage eat up, and a hundred dollars' debts besides, and children sick.
But every dollar 's there.

"Now, what I ask," he added, "is four days' time to ship and get away. What are you going to do?"

"Nothing," said David; "settle your debts and pay me when you can." And taking five twenty-dollar
bills from the wallet, he left them on the table and went away.

