CEREBRUM

By ALBERT TEICHNER

 For thousands of years the big brain served as a
               master switchboard for the thoughts
                         and emotions of humanity.
   Now the central mind was showing signs of decay
                            ... and men went mad.

Illustrated by BIRMINGHAM

The trouble began in a seemingly trivial way. Connor had wanted to speak to Rhoda, his wife,
wished himself onto a trunk line and then waited. "Dallas Shipping here, Mars and points Jupiterward,
at your service," said a business-is-business, unwifely voice in his mind.

"I was not calling you," he thought back into the line, now also getting a picture, first flat,
then properly 3-D and in color. It was a paraNormally luxurious commercial office.

"I am the receptionist at Dallas Shipping," the woman thought back firmly. "You rang and I
answered."

"I'm sure I rang right," Connor insisted.

"And I'm sure I know my job," Dallas Shipping answered. "I have received as many as five hundred
thought messages a day, some of them highly detailed and technical and--"

"Forget it," snapped Connor. "Let's say I focussed wrong."

He pulled back and twenty seconds later finally had Rhoda on the line. "Queerest thing happened,"
he projected. "I just got a wrong party."

"Nothing queer about it," his wife smiled, springing to warm life on his inner eye. "You just
weren't concentrating, Connor."

"Don't you hand me that too," he grumbled. "I know I thought on the right line into Central.
Haven't I been using the System for sixty years?"

"Exactly--all habit and no attention."

How smugly soothing she was some days! "I think the trouble's in Central itself. The Switcher
isn't receiving me clearly."

"Lately I've had some peculiar miscalls myself," Rhoda said nervously. "But you can't blame
Central Switching!"

"Oh, I didn't mean that!" By now he was equally nervous and only too happy to end the conversation.
Ordinarily communications were not monitored but if this one had been there could certainly
be a slander complaint.

       *       *       *

On his way home in the monorail Connor tried to reach his office and had the frightening experience
of having his telepathic call refused by Central. Then he refused in turn to accept a call
being projected at him, but when an Urgent classification was added he had to take it. "For
your unfounded slander of Central Switching's functioning," announced the mechanically-synthesized
voice, "you are hereby Suspended indefinitely from the telepathic net. From this point on all
paraNormal privileges are withdrawn and you will be able to communicate with your fellows only
in person or by written message."

Stunned, Connor looked about at his fellow passengers. Most of them had their eyes closed and
their faces showed the mild little smile which was the outer hallmark of a mind at rest, tuned
in to a music channel or some other of the hundreds of entertainment lines available from Central.
How much he had taken that for granted just a few minutes ago!

Three men, more shabbily dressed, were unsmilingly reading books. They were fellow pariahs,
Suspended for one reason or another from paraNormal privileges. Only the dullest, lowest-paying
jobs were available to them while anyone inside the System could have Central read any book
and transmit the information directly into his cortex. The shabbiest one of all looked up and
his sympathetic glance showed that he had instantly grasped Connor's changed situation.

Connor looked hastily away; he didn't want any sympathy from that kind of 'human' being! Then
he shuddered. Wasn't he, himself, now that kind in every way except his ability to admit it?

When he stepped onto the lushly hydroponic platform at the suburban stop the paraNormals, ordinarily
friendly, showed that they, too, already realized what had happened. Each pair of suddenly
icy eyes went past him as if he were not there at all.

He walked up the turf-covered lane toward his house, feeling hopelessly defeated. How would
he manage to maintain a home here in the middle of green and luxuriant beauty? More people
than ever were now outside the System for one reason or another and most of these unfortunates
were crowded in metropolitan centers which were slumhells to anyone who had known something better.

How could he have been so thoughtless because of a little lapse in Central's mechanism? Now
that it was denied him, probably forever, he saw more clearly the essential perfection of the
system that had brought order into the chaos following the discovery of universal paraNormal
capacities. At first there had been endless interference between minds trying to reach each
other while fighting off unwanted calls. Men had even suggested this blessing turned curse
be annulled.

The Central Synaptic Computation Receptor and Transmitter System had ended all such negative
thinking. For the past century and a half it had neatly routed telepathic transmissions with
an efficiency that made ancient telephone exchanges look like Stone Age toys. A mind could
instantly exchange information with any other Subscribing mind and still shut itself off through
the Central machine if and when it needed privacy. Except, he shuddered once more, if Central
put that Urgent rating on a call. Now only Rhoda could get a job to keep them from the inner
slumlands.

He turned into his garden and watched Max, the robot, spading in the petunia bed. The chrysanthemums
really needed more attention and he was going to think the order to Max when he realized with
a new shock that all orders would have to be oral now. He gave up the idea of saying anything
and stomped gloomily into the house.

       *       *       *

As he hung his jacket in the hall closet he heard Rhoda coming downstairs. "Queer thing happened
today," he said with forced cheerfulness, "but we'll manage." He stopped as Rhoda appeared.
Her eyes were red and puffed.

"I tried to reach you," she sobbed.

"Oh, you already know. Well, we can manage, you know, honey. You can work two days a week and--"

"You don't understand," she screamed at him. "I'm Suspended too! I tried to tell it I hadn't
done anything but it said I was guilty by being associated with you."

Stunned, he fell back into a chair. "Not you, too, darling!" He had been getting used to the
idea of his own reduced status but this was too brutal. "Tell Central you'll leave me and the
guilt will be gone."

"You fool, I did say that and my defense was refused!"

Tears welled in his eyes. Was there no bottom to this horror? "You yourself suggested that?"

"Why shouldn't I?" she cried. "It wasn't my fault at all."

He sat there and tried not to listen as waves of hate rolled over him. Then the front bell
rang and Rhoda answered it.

"I haven't been able to reach you," someone was saying through the door. It was Sheila Williams
who lived just down the lane. "Lately lines seem to get tied up more and more. It's about tonight's
game."

Just then Rhoda opened the door and Sheila came to an abrupt halt as she saw her old friend's
face. Her expression turned stony and she said, "I wanted you to know the game is off." Then
she strode away.

Unbelieving, Rhoda watched her go. "After forty years!" she exclaimed. She slowly came back
to her husband and stared down at him. "Forty years of 'undying' friendship, gone like that!"
Her eyes softened a little. "Maybe I'm wrong, Connor, maybe I said too much through Central
myself. And maybe I'd have acted like Sheila if they had been the ones."

He withdrew his hands from his face. "I've done the same thing to other wretches myself. We'll
just have to get used to it somehow. I've enough social credits to hang on here a year anyway."

"Get used to it," she repeated dully. This time there was no denunciation but she had to flee
up the stairs to be alone.

He went to the big bay window and, trying to keep his mind blank, watched Max re-spading the
petunia bed. He really should go out and tell the robot to stop, he decided, otherwise the
same work would be repeated again and again. But he just watched for the next hour as Max kept
returning to the far end of the bed and working his way up to the window, nodding mindlessly
with each neat twist of his spade attachment.

Rhoda came back downstairs and said, "It's six-thirty. The first time since the boys left that
they didn't call us at six." He thought of Ted on Mars and Phil on Venus and sighed. "By now,"
she went on, "they know what's happened. Usually colonial children just refuse to have anything
more to do with parents like us. And they're right--they have their own futures to consider."

"They'll still write to us," he started reassuring her but she had already gone outside where
he could hear her giving Max vocal instructions for preparing dinner. Which was just as well--she
would know the truth soon enough. Without a doubt the boys were now also guilty by association
and they'd have nothing left to lose by maintaining contact.

At dinner, though, he felt less kindly toward her and snapped a few times. Then it was Rhoda's
turn to exercise forebearance and to try to smooth things over. Once she looked out the picture
window at the perfect synthetic thatch of the Williams' great cottage, peeping over the hollyhock-topped
rise of ground at the end of the garden. "Well?" he demanded. "Well?"

"Nothing, Connor."

"You sighed and I want to know what the devil--"

"Since you insist--I was thinking how lucky Sheila Williams always is. Ten years ago the government
authorized twins for her while I haven't had a child in thirty years, and now our disaster
forewarns her. She'll never get caught off guard on a paraNormal line."

       *       *       *

He snapped his fingers and Max brought out the pudding in a softly shining silver bowl. Above
it hovered a bluish halo of flaming brandy. "Maybe not. I've heard of people even being Suspended
without a reason." He slowly savored the first spoonful as if it might be the last ever. From
now on every privileged pleasure would have that special value. "One more year of such delights."

"If we can stand the ostracism."

"We can." Suddenly he was all angry determination. "I did the wrong thing today, admitted,
but it really was the truth, what I said. I've concentrated right and still got wrong numbers!"

"Me too, but I kept thinking it was my own fault."

"The real truth's that while the System assumes more authority each decade it keeps getting
less efficient."

"Well, why doesn't the government do something, get everything back in working order?"

His grin showed no pleasure. "Do you know anybody who could help repair a Master Central Computer?"

"Not personally but there must be--"

"Must be nothing! People are slack from having it so good, don't think as much as they used
to. Why bother when you can tap Central for any information? Almost any information."

"How can it all end?"

"Who knows and who cares?" He was angry all over again. "It will still be working well enough
for a few centuries and we, we're just left out in the cold! I'm only ninety, I can live another
sixty years, and you, you're going to have a good seventy-five more of this deprivation."

Max was standing at the foot of the table, metal visual lids closed as he waited for instructions.
Rhoda considered him unthinkingly, then snapped back to attention. "Nothing more, Max, go to
the kitchen and disconnect until you hear from us."

"Yes," he said in that programmed tone which indicated endless gratitude for the privilege
of half-being.

"That ends my sad day," Connor sighed. "I'm taking a blackout pill and intend to stay that
way for the next fourteen hours."

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning he rode into the city in the same car as the one that had brought him back
the day before. None of the regulars even deigned to look in his direction. There was another
change today. Only two fellow Suspendeds were reading their books even though there had been
three for the past few months. Which meant another one had exhausted his income and was being
forced into the inner city.

At the office none of Connor's associates greeted him. They didn't even have to contrast the
new tension in his face with the easy-going, flannelled contentment of their fellows. Undoubtedly
somebody had tried to reach him or Rhoda and heard the Suspension Notice on their severed thought-lines.

As was also to be expected, there was a notice on his desk that his executive services would
no longer be needed.

He quickly gathered up his personal things and went downstairs, passing through the office
workers pool. Miss Wilson, his Suspended secretary, came up to him. She looked saddened yet,
curiously, almost triumphant too. "We all heard the bad news this morning," she said, her blue
eyes never wavering. "We want you to know how sorry we are since you're not accustomed--"

"I'll never be accustomed to it," he said bitterly.

"No, Mr. Newman, you mustn't think that way. Human beings can get accustomed to whatever's
necessary."

"Necessary? Not in my books!"

"Some day you may feel differently. I was born into a Suspended family and we've managed. Being
on the outside has its compensations."

"Such as?"

"We-l-l--," she faltered, "I really don't know exactly. But you must have faith it will be
so." She pulled out a card from a pocket of her sheath dress. "Maybe you'll want to use this
some day."

He glanced at the card which said, John Newbridge, Doctor at Mind, 96th Level, Harker Building,
Appointments by Writing Only. There was no thought-line coding.

"I have no doubt," he muttered. But she was starting to look hurt so he carefully slid the
card into his wallet.

"He's very helpful," she said. "I mean, helpful for people who have adjustment problems."

"You're a good girl," he said huskily. "Maybe we'll meet someday again. I'll have my wife call--write
to you so you can visit us before we have to come into the city."

"That," she smiled happily, "would be so wonderful, Mr. Newman. I've never been in a home like
that." Then, choking with emotion, she turned and hurried away.

       *       *       *

When he reached home and told Rhoda what had happened, his wife was not in the least bit moved.
"I'll never let that girl in my house," she said through thin lips. "A classless nothing! I'm
going to keep my pride while I can."

There was some sense to her viewpoint but, he felt uncertainly, not enough for him to remain
silent. "We have to adjust, darling, can't go on thinking we're what we're not."

"Why can't we?" she exploded. "I couldn't even order food today. Max had to go to the AutoMart
and pick it up!"

"What are you trying to say?"

"That you made this mess!"

For a while he listened, dully unresponsive, but eventually the vituperation became too bitter
and he came back at her with equal vigor. Until, weeping, she rushed upstairs once more.

That was the first of many arguments. Anything could bring them on, instructions for Max that
she chose to consider erroneous, a biting statement from him that she was deliberately making
herself physically unattractive. More and more Rhoda took to going into the city while he killed
time making crude, tentative adjustments on Max. What the devil, he occasionally wondered,
could she be doing there?

But most of the time he did not bother about it; he had found a consolation of his own. At
first it had been impossible to make the slightest changes in Max, even those that permitted
the robot to remain conscious and give advice. Again and again his mind strained toward Central
until the icy-edged truth cut into his brain--there was no line.

Out of boredom, though, he plugged away, walked past the disdainfully-staring eyes of neighbors
to the village library, and withdrew dusty microfiles on robotry. Eventually he had acquired
a little skill at contemplating what, essentially, remained a mystery to his easily-tired mind.
It was not completely satisfactory but it would be enough to get him a better-than-average
menial job when he had finally accepted his new condition.

At long last a letter came from Ted on Mars. It said:

    Guilty by association, that's what I am! When it first happened I
    was furious with the two of you but resignation has its own
    consolations and I've given up the ranting. Of course, I've lost my
    job and my new one will keep me from Earth a longer time but the
    real loss is not being able to think on Earth Central once a day. As
    you know, it's a funny civilization here anyway. As yet, there's no
    local telepathic Central but all Active Communicators are permitted
    to think in on Earth Central once a day--except for the big shots
    who can even telepath social engagements to each other by way of
    Earth! Privileged but a pretty dull crowd anyway.

    Oh yes, another exception to the general ration, Suspendeds like me.
    Funny thing about that, seems to me there are more Suspended from
    the Earth System all the time. Maybe I'm imagining it.

    As lovingly as ever, your son, Ted. (NO. More than ever!)

Rhoda really went to pieces for a while after that letter but, oddly enough, all recriminations
soon stopped. She began going into the city every day and after each visit seemed a little
calmer for having done so.

       *       *       *

Finally Connor could no longer remain silent about it. But by now all conversations had to
be broached by tactful beating around the bush so he began by saying he had decided to take
a lower level job in the metropolis.

Rhoda was not surprised. "I know. A good idea but I think you should wait a while longer and
do something else first."

That made him suspicious. "Are you developing a new kind of unblockable ESP? How'd you know?"

"No," she laughed. "Some day we will maybe and people will use it better this time. But right
now I'm just going by what I see. You've been studying Max and I knew you were bound to get
restless." She became thoughtful. "What you really want to know, though, is what I've been
doing in the city. Well, at first I did very little. I kept ending up in theatres where we
Suspendeds can go. That gave a little relief. But since Ted's letter it's been different. I
finally got up the courage to see Dr. Newbridge."

"Newbridge!"

"Connor, he's a great man. You should see him too."

"My mind may have smaller scope outside the System but what's left of it isn't cracking, Rhoda."
Working himself into a spasm of righteous rage, he stalked out into the garden and tried to
convince himself he was calmly studying the rose bushes' growth. But Sheila and Tony Williams
came down the lane that skirted the garden and, as their eyes moved haughtily past him, his
rage shifted its focus. He came back into the house and remained in sullen silence.

Rhoda went on as if there had been no interruption. "I still say Dr. Newbridge is a great man.
He dropped out of the System of his own free will and that certainly took courage!"

"He willingly gave up his advantages and privileges?"

"Yes. And he's explained why to me. He felt it was destroying every Subscriber's ability to
think and that it could not last. Some day we would be without anything to do our thinking
and he wanted out."

Connor sat down and stared thoughtfully out the window. Max had just lumbered into the garden
and, having unscrewed one hand to replace it with a flexible spade, was starting on the evening
schedule for turning over the soil at the base of the plants. He would go methodically down
one flower bed, then up the next one, until all had been worked over, then would start all
over again unless ordered to stop. "Are we to end up the same way?" Connor shuddered. He slapped
his knee. "All right, I'll go with you tomorrow. I've got to see what he's like--a man who'd
voluntarily surrender ninety percent of his powers!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning they rode into the city together and went to the Harker Building. It was in
an area dense with non-telepaths each one showing that telltale cleft of anxiety in his forehead
but briskly going about his business as if anxiety were actually a liveable quality. Newbridge
had the same look but there was a nonetheless reassuring ease to the way he greeted them. He
was tall and white-haired and his face frequently assumed an abstracted look as if his mind
were reaching far away.

"You've come here," he said, "for two reasons. The first is dissatisfaction with your life.
More precisely, you're dissatisfied with your attitude toward life but you wouldn't be willing
to put it that way, not yet. Secondly, you want to know why anyone would willingly leave the
System."

Connor leaned back in his chair. "That'll do for a starter."

"Right. Well, there aren't many anomalies like me but we do exist. Most people outside the
System are there because they've been Suspended for supposed infractions, or they've been put
out through guilt by association, or because they were born into a family already in that condition.
Nothing like that happened to me. From early childhood I was trained by parents and teachers
to discipline the projective potential of my mind into the System. Like every other paraNormal,
I received my education by tapping Central for contact with information centers and other minds.
But I was a fluke." His dark blue eyes twinkled. "Biological units are never so standardized
that all of them fall under any system that can be devised. I functioned in this System, true,
but I could imagine my mind existing outside, could see my functioning from the outside. This
is terribly rare--most people are limited to the functions which sustain them. They experience
nothing else except when circumstances force them to. I, though, could see the System was not
all-powerful."

"Not all-powerful!" Connor exploded. "It got rid of me awfully easily."

His wife tried to calm him. "Listen, dear, then decide."

"You're surviving as a pariah, Mr. Newman, aren't you? Your wife tells me you've even started
to study robot controls, valuable knowledge for the future and personally satisfying now. Millions
of people do survive as outsiders, as do the planetary colonists who only have limited access
so far to social telepathy. The System has built into it defenses against Subscribers who lack
confidence in it--if it didn't it would collapse. But people in the System are not forced to
remain there. They can will themselves out any time they close their minds to it, as I did.
But they don't want to will themselves out of it--you certainly didn't--and their comfortable
inertia keeps everything going. I think you have to know a little about its history, a history
which never would have interested you if you were still comfortably inside it."

He slowly outlined the way it had developed. First those uncertain steps toward understanding
the universally latent powers of telepathy, then growing chaos as each individual spent most
of his time fighting off unwanted messages. After a period of desperate discomfort a few great
minds, made superhuman by their ability to tap each others' resources, had devised the Central
System Switchboard. Only living units, delicately poised between rigid order and sheer chaos,
could receive mental messages but this problem had been solved by the molecular biologists
with their synthesized, self-replicating axons, vastly elongated and cunningly intertwined
by the billions. These responded to every properly-modulated thought wave passing through them
and made the same careful sortings as a human cell absorbing matter from the world. Then, to
make certain this central mind would never become chaotic, there was programmed into it an
automatic rejection of all sceptical challenges.

"That was the highest moment of our race," Newbridge sighed. "We had harnessed infinite complexities
to our needs. But the success was too complete. Ever since then humanity has become more and
more dependent on what was to be essentially a tool and nothing more. Each generation became
lazier and there's no one alive who can keep this Central System in proper working order."
He leaned forward to emphasize his point. "You see, it's very slowly breaking down. There's
a steady accretion of inefficiency mutations in the axons and that's why more and more switching
mistakes are being made--as in your case."

       *       *       *

Connor was dazed by it all. "What's going to be the upshot, I mean, how is it going to break down?"

Newbridge threw up his hands. "I don't know--it's probably a long way off anyway. I guess the
most likely thing is that more and more errors will accumulate and plenty of people will be
Suspended just because Central is developing irrational quirks. Maybe the critical social mass
for change will exist only when more are outside the System than inside. I suspect when that
happens we'll be able to return to direct telepathic contact. As things are, our projection
attempts are always blocked." A buzzing sound came out of a small black box on the doctor's
desk, startling Connor who in his executive days had received all such signals directly in
his head. "Well, I've another patient waiting so this will have to be the end of our chat."

Connor and his wife exchanged glances. He said, "I'd like to come back. I'll probably have
a twenty-hour week so I'll be in town a few days a week."

"More than welcome to come again," Newbridge grinned. "Just make the arrangements with Miss
Richards, my nurse."

When they were in the street Rhoda asked, "Well, what do you think now?"

"I don't know what to think yet--but I do feel better. Rhoda, would you mind going home alone?
I think I'll find a job right away."

"Mind?" she laughed. "It's wonderful news!"

After he left her he wandered around the city awhile. In his paraNormal days he had never noticed
them but it certainly was true that there were a lot of Suspendeds about. He studied some of
them as he went along, trying to fathom their likes and dislikes by the way they moved and
their expressions. But, unlike the paraNormals, each was different and it was impossible to
see deeply into them.

Then, as he rounded a corner, he was suddenly face to face with his new enemy. A large flat
park stood before him and there in the middle was a hundred-story tower of smooth seamless
material, the home of the Central System's brain. There were smaller towers at many points
in the world but this was the most important, capable of receiving on its mile-long axons,
antennas of the very soul itself, every thought projected at it from any point in the solar
system. The housing gleamed blindingly in the sun of high noon, as perfect as the day it had
been completed. That surface was designed to repel all but the most unusual of the radiation
barrages that could bring on subtle changes in the brain within. The breakdown, he thought
bitterly, would take too many centuries to consider.

