 But the honest pastry-cook came back directly. A countenance red enough to begin with, and further
flushed by the bake-house fire, was suddenly blanched; such terror
perturbed him that he reeled as he walked, and stared about him like
a drunken man. But I'll tell you one thing, Joe: I wouldn't
put the price of them eggs down at first; I'd wait until a couple of dozen had been laid and
blowed, and then, perhaps, I'd put the price down.'

"'No, sir,' said Joe; 'I'll put the price down at the very beginning. Sixteen hundred dollars,
or three thousand for two, is enough for any eggs, and we oughter be satisfied with it.'

"'And when are you goin' to start north?' asked Abner.

"'That's the p'int,' said Pearson, 'that's the p'int. You see, Abner, I ain't got no family,
and I can start north whenever I please, as far as that's concerned. But there's obstacles.
For one thing, I ain't got the right kind of clothes; and then there's other things. It's awful
hard lines startin' out on a business like this, and the more money there is in it the harder
the lines.'

"'But you can do it, Joe,' said Abner. 'I feel in my bones you can do it. It'll be blackgum
ag'in' thunder, but you'll be blackgum, and you'll come out all right.'

"'I can't be blackgum nor nothin' else,' said Pearson, 'if I don't get no help; specially if
I don't get no help from the party what's goin' to get a lot of the money.'

"Abner reflected. 'If we was to set any auk eggs next month, it'll be well on into next summer
before we'd have eggs to sell.'

"Pearson also reflected. 'Yes,' he said; 'and it might be a little later than that. You've
got to leave a margin. I allus leave a margin. Then I'm safe.'

"'Yes,' said Abner; 'then you're safe.'

"Joe Pearson was a man of resourceful discretion. He rose now. 'Abner,' said he, 'I've got
to go; I've got a lot of things on my hands. And I want you to remember that what I've said
to you I said to you, and I wouldn't have no other man know nothin' about it. If anybody else
should hear of this thing, and go north, and get ahead of me, it would be--well, I don't know
what to say it would be, I've such feelin's about it. I've offered to take you in because you've
got a farm, and because I think you're a good man, and would know how to take care of auks
when they was hatched. But there's a lot for me to do. There's maps to look over, and time-tables;
and I must be off. But I'll stop in to-morrer, Abner, and we'll talk this over again.'

"When Pearson had gone, Abner sat and stared steadily at a knot-hole in the floor. 'Mrs. B.,'
he said to himself, 'has allus been a great one on eggs. She's the greatest one on eggs I ever
knowed. If she'd go in, now, the thing 'u'd be just as good as done. When she knows what's
ahead of us she oughter go in. That's all I've got to say about it.'

"The significance of these reflections depended upon the fact that Mrs. Batterfield had a small
income. It was upon this fact that there depended the other fact that there were three meals
a day in the Batterfield household. It was this fact, also, which was the cause of Mr. Joe
Pearson's visit to the library. He was very well acquainted with Abner, although he knew Mrs. Batterfield
but slightly; but he was aware of her income.

"After reflecting for about twenty minutes or half an hour upon the exciting proposition which
had been made to him, Abner grew very impatient. 'No use of my stayin' here,' he said; 'there's
nobody goin' to get out books in this hot weather; so I'll just shut up shop and go home. I
never did want to see Mrs. Batterfield as much as I want to see her now.'

"'Libraries seem to shut up early,' said Mrs. Batterfield, as her husband walked into the front
yard.

"'Yes, they do,' said Abner, 'in summer-time.'

