The human soul is on its journey from the law to love, from discipline to liberation, from
the moral plane to the spiritual. Buddha preached the discipline of self-restraint and moral
life; it is a complete acceptance of law.  But this bondage of law cannot be an end by itself;
by mastering it thoroughly we acquire the means of getting beyond it.  It is going back to
Brahma, to the infinite love, which is manifesting itself through the finite forms of law.
Buddha names it Brahma-vihāra, the joy of living in Brahma.  He who wants to reach this stage,
according to Buddha, "shall deceive none, entertain no hatred for anybody, and never wish to
injure through anger.  He shall have measureless love for all creatures, even as a mother has
for her only child, whom she protects with her own life.  Up above, below, and all around him
he shall extend his love, which is without bounds and obstacles, and which is free from all
cruelty and antagonism.  While standing, sitting, walking, lying down, till he fall asleep,
he shall keep his mind active in this exercise of universal goodwill."

Want of love is a degree of callousness; for love is the perfection of consciousness.  We do
not love because we do not comprehend, or rather we do not comprehend because we do not love.
For love is the ultimate meaning of everything around us. It is not a mere sentiment; it is
truth; it is the joy that is at the root of all creation.  It is the white light of pure consciousness
that emanates from Brahma.  So, to be one with this sarvānubhūh, this all-feeling being who
is in the external sky, as well as in our inner soul, we must attain to that summit of consciousness,
which is love: Who could have breathed or moved if the sky were not filled with joy, with love?
[Footnote: Ko hyēvānyāt kah prānyāt yadēsha ākāça ānandō na syāt.]  It is through the heightening
of our consciousness into love, and extending it all over the world, that we can attain Brahma-vihāra,
communion with this infinite joy.

Love spontaneously gives itself in endless gifts.  But these gifts lose their fullest significance
if through them we do not reach that love, which is the giver.  To do that, we must have love
in our own heart.  He who has no love in him values the gifts of his lover only according to
their usefulness.  But utility is temporary and partial.  It can never occupy our whole being;
what is useful only touches us at the point where we have some want.  When the want is satisfied,
utility becomes a burden if it still persists.  On the other hand, a mere token is of permanent
worth to us when we have love in our heart.  For it is not for any special use.  It is an end
in itself; it is for our whole being and therefore can never tire us.

The question is, In what manner do we accept this world, which is a perfect gift of joy?  Have
we been able to receive it in our heart where we keep enshrined things that are of deathless
value to us?  We are frantically busy making use of the forces of the universe to gain more
and more power; we feed and we clothe ourselves from its stores, we scramble for its riches,
and it becomes for us a field of fierce competition.  But were we born for this, to extend
our proprietary rights over this world and make of it a marketable commodity?  When our whole
mind is bent only upon making use of this world it loses for us its true value.  We make it
cheap by our sordid desires; and thus to the end of our days we only try to feed upon it and
miss its truth, just like the greedy child who tears leaves from a precious book and tries
to swallow them.

In the lands where cannibalism is prevalent man looks upon man as his food.  In such a country
civilisation can never thrive, for there man loses his higher value and is made common indeed.
But there are other kinds of cannibalism, perhaps not so gross, but not less heinous, for which
one need not travel far.  In countries higher in the scale of civilisation we find sometimes
man looked upon as a mere body, and he is bought and sold in the market by the price of his
flesh only.  And sometimes he gets his sole value from being useful; he is made into a machine,
and is traded upon by the man of money to acquire for him more money. Thus our lust, our greed,
our love of comfort result in cheapening man to his lowest value.  It is self deception on
a large scale.  Our desires blind us to the truth that there is in man, and this is the greatest
wrong done by ourselves to our own soul.  It deadens our consciousness, and is but a gradual
method of spiritual suicide.  It produces ugly sores in the body of civilisation, gives rise
to its hovels and brothels, its vindictive penal codes, its cruel prison systems, its organised
method of exploiting foreign races to the extent of permanently injuring them by depriving
them of the discipline of self- government and means of self-defence.

Of course man is useful to man, because his body is a marvellous machine and his mind an organ
of wonderful efficiency.  But he is a spirit as well, and this spirit is truly known only by
love. When we define a man by the market value of the service we can expect of him, we know
him imperfectly.  With this limited knowledge of him it becomes easy for us to be unjust to
him and to entertain feelings of triumphant self-congratulation when, on account of some cruel
advantage on our side, we can get out of him much more than we have paid for.  But when we
know him as a spirit we know him as our own.  We at once feel that cruelty to him is cruelty
to ourselves, to make him small is stealing from our own humanity, and in seeking to make use
of him solely for personal profit we merely gain in money or comfort what we pay in truth.

