How did she bear the change in her life and circumstances? When her husband told her, she just
put her arms around his neck and whispered; "All right, John, I shall do the best I can to
help you bear it." And from that moment they began life again. She did not even complain when
they were obliged to move into a small cottage in the suburbs, but it was hard for her to be
ignored and forgotten by the elegant social world, where she had so recently been an acknowledged
leader.

Alas! she had no sugar plums for society now, so it soon forgot her existence. There were,
however, some exceptions among her former friends, and she was glad to welcome among her few
visitors, Kate Turner and Grace Hall, who had grown to love Mrs. Hayden more than they would
have thought possible when she seemed so high above them in the social scale.

"She is turning out a saint rather than a sinner," said Kate one evening, as they were discussing
the Haydens and recalled the conversation of the night of the party.

"Just wait awhile. Many people can be heroic in great things, but are sadly deficient when
it comes to the little things," said Grace, with her usual caution. "I believe I could be a
heroine myself, if some grand opportunity came," she added, smiling.

"Oh, Grace, don't trifle so; you know this is a very serious matter with Mr. and Mrs. Hayden,
and they are both doing nobly," cried Kate, with tears in her eyes.

"Well, queen Katherine, I don't mean any harm, and you must not think anything of my brusque
speeches. As you know, there is a tinge of skepticism in me which I can not help, and my ideals
are so much higher than the realities of life, that I am always painfully conscious of the
difference."

"Well, what would you wish Mrs. Hayden to be like, for instance, in order to come up to your
ideal of the heroic woman?" asked Kate in a softened tone.

"Kate dear, I love Mrs. Hayden as much as you do, and would not for a moment disparage her
virtues, but it strikes me as a philosophical fact that as a rule, human nature can and does
display wonderful courage in great emergencies, but fails miserably in details, and this ought
not to be so. Nothing would please me better than to see one life prove that I am wrong."

"That is all true, Gracie, about humanity in general, but she is lovely, and I am sorry for
her having to be lame all her life. It's a perfect shame that she must lose even her health,
for of course she will never be strong again."

"Another defect to be noted somewhere in the universal economy. It seems to me we are pretty
helpless creatures, generally speaking, for it all appears to be a matter of chance whether
we get well or not, when we do get sick," mused Grace, bent upon drawing her own conclusions.

Poor girl! Life had been rather hard for her, and she judged it as it appeared, and there did
seem a great flaw somewhere which she was trying her best to solve by noting every phase of
life as she found it. Naturally bright, keenly intellectual and very independent, she was a
philosopher as well as an artist, and always ready for a tilt with the world on its most petted
opinions. Hers was a reasoning mind that observed all inconsistencies and discrepancies in
anything she studied, and there was generally a little acidity in her judgment of the world
and its bigoted ways.

"I can't see why Mrs. Hayden should not be cured completely," continued Kate, ignoring her
companion's last shot, "for it wasn't so bad that anybody knew of until she got up."

"My dear madam," said Grace, striking an owlish attitude, "you have not read the latest opinion
expressed by one of the most learned professors in the Allopathic school of medicine in Paris.
He stood before the class of graduating students and said: 'Gentlemen, you have done me the
honor to come here to listen to a lecture on the science of medicine. I must frankly confess
I know nothing about it, and, moreover, know of no one who does. Any one who takes medicine
is fortunate if it helps him, but more fortunate if it does not harm him.' Whether our friend
is fortunate or unfortunate is a question hard to decide. I move we discuss another subject."

Kate laughed in spite of herself, and Grace got up to take another view of the "Modern Hypatia,"
which at last was growing into a visible creation under her skillful brush.

"Isn't that a woman for you?" she said, pointing to the picture admiringly, as she held it
under the gas light.

"Yes, I like her better than Hebe. She has a look of reserved power about her that is captivating,
but there is something in her face that makes me sad, something that is lacking."

"What is it? Tell me, for I can see nothing!" Grace questioned impetuously.

"Wait a minute, perhaps I can define it. There! hold it so. Let me see," and Kate walked off
a few paces.

"Yes, it is dissatisfaction, an incompleteness, as though she had not found what she sought."

"Can you see that, Kate? Then I am at the same time the most happy and unhappy creature alive,"
cried Grace, breathlessly dropping into a chair and holding the picture fondly near her face.

"Why?" said the astonished Kate.

"Don't you know I am forever putting myself into my pictures? And I've succeeded too admirably
with this one. The poor thing has caught my unconscious fault of finding defects everywhere.
Oh, I must get it out of her some way; how shall I, when to me she looks so perfect?"

"You better get it out of yourself first, if that is the trouble," replied Kate, with a great
wave of pity in her voice.

"I wish I could. Oh, why do I have to see everything in the wrong way? It seems to me life
would be heavenly, if I could know only the good in everything." Grace put down the picture
and gazed at it with stern, accusing eyes. "I shall leave this one and begin another to-morrow,"
she finally announced in a subdued tone.

"I am glad you won't rub this out, for she is too lovely," said Kate, softly, as she went about,
gently putting things in order, picking up her music and arranging the books.

Grace sat there brooding over her life problems with a new thought in her mind. She dimly realized
that a woman must have a genuine message herself before she tries to give it to the world.
And alas, her message was sadly deficient, she found. Mechanically she took a book from the
table and opening it at random, read:

  "If the whole is ever to gladden thee,
  That whole in the smallest thing thou must see."

"That is not bad philosophy, whose is it?" she thought. She looked at the book. It was Goethe's
poems, but she was not in the mood for reading, and she sat thinking till late at night. This
was a new sentiment. She would digest it and test its practical truth.

CHAPTER V.

  Take up the threads of life at home,
   Let not the stitches drop;
  The busy world will know 'tis done
   Though ne'er it pause nor stop.

"Nothing can bring you peace but yourself. Nothing can bring you peace but the triumph of principles."--Emerson.

A year passed away, and Mrs. Hayden grew no better. She was not as cheerful as she had been
at first, and instead of growing into the brave, patient woman she longed to become, she had
grown fretful and irritable, and was in many ways different from the Mrs. Hayden Kate and Grace
had talked about so enthusiastically. None knew better than she, how miserably she had failed
to live the life that was soul satisfying--the life that brought forth fruits. In all the years
of her prosperity, in the midst of the gayeties and luxuries, she had secretly longed for something
she never found, and in one sense it had not been hard for her to give up the life of ease
and idleness, because she had hoped to find in the new duties a new peace and satisfaction,
had hoped to live up to her ideal of a noble woman, and it was with her whole heart she had
promised her husband her help and sympathy, but in all the eighteen months, she had been but
a burden; even calm forbearance and cheerfulness had ceased to be virtues. The children, not
having a nursery, must needs be anywhere and everywhere, and in spite of her efforts to the
contrary, their noise annoyed her.

To-night she sat thinking it all over, in one of her most despondent moods, for be it said
to her credit, things did not always appear as gloomy as she represented them to herself.

The ruddy firelight flickered over her in fitful gleams of light and shadow. The children were
out romping in the twilight, enjoying the first snow of the season. Her husband had not yet
returned from the store.

What was the use, anyway, pursued the relentless conscience--even the wish to be good was always
choked by a complete forgetfulness; and before she could catch her breath the words were out,
so, although she had believed nearly all her life that one might grow into goodness, she was
quite rebellious to-night with the thought of its impossibility, and she felt bitter, too,
to think of the long years of uselessness stretching out before her. Scarcely thirty-five and
yet she felt like a cross, crabbed old woman, and shuddered to think of all the years to come,
if they were to be like the past, and there seemed no help for it unless she could conquer
herself. The doctor had done what he could to cure her dyspepsia but she was a veritable slave
to her capricious stomach. She felt one of her oft-recurring sick headaches coming on and every
thought grew blacker and more disconsolate. Oh! she wished supper were over and the children
safe in bed, so she could be free from their noise, and here they come! she thought, as a great
stamping and laughing was heard in the hall.

"Oh, mamma! such lovely snowflakes, just like a fairy's quilt, and they have been falling all
over us till we're like people in frost land. Just look, mamma!" cried Mabel, who liked a romp
as well as the boys, although she was thirteen. Three-year-old Jamie and five-year-old Fred
came trooping in behind.

"Well, mamma, God has turned on the snow faucets," announced Fred, with characteristic importance.

"An' all 'e fevvers is tummin' down fum 'e 'ky," shouted Jamie at the top of his voice.

"And mamma, can't we have a sled and go coasting this winter?" queried Mabel, not noticing
in her eagerness that her mamma was very sick.

"Oh, don't make so much noise. Take them away and keep quiet, Mabel. I can not endure so much
confusion."

They went out clanging the door behind them in spite of their efforts to keep quiet, and as
their voices grew fainter, she thought with another remorseful pang: "I have sent them away
again. Why must I yield always to self instead of overcoming?" Presently, however, all attempts
at thinking were lost in the efforts to get the camphor, bathe her head and find some comforting
spot whereon to rest her aching temples.

A subdued family gathered around the table that evening and everyone felt the necessity of
being quiet as possible. Even Fred and Jamie understood that they must keep still, and managed
to keep their voices down to something less than a shrill whisper.

Mrs. Hayden partook only of a small cup of tea and was then assisted to her room, where she
expected to remain for at least two days--the usual time. Her husband spent the evening rubbing
her head, bathing it with camphor and keeping the house quiet as possible.

The next day dawned cloudy and grey, with a faint mildness in the air, indicating a thaw. Mabel
went to school, Fred and Jamie amused themselves in the back parlor until they were tired and
then flattened their noses against the window, trying to see how many drops of melted snow
fell from the porch roof.

"I want a snow man," wailed Jamie, suddenly remembering what papa said about the snow long ago.

"Well, you can't have it," said Fred, with great decision, who generally opposed anything on
principle.

"Yes, we can. We can go out and make one," persisted Jamie.

"Jack Frost'll bite your fingers."

"No he won't."

"He will--"

"He won't eever--"

"He will, 'cos mamma said so," said naughty Fred.

Jamie's little face clouded and the lip began to quiver; then a sudden thought striking him,
he jumped up, beaming with delight, and cried, as he ran towards the hall:

"Mamma said Jack Frost couldn't find me when I had my overcoat and wed mittens on, and my wed cap."

"You can't reach your coat an' you've lost your mittens," insisted Fred, with perseverance
worthy a better cause.

"O, yes I can. I can 'tep on my high chair," dragging it after him.

"I can get my things on first," said Fred who suddenly decided in favor of the snow man, and
hurriedly suiting the action to the word, rushed to get his coat which hung under Jamie's,
just as Jamie reached his little hands up to get his. Fred gave a tremendous flirt and pull
at his coat which overbalanced his little brother and down came the high chair and Jamie plump
upon the luckless Fred, whose angry squeals and kicks, mingled with Jamie's loud shrieks of
terror made a commotion that brought Anna, the housekeeper, to the rescue.

"What is the matter?" as she plucked Jamie from the general debris.

"Fred pulled me down--"

"Jamie jumped on me," said both at once as soon as they could get their breath.

"An', I aint lost my wed mittens, an' my little white leg is broke off," cried Jamie suddenly,
spying the oft-mended leg of the high-chair, which in this melee, had completely severed company
with the rest of the chair, and now mutely appealed for help to be put on again.

"There, there, papa can mend it all right again. Don't cry, little man. Now Fred, you must
stop crying and play nice with Jamie and not quarrel so much. There! I hear mamma's bell; I
must go see what she wants. Run away and be quiet, for mamma can't stand a bit of noise to-day,"
and Anna left them again to their own devices. Jamie carefully laid the little white leg away
in his box of playthings, and then both children went back to the window to watch the drops again.

"I see one, two, three, seven, four, ten--" slowly counted Jamie as the crystal drops fell.

"Oh, I see a ice berg, an' I'm goin' to get it for candy," shouted Fred as he ran out on the
porch and seized an icicle. It seemed so nice out there that he stayed and called Jamie to
come, too. They were delighted with the new plaything and new sights, and any thought of being
cold or needing their coats never entered their minds, so the icicle, the beautiful drops,
and finally the snow claimed their attention until they were at last happily engaged in the
much-desired occupation of making a snow man.

It was near noon and the sun had finally rifted the grayest clouds, and was sending such warm
smiles on the snow-laden earth that trees and fences, roofs and ridges burst into tears of
joy. So, often does the sun-shiny smile melt the ice-bound prison of discontent or misunderstanding.

Fred and Jamie were in the midst of their interesting creation when Mr. Hayden came home to dinner.

"Boys! boys!" he called from the gate as soon as he saw them. "You'll catch your death of cold;
run into the house, quick! Why haven't you something on your heads and rubbers on your feet?"
and without waiting to hear their vociferous reply, he hurried them into the house.

"Oh, but it was such fun, papa, an' we was goin' to put two coals in his head, cos' his eyes
was black, you know, an' your old mashed hat for his head, an'--"

"An' me foun' a 'tick for his arm," interrupted Jamie, who must be sure papa knew all about
this wonderful man.

"Yes, he looks very promising, and I guess I'll have to finish him for you; but you must not
go out again to-day. Just think what would we do if you should be sick while mamma must be
in bed. Poor mamma, she would feel bad and cry because she couldn't help you, and it would
make her feel very sorry indeed to know her little boys went out without somebody saying they
might."

"Well, papa, we didn't mean to go 'thout our things on, but two of the beautifullest icebergs
hunged down an' we played they was candy an' all the pretty drops said stop, stop, stop, an'--"

"Yes, an' the 'no was full of 'tars 'at shined right up at us an' laughed an' played hide an'
seek wiv each other."

"An' Jamie wanted to make a snow man," suddenly remembered Fred.

"Cos papa did when he was a little boy, an' he telled me sometimes so could I--"

"Oh, you little rogues, it is well you can trace it back," laughed papa, catching each small
man, and placing upon his knees.

"Why, look here, your shoes are all wet, and your fingers red, and your clothes sprinkled with
water. This will never do. Take off your shoes, Fred. Here, Anna," he called, as he heard her
in the dining room, "bring some dry stockings and aprons. These boys have been out in the wet
snow, and must be changed right away. Put a flannel round their necks, too. I'm afraid they'll
have the croup to-night." With as much haste as possible, he stripped off their wet clothes,
chafed their hands and feet, and with an anxious look left them, to go and speak to his wife
who, when suffering from headache could allow no one to enter the room except her husband or Anna.

That night the whole household were aroused by the hoarse and unmistakable cough of croup.
Jamie had taken cold, as his father feared he would. The doctor was sent for in wild haste,
and after several hours of watchful care and frequent taking of hive syrup or ipecac, Jamie
was at last sleeping quietly, and every one felt that after this, at least, those children
should be so well guarded that escape would be impossible, and the dreaded enemy kept out.
This was always a result of exposure, and Mr. and Mrs. Hayden had often wished for the time
when Jamie would outgrow the attacks as that really seemed the only thing in which lay any hope.

"How do you do Mrs. Hayden? You see I come in without ceremony as usual, but I heard you'd
had one of your headaches again," and Mrs. Reade seated herself cosily on the sofa near which
Mrs. Hayden sat languidly trying to read.

"Oh, I have about recovered my usual strength, but of course I must be careful and not get
excited or overworked, though my work I am sorry to say, does not amount to much." After a
few moments commonplace conversation, Mrs. Reade said, carefully:

"Now Mrs. Hayden, I believe there is a help for you somewhere. Wouldn't you like to try something
new?"

"Why, you know I would try anything that would give relief, but I have exhausted everything
that ever was heard of, and now every remedy seems very transient or of no effect at all."

Mrs. Hayden leaned wearily back in her chair and seemed to think there was no use discussing
the subject any longer. After a few moments thoughtful silence, Mrs. Reade looked up at her
friend and said, timidly:

"Mrs. Hayden, have you ever heard of Christian Healing?"

"No. What is it?"

"I can't tell, only that it is just the most wonderful panacea for all ills that ever was discovered
and they say it can be learned, and applied by everybody."

"Do you mean that I could learn it and could then cure myself?"

"Yes, that is what they claim."

"Why, Mrs. Reade, what is all this wonderful news, and if it is true, why hasn't the world
heard of it before?" exclaimed Mrs. Hayden with an amused smile.

Mrs. Reade did not return the smile but a still more earnest look came into her eyes. She bent
over her bit of sewing for a moment and then looking up, as though resolved to speak the truth
at any cost, she went on:

"Mrs. Hayden, it is the fulfillment of the promises in the Bible, that to them that believe,
these signs should be given. You remember the passage don't you, where Jesus gave His disciples
the same power to heal that He had?"

"Well, but that was long ago, and the promise was for the disciples, I suppose."

"No, it was for everybody; and do you know, Mrs. Hayden, I can hardly wait to learn this new
method, I am so interested."

"How did you hear about it?"

"When I was down to Mapleton last summer I heard something about it through a friend of mine,
who was cured of chronic congestive headaches, and now my cousin, Miss Greening, from Norfolk,
has come on to spend the holidays with us, and strange to say, she has been cured of weak eyes--just
came straight from Princeton where she was treated, and--and--well, the fact is, I want you
to come over and see her and may be you can be cured."

Mrs. Reade was quite frightened for having said so much, but was reassured by the growing interest
in Mrs. Hayden's eyes.

"And you know these things to be true? Why, it is wonderful. How is it done, by prayer?"

"Not exactly, but it is by some process of thinking. Oh, I can't begin to tell you, only that
it is wonderful, and you must come over and talk with cousin Helen."

"I am afraid to trust myself out in this uncertain weather. Can't you both come and take tea
with us to-morrow? I hope to be well enough then, and it would be a great pleasure, for if
there is any truth in this, I want to know it. Do come."

This was a good deal for Mrs. Hayden to say, but she was very earnest when aroused to interest.

"Yes, we will," said Mrs. Reade, as she rose to go, looking straight into her friend's eyes
with joyful earnestness, "and I am so glad. Good bye," and she retreated as unceremoniously
as she had come, leaving Mrs. Hayden to wonder why she should be so childishly pleased over
that invitation. It never occurred to her that Mrs. Reade should be so glad to come merely
to tell more about this new way of getting well.

Mrs. Reade was a young housekeeper, who, living just across the street, was in the habit of
often running in to Mrs. Hayden with her little vexations, her triumphs of cookery, her questions
of how to manage little May, or what to do in matters of household furnishing. She was a very
progressive little woman, and, perhaps owing to the influence of Mrs. Hayden, was ready at
least to give everything a fair hearing. This new "craze," as some called it, had been presented
to her in a way that compelled her attention and commanded her respect, and especially since
her cousin's coming had she been intensely interested.

Particularly was she desirous of enlisting the attention of Mrs. Hayden, who not only needed
the physical help to be obtained, but who would be an excellent advocate of the principles,
providing she could endorse them, as Mrs. Reade was sure she would, if she could only be made
to understand.

So it was with great anticipated pleasure Mrs. Reade introduced her cousin to Mrs. Hayden as
they went in the next day.

"Now, Cousin Helen, just tell Mrs. Hayden how you were cured. I am so anxious to set the ball
rolling," said Mrs. Reade, with an arch look at Mrs. Hayden after they were comfortably settled
for their talk.

"Yes, indeed," added Mrs. Hayden; "if you have half as wonderful a message as Mrs. Reade fondly
imagines I shall be delighted to hear it, but I would first like to ask what was the trouble
with your eyes, and something as to their condition when you first looked into this method
of healing."

"I had been obliged to leave school because they were so weak. They were inflamed and bloodshot.
I could not bear to go out in the wind, ride on the cars, or have any excitement whatever.
The occulists said the trouble was caused by a physical defect that could not be remedied,
so you may imagine my despair. Father and mother came home from a visit in Kansas, and while
there they had heard of a lady in Princeton who was having remarkable success with mind-cure,
as they called it. They coaxed me to go and try it. I had no faith, but to please them thought
I would go. It could do no harm, they said. The journey, though only sixty miles from home,
was very hard for me. When I arrived at Mrs. Harmon's it seemed as though I could hardly bear
the pain caused by the journey.

"Mrs. Harmon allowed me to stay right at her home, and though only there a week, I was not
only cured, but learned the principles and how to apply them. After the first treatment I felt
so well and happy she told me I could use my eyes to read an hour or so. From the second treatment
I could use them all I wished. It was perfectly wonderful. When I went home I was cured. That
is now three weeks ago, and I have been using my eyes constantly, have taken several journeys
on the cars, and gone out day and night."

Mrs. Hayden had listened with the greatest interest, her mind filled with varying thoughts.
Sudden glimpses of wonderful might-be's, mingled with doubts and hopes, had chased each other
in wild confusion through her bewildered brain.

"Tell me," she found breath at last to ask, "what is it, and how is it done, and can anybody
do it?"

Miss Greening was delighted to find so willing an audience, for in spite of her remarkable
cure, most of her family and friends ridiculed her new "cure all."

"Oh, I wish I could explain to you as Mrs. Harmon does. I am so very new in the thought, but
I will do the best I can to give you some idea. The main thing in the beginning is to know
that you know nothing," continued Miss Greening, with a smile. "The world believes in the character
as it appears, to be the real character, that the person who suffers sickness, sorrow, disappointment,
anger or pain is the real self. We have always taken the people of the world, as they appear,
to be the children of God. This truth teaches that the real child of God is in His image and
likeness and in Him lives, is moved and has His being. According to the laws of thought, the
thought of one individual affects another, and on this principle the treatments are given,
but it is the omnipresent life Principle that does the work.

"Oh, it is perfectly wonderful, and if you could see what I saw while I was with Mrs. Harmon,
you would not doubt a moment. She was busy from morning till night with patients. Hardly had
time to eat or sleep. It seemed like the times of the New Testament come back again. Mrs. Harmon
cured a man of rheumatism, where the joints had been stiffened and contracted for years, in
seven treatments. The first week the treatments did not seem to have any effect, but the second
week he suddenly recovered the use of his arm and limbs, so that he could run and jump or do
anything else that a healthy man can do.

"One young girl, who was suffering from lead poisoning so that she was given up by three or
four prominent physicians, received nine treatments and, although not perfectly strong and
robust, was able to walk several blocks and was so well that she did not need further treatment.

"Mrs. Harmon treated an old lady of seventy, so that she laid aside glasses and could see to
sew on black cloth. A lady who had been an invalid for sixteen years was cured so that in a
week she was able to ride a mile and a half to the lectures.

"All these things I saw with my own eyes, and if the evidence had not been enough in my own
case, there were all these proofs. And the teaching! Oh, it is beautiful. If we could only
live up to that the millenium would surely be here."

In her enthusiasm Miss Greening scarcely noticed the effect of her words, else she would have
seen Mrs. Hayden's expressive eyes full of a yearning, silent and strong.

"Can it touch anyone's character or moral life?" she asked after a moment's pause.

"Yes, indeed; there is not one thing in life that is not amenable to its discipline. Mrs. Harmon
says it is a great advantage in governing children, that every mother ought to know it, for
the help in that direction, even if not for their health."

"What a wonderful thing it must be; and yet I always thought the days of miracles were past,
if indeed they ever were," said Mrs. Hayden, thoughtfully.

"These are not miracles, as the ordinary understanding of that word would imply, but are done
in accordance with Divine Law, the highest law,--not the setting aside of any law," interposed
Mrs. Reade, who had been deeply interested in the conversation, but hitherto had been a silent
listener.

"Oh, mamma, I wish supper was ready; I'm so hungry!" cried Fred, bursting into the room, followed
by Jamie and Mabel.

"Mamma, can't we have some--" began Jamie, and then stopped, abashed at the size of the audience.

"No, dears; mamma don't want you to eat anything before supper. You know what Doctor Jackson
said about the little stomachs that were overworked. Now, run away and be good; when everything
is ready mamma'll call you."

"But we want it now. Doctor Jackson don't know everything. It's only God that knows everything,"
said Fred, with unanswerable argument.

"Come away, Fred," whispered Mabel, giving him an impatient twitch.

"It's so, anyway; mamma told me about God just the other night."

"He knows I want some ginger 'naps," whimpered Jem.

"Never mind; run out, as mamma says," said Mrs. Hayden, resolutely, and the aggrieved trio
reluctantly departed.

"It would be an immense help to me if I could learn to manage these three irrepressibles without
getting tired all out," said Mrs. Hayden, with a little sigh.

"Wouldn't it be splendid? I think, Mrs. Hayden, you better let Cousin Helen treat you, and
get you all cured, and then you can go somewhere and learn how, yourself," said Mrs. Reade,
as she demurely wound up the ball.

Mrs. Hayden looked up with interested surprise. "Do you think anything could be done for me,
Miss Greening?"

"A great many worse than you have been cured, why not you?"

"Well, I don't know; it seems so far away and so intangible some way."

"Now, Mrs. Hayden, try it. Let Cousin Helen treat you," interposed Mrs. Reade.

"What must I do, any mysterious unheard-of thing?" was the answer, with a look of evident amusement.

"Oh, no! Just sit quietly passive, and be as hopeful as possible during the treatment. The
only thing that might seem hard is to give up all medicine and material applications while
you are under treatment."

"That will not be hard at all, for I have lost all faith in medicine anyway. When do you want
to begin, Miss Greening?"

"Well, I am willing to try my best to help you, Mrs. Hayden, but you must understand, in the
first place, that I take no credit to myself, for it is God's work. Then I have really not
tried to heal any one; since it was so recently I was cured myself, there has been no opportunity,
but as I said, I will do what I can."

Miss Greening spoke earnestly and reverently. It seemed rather new to her to be called upon
to prove her principles, and yet she had such perfect faith in them, she never thought of wavering.

"Then it's all settled, and you can take your first treatment to-night," spoke up Mrs. Reade,
volubly. "I'm so anxious to see you strong and well like the rest of us," she added half apologetically.

"It will seem too good to be true. I can not realize such a possibility."

A thoughtful silence fell upon the little company for a few moments, and when they resumed
their conversation, it was about something else.

At their usual tea time, Mr. Hayden, accompanied by Mr. Reade, came in, and all were presently
called to the dining room.

Mr. and Mrs. Hayden had dropped all pretension of style in their present circumstances, and
lived like their neighbors, in a modest but comfortable way. The children came trooping in
when they heard the supper bell, and delightedly filed out to the dining room with their elders.

"Well, I hope you ladies have been enjoying yourselves this afternoon. I notice ladies have
that faculty whenever they meet for an hour or so," said Mr. Hayden, with a genial smile, as
he passed the plates.

"Oh, we have indeed had a lovely time, and a profitable one, too, I hope," said Mrs. Reade,
impulsively.

"You have about converted Mrs. Hayden to your ideas, you and Helen together, I presume," remarked
Mr. Reade, as he spread his napkin out to its fullest capacity.

"I should certainly like to be converted, if so many wonderful things are possible as I have
heard about this afternoon," and Mrs. Hayden showed by the unusual energy in her manner and
the brightness of her eyes that something had inspired her to an unwonted degree.

"Well now, tell me what all this is about. You seem to have conspired to talk in riddles,"
exclaimed Mr. Hayden, with an injured air.

"Why, it is this new 'craze' they call Christian Healing that seems to have taken hold of our
worthy partners, Mr. Hayden," exclaimed Mr. Reade, with a half-believing, half-skeptical air.

He really believed much more than he cared to acknowledge, but until he was better informed
of Mr. Hayden's opinions, he thought "discretion the better part of valor." Someway we often
stumble upon such characters in life. Good-natured souls they are, and so anxious to please
everybody.

"I am not sure but there is a good deal in that, Reade. I heard some gentlemen talking about
what was being done in Chicago, and it is truly wonderful. After all, we know that the mind
has a great influence over the body, and why shouldn't we discover new abilities and powers
in that as we develop in other directions?"

"To be sure; just what I have always said, and now I am having an opportunity to prove it since
my wife is willing to listen," replied Mr. Reade, with graceful diplomacy.

"Oh, there is something far beyond what you gentlemen see--something so spiritual and beautiful,
that mere intellect can not recognize it. But you will come to that after awhile, if you only
seek to know for Truth's sake, though the recognition of what you see often comes first," interposed
Miss Greening, with a warm flush of enthusiasm on her face.

"Certainly. I believe our capacity to recognize higher phases of thought grows with our eagerness
to receive. That is true of any branch of study," said Mrs. Hayden, with conviction. She was
well pleased that her husband was so favorably inclined to hear, and expressed himself so cordially.
While she was quite independent in her own way of thinking, it was still a keen pleasure to
have her husband on the same side. He, on the other hand, had great confidence in her judgment,
and generally allowed himself to be convinced, even if he had an opinion in the beginning.
They had been especially near to each other the last year.

Miss Greening was mentally congratulating herself on having found such a ready audience, and
felt as though she could do anything in the way of healing, as she talked on and on, telling
them the many things that had happened in Princeton. She finished by saying, enthusiastically:

"When I had such wonderful proofs right before my eyes, do you wonder that I looked with awe
and astonishment and wanted to know the secret of this power? Can you wonder that I felt anxious
to go forth into all the world and preach the gospel? Oh, how delightful, I thought, to carry
such blessed news and be able to give such blessed proof! So when Cousin Ruth's letter came,
asking me to make her a visit, I felt that perhaps an opportunity would offer in which I might
demonstrate the truth of my precious science, and here it is ready for me, the very work I
wanted. Yes, just as far as possible will I use my knowledge, though as yet it is but little,
to help Mrs. Hayden."

Miss Greening had waxed eloquent in her unconscious enthusiasm, and seeing the whole company
gazing at her in astonished admiration, she paused suddenly, with a vivid flush on her face,
saying: "Pardon me. I did not mean to monopolize the conversation."

"That apology is entirely unnecessary, for we have been listening to something so new that
its very newness and unconventionality is quite refreshing, and certainly interesting," said
Mr. Hayden, warmly.

"Surely, there must be some healing virtue even in your talk, for I feel remarkably well to-day,"
was his wife's delighted addition.

"How glad, oh, how glad I am," fluttered Mrs. Reade.

A movement from Jem caused Mrs. Hayden to notice his extra dish of sauce and huge piece of
frosted cake.

"No, Jem, dear, you mustn't eat any more to-night, and you know mamma don't want you to have
any cake."

"O-o-o-h, peaze, tan't I have some more?"

"Not any more to-day. You know you had to be sick all night, not long ago, and mamma had to
give you some medicine. You don't want to have to take paregoric, do you?"

"No-o-o, but I want e take!"

"Mamma said you couldn't have any. You're too little, anyway. Didn't I tell you I ought to
have the biggest piece 'cause my stomach's the biggest, an' I'm not afraid of stomachache.
Give me your sauce, if you can't eat it," said shameless Fred.

Papa and mamma Hayden looked upon their oldest son in dismay, as he thus openly delivered his
sentiments.

"Hush, Freddie, you mustn't want any more, either, nor talk that way to Jem. You have had enough
for to-night."

"Well, I've had six biscuits any way," and Fred settled himself back with a satisfied air as
though he could stand anything if necessary, while poor Jem was taken away from the table crying
as if his heart would break at the loss of his coveted sweets.

"You see, we seldom have company, and the children are unused to sweet things as a rule, because
the doctor always says their diet must be carefully attended to, in order to avoid inflammation
of the bowels, which Jem once had," explained Mrs. Hayden with the old look of weariness for
a moment settling back on her face.

"Just wait till you have studied Christian Healing and then see how to manage," said Mrs. Reade
with sparkling eyes.

"Have you taken such a fancy to this too, Mrs. Reade?" asked Mr. Hayden, rather teasingly.

"Oh, she's almost a crank now," answered her husband, with a merry twinkle.

"Well, it is very good to have such an article in the family. It keeps things lively and announces
the world's progress with unerring certainty," she retorted, and with this good-natured sally
they rose from the table. The evening was spent in a mixture of small talk and earnestness,
and before they departed Mrs. Hayden received her first treatment.

CHAPTER VII.

  "Like an Æolian harp, that wakes
   No certain air, but overtakes
   Far thought with music that it makes,--

  "Such seemed the whisper at my side;
  'What is't thou knowest, sweet voice?' I cried;
  'A hidden hope,' the voice replied."

  --Tennyson.

The second morning after this Mrs. Hayden awoke, feeling much better than she had for months.
A strange, happy feeling possessed her. All that had seemed dark and hopeless now appeared
as nothing but gossamer fog-wreaths. The world seemed so joyous and beautiful. God seemed so
near, so loving, so all-protecting. Why had she ever doubted the possibility of health? Surely
it was easy to feel well when she felt happy; and yet, would this last? Had this delightful
change any connection with Miss Greening's treatment? No, surely not. It would be too unreasonable
to expect any benefit so soon; besides, she was probably no better physically, that is, her
lameness and dyspepsia were not touched as yet, if indeed they ever could be. Well, how it
would astonish everybody if she really were cured, and could walk like her old self again.
Her stiffened limb would have to undergo a marvelous change, but time would tell--it seemed
nothing was beyond reach of this extraordinary Power. Miss Greening was so sincere and earnest,
she could not for a moment doubt the truth of her statements, besides Mr. Hayden himself confessed
to having heard of the wonderful works, though he had never mentioned it before, strangely
enough. At the time it probably appeared so vague and visionary, that he had thought best not
to excite her curiosity and hope without cause.

How glad she was that he had at last allowed her to try this without ridiculing or scolding
her. How beautiful this theory was, but it seemed too good to be true. She would not be carried
away with it until she had demonstrated beyond doubt, until she could see the reason and understand
it.

The clock struck nine. Why, it was time to rise, and she really felt hungry, so hungry that
dry toast and hot water had no attractions for her. She wondered if there would be anything
on the table she dared not eat; it would be hard to resist if there were. Thus musing she dressed
with more alacrity and energy than she had displayed for many months.

Her husband stood in the doorway as she left her room, and remarked as they went down stairs:

"You must have had a good sleep last night, you are so bright and spry this morning."

"Yes, indeed, I can scarcely remember when the night has passed so quickly and the morning
seemed so exhilarating; please help me down this turn, won't you? It is always so hard to get
down stairs."

The cane was brought into requisition, and with Mr. Hayden's help the stairs were descended,
but the refractory limb was forgotten again in the interest with which she viewed the breakfast
table.

"Mamma, we've waited and waited till we thought we'd have to eat something, so we each took
a doughnut to save time," was the explanatory greeting of Fred, who acted as spokesman for
the three hungry culprits, who had this time, at least, disobeyed the imperative injunction
not to eat cake the first thing in the morning.

"Why, children, don't you remember how Dr. Jackson--"

"Well, mamma, I heard that lady 'at was here, say 'twouldn't hurt us to eat if you wasn't so
'fraid 'bout our stomachs; an' she's a doctor, too, an' ladies know 's much 's men, 'cos you
said so," interrupted the irrepressible, as usual, with unanswerable argument.

"Well, we'll see this time, but you must be more careful to remember what mamma wishes you
to do," said Mrs. Hayden more mildly than usual, while her eyes smiled a little.

The breakfast was brought in, and, much to the astonishment of all, she recklessly disregarded
the dry toast and hot water, mutely appealing to her from the side of her plate, and ate heartily
of beefsteak, potatoes, and pan cakes. "I am so hungry, and will risk it on the strength of
Fred's reminder," she apologized, as she sent her plate the third time for cakes.

"Don't tell me you've no faith in Fred's newly-acquired wisdom," laughed Mr. Hayden, and then
added, with some concern, "but, really, my dear, you ought to be careful. Remember the condition
of your stomach."

"That is just what she told me to forget."

"Well, it beats all how things can be turned upside down," mused Mr. Hayden, as he rose from
the table preparatory to going to the store.

"It certainly is strange about this, for you remember yesterday, I even walked over to Mrs.
Reade's and back without any unusual fatigue."

"Oh, yes! I've noticed various daring breaches of the old code, and, more than all, I've seen
the best color in your face that has been there for many a month," and he went out with a thoughtful
expression on his face.

"Mamma's well now," said little Jem, timidly, "'cos she puts me to bed."

"Yes, an' we can make a noise when we dress, an' talk 'bout Christmas," added Fred, as he was
walking about, wiping his hands, in his usual restless manner.

CHAPTER VIII.

  "There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
  Than are dreamt of in your philosophy."--Shakespeare.

Of course Kate and Grace were told about the new way of being healed, and Grace looked on at
first with her usual incredulity, but when she saw Mrs. Hayden getting so well and looking
so happy, she began to wonder and then to exclaim. Then she wanted to learn something about
this new "doctrine," and Mrs. Hayden had Miss Greening come over and meet the girls one evening
so they could hear her explain a little about it. Grace was delighted, saying that was more
reasonable than anything she had ever heard.

"I really should like to learn it," she said for the third time as they walked home.

"Why, you are really enthusiastic about it," said Kate, giving the artistic arm a gentle squeeze.

"I must confess, Kate, that it is nearer my idea of religion than anything I ever heard, and
it is marvelous to see Mrs. Hayden. Did you see how bright she looked to-night? More like her
old self than since her sickness. I can't understand it."

"She said her limb was actually growing natural again so she could bend it," added Kate.

"If she could be cured, it would be a wonderful demonstration or proof of the theory," remarked
Grace.

"Oh, I don't know, Grace, I am afraid, after all, it might be wrong. You know it says in the
Bible we are to beware of false doctrines, and the miracles of anti-Christ, and this may be
that very thing," said Kate, with a sudden smiting of conscience and reproaching herself that
she had not thought of this before. She had been brought up a strict Methodist, but had grown
rather careless of religious matters, till all at once she realized the mighty import of her
backsliding.

"I don't think if there is such a thing, it could do so much good, and good power must come
from the God of goodness," answered Grace, with unusual gentleness. They walked on in silence,
each pondering her own thoughts.

Three weeks after, Mrs. Hayden was known as a restored invalid, was daily answering a thousand
questions as to how it was done. Was it really so? Could she walk as well as ever? Didn't she
get tired? Had she any faith after all? etc.

She patiently told them the truth of the matter, that her limb had become well and pliable
as ever, that her stomach was perfectly sound, her head free from nervous aching, her nights
a joyous rest and her days a round of delightful labor.

For the first time she learned there had been many cures, and several classes taught in Hampton,
but no case had excited the attention, public and private, that hers had.

The various members of society wagged their wise heads, and cast mingled glances of pity, wonder,
ridicule or disdain upon the poor deluded victim of the "latest humbug." Even the select circles
heard of it as a report finally reached the daily paper, which appeared with a glaring head
and ridiculous comments.

One of the weeklies contented itself by reprinting a scathing denunciation from a prominent
religious paper. Another contained clippings from an Iowa paper giving an account of the arrest
and trial of a so-called Christian Scientist for illegal practice. But it failed to add that
"the judge instructed the jury to return a verdict for the defendant," remarking that "under
the constitution and laws of Iowa it is no crime for a person to pray for his afflicted neighbor."

Among the worthy M. D.'s, a miniature storm arose and spent itself in the characteristic fashion
of storms, now carrying everything before it, in its impetuous fury, now quietly subsiding
into a ripple of condescending concession, or languid comment, now breaking out with renewed
force into explosive epithets or vindictive rage.

Dr. Crouse expressed his astonishment that anybody should have the audacity to practice medicine
without a diploma, as this woman evidently did, and demanded that the authorities enforce the
law at once with the utmost rigor--. "Such quacks ought to be dealt with without mercy, as
an example to other upstarts!" and with an angry growl the doctor recklessly spat the whole
width of the sidewalk.

Dr. Jones admitted that the mind had a great deal to do with the body, and possibly this mind
cure might help nervous prostration or hysterical women, but if Mrs. Hayden's limb was healed,
depend upon it, the medicine taken all those months was the cause.

Dr. Bundy considered the matter too absurd to even mention.

Dr. Hone went up and down the streets, loudly denouncing such "humbugs," while his partner,
Lapland, laughed at the preposterous idea of learning all about materia medica in three weeks!
"It is simply ridiculous, sheer nonsense! Ha, ha, ha!" and the office fairly shook at the outburst
of merriment.

On the other hand, Dr. Wilson was deeply interested, and went so far as to call on Miss Greening,
and to her he frankly admitted there was an unaccountable power in the mind some way, and if
it did the work for suffering humanity he was quite ready to welcome it, and anxious, for his
part, to investigate the matter.

Kind, liberal Dr. Jackson, Mrs. Hayden's former family physician, shook his head wonderingly,
but said nothing. He was a careful thinker and needed time for his conclusions, but as every
one well knew, he had the friendliest, most charitable heart that ever was, and very candid,
withal, in his judgments, and fair in his investigations. So in time they would know what he
thought. It was whispered about that he had already invested in some books, and was quietly
studying Christian Healing in his leisure moments.

Among the churches no less of a tumult raged. Rev. Rush preached a stirring sermon about the
evil days in which even the very elect should be deceived by the miracles of anti-Christ, and
warned his hearers against being beguiled.

Rev. Long openly denounced Christian Healing as but another form of spiritualism, and admonished
his flock to beware of ravening wolves.

Rev. Morton mildly preached about being steadfast to the old faith, avoiding investigation
in anything new, while from the gentle, spiritually minded Prof. Mill was heard an eloquent
disquisition on the promises and the all-abiding power of God.

All shades and phases of ministerial sentiments were expressed, and whatever was grand and
Christ-like sprang up as dainty, fragrant blossoms amid the wayside weeds of falsity and Pharisaical
bigotry.

The ladies' sewing societies discussed the subject to its fullest extent with widely varying
opinions, some exclaiming with wonder and awe that it certainly must be a higher power that
would perform such miracles; others that it was nothing but mesmerism. A few reverently expressed
their conviction that Mrs. Hayden was extremely fortunate to be chosen for such a favor, while
still others of quite a contrary mind declared it was nothing more nor less than the devil,
who was stealthily taking possession of the weak.

One timid little woman ventured to say that it could not be Satan, for he was never known to
do anything good. Another said there must be something uncanny about it, for she had experienced
the most peculiar sensations when shaking hands with Mrs. Hayden.

Mrs. Dyke had waited for a more practical time to give her opinion, and now she concluded the
whole matter for herself, at least, by saying in a most practical way:

"It is the devil's work from first to last, and I am not surprised that that woman, Mrs. Hayden,
has got into his clutches, for she never did her duty to the church, and such people can't
expect he will always let them go their own way. Christian Healing has no right to its name
or its pretentions. It is only the magician's rod, and I, for one, don't propose to look at
it," with which profound announcement she went to the other room to oversee her charge of sewing
girls.

"Oh, how righteous we are!" giggled one very young lady, with a mock look of reverence.

"Well, now, see here ladies!" declared Mrs. Grant, another "practical" woman, but of a different
type from Mrs. Dyke, "we may as well look at this matter in a sensible and candid light. Here
are the facts: Mrs. Hayden is a lovely and reliable woman. She has, as we all know, suffered
everything from her headaches and dyspepsia, besides the limb that was broken at the fire.
We see her well, and ought to believe what she says. They often say, 'Truth is stranger than
fiction.' An example has come to our door, and why should we refuse to believe, when the proof
is so plain? For my part, I can believe though I do not understand, and I want to know what
there is in Christian Healing."

Mrs. Grant had spoken, and as she usually did, turned the tide of thought in her direction.

"Why, yes, we all want to know if there is anything in it, but there is an if--"

"If! There it is again! I've no patience with people who always tumble over an if. You can
bar the very gates of heaven with that nipping little word. It means doubt, and doubt is the
destroyer of faith which we must have in this world, if we live at all."

Mrs. Grant unwittingly preached a little sermon, which not only served to quell the confusion,
but gave them a helpful thought to carry home. Scattering good seed seemed to be her mission,
and many a good word dropped into fruitful soil, and took its time to bring forth.

CHAPTER IX.

     "Soul, receive into thyself the warm and radiant life of heaven, to
     breathe it out again as spiritual fragrance over other lives, and
     so change this wilderness-world into the garden of the Lord! This
     is the lovely moral which hides within the roses of June, and makes
     more than half their sweetness."--Lucy Larcom.

And Mrs. Hayden? The old expressions of joy seemed utterly inadequate to describe her feelings.
It seemed that she was veritably dreaming of heaven, such a sense of largeness, of freedom,
had come over her, so much wider was her horizon, so much more clearly could she see and understand
the hard questions that had always puzzled her, and yet she had, as it were, just come to the
edge of the beautiful flower-dotted, dew-besprinkled field that seemed spreading out before
her. So long hopeless, so long hungry as she had been after this taste, she only hungered the
more. Wonderingly she looked at herself walking about without pain; with an elastic step and
the springing freshness of health; wonderingly she remembered the dull, nervous throbbing headaches,
contrasted with the refreshing clearness, the joyous comfort and peace of mind which made thinking
a tonic, and labor a luxury.

What a glorious strength of exhiliration seemed flowing in to her with every breath; how it
expanded and thrilled her with its power! If this was life, what joy to live, to know and feel
the gladness and beauty of God's beautiful world, and it must not be for her alone, but for
all hungering, thirsting mankind. She must impart it to those who had been suffering and helpless
like herself. It was even now flowing into her own family. Although Miss Greening had given
her but the first and fundamental principles of the method, she had in many instances already
demonstrated their worth and power. It soon grew to be a regular matter of course to treat
every one in the family who seemed in need of a remedy for anything.

Mr. Hayden had frequently come home with neuralgia in his face, but after one or two attacks
the unwelcome intruder vanished. The family medicine case, which had recently been replenished
for the winter, was left to its own devices, and dust gathered on the necks and shoulders of
the cough remedies, paregoric and hive syrup bottles, until they would have looked quite pitiful
in their desertion, if anybody had seen them. Jamie's one attack of croup yielded more readily
to his mother's silent treatments than it ever had to hive syrup, and it was with a deep thankfulness,
not unmixed with awe, that Mr. and Mrs. Hayden felt their little one at last free from his
old, dreaded enemy. Never before had the children been so free from colds or ailments common
to childhood, as this winter. Never before had there been such a seemingly reckless carelessness
in wrapping them up, keeping them out of the draughts, or letting them eat just what was on
the table.

"Why, it is like living in another world altogether," said Mr. Hayden, enthusiastically to
one of the neighbors. "The children are so much happier, quieter, more peaceable. I tell you,
it is like getting free from prison to come into this way of living, and my wife is getting
stronger all the time. Of course you want it," he continued. "Come over some time, and we'll
tell you more about it." Saying good night he walked away, leaving his friend to wonder if
the entire family had not turned lunatics.

Enwrapped in the seamless robe of Truth, the sharp winds of worldly criticism seldom reach
us, because we are no longer susceptible to their sharpness. A gentle mildness beams from every
face, for beyond the veil of outward appearances we learn to discern the pure, perfect holiness
of God's child--the divinity behind the bars. Not, however, till we know how to put on this
wondrous robe are we invulnerable.

Although Mrs. Hayden had learned much and lived much in these last few months, there came a
time, as the summer drew near, when it seemed that everything was slipping away from her. Not
her health, except that her old headache occasionally threatened her, but things did not seem
as clear to her. Many problems were only in a partial state of solution, and a vague dissatisfaction,
a helpless discouragement took possession of her at times, very hard to bear, especially when
contrasted with the light she felt had so long guided her. Of late even her treatments seemed
almost fruitless. Her old-time impatience had manifested itself on several occasions, and one
warm June morning she went about her work in a decidedly old-fashioned mood.

It was Monday, and in addition to the washing to be seen to, the little extra help to be rendered
the girl, her husband had sent her a large case of strawberries to be put up, manlike, forgetting
that this day at least was full. She was hastening to get them ready before the dinner hour,
and the "picking up" of the sitting-room, so essential Monday mornings, had been left till
a more convenient season.

Mabel had gone to school, while Jamie and Fred were playing in the sand in the back yard.

With her hands in the berries, and her thoughts busily engaged, she was suddenly roused from
her reverie by the noisy entrance of Fred, who just came in for a drink of water. As he turned
to go out, he threw his arms around his mother's neck and gave her a boy's impetuous hug, and
a kiss that ought to have rejoiced any mother's heart, but this morning it annoyed her. "Run
away, now; mamma hasn't time this morning," and she pushed him impatiently away. Just then
the door bell rang, and Fred sprang to answer it. In another moment he ushered into her presence
a shabbily dressed, poor, miserable looking woman, who immediately asked for a drink of water.
"I can get it," said the ready Fred. While he was gone, the woman began her request:

"Plaze, Ma'am, would you be wantin' some garters to-day? They are warranted by the very man
as made 'em. My boy is layin' sick, and his father is dead, and all my health has been took
away carin' for him, and a friend of mine, she has been in this business a long time, and says
it's very good some days, and she let me take her place to-day, so if you could take a pair
or two to-day it would be very thankful I'd be, and I'm sure this boy would need a pair; they
are only 25 cents, and will just fit; ain't they nice, my boy?" She poured her story out, as
though there were no end to it, as she held up some brilliant red and blue elastics that quite
dazzled Fred, who claimed them at once.

"I have not time to examine and choose this morning, and Fred, you do not need them now," said
Mrs. Hayden, with some annoyance in her tone.

"Now, mamma, you didn't see my old ones, they ain't red and blue, nor stretchy, an' my stockin's
come down all the time. See how wrinkly they are," and he held up a dusty little shoe with
a sadly demoralized stocking above it, rich in holes as well as wrinkles. The stocking had
been torn on a nail, he volubly explained. In his excitement Fred raised his voice, thus summoning
Jamie to the scene with a rush that upset the dish of berries just picked over.

"I didn't mean to, and I can pick them up again," and he swept his dirty little hands into
the soft mushy pile, gathering berries, dust, stems or whatever happened to be in the way,
dashing the miscellaneous mess into the clean berries that had escaped.

"Jamie, you careless child! how can you be so naughty? Go and wash your hands this minute!
Fred, leave those things and stay out with Jamie, I can not have you around when there is so
much to do!" and with an impatient gesture she brushed Jamie aside and began sorting the berries
as best she could.

Fred started toward her with the elastics, saying:

"But, mamma, you haven't looked yet;"

"Well, you see my hands are full, and I can tell you just as well without looking."

"You always tell me to do as I am told," pouted Fred as he reluctantly departed.

Mrs. Hayden was ashamed and yet reckless with discouragement, and scarcely noticed the anxious
pedlar, who stood waiting for some decisive word from her.

"I have no use for the supporters at present," she said at last. But as she noticed the look
of despair slowly settling on the woman's face, she added, "but, if you are in such distress,
I will let you leave two pairs. Take the 50 cents lying there on the shelf," pointing to the
place. The woman was very grateful and soon went away with a brighter face.

For a long time after she was gone, her picture remained in Mrs. Hayden's remorseful memory,
though she put it away as much as possible and went on with her work. Jamie and Fred had quarreled
several times, but even in peace, the fires of war were likely to burst out afresh, for it
was always so when she felt this way.

As Mrs. Hayden sat in her own room that evening, reviewing the events of the day, which seemed
the culmination of many days, it seemed that the Marion Hayden who had been so happy these
last few months, improving in health and strength and ability to live a more useful life, and
the Marion Hayden who had so miserably disgraced herself to-day, were far apart--in fact irretrievably
separated. Where, indeed, had gone her power of self-control, her wisdom and tact in governing
the children? Why had she so harshly told Fred to run away from her when the dear child was
only showing his affection according to his own nature? Such an active, impulsive yet loving
child must be wisely dealt with, and she had often realized that with Fred, love must be the
governing power, not force. To give way as she had to-day would be to lose her influence over
him, not only because of repulsing the child himself, but because his critical eyes noticed
every weakness and failure in her, to live up to her own code of morals laid down for him to
follow.

Her accusing conscience asked why she had not questioned and tried to help that poor woman
who, with all her ignorance, was doing the best she could, to solve life's problem.

After all, what had she, Marion Hayden, to offer the world while she had not yet conquered herself?

Oh, the bitterness of regret, the repining for wasted moments and lost opportunities! but here
she was in her old groove of thought. Could she not try the new way, now that she so sorely
needed it?

She would try; she would begin to look on the other side of these questions. She would regain
her footing in spite of her humiliating downfall, although there might still be a lingering
sense of shame over her defeat.

Later, her husband came home. He tossed her a paper saying: "Here is something that will clear
you up. Read it aloud. I just glanced over it, and found it very good." He threw himself upon
the sofa, waiting for her to begin. Mechanically she took up the paper.

"'The Ubiquity of Good;' is this the article?"

"Yes, there are several just as strong as that one."

"Oh, I see; yes--I can hardly wait to read aloud," she exclaimed, running her eyes over the
pages, instantly imbibing the spirit of the writer. She began with an awakening interest which
increased till she was fairly electrified with delight.

Her husband looked at her in astonishment although it had much the same effect on him. "I thought
you needed something like that;" he said, sitting bolt upright and looking at her. "You see,
Marion, if you could only be as enthusiastic all the time as that woman is, you could do the
works that she does, and be as positive too."

"I know it, and if I understood as well as she does, it would be different, but I know so little
comparatively. Oh, if I could take lessons of the teacher she had--just listen, she says: 'I
have just had the privilege of going through a class in metaphysics taught by one who is conceded
to be the best teacher in the world,' but," continued Mrs. Hayden, "I've looked all over the
paper and can't find the name of the teacher; queer, isn't it? Mayn't I subscribe for this
paper, John, and I will ask her who this teacher is, when I send the subscription?"

"Well, yes, I think if you could get the benefit from every number you have from that, it would
be money well invested," replied Mr. Hayden. In fact he was as much interested in this subject
as she, and desired her to "go to the bottom of it," as he expressed it.

That night she retired with a new hope. If others could learn and demonstrate and keep, why
could not she?

The very next morning the letter was written and the money sent for the new paper.

Mrs. Reade came over on one of her bird-like errands, and of course, must hear something of
the great help that had come so unexpectedly.

"How fortunate it came just now, for I have noticed several weeks you have been losing courage,
and as for myself, I don't seem to know what to do in any case any more," she exclaimed, after
hearing a few extracts read from the paper. "Now you will find out who the teacher is and--"

"I shall go away to take lessons as soon as possible," interrupted Mrs. Hayden. "Yes, I must
go," she continued, "and see what there is in it. I have already experienced too much physically
and spiritually to be able to give it up."

"Indeed, you have certainly had as much of a proof as one could wish. If I could only do as
much as you have, I should feel that it would be better to go without many other things rather
than this."

Mrs. Reade forgot that she had been able to keep little May in perfect health; that she herself
had ceased worrying over trifles and learned to make the best of everything. To her, the change
had been so gradual that she hardly knew in what it consisted. In the meetings held by the
few who were interested she had, unconsciously almost, given many glimpses of her private efforts
and success, which showed how faithfully she used what light she had.

"I wonder what Mrs. Grant would say to this," she resumed, after looking over the paper. "I
think she ought to take this paper, too. Of course, I expect to read yours," with an arch smile.

"As you certainly may, I will let you have this number this afternoon; I can't spare it yet.
You can't imagine the abyss I fell into yesterday. It seemed that I had not only lost the ability
to hold myself up, but the self respect that would help to regain my footing."

"'It is always darkest before the dawn', they say," quoted Mrs. Reade, merrily, "and now the
dawn of our delivery is at hand, we shall know what to do before the twilight comes again.
But I came after your jelly mold and must not stand here all day talking about things so utterly
unlike--well, good-bye! I can hardly tear myself away when I talk with you," and she ran out
with a gay smile.

Nearly every week these last few months Mrs. Hayden, Mrs. Reade, Mrs. Grant and occasionally
one or two others had met to read and talk on the all-absorbing topic and gain confidence and
strength by an exchange of ideas and experiences; but they knew not how to draw from the fountain
of knowledge itself, and while they had learned much and gained much, there was a lack which,
in the moment of trial, they knew not how to supply.

In a few days Mrs. Hayden received the coveted information as to the identity of the wonderful
teacher, and that she was to teach several classes in Marlow, only two hundred miles away,
which quite set her on fire with impatience to go at once.

But circumstances were not propitious. There were many details to be arranged, much to be considered.
What should be done with the children? Could she afford it? What could she wear? In her eagerness
she could have overcome every obstacle within an hour, but her better judgment told her to
be patient a little longer, a decision her husband quite approved.

In the meantime she tried to live more faithfully up to the light she had received, but the
first flush of faith that had brought forth the works, seemed gone, and she knew not how to
bring it back. Not that she was not just as earnest, not that she had lost a whit of her faith
or interest, but the fire of impulse, unclouded by doubt, had disappeared. She thought about
it every leisure moment, but concluded at last to let go such intense effort that must necessarily
be blind, and live more in the "holy carelessness of the eternal Now," as George MacDonald
so beautifully expressed it in his book she was reading.

In one respect she fared as comparatively few women do, who hunger after spiritual things;
she had her husband's full sympathy and co-operation. Afterward, when she had seen more of
the world and knew more about other women's lives, she realized the value of it, realized that
without it she would have starved before she could have feasted. Oh, the sweet influence of
a sympathy that unites and harmonizes two natures, no matter how opposite in character and
tendencies.

CHAPTER XI.

     "As out of a dream, paths impossible to sense and every day show
     plain and sudden transit into distant places, so from your shut
     souls widens out an entrance way into God's everlasting joy!"

     --A. D. T. Whitney.

At last the time came. She was to go for the last class in Marlow. The last problem as to what
to be done while she was gone had been solved. The children were to be under the kind care
of Anna, who agreed to do her best in looking after them.

Mrs. Hayden's wardrobe had received the necessary additions, the question of affording was
not asked again, for it was like asking if she could afford food or clothing.

It meant a great deal to her, going out in the world to get this wonderful knowledge. It was
a new way of seeking the kingdom of heaven, and it must surely teach the right knock that would
open the door. The little light that had already come to her proved that, for never before
in all her years of hungry longing had she been so well fed, so visibly nourished. Surely her
soul could not be mistaken in thus dictating her quest.

"It seems too good to be true, John, that there is a way and that I am going to find it," she
said a few days before she went away.

"I am very glad, dear Marion, for your sake, that you are so happy in this. It certainly is
a beautiful religion as far as we can understand it."

"Yes, the very thing we tried so hard to find during all those years of darkness, and I have
begun to actually feel thankful for our misfortunes, because it seems they have led us into
this knowledge. What would we have known or cared for Miss Greening, had we been living in
the mansion on the hill? Or what would we have believed, even if we had read something about
Christian Healing?"

"It is hard to tell, but if you are content I am, wifie, although I should like the old home
again."

Like many others he was able to appreciate the material good things, but knew not that the
material are but emblems or symbols of the spiritual.

"We shall possess something far better than all the palaces and kingdoms of the earth, if we
get this 'pearl of great price.' I know now what it means for the rich to hardly enter the
kingdom of heaven. It is because they are so satisfied in their rich possessions they feel
they have everything worth having and need nothing more. That very indifference and apathy
keeps them from getting spiritual treasures."

"How true that is, Marion," said her husband, stroking his mustache thoughtfully.

Just then the door bell rang and the girl presently ushered Grace and Kate into the room.

"Why, how do you do? I am more than glad to see you," said Mrs. Hayden, warmly grasping a hand
in each of hers.

"It is such a lovely evening that we felt we should like a walk, and as we generally gravitate
toward your house, here we are," said Kate, laying aside her hat.

"Do you know I am going to Marlow to take the Christian Healing lessons?" asked Mrs. Hayden,
with a bright smile, as they were cosily seated for their chat.

"Are you, really? I am so glad, Mrs. Hayden," said Grace. "When are you going?"

"Monday, on the afternoon train, and I shall be gone three weeks. It seems a long time now,
but I hope it will be so profitable and pleasant that it will not seem long while it is passing."

Kate looked very grave. Finally she said: "Well, Mrs. Hayden, I am sorry you are going."

"Why?" exclaimed Mrs. Hayden.

"Why?" echoed Grace, and the host looked the interrogation he did not verbally express.

"Because I am seriously afraid it is wrong. Just a few days ago I had a talk with the minister,
and he is very decided in his denunciation of it, saying it is plainly contrary to the teachings
of the Bible, and I have been reading an article this afternoon that is very convincing in
its arguments against it. No, Grace, you needn't shake your head. I have been cowardly and
lazy long enough about my religion, now I shall stand up for what I think is right, and I love
Mrs. Hayden too well not to warn her of what I believe to be a most dangerous heresy."

She had evidently nerved herself to say this, but her voice trembled with earnestness, and
when she finished there were tears in her eyes.

"I thank you, dear Kate, for your sincere regard, and appreciate your motive most deeply, but
of course, that can not change my mind now," said Mrs. Hayden, much touched.

"That, of course, is for you to decide, but I have suddenly realized my religious responsibility
as never before, and have been earnestly considering this matter. At first it seemed all right
and very beautiful, but I believe it is only the work of the devil to get people into his net
of wickedness."

Grace was too astonished for speech; now she understood what Kate had meant by her disinclination
to talk on the subject since that night they had heard Miss Greening. Now her thoughtful spells
were explained, as well as her eager desire to come here to-night.

"I do not see why the ministers should oppose it as they do," said Mr. Hayden, after a short
silence.

"If you look back over the history you will find they opposed giving freedom to the slaves;
they opposed the temperance movement until it was forced upon them. Many of them now oppose
woman's suffrage, though their audiences are often composed almost entirely of women. It seems
a great mystery why they should oppose any of these good and necessary reforms, but I think
it is because they are only mortal men, and have many mortal faults and a great deal of mortal
ignorance," said Grace, recovering her tongue at last.

"It seems to me if everybody would read the words of Jesus and follow his example they would
never be harsh, or critical, or uncharitable, and above all, they would not judge anybody or
anything without a righteous reason. The whole burden of his teaching is expressed in the sentence:
'Little children, love one another,'" was Mrs. Hayden's opinion. Kate looked at her gratefully.

"We would have a very different world if every one followed that law, and we have never heard
a better one. The only difficulty is to know how to follow it," added Mr. Hayden.

"We must know the whole truth if we would be free from all error, and we can only get truth
by earnestly seeking for it, is my firm conviction," said his wife.

"If the truth makes us free, certainly we ought to search for it, and as we get it we can not
be moved from our position, for by the nature of truth it is forever the same. Imagine anybody
telling me two times two are five. If they argued and talked forever they could not prove it,
for a lie can never be proved true."

"That's capital reasoning, Grace," exclaimed Mr. Hayden, admiringly.

"Then if these ministers are in the right," she continued, "why should they need to be so active
and emphatic and malevolent, as they sometimes are, in their denunciation of what they call
a lie, because if it is a lie, won't it prove itself? And if their position is assured, and
the truth must necessarily be assuring, since that is the essence and nature of it, if their
position is assured, why is there any need of such resistance? Jesus plainly taught the non-resistance
of evil, if I read my Bible correctly this morning. I have been studying religion somewhat,
too, the last few weeks," she concluded, glancing at Kate rather apologetically.

"It would be well if we studied it a great deal more earnestly than we have before," said Kate,
flushing warmly.

"Well, Kate, isn't one of our best ways a thorough investigation of it?"

"Yes, of course."

"Then I intend to look into Christian Healing at my earliest opportunity, and see what there
is in it. If there is nothing, it can not hurt me. If there is something, it will prove itself,
and I shall gladly accept the help it gives," and Grace rested on her oars.

"I have a suggestion to make," said Mr. Hayden, "and that is that Mrs. Hayden write us a report
of each day's lecture, and you can come down and we will read them together, or I can hand
them to you after I have finished them."

"Capital!" exclaimed Grace. "Will you do that, Mrs. Hayden?"

"I will do the best I can, and be delighted. It will help me as well as you; but they will
be nothing but ordinary letters, for I would have neither the time nor the ability to write
lectures." Then she added, turning to Kate, "You will read them, too, won't you, dear? for
I do want you to understand that this is the true Christ-religion, and as Grace says, if it
is true it will prove itself."

"I do not object to reading your letters; indeed shall be glad of the privilege," replied Kate,
with a deprecatory gesture.

"You must be sure and give us the practical part, so we can learn by practice as well as theory,"
said Mr. Hayden, playfully.

"Yes, and I will promise to be a faithful student, if that will be any inducement," added Grace;
"and I know Kathie will, too; won't you?"

"Don't say any more, please. You all know I want what is true and good," she replied, huskily.

       *       *       *       *       *

It seemed hard to say the good-byes, even to go on this little trip. Mrs. Hayden looked at
the children and home through blinding tears as her husband helped her into the carriage. They
did not say much as they drove away to the depot, and both were deeply moved. There seemed
such a momentous meaning in this journey.

"You must promise to write often, John?"

"Yes, dear Marion, and don't worry about us."

"I shall write every day, John, and I do want you to grow with me. Read the lessons please,
very carefully."

"Yes; good-bye."

A kiss, and he was off. She waved her hand as the train started.

Like a leaf on the rippling river, gently touching the stones or mosses in passing, but hurrying
on to a broader outlook and a straighter pathway, we float in the varying current of life,
now dallying with youth's pleasures and playfully touching the problems before us, then sent
adrift by a deep desire to know, we go out on a voyage of discovery, and be the winds rough
or gentle, we go on till harbored at last.

Nor would we leave thee, gentle Truth. May thy voice guide and strengthen and cheer; thy sweet
knowledge be the lamp to our path; thy words of wisdom our armor and shield, and all the sweet
enchantment of thy presence be with us forevermore.

CHAPTER XII.

  "Our weary years of wandering o'er,
  We greet with joy this radiant shore;
  The promised land of liberty,
  The dawn of freedom's morn we see.
  O promised land, we enter in,
  With 'peace on earth, good will to men,'
  The 'Golden age' now comes again,
  And breaking every bond and chain;
  While every sect, and race and clime,
  Shall equal share in this glad time."

  --E. B. Harbert.

Mrs. Hayden immediately sent a few words to her husband informing him of her safe arrival,
but said nothing concerning her plans until later in the week, she wrote:

"I attended a reception last night that gave me a good idea of the great interest manifested
in this new subject by people from all parts of the country as well as this great city. Many
who have been attending a convention of truth seekers this week were there, and I met, among
others, Mrs. Harmon. She is lovely, with such a sweet pleasant face and clear mild eyes. I
do not wonder Miss Greening was charmed with her. We had quite a chat about mental healing.
She gave me an interesting account of how she came into the work and what she is doing. I also
met many others. One thing noticeable about these people that seems peculiarly characteristic,
was the bright, happy faces so full of repose and trustfulness contrasted with the dull, sluggish
care-worn expression of people in general. It really rests and cheers wonderfully to look upon
countenances that carry the gospel of healing with them.

"After a pleasant social time, Mrs. Pearl, in whose honor the reception was given, was called
upon for an address, the substance of which is about as follows:

"It is an unexpected pleasure as well as privilege to thus meet face to face so large a body
of people who are working or desire to work for the uplifting and healing of humanity by this
new yet old Christ-method.

"While there are so many thousands of the world's best workers engaged in lifting the burdens
of sickness, sorrow and sin, there are none who accomplish more marvelous or speedy results
than Christian healers. Indeed they have already demonstrated this philosophy to be a most
powerful means of reclaiming the sinful and adjusting social relations as well as healing the sick.

"It already promises a better method of dealing with intemperance than that of any other class
of reformers. Why? Not because earnest, devoted women do not give time, labor and hearts' blood
to the temperance cause; not because wise, honest men are not doing their best with tongue
and pen, in legislative halls and political conventions, but because neither women nor men
have learned the true principle of moral reform.

"The wise mother knows that the best way to keep her child from mischief is not to talk about
his temptation but cause him to forget it by thinking of other and better things. She encourages
him to do better by recognizing his higher nature and showing him a better way. She 'overcomes
the evil with the good.' Thus his moral nature gradually gains ascendency over the lower. This,
and this only is the true reform; but the same mother fails to carry out the same principle
with larger children. She must learn that the same management which corrects and improves the
child will correct and improve the sinner, for a sinner is only a child of larger growth.

"Thus far, the world has been most attracted to the healing of bodily ills, and all discomforts
of the flesh, but the material demand is only a forerunner or symbol of the spiritual, and
the signs of the times are even now ready for the keenest readers. People are beginning to
enquire if this wonderful power for healing the body can not be used for the healing of vicious
minds, the curing of depraved appetites.

"Since religious teachings and ethical lectures seem to be so inadequate to meet the crying
need, why not try this new method which claims to be a panacea for all ills, ask the moral
philosophers.

"'The world moves slowly,' it is said, but the world awakes slowly, it should be. We are ministering
angels to one another, in our process of awakening. If we have not enough realization of truth
to keep ourselves awake, some one comes along and wakes us up, by telling us more and we, in
turn, wake some slumbering neighbor.

"Invisible and silent are the workings of Truth, and none may judge what best teaches the law.
None may know what has given this or that insight into a broader truth, but all at once some
one has the new light, and hastens to impart the knowledge.

"All effort for truth points to one end--Truth. All reforms, all religions point to a higher
standard of living, a clearer realization of the highest and best, a broader vision of truth,
a breaking away from the false and a bringing about of the true.

"Mankind is conservative and must needs consider many things in many ways. Old opinions are
not easily relinquished because they are 'bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh' and not
till we awake to spiritual as well as intellectual knowledge, shall we realize that we are
free--free to listen, learn and live.

"As in the history of every reform, we find opposition and persecution facing the Christian
healers, but as time goes on, even the unbelieving and conservative shall be brought to a knowledge
of the truth. Many things unaccepted and unestablished to-day shall be proverbial platitudes
of to-morrow.

"We who have a clearer vision of the better way, who are demonstrating our position with such
wondrous signs, must realize more and more the importance of the first and only law--the law
of love. Judge not. Be a unit in Truth.

"We come together as many, but should go away as one. We now have thousands of Christian healers
all over the country who are striving as never before to live a higher life, to work for humanity
according to the Master's teachings, and it becomes us, as true disciples of such a leader
to so live that we shall see the fulfillment of that blessed promise: 'Greater works than I,
shall ye do.'

"Let us recognize the use and beauty of unity. Let us be as one, and then, like the brave and
faithful Joshua, we shall be able to break down the walls of any Jericho.

"Christ followers, truth seekers, friends! Make use of the golden privileges of to-day, use
every moment for the furtherance of good, make every silent thought or uttered word a stream
of influence that shall cause the desert to blossom like the rose. Send your thoughts out to
the grand reformers, the women workers and the men workers, the tired mothers and the anxious
fathers, the faithful teachers and the innocent children. Sow the seed diligently, no matter
what the soil. Never mind the coldness, the indifference, the slighting disparagements, for
bye-and-bye will come the harvest. Do in all ways as you would be done by.

CHAPTER XIII.

  "One Holy Church of God appears
    Through every age and race,
  Unwasted by the lapse of years,
    Unchanged by changing place.

  "From oldest time, on farthest shores,
    Beneath the pine or palm,
  One unseen Presence she adores,
    With silence or with psalm.

  "Her priests are all God's faithful sons,
    To serve the world raised up,
  The pure in heart her baptized ones,
    Love, her communion cup.

  "The Truth is her prophetic gift,
    The soul her sacred page;
  And feet on mercy's errand swift
    Do make her pilgrimage."

  --Longfellow.

The next day Mr. Hayden, with great interest, read the letter containing the first lecture,
which was given the day after the reception reported in the last chapter. Pertaining to the
lesson he read:

"How I wished you were with me yesterday, and could see the fifty eager faces as they gathered
in the class room and waited for Mrs. Pearl.

"Some sorrowful and careworn, some filled with the marks of suffering and pain, some hopeless
and despairing, some careless and gay, some merely curious, but all expectant and interested.

"It matters not with what varying motives a mass of people meet together, there is a common
chord of sympathy, which, if rightly touched, will cause the many to think and feel as one,
and herein lies the secret of a teacher's power. Mrs. Pearl has this faculty of gathering and
holding the thoughts of her audience, and I could not help noting the calm and satisfied expression
as they went out after the lecture.

"The first lesson is about The True Foundation, and while much of it is what we have known
and believed, it is stated in a new and interesting way. I will give it, as nearly as possible,
in her own words:

"It is necessary to have a common premise in order to sustain a harmonious argument, and the
first thing is to find a base or foundation from which and upon which to build. Our doctrine
is to be established by sound reasoning and scientific argument, and we must go back to the
beginning and learn something about the First Cause of all things.

"In ancient times students devoted themselves to the study of pure reasoning, and they found
that by putting themselves in harmony with First Cause, they attained a power, by certain lines
of thought and through the speaking of words, to perform wondrous works, healing the sick,
having dominion over all creation.

"They discovered the different results of speaking words of science, which are words of truth,
and words of error or words contrary to reason. Right, true words brought forth right and true
conditions to everyone around them, but deviation from this line of reason, would bring discord
and trouble and undesirable conditions. These wise thinkers declared Mind to be the First Cause
of all creation, and announced the study of Mind and the words and ways of Mind, to be the
profoundest theme that could engage the attention of man.

"We find this philosophy and these conclusions corroborated by the Bible, which we shall consider
and prove to contain revelations of changeless, eternal truth.

"Truth is universal, and whatever is true in one part of the universe must be true in all parts.
That which has been understood and conceded to be true in all ages and climes is what we call
universal truth.

"Because the first chapter of Genesis, then, agrees in all essential particulars with the accounts
of other nations and among other peoples we consider it universal truth.

"Because it is so beautiful, logical and spiritual, we revere it; because our own inner consciousness
of truth agrees with its statements, we concede it to be as accurate and reasonable an account
of Creation as we have, and we are therefore willing to use it as the basis of our argument.

"We read: 'In the beginning God created,' but a more literal and spiritual rendering would
make the pivotal statement, 'God creates.' Now we know there can be no beginning or end to
Omnipotence, hence there must be a continuous creating, and thus the term 'beginning' could
only refer to the manifestation of what had already been created. How was the creation manifested?
By the Word. 'God said, let there be light, and it was so,' and by every 'God said,' was manifested
the thing which He said was to be.

"The word God is an abbreviation of the Anglo-Saxon of Good, the two words in that language
being identical. To many this will be an aid to realizing the omnipresence God, and add to
the reverential sense of that personal nearness which makes the Deity a Father and an ever-loving
Friend.

"God is not person as to form or personal limitations, yet personal in the sense of Presence
and intelligent communication with intelligent beings. Jesus said truly, 'No man hath seen
God at any time, because the eye of the flesh cannot perceive spirit.' Through the quality
or influence of Good, Intelligence, Love and all we may name as soulful, we perceive and feel
God's presence.

"Thus in the spiritual sense, the 'pure in heart may see God.' We can, too, perceive the quality
of God in Good, as we perceive the attributes of the sun in its light. As the light of the
sun warms the dark earth, making it fruitful, so the divine Light (Intelligence), shining upon
our earth nature, makes it fruitful because of the presence of its Creator.

"Some there are who call this ever-present Intelligence or Good the living Principle. As the
Infinite, it wears all phases and adapts itself to every conception of the Finite, so in the
sense of omnipresence and unchangeableness it might from this point of view be called Principle.
This is the cold, mathematical conception of God as Law, which without Love would be incomplete.
We must, therefore, know the duality of God if we are to understand either Law or Love. Some
things can only be known by intuition, without the aid of the senses, and because of an inherent
idea in our consciousness. For instance, every nation worships Deity in some way. Since we
cannot know God through the senses, by which we gain knowledge of visible things, how can we
know there is a God?

"As Paul says: 'Likewise the spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the
children of God;' and what better answer could we have?

"Spirit, according to Webster, is: 'Life or living substance considered independent of corporeal
existence--vital essence, force, or energy as distinct from matter.' God is the vital essence,
God is spirit, and God is substance--'the real or existing essence,' 'the divine essence or being.'

"God, therefore, is the Divine Power that creates and sustains all things--the All-Power, the
All-Intelligence, the All-Mind, the All-Love, the All-Substance, the All-Harmony, the All-Life,
the All-Good, omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent. This is the one Creator, 'one God who is
Father of all, over all, and in all.'

"Though we cannot see this God or Good Principle, we can apprehend it through the signs or
manifestations that we see. As we look about, we everywhere see the signs of life--not Life
itself, but the signs of it--that tell of the presence of God or Good. Now Life is Good in
and for itself.

"We often see the divinest love manifested through every deed of love, every heroic act of
higher living, every grand sacrifice of self-comfort, pleasure, even life itself. Jesus says:
'Greater love can no man have than to lay down his life for his friend.' Such love is a manifestation
of the one, only Love, which is God--Good omnipresent.

"Every glimpse of Truth which the whole world seeks to know and wherever found, is a realization
of the omnipresent Truth, which is God.

"Intelligence, in its highest or lowest form, is but a manifestation of God as Intelligence;
for whence comes our intelligence if not from the great and only Intelligence, which is ever
flowing to us and through us, which is ever being generated in us, whenever and wherever we
are willing to let it manifest itself. * * * * Who hath access to this universal mind is a
party to all that is or can be done, for this is the only and sovereign agent.'

"So we reason about health and strength and justice, or any of the divine qualities, which
we may claim as a part of our inheritance, because they are inherent in the All, in which 'we
live, are moved, and have our being.'

"Having something of an understanding as to the nature of this divine Creator, we can, to some
extent, apprehend that the essence of all things manifesting it, and manifested by it, must
be good like itself, must be of the same quality as itself; as light emanating from light,
must be of the same essence and quality as that from which it emanates. God, like light, is
always the same, and cannot send forth or create anything opposite Himself.

"The nature of God embraces every good quality of masculine and feminine character, as also
the impersonal life Principle. It is therefore proper to use the masculine, feminine or neuter
pronoun when referring to Deity. As different phases of the one Love, we see manifested, the
strong, all-protecting, intelligent father-love, the tender, restful, patient mother-love,
the innocent, confiding, trustful child-love, each complete in the whole, which can be recognized
by all or one of these attributes.

"The great Mind of which the ancient philosophers tell us and which Emerson so plainly realized,
is the the Origin and Force of all Creation, the Mind for which we have found so many synonyms
and so many offices, the Great Invisible of which all visible things are but signs or symbols.

"There is but one great Mind, one great Thinker. All thoughts of this Mind, which is Infinite
Goodness, must be infinitely good, and man is the crown and apex of the wonderful creation--is
made in the image and likeness of God.

"If we concede the Creator, God, to be omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent, the only Power
there is, perfect, unchangeable and eternal, we must necessarily concede that all which He
creates is good, and must remain so because everything connected with, emanating from, or similar
to Him is, and must be like Him in quality and essence.

"The true man is spiritual, perfect like his Father, and can only be subject to perfect conditions.
If we continually and persistently recognize the true creation which is invisible, we make
manifest the perfect conditions in the sign of the true, which is the visible. In doing this,
we are, in the most essential sense, acknowledging God, worshiping the one Deity.

"Because we have so long recognized the other powers we have become idolators, and must now
turn back to the only true God. How can we know spiritual truth without spiritual knowledge?
How can we have spiritual knowledge without spiritual perception; how can we have spiritual
perception without recognizing Spirit, Substance, God, as the supreme Essence back of all visible
forms?

"This is the fundamental principle of healing--this recognition of spiritual being and spiritual
law. Grasping only the surface meaning of this grand truth, we recognize and admire the mental
power which produces cures, hence it is frequently called mind-cure, because, through the agency
of mind, the cure is wrought, as we say, water-cure or sun-cure for the same reason; but as
we proceed in the study, we will go beyond an intellectual to a spiritual perception of what
is meant by met-a-physical, which pertains not only to a science of mental phenomena, but the
science of real being, and has to do with the spiritual or real self of man.

"Now John, if you don't understand, just wait and study, for really we must study these statements,
without prejudice, too, for that is the only way, and of course we cannot expect to understand
at once. The great essential is to keep uppermost the desire for truth, but I need not tell
you that, for what an earnest truth-seeker you are, nobody knows better than myself.

"This is the best I can do toward giving the first lesson, but you must think well upon it
and get a good foundation laid for what is to come next. This science is to be developed rather
than learned.

"I want to put in every moment I can get for study, so must close. Hand this to Kate and Grace.
I do hope they will be interested.

"Tell me all about your progress, and the precious little ones--how are they?

  "Your loving MARION."

CHAPTER XIV.

     "How shall I know if I do choose the right?"--Shakespeare.

"That is a very clear statement," said Mr. Hayden, as he handed the letter to Grace when she
called the next evening.

"Do you think we can get much of an idea from it?"

"O yes, indeed we can; but you take it home and read it with Kate."

Grace went straight home with her prize for she was more interested than she cared to admit
just yet, and Kate was still reluctant and fearful about the possible wrong.

Grace had awakened in the night, just after Mrs. Hayden had gone and found her crying. "What
is the matter, Katie?" she asked.

"Oh, Grace, I am so worried about this Healing, and I am afraid I did wrong to even promise
Mrs. Hayden I would read her letters," sobbed the poor child.

"Why, Katie dear, we could never know anything if we did not look into it and use the reason
God has given us. Surely you are not afraid to examine into what claims to be such wonderful
truth. You do not necessarily accept by examining it, and I am glad we can have the privilege
of reading what Mrs. Hayden says, for she has such a fair, unprejudiced mind, and will give
us the matter just as nearly right as she can; then we can judge for ourselves."

She reached over and drew Kate into her arms, but the sobbing did not cease at once. Grace
was naturally kind-hearted, and respected people's feelings. To-night she was very gentle,
as Kate gratefully realized.

"Come Kate, put away your fears. There's nothing can change the truth you have, and if it isn't
truth, the sooner you change your mind the better. What makes you feel so, all at once? Has
some one said anything?"

"Yes, Mr. Narrow gave me such a talking to when I asked him if it was wrong; for someway, I
got so troubled that I did not know what else to do."

"Well, what of it; you don't see anything wrong in it yourself, do you?"

"N--o, not exactly."

"What are you afraid of, then?"

"I--I don't know," with a hysterical sob. She was ashamed to admit that she was half afraid
of eternal punishment, something she had been in vague terror of all her life. It had been
impressed upon her so vividly, and now she was suffering from a keenly reproachful conscience,
because for so long a time she had been indifferent and neglectful of her religious duties.

Grace finally persuaded her it would be all right to give the matter a fair investigation.
Then she went to sleep, comforted, for half her misery had been caused by her indecision and
wavering.

When they read the letter together, Grace was delighted and Kate not much less so, though she
demurred a little about some things.

"What beautiful ideas of God! It seems plainer than anything I ever heard. To say God is Principle,
not person, makes it easier to apprehend His omnipresence," exclaimed Grace, laying down the
letter.

"Y-e-s, in one sense," slowly assented Kate, "but in the Bible He is spoken of as Person, or
at least as having personal attributes, and you know they frequently refer to what He says
and how He talked with Abraham."

"O, I think that is figurative, if it is true at all. How can a being with a definite or outlined
form be everywhere at the same time?"

"But surely, you believe His thoughts can be everywhere, and that is what is meant by this
omnipresence," said Kate, earnestly.

"Then do you think of Him as sitting on a great golden throne, listening to the petitions of
men below, and able to hear and to grant or refuse at the same moment every prayer that is
sent to Him by the millions of His children on earth?"

"'God's ways are not our ways, and with Him all things are possible.'"

"But is it not much easier to say this is Principle, which is everywhere waiting for our recognition
of its presence to become manifested to us?" pursued Grace.

"Yes, I don't know but it is."

"Now Kate, I am truly in earnest and mean to study this very earnestly. I know very little
about the Bible, because it has been a sealed book to me every time I ever tried to read it,
but during these three weeks that Mrs. Hayden is gone, I am going to put away my preconceived
opinions as far as possible and see if I can learn something, and now let us get the Bible
and see what it says on these questions. You have a concordance. Let us look up the word omnipresence
and read some of the passages in which it occurs."

Kate was well pleased, not only to make the Bible the foundation of this study, but to find
Grace so changed, and so ready to look into sacred things. "Perhaps she will be converted,"
she thought, and from that moment she, too, resolved to look fairly into Christian Healing.
She brought the concordance and found there was no reference to omnipresence.

"We'll look for present or presence," suggested Grace. She glanced rapidly down the columns
and found a reference to Ps. cxxxix. and turned to that.

"Yes, in the seventh verse it says: 'Whither shall I go from thy spirit or whither shall I
flee from thy presence?' and here is a marginal reference to Jer. xxiii: 24.

"Well, let us look up the references to God," suggested Grace again. "Here's one in Deut. xxxii:
4. Of course that is symbolical, but find another. Isn't there one that tells of Him as spirit?"

"Ah! there we have it very plain; word is not flesh and blood or person. Doesn't it say in
the letter that God is Intelligence, which is only another way to express the same thing?"

"Truth can only be considered as principle, so we have that statement confirmed by the Bible,
and that would agree with what Pythagoras wrote," said Grace, quoting: "'There is one Universal
Soul diffused through all things, eternal, invisible, unchangeable; in essence like truth,
in substance resembling light; ... to be comprehended only by the mind.' Now it is comparatively
easy to see manifestations of the Good. By the way, I think it a volume of explanation in itself
to say Good instead of God, don't you?"

"Well, yes, it does seem peculiarly expressive, but the old way sounds a little better yet."

"Of course," pursued Grace, "it doesn't matter so much what we call this omnipresent power,
as whether we understand it. All humanity worship the same Deity in the sense of recognizing
an omnipotent Power. I once read something comparing the ideas of God among the different peoples,
and it was really wonderful how similar they were, excepting, of course, each nation had a
different name for Deity. I believe I have that book now somewhere;" and Grace went to look
for it, but presently returned without finding it. "Well, it made such a vivid impression on
me that I remember a few of the principal statements. One was that the Hindoos teach of an
omnipresent, omniscient and omnipotent Being called Brehm who is the creator of all things,
from whom all things emanate and by whom all things are sustained. The Persians, Egyptians,
Greeks held similar ideas. The Persians called God, Ormuzd, the Greeks, Orpheus, the Egyptians,
Osiris."

"I did not know the Pagans held such ideas of Deity. I always thought they believed in many
gods," said Kate.

"They did, but as Edward Everett Hale, says: 'The innumerable Gods of the Pantheon are but
manifestations of the One Being,' that is, they had special names for the different manifestations
of God, as He appeared to them in the sun, the air, the earth, and also the different qualities
of human character. They all alike believed in a Supreme Being, and made statements almost
synonymous with many in the Bible. That is what may be called universal truth, and if this
philosophy is what is consistent with fundamental truth, it will be just what I have been wishing
to find." Grace leaned back meditatively, adding, "Mythology used to have a peculiar charm
for me, and many of those old stories are coming back with a new significance."

"'There is but one foundation, other, can no man lay,'" quoted Kate, earnestly.

"Yes, my dear," and Grace rose and paced back and forth in deep abstraction. "There is but
one Truth and we can not establish a falsity. But I want to carry my reflections a little further
concerning this universal worship. To my mind, the power inherent in everything and recognized
in some way by every individual is the supreme, perfect Power in different phases of manifestation.
The man who trusts an unseen power to bring the seed he plants to full fruition, is believing
in the true God, though he may not know it.

"The whole world lives on faith from one year to another, for there is not enough food produced
in one season to last more than one year, and if men did not know every succeeding season would
provide, they would be desperate indeed. What is this but believing in a supreme Power? Even
materialists admit that the great First Cause is beyond matter. Herbert Spencer speaks of it
as the 'Universal Reality, without beginning and without end.'"

"All people reverence and admire the sentiments of love and justice and truth and mercy. Let
us agree they come from the same cause and are everywhere present, and we shall come nearer
to worshiping God in spirit and in truth, than we ever have before. Now let's have your opinion,
Queen Katherine," concluded Grace, looking at Kate with a playful smile as she finished her
long dissertation.

"There is nothing I can add to that, and it seems a very good conclusion to our first lesson.
I did not know you had thought so much about religious things, Grace."

"I always had a fondness for looking on the forbidden side of things, and I am afraid I was
more curious than religious, but I am rather glad if there is an explanation to these things
that have always puzzled me."

CHAPTER XV.

     "A lie can not exist--it only appears. Truth is consciousness
     consistent with itself in every relation; error is consciousness
     inconsistent with itself in some relation."--Judge H. P. Biddle.

     "And what an end lies before us! To have a consciousness of our own
     ideal being flashed through us from the thought of God! Surely, for
     this may well give way all our paltry self-consciousness, our
     self-admiration and self-worships! Surely, to know what He thinks
     about us will pale out of our souls all our thoughts about
     ourselves!"--George MacDonald.

  MARLOW, September ----.

"Dear John: I hope you are as anxiously awaiting this letter as I awaited the second lecture.
It was splendid, so comprehensive, and above all, so practical. It throws light on many puzzling
points, and I am delighted so far with what seems so plain and true.

"Some of the members of the class seemed quite shocked at some of the statements, but it is
not strange that they should seem startling to one who has never thought on the subject, for
indeed, I should think it would take a good while to get used to reasoning that is directly
opposite the world's first conclusions; still we are looking for results that are quite contrary
to what the world looks for, so we can afford to collide with its opinions. When Mrs. Pearl
came into the class room, all turned to look at her and every ear was ready to listen.

"In yesterday's lesson we made a statement of God as the only Mind of the universe, the Great
Reality beside whom there is absolutely nothing in existence; but as we look around at the
scenes of suffering and poverty and ignorance, we are mightily tempted to disbelieve such a
statement.

"'Talk of omnipotent Light in the midst of midnight darkness!' you exclaim. Ah, but you are
to remember we are talking of the real creation; the invisible and unapparent instead of the
visible and apparent; the changeless and eternal instead of the evanescent and decaying.

"If God is the only Reality, His creation is the only real creation. The word real is applied
to that which actually exists, which forever is, not to that which seems or appears; therefore,
in speaking of the real we mean the changeless and invisible.

"If God is the only Mind, His are the only real thoughts, and thoughts are invisible to the
eye, but discernible to the mind or consciousness.

"If God is everywhere, there is no possible place or space in the universe where God is not;
hence He is all there is.

"What then, about this body, which is not spiritual, you ask? What about the material universe?

"Wait a moment. Think of the premise. As God the invisible is the changeless, what is the variable,
fleeting, visible unreality? The real is everlasting, the unreal is transitory. The real is
called Spirit, the unreal matter.

"What is Spirit? The underlying omnipresent substance that we call God.

"What is matter? The counterfeit, shadow, emblem, showing that Spirit exists or is.

"We read in a very ancient Hindoo Scripture: 'Those who have understanding, whose thought is
pure, see the entire universe as the picture of Thy wisdom;' and the thoughtful Carlyle said:
'All visible things are emblems.... Matter represents some idea and bodies it forth.'

"These thoughts are in perfect accord with the principles laid down in our premise, hence we
find that as we believe matter, believe the body to be the real creation, we are believing
a falsity. This is the idol we are worshiping instead of the true and only God. The grand visible
universe in which we see so many beauties, so many charms, is but the mighty object lesson
before us by which we may learn of the infinite, invisible All. As Theodore Parker said: 'The
universe itself is a great autograph of the Almighty.'

"The characters used in mathematics do not constitute the science but merely represent to the
senses the invisible ideas of the principle of mathematics. The visible does not constitute
the invisible, but may carry its messages as we learn to read its poetic and mystic pages.
The visible speaks to the mortal nature, but the invisible beyond and above, speaks to the
immortal nature.

"Since we find matter to be so totally opposite the real, there is no other name for it than
as the unreal, and the unreal being a counterfeit of the real, must be a lie, as the nature
of a lie is to make false claims, pretending they are true.

"Matter is a counterfeit because it is not genuine or of God, because it is changeable and
fleeting, because being limited to a visible form, it must have finite limitations and can
merely give finite conceptions.

"Taking it as a sign of something infinite, we learn of the infinite. All the students, teachers,
learned men and women of the world have added to the world's spiritual ideas revealed by their
study of the finite as well as their intuitive knowledge of the infinite. Charles Kingsley
gives us a hint of how to learn: 'Do not study matter for its own sake but as the countenance
of God. Try to extract every line of beauty, every association, every moral reflection, every
inexpressible feeling from it.'

"Our ideas of matter must then be entirely changed, and we must learn to look beyond the seeming,
to the true. We have believed in the reality of matter and material environment because of
reasoning from the false basis that man is material or that he is a mixture of material and
spiritual. To believe that the flesh and blood of our sister or brother is their real self,
is to believe God capable of creating something utterly unlike himself (John iii, James i.)
which may suffer, sin and die, and if He is all perfection, He can not know imperfection. If
He is all spirit, He can not know or be matter. Keep before your mind the perfection, omnipotence,
omnipresence of Spirit, God or Principle, and you will see more and more clearly the inconsistency
of anything opposite Him emanating from Him.

"Believing in matter as a reality, we have endowed it with all the power of the real, have
ascribed to it life, substance and intelligence, when it possesses neither.

"Where is the life when the body dies? If life were inherent in the physical body, could it
ever cease to be? God the eternal life principle can not cease to be. The life manifested through
the body is the life which is God and can not be affected by the decay or disappearance of
the body.

"The invisible essence of life is also the true substance, the reliable and changeless something,
upon which we may forever depend. We use the word substance in its etymological sense (from
sub, under and stare, to stand), and since Spirit or Mind is the reality that underlies every
material or sensible object, there is no substance to the object itself.

"Plato taught that 'ideas, are the only real things.' Ideas are expressions of thoughts, and
thoughts are expressions of mind, and this reasoning brings us back to God as Mind and Mind
as Cause. Admitting Mind or Spirit to be the life and substance back of or expressing itself
through the body, we may easily see that intelligence can not exist apart from Mind, and hence
can not belong to matter.

"In the language of Jesus the Christ, we are told, 'Spirit is all, the flesh profiteth nothing;'
thus from all classes of conscientious but confessedly diverse thinkers, we find statements
of universal truth, and this is what the hungry, starving world is seeking with more earnestness
than ever before.

"Since there is no life, substance or intelligence in matter, it will be comparatively easy
to prove that there can be no sensation, for where there is no life in the body, there can
be no feeling. Even the physiologists tell us mind must know pain before it can be located
in the body. We state therefore a theorem which is practically demonstrated; there is no sensation
in matter.

"As we visit penitentiaries, reform schools and hospitals, as we read and hear the startling
statements of press and pulpit, we grow disconsolate and heavy-hearted over the awful power
and reality of evil, forgetting again that He who is perfect goodness can not behold evil or
in any way permit its existence, any more than heat can permit cold, or light can permit darkness.

"Granting the omnipotence of Good, where is there any room for its opposite?

"If there is but one Power, and that omnipotent and perfect, there can be no evil in reality;
hence we are dealing with another lie when we judge according to appearances, which Jesus said
we should not do. It is really disloyalty to God to impute to Him all misery, pain, sickness
and suffering caused by the evil and ignorance of man. We are told: 'Let your soul be subject
to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God.' Because we have not done so, but have
believed in every claim power, we suffer from 'evils which our own misdeeds have wrought,'
as Milton wrote, or, in the words of Emerson, 'we miscreate our own evils.'

"Jeremiah said: 'It is your sins that have withholden the good things from you.'

"According to Webster, 'sin is a transgression of the law of God.' There is but one law--the
perfect and unchangeable Truth. Any deviation from Truth is error, and error is sin. In proportion
as we deviate from the strictly true, then, we sin. Because we admit things to be true which
are not true, we admit, then commit sin, and hence suffer for sin. We first think wrong. Sin
is of the mind, not of the body.

"To acknowledge the reality of sin or evil is a transgression of the law, because, according
to our established premise, it cannot be true.

"Through a misconception of our relation to God, and a belief in the power of evil, we are
obliged to admit the existence of sin, sickness, and death, neither of which can be true in
the presence of God, as the only Reality, in which or in whom are all things that eternally
are, not that temporarily appear.

"We have believed in a mind or power of thought opposite and contrary to God, when in reality
there can be nothing opposite or contrary to eternal Mind. We have believed ourselves endowed
with a mind separate from God, and ourselves subject to temptation from some cause not Good.
We have believed in minds, when there is but one Mind.

"This false force, this false mind, is variously called the evil or carnal mind, the mind of
the flesh, the old man, the serpent, the devil, the adversary. It is simply the opposite or
contradictory of the Good, the god of evil.

"Beside every true or positive statement there is a false or negative claim, and in so far
as we are ignorant of the true, we are in bondage to the false. To believe the claims of error
is to be bound; to know the reality of truth is to be free. To believe in a mind or power separate
or opposite from God, is to be subject to any suppositions or beliefs formulated by that mind
or negative thought.

"That we are spiritually perfect is true, but it is necessary for us to prove that fact by
'working out our own salvation,' by manifesting the positive or God quality of thought through
our life and actions, and the only way to be filled with good thought is to recognize and acknowledge
the Good only as the real.

"This error, tempter or devil, was spoken of by Jesus as having no truth, as being a liar,
and the father or cause of lies (John viii: 44). Instead of devil (which is only another name
for evil or the slanderer), or 'carnal mind', as Paul called it, we find mortal thought a better
term for the expression of this power of thinking.

"'Why have we this power of thinking wrong thoughts when there is but one good and only Mind?'
you ask. As God's idea, in the image and likeness of Mind that thinks, we have the power of
recognition, the power to be or not to be, the possibility to become sons of God. We have the
power to distinguish, to judge, to know; we have the spirit that ever leads us on and on in truth.

"But here is where we fail. In our ignorance or limited state of unfoldment, we have mistaken
the symbol for that which is symbolized matter is the symbol, as also the body, we have judged
according to appearances instead of righteous or strictly true judgment; we have yielded to
a belief in sin, hence are servants of sin.

"The conception of matter as having power, is based on appearances, and because we have delegated
to it a power, have acknowledged it as an entity, separate from the eternal mind, it has enslaved
us.

"Reasoning in this way we find everywhere two opposites or contradictories to be recognized
and judged, as the visible and the invisible, the material and the spiritual, the false and
the true, the mortal and the immortal, the unreal and the real, the negative and the positive.

"Judging of the true by that which is changeless and eternal, we can decide at once on those
qualities or attributes belonging to or describing what is true, and by knowing what is true,
we can readily distinguish it from the erroneous.

"We have considered these great errors or negatives which the world has believed and still
believes in, and they must be dealt with according to scientific law.

"Through all the ages of Christianity have been heard the words of the Master: 'If any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross and follow me;' but who has understood
it? The letter of the law has indeed been observed by many earnest followers of Jesus to a
degree not considered necessary in this age, but what has it demonstrated? What has come of
all the fasting and renunciation, the cruel asceticism and severe discipline?

"Do these conscientious disciples give an unmistakable proof of their discipleship by showing
the signs that must follow the true believer? How can they when they talk of sin, sickness
and death; of things contradictory to the nature, power and presence of God?

"Then they must not have understood the spiritual import of these words of Jesus to 'deny himself.'
Deny means, according to Webster, 'to contradict; to declare not to be true; to disclaim connection
with; to refuse to acknowledge; to disown.' Jesus meant deny the mortal thought, the false
self; refuse to acknowledge it as having any authority; and it is only as the Christ follower
proves this to be the true mode of denying self, that he can speak with authority as to the
scientific method of dealing with all the errors to which mortal thought gives birth.

"No other way has brought the desired result; hence we confidently assert that all these mistakes
agreed to and participated in by mankind must be emphatically, persistently, scientifically denied.

"Systematically and repeatedly we say:

"1. There is no life, substance or intelligence in matter.

"2. There is no sensation or causation in matter.

"3. There is no reality in matter.

"4. There is no reality in sin, sickness or death.

"5. There is no reality in evil.

"6. There is no reality in mortal thought.

"This is denying the self recognized by the world. This is the life that must be laid down,
that must be sacrificed, lost.

"Humanity has proven its subjection to these errors. Now, by its faithful rejection of them,
let it prove them lies, for the force of a lie is always annulled by rejection. This proves
the law referred to by Jesus when he made a denial of self the first duty of his disciples.

"In denying, it is necessary to say the words over and over again; it may be mechanically at
first, but say them over, several hours at a time, if possible.

"More is accomplished by concentration than anybody is aware, and the repetition of the words
helps to concentrate the thought. First repeat the whole list of denials, then select one on
which to spend most of the time for several days. The denial of matter, for instance, makes
us more spiritually minded.

"When denying, try to realize there is no space, but that anywhere you send your thought it
will go, and as you think or say the words, you will be denying error for the world as well
as for yourself, as every thought is world-wide in its influence, and helps to free or bind
humanity, even as it is truth or error.

"To deny is to put out of mind, to erase, as it were, the false beliefs. Be earnest, be faithful,
and you will have an abundant reward.

"This, dear John, is the substance of the lecture as nearly as I can give it. After Mrs. Pearl
had finished the lesson, she requested the class to sit in silence a few moments and together
hold the thought, 'There is no reality in matter;' after which we were dismissed with this
benediction: 'May we realize that God is, that spirit is the only reality.'

"The lessons are always opened by silent prayer, which I have forgotten to mention before.

"Please, dear husband, observe these rules and study every assertion as carefully as though
you were in the class. You, and Grace, and Kate, can accomplish a great deal together; but
by all means don't pass judgment till you have carefully examined all the evidence.

"Tell me all about the children. Such details will greatly comfort me, for I must confess that
to-night I am the least bit homesick.

  "Good night,

  "Your loving MARION."

CHAPTER XVI.

     "God is commanding us off, every hour of our lives, toward things
     eternal, there to find our good, and build our rest. Sometimes He
     does it by taking us out of the world, and sometimes by taking the
     world out of us."--H. Bushnell.

"The second letter has come," said Grace the moment Kate entered the room, after her day's
lessons were over.

"Has it? Let us hurry and get the tea over so we can study it."

"Don't you want to hear it first? I haven't looked at it because I wanted to wait for you,
but I can't wait that long," cried Grace, pulling it out of her painting-apron pocket.

"All right, then read away while I start the fire."

"No; come and sit down like a good child, you can't half listen when your mind is filled with
stoves and tea-pots."

Kate smiled, and drawing her chair up beside Grace, she listened to the reading, while her
face alternately brightened or darkened.

"Well, it sounds very beautiful and very plausible, but I can't see how any one can say there
is no evil when the world is full of it, and to say there is no sin, sickness or death! why,
that is blasphemous! I know the Bible won't corroborate that," she said, in a horrified voice,
at the conclusion of the letter.

"Hold on, we must not be so fast; there are good reasons for every statement, and she says
it is necessary to say these denials over and over. It is harder for me to believe there is
no matter, but if there is a way to prove there is none, then I will submit. But first let
us see what the Bible says," said the more moderate Grace.

She got the Bible and concordance, but could find no reference to matter as pertaining to physical
creation, but she found under the word "flesh" an allusion to John i: 12-13, and iii: 6.

She pondered a moment, then referred to the letter--"Oh, I see! She says, 'no reality in matter,'
and then goes on to explain about the real. Yes, now I see. Do you understand it, Kate?"

"I can understand that the body is not the real," replied Kate, thoughtfully, "for Jesus said
'the spirit is all, the flesh profiteth nothing,' but--"

"That's so. Why didn't we think of that before? Besides, it was taught by the ancient philosophers
as much as 4,000 years ago, that matter has no reality. Yes, its plain to see how it can be,
theoretically, but where they can demonstrate it practically, puzzles me. Here is a reference;
let us see if that will tell us something."

"That seems quite conclusive," said Kate.

"Yes, it does. Now we will consider your problem," replied Grace, running her finger down the
references, "and see if we can find anything in that. Let us bear in mind," she continued,
"she does not say there is no appearance, but no reality in evil. Among the first references,
I find one to the twenty-third Psalm: 'I will fear no evil, for thou art with me.' How plain
that is! Of course there can be no evil where God is, and God is everywhere. God is Love. In
Love there is no evil."

"But just think of the awful crimes that are committed every day, and the wicked people who
commit them," demurred Kate, with an incredulous look.

"We haven't got far enough to solve everything; listen to this: 'Only with thine eyes shalt
thou behold and see the reward of the wicked,'" read Grace.

"That must mean that with the carnal mind we see all things opposite God, and with the mind
of the spirit we discern spiritual things; that is in Romans somewhere," exclaimed Kate, with
a gleam of understanding in her face.

"What word shall I look for?" asked Grace, intently pursuing her search.

"Mind, I think; shan't I look for it?"

"No; here it is in the eighth chapter and tenth verse: 'The carnal mind is at enmity against
God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be.' That is plain enough.
It means that all thoughts opposite God and God's creations are of the animal man, hence at
enmity with God, and since there is nothing real but God and His creations, of course there
is no reality in them. Now you are satisfied, aren't you, Kate?"

"I suppose I ought to be, for I don't see any other way to understand those passages," she
admitted, with a sigh of relief.

"Just one more, and we'll go on to the next denial, which will hit me, I'm afraid," continued
Grace.

"I really did not know there was such a passage in the Bible, and I don't see why other people
haven't found it before," said Kate, quite won over. "But how strange it seems to deny this way."

"Yes, that is the most unreasonable part of it, and yet I think Mrs. Hayden has explained it
very clearly. Now what is next?" asked Grace.

"There is no life, substance or intelligence in matter," answered Kate, glancing at the letter.

"I must confess that puzzles me," mused Grace, thoughtfully.

"Oh, that is easy enough to understand, when you remember the spirit is all, besides, when
a person dies the organs of the body may be perfect, but there is no life or feeling, and according
to this new understanding, no substance," explained Kate, in her turn.

"I can see it well enough as a theory, but what all this has to do with practical every-day
living, is a mystery to me."

"'We haven't got far enough to solve everything,' somebody said to me once, and here it is
for you," remarked Kate, with a spice of mischief in her tone.

"All right, what next?"

"No sensation or causation in matter; but I think that is answered the same way as the other.
But this last one; I do wonder if the Bible corroborates it?" Kate looked troubled again, as
she read: "'There is no sin, sickness nor death.'"

"The same reasoning applies to that as to all the rest. There is no reality to anything but
God's creation, and that is changeless and perfect. But we will see what the Bible has to say;
I. John iii: 2-10. In the second verse it reads: 'Beloved, now are we the sons of God, but
it doth not yet appear what we shall be;' that of course is an assertion of our spiritual self.

"It is wonderful," murmured Kate.

"What is next?" pursued Grace, with the concordance open before her.

"That is all, except she explains the use and necessity of denial, and suggests to Mr. Hayden
the benefit of denying for hours at a time."

"Well, we can do that, too. If it is good for him, it must be for us. I mean to do it," said
Grace, shutting her book with a snap and pacing back and forth excitedly.

"Oh, well, take it calmly; we can do that while we are getting supper, and I am hungry now.
Do you know it is seven o'clock?" Kate exclaimed, looking at her watch.

"Two hours we have been studying," said Grace. "Really, this is as interesting as painting.
I don't see one thing but what is reasonable, do you, Kate?"

"Not the way it seems now."

After everything was put away they began making earnest application of the rules. Each sat
silently thinking, according to directions: "There is no reality in matter, there is no reality
in matter," etc. For two hours neither spoke. Then Kate said: "I feel so light; as though there
were no weight to my body. What does it mean?"

"I don't know, unless it shows you are realizing what you say."

"That is it. I can feel that there is no obstruction to spirit or thought; that spirit is limitless
and God is everywhere."

She seemed lost in her new thoughts, and went to bed as though she were dreaming. Grace had
experienced nothing but a sense of dullness and extreme sleepiness.

CHAPTER XVII.

     "The soul is not a compensation, but a life. The soul is. Existence
     or God is not a relation or a part, but a whole."--Emerson.

  "MARLOW, September ----.

"Dear husband: I was made very happy this morning by the messages from home, and especially
Fred's and Jamie's baby efforts. They wanted to send mamma their love, and the straggling characters
meant for words, convey as much meaning as though they were in good English, for they speak
to me in unmistakable language. Why do I understand so well? Ah, John, I see. Because, being
filled with love for them, I recognize the same quality in what they feel for me, and only
need a sign to read the meaning back of it.

"As I write, new light comes to me regarding the real meaning of signs and symbols. Until we
are filled with a desire and love for God, we can not perceive or understand the real meaning
of the universe, can not read God's love for us. Until we have a conscious apprehension that
there is a spiritual knowledge, we can not recognize spiritual truth.

"Oh, I can not help wishing you had been here to-day! It was simply grand; such an uplifting,
such a glimpse of the wondrous Now. We learned about what is, what we are and how to prove
ourselves God's children. Were it not for this vein, nay this wholeness of the invisible spirit,
what could we have on which to found hopes of 'halcyon days?'

"Not from the visible man of flesh and blood do all things beautiful and true emanate, nor
from the material and unstable, but from the one source that is God, as apprehended and realized
by His idea, the real, invisible, spiritual man. Beauty, worth, can only be in idea or understanding.

"What made Milton, Shakespeare, Emerson, truly great was their appropriation and manifestation
of the invisible inheritance of spirit, mind.

"What is man without intelligence, without love, without life, without truth? The real man
is spiritual because he is the idea of Spirit, Mind, God, the only Creator. All that is grand,
noble, true in an individual is a manifestation of the God-power and presence. There is but
one real Mind, and all real or positive thought or intelligence is the manifestation of Mind,
which is God. There is but one real Intelligence, and the intelligence manifested by the individual
is the Intelligence which is God.

"God is absolutely one Verity, the primordial Essence. To which proposal all agreeing, they bade
Pietro strip himself: but while, already divining his fate, he was
so doing, an ambuscade of full five-and-twenty men at arms fell suddenly
upon them, crying:--"Death, death!"

Thus surprised, they let Pietro go, and stood on the defensive; but, seeing that the enemy greatly
outnumbered them, they took to their heels, the others giving chase. Whereupon Pietro hastily
resumed his clothes, mounted his nag, and fled with all speed in the direction which he had seen
the damsel take. But finding no road or path through the forest, nor discerning any trace of
a horse's hooves, he was--for that he found not the damsel--albeit he deemed himself safe
out of the clutches of his captors and their assailants, the most
wretched man alive, and fell a weeping and wandering hither and thither
about the forest, uttering Agnolella's name.

None answered; but turn back he dared not: so on he went, not knowing whither he went; besides
which, he was in mortal dread of the wild beasts that infest the
forest, as well on account of himself as of the damsel, whom momently
he seemed to see throttled by some bear or wolf.

Thus did our unfortunate Pietro spend the whole day, wandering about the forest, making it to
resound with his cries of Agnolella's name, and harking at times back, when he thought to
go forward; until at last, what with his cries and his tears and
his fears and his long fasting, he was so spent that he could go no
further.

'Twas then nightfall, and, as he knew not what else to do, he dismounted at the foot of an immense
oak, and having tethered his nag to the trunk, climbed up into the branches, lest he should be devoured
by the wild beasts during the night.

Shortly afterwards the moon rose with a very clear sky, and Pietro, who dared not sleep, lest
he should fall, and indeed, had he been secure from that risk, his misery and his anxiety on
account of the damsel would not have suffered him to sleep, kept
watch, sighing and weeping and cursing his evil luck.

Now the damsel, who, as we said before, had fled she knew not whither, allowing her nag to carry
her whithersoever he would, strayed so far into the forest that she
lost sight of the place where she had entered it, and spent the whole
day just as Pietro had done, wandering about the wilderness, pausing
from time to time, and weeping, and uttering his name, and bewailing
her evil fortune.

At last, seeing that 'twas now the vesper hour and Pietro came not, she struck into a path,
which the nag followed, until, after riding some two miles, she espied
at some distance a cottage, for which she made with all speed, and
found there a good man, well stricken in years, with his wife, who
was likewise aged.

Seeing her ride up alone, they said:--"Daughter, wherefore ridest
thou thus alone at this hour in these parts?"

Weeping, the damsel made answer that she had lost her companion in
the forest, and asked how far might Anagni be from there?

"My daughter," returned the good man, "this is not the road to Anagni;
'tis more than twelve miles away."

"And how far off," inquired the damsel, "are the nearest houses in
which one might find lodging for the night?"

"There are none so near," replied the good man, "that thou canst
reach them to-day."

"Then, so please you," said the damsel, "since go elsewhither I cannot, for God's sake let me
pass the night here with you." Whereto the good man made answer:--"Damsel, welcome art thou
to tarry the night with us; but still thou art to know that these parts are infested both by day
and by night by bands, which, be they friends or be they foes, are
alike ill to meet with, and not seldom do much despite and mischief,
and if by misadventure one of these bands should visit us while thou
wert here, and marking thy youth and beauty should do thee despite
and dishonour, we should be unable to afford thee any succour.

This we would have thee know, that if it should so come to pass, thou mayst not have cause
to reproach us." The damsel heard not the old man's words without dismay; but, seeing that the
hour was now late, she answered:--"God, if He be so pleased, will save both you and me from
such molestation, and if not, 'tis a much lesser evil to be maltreated
by men than to be torn in pieces by the wild beasts in the forest."

So saying, she dismounted, and entered the cottage, where, having supped with the poor man
and his wife on such humble fare as they had, she laid herself in her clothes beside them in their
bed. She slept not, however; for her own evil plight and that of Pietro, for whom she knew
not how to augur aught but evil, kept her sighing and weeping all
night long.

And towards matins she heard a great noise as of men that marched; so up she got and hied her
into a large courtyard that was in rear of the cottage, and part
of which was covered with a great heap of hay, which she espying,
hid herself therein, that, if the men came there, they might not so
readily find her.

Scarce had she done so than the men, who proved to be a strong company of marauders, were at the
door of the cottage, which they forced open; and having entered, and found the damsel's nag, still
saddled, they asked who was there. The damsel being out of sight, the good man answered:--"There
is none here but my wife and I; but this nag, which has given some
one the slip, found his way hither last night, and we housed him,
lest he should be devoured by the wolves."

"So!" said the chief of the band, "as he has no owner, he will come in very handy for us."

Whereupon,
in several parties, they ransacked the cottage from top to bottom; and one party went out into the
courtyard, where, as they threw aside their lances and targets, it so befell that one of them,
not knowing where else to bestow his lance, tossed it into the hay,
and was within an ace of killing the damsel that lay hid there, as
likewise she of betraying her whereabouts, for the lance all but grazing
her left breast, insomuch that the head tore her apparel, she doubted
she was wounded, and had given a great shriek, but that, remembering
where she was, she refrained for fear.

By and by the company cooked them a breakfast of kid's and other meat, and having eaten and
drunken, dispersed in divers directions, as their affairs required,
taking the girl's nag with them.

And when they were gotten some little way off, the good man asked his wife:--"What became of
the damsel, our guest of last night, that I have not seen her since we rose?" The good woman
answered that she knew not where the damsel was, and went to look for her. The damsel, resigning
herself to her loss, besought them for God's sake to take her to the castle: whereupon they set forth,
and arrived there about half tierce. Now the castle belonged to one of the Orsini, Liello di
Campo di Fiore by name, whose wife, as it chanced, was there.

A most kindly and good woman she was, and, recognizing the damsel as soon as she saw her,
gave her a hearty welcome and would fain have from her a particular account of how she came
there. So the damsel told her the whole story. The lady, to whom Pietro was also known, as being
a friend of her husband, was distressed to hear of his misadventure,
and being told where he was taken, gave him up for dead.

So she said to the damsel:--"Since so it is that thou knowest not how Pietro has fared, thou
shalt stay here with me until such time as I may have opportunity to send thee safely back
to Rome."

Meanwhile Pietro, perched on his oak in as woeful a plight as might
be, had espied, when he should have been in his first sleep, a full
score of wolves, that, as they prowled, caught sight of the nag, and
straightway were upon him on all sides.

The horse, as soon as he was ware of their approach, strained on the reins till they snapped,
and tried to make good his escape; but, being hemmed in, was brought to bay, and made a long fight
of it with his teeth and hooves; but in the end they bore him down and throttled him and forthwith
eviscerated him, and, the whole pack falling upon him, devoured him to the bone before they had
done with him.

Whereat Pietro, who felt that in the nag he had lost a companion and a comfort in his travail,
was sorely dismayed, and began to think that he should never get out of the forest. But towards
dawn, he, perched there in the oak, almost dead with cold, looking around him as he frequently
did, espied about a mile off a huge fire. Wherefore, as soon as 'twas broad day, he got down,
not without trepidation, from the oak, and bent his steps towards
the fire; and being come to it, he found, gathered about it, a company
of shepherds, eating and making merry, who took pity on him and made
him welcome.

And when he had broken his fast and warmed himself, he told them the mishap that had befallen
him, and how it was that he was come there alone, and asked them
if there was a farm or castle in those parts, whither he might betake
him.

The shepherds said that about three miles away there was a castle belonging to Liello di Campo
di Fiore, where his lady was then tarrying. Pietro, much comforted, requested to be guided
thither by some of their company; whereupon two of them right gladly
escorted him.

So Pietro arrived at the castle, where he found some that knew him; and while he was endeavouring
to set on foot a search for the damsel in the forest, the lady summoned him to her presence, and
he, forthwith obeying, and seeing Agnolella with her, was the happiest
man that ever was.

He yearned till he all but swooned to go and embrace her, but refrained, for bashfulness, in the
lady's presence. And overjoyed as he was, the joy of the damsel was no less. The lady received
him with great cheer, and though, when she had heard the story of his adventures from his own
lips, she chid him not a little for having set at nought the wishes of his kinsfolk; yet,
seeing that he was still of the same mind, and that the damsel was
also constant, she said to herself:--To what purpose give I myself
all this trouble? they love one another, they know one another; they
love with equal ardour; their love is honourable, and I doubt not
is well pleasing to God, seeing that the one has escaped the gallows
and the other the lance, and both the wild beasts: wherefore be it
as they would have it.

Then, turning to them, she said:--"If 'tis your will to be joined in wedlock as man and wife,
mine jumps with it: here shall your nuptials be solemnized and at
Liello's charges, and for the rest I will see that your peace is made
with your kinsfolk."

  So in the castle the pair were wedded,
  Pietro only less blithe than Agnolella, the lady ordering the nuptials
as honourably as might be in her mountain-home, and there they had
most sweet joyance of the first fruits of their love.

So some days they tarried there, and then accompanied by the lady with a strong escort, they
took horse and returned to Rome, where, very wroth though she found Pietro's kinsfolk for what
he had done, the lady re-established solid peace between him and them; and so at Rome Pietro and
Agnolella lived together to a good old age in great tranquillity and happiness.

(1) In reference to the forlorn condition of the city while the seat
of the papacy was at Avignon, 1308-1377.

Know then, noble ladies, that 'tis no long time since there dwelt in Romagna a right worthy and
courteous knight, Messer Lizio da Valbona by name, who was already verging upon old age, when,
as it happened, there was born to him of his wife, Madonna Giacomina, a daughter, who, as she grew
up, became the fairest and most debonair of all the girls of those parts, and, for that she was
the only daughter left to them, was most dearly loved and cherished by her father and mother, who
guarded her with most jealous care, thinking to arrange some great match for her. Now there was
frequently in Messer Lizio's house, and much in his company, a fine, lusty young man, one Ricciardo
de' Manardi da Brettinoro, whom Messer Lizio and his wife would as little have thought of mistrusting
as if he had been their own son: who, now and again taking note of the damsel, that she was very
fair and graceful, and in bearing and behaviour most commendable, and of marriageable age,
fell vehemently in love with her, which love he was very careful to conceal. The damsel detected
it, however, and in like manner plunged headlong into love with him, to Ricciardo's no small
satisfaction.

Again and again he was on the point of speaking to her, but refrained for fear; at length, however,
he summoned up his courage, and seizing his opportunity, thus addressed
her:--"Caterina, I implore thee, suffer me not to die for love of
thee."

Whereto the damsel forthwith responded:--"Nay, God grant that it be not rather that I die for
love of thee." Greatly exhilarated and encouraged, Ricciardo made answer:--"'Twill never be
by default of mine that thou lackest aught that may pleasure thee; but it rests with thee to
find the means to save thy life and mine." Then said the damsel:--"Thou seest, Ricciardo, how closely
watched I am, insomuch that I see not how 'twere possible for thee
to come to me; but if thou seest aught that I may do without dishonour,
speak the word, and I will do it."

Ricciardo was silent a while, pondering many matters: then, of a sudden, he said:--"Sweet my
Caterina, there is but one way that I can see, to wit, that thou shouldst sleep either on or where
thou mightst have access to the terrace by thy father's garden, where,
so I but knew that thou wouldst be there at night, I would without
fail contrive to meet thee, albeit 'tis very high."

  "As for my sleeping there," replied Caterina, "I doubt not that it
may be managed, if thou art sure that thou canst join me."

  Ricciardo answered in the affirmative.

Whereupon they exchanged a furtive kiss, and parted.

On the morrow, it being now towards the close of May, the damsel began
complaining to her mother that by reason of the excessive heat she
had not been able to get any sleep during the night.

  "Daughter," said the lady, "what heat was there?

Nay, there was no heat at all."

  "Had you said, 'to my thinking,' mother," rejoined
  Caterina, "you would perhaps have said sooth;
  but you should bethink you how much more heat
  girls have in them than ladies that are advanced in years."

  "True, my daughter," returned the lady, "but I cannot order that
it shall be hot and cold, as thou perchance wouldst like; we must
take the weather as we find it, and as the seasons provide it: perchance
to-night it will be cooler, and thou wilt sleep better."

"God grant it be so," said Caterina, "but 'tis not wonted for the nights to grow cooler as
the summer comes on."

"What then," said the lady, "wouldst thou have me do?" "With your leave and my father's," answered
Caterina, "I should like to have a little bed made up on the terrace by his room and over his
garden, where, hearing the nightingales sing, and being in a much
cooler place, I should sleep much better than in your room."

Whereupon:--"Daughter, be of good cheer," said the mother; "I will speak to thy father, and we
will do as he shall decide." So the lady told Messer Lizio what had passed between her and
the damsel; but he, being old and perhaps for that reason a little morose, said:--"What nightingale
is this, to whose chant she would fain sleep? I will see to it that the cicalas shall yet lull
her to sleep."

Which speech, coming to Caterina's ears, gave her such offence, that
for anger, rather than by reason of the heat, she not only slept not
herself that night, but suffered not her mother to sleep, keeping
up a perpetual complaint of the great heat.

Wherefore her mother hied her in the morning to Messer Lizio, and said to him:--"Sir, you hold your
daughter none too dear; what difference can it make to you that she lie on the terrace? She has tossed
about all night long by reason of the heat; and besides, can you wonder that she, girl that
she is, loves to hear the nightingale sing? Young folk naturally affect their likes." Whereto
Messer Lizio made answer:--"Go, make her a bed there to your liking,
and set a curtain round it, and let her sleep there, and hear the
nightingale sing to her heart's content."

Which the damsel no sooner learned, than she had a bed made there with intent to sleep there
that same night; wherefore she watched until she saw Ricciardo, whom by a concerted sign she
gave to understand what he was to do. Messer Lizio, as soon as he had heard the damsel go to
bed, locked a door that led from his room to the terrace, and went to sleep himself. When all
was quiet, Ricciardo with the help of a ladder got upon a wall, and
standing thereon laid hold of certain toothings of another wall, and
not without great exertion and risk, had he fallen, clambered up on
to the terrace, where the damsel received him quietly with the heartiest
of cheer.

Many a kiss they exchanged; and then got them to bed, where well-nigh all night long they
had solace and joyance of one another, and made the nightingale sing
not a few times.

But, brief being the night and great their pleasure, towards dawn, albeit they wist it not, they
fell asleep, Caterina's right arm encircling Ricciardo's neck, while with her left hand she held
him by that part of his person which your modesty, my ladies, is
most averse to name in the company of men.

So, peacefully they slept, and were still asleep when day broke and Messer Lizio rose; and calling
to mind that his daughter slept on the terrace, softly opened the
door, saying to himself:--Let me see what sort of night's rest the
nightingale has afforded our Caterina?

And having entered, he gently raised the curtain that screened the bed, and saw Ricciardo asleep
with her and in her embrace as described, both being quite naked
and uncovered; and having taken note of Ricciardo, he went away, and
hied him to his lady's room, and called her, saying:--"Up, up, wife,
come and see; for thy daughter has fancied the nightingale to such
purpose that she has caught him, and holds him in her hand."

"How can this be?" said the lady. "Come quickly, and thou shalt see," replied Messer Lizio.
So the lady huddled on her clothes, and silently followed Messer Lizio, and when they were
come to the bed, and had raised the curtain, Madonna Giacomina saw
plainly enough how her daughter had caught, and did hold the nightingale,
whose song she had so longed to hear.

Whereat the lady, deeming that Ricciardo had played her a cruel trick, would have cried out
and upbraided him; but Messer Lizio said to her:--"Wife, as thou valuest my love, say not
a word; for in good sooth, seeing that she has caught him, he shall
be hers.

Ricciardo is a gentleman and wealthy; an alliance with him cannot
but be to our advantage: if he would part from me on good terms, he
must first marry her, so that the nightingale shall prove to have
been put in his own cage and not in that of another."

Whereby the lady was reassured, seeing that her husband took the affair so quietly, and that
her daughter had had a good night, and was rested, and had caught the nightingale. So she
kept silence; nor had they long to wait before Ricciardo awoke; and, seeing that 'twas broad day,
deemed that 'twas as much as his life was worth, and aroused Caterina, saying:--"Alas! my soul,
what shall we do, now that day has come and surprised me here?

"


"Mrs. Hayden refers to the liberty brought by the spirit. Suppose you look up a reference to
liberty," suggested Grace.

"Yes," said Kate, a moment later, "here in verses 17 and 18 of II.

"Why, Grace," exclaimed Kate, shutting the book in her eagerness, "I see it all now. By denial
we take away falsities that bar us from looking into the face of God (Good), and by the affirmation
we acknowledge Him, which is turning an open face to Him and reflecting His glory. Isn't that
the way you understand it?"

Kate's face was all aglow with enthusiasm. A new light had come to her, and she was lifted
to a higher plane, both in conception and feeling.

"That is a beautiful interpretation, but I don't want to stop to think about it now," said
Grace, with a yawn, betraying fatigue for the first time.

"Why, Grace, a little while ago you said you were 'so interested.' What has come over you?"
was Kate's rather discomfited answer.

"Oh, nothing, nothing!" rejoined Grace hastily, "only you know one can be surfeited with good
things, but never mind. I shall not stop till we get through with this looking up, and then
I must have a good long think." She playfully chucked Kate under her chin, and asked her "to
go on," but the searching was not so spontaneous as before, and in the spontaneity of study
lies the acquisition of knowledge.

Grace, it must be confessed, was compelling herself to a thorough intellectual investigation
which, till now, had been a novel pleasure, but was getting a little monotonous, although she
was deeply interested and more pleased with the Bible readings than she would have thought
possible, because, as she had said herself, the Bible had been a sealed book to her before.
She was very careful to conceal this new feeling from Kate, for at least, she would not lay
one obstacle in her path, and after a few moments' desultory conversation, they went on as before.

"The next affirmation is about the will, what can you find for that?" asked Grace, as they
had resumed their study again.

"I have found it already," replied Kate, with her finger on the passage. "In Phil. ii: 13:
'For it is God who worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.' That subordination
to the will of God runs all through the New Testament."

"Here is the last one," resumed Grace, referring to the letter again. "I am subject to God's
law and can not sin, suffer or die," she read.

"Oh, that does not sound right; I do not see how it can be right to say such things," interposed
Kate, darkening again.

She looked up a reference to sin and turned to the sixth chapter of Romans. "I don't see very
clearly yet," she faltered, after she had finished the chapter.

"Yes, in the 16th verse is the key to it all," said Grace, looking over the page with her.
"The idea is, if we admit sin or talk about it, we are committing sin, for it is wrong to do
either."

"I understand a little better now, but it is not an easy matter to be so good," sighed Kate.

"But we are given these rules in order to know how to be good. Let us sit as we did last night,
and say these affirmations," suggested Grace, determined to do her duty, for Kate's sake at least.

Diligence and faithfulness never fail to bring forth fruit, and they were laboring hard, both
with soil and seed.

CHAPTER XIX.

     "Each of us is a distinct flower or tree in the spiritual garden of
     God,--precious each for its own sake in the eyes of Him who is even
     now making us,--each of us watered and shone upon and filled with
     life for the sake of His flower, His completed being, which will
     blossom out of Him at last to the glory and pleasure of the great
     Gardener. For each has within him a secret of Divinity; each is
     growing toward the revelation of that secret to himself, and so to
     the full reception, according to his measure of the
     Divine."--George MacDonald.

  "MARLOW, September ----.

"Dear Husband: Your letter seemed the only bright spot in my yesterday's experience, for, strange
as it may seem, I awoke with the same old headache and pain in my limb, and felt so dull and
stupid, that I was almost doubtful whether I had ever known anything. In vain I tried to treat
myself, but the more I tried the more perplexed I became, until about noon, when I began to
feel better, though the whole day was a novel and rather disagreeable experience. When I went
into class to-day, from nearly every quarter was heard a similar story of how the day of rest
had been passed.

"It was more and more astonishing. Dr. Bright had hardly recovered from her sick headache;
Mrs. Dawn was still feeling stupid; two ladies were not able to attend class; Dr. Johnson and
Dr. Lorimer actually looked angry, and the two ministers in the class were gravely discussing
the knotty points and knitting their clerical brows over 'doubtful explanations' as they called
them, while a perplexed and troubled air seemed to settle on everybody. But there are a few
old students in the class, and they looked at us with a knowing smile, saying: 'This is only
chemicalization; you will be all the brighter after you get over it.'

"They did not explain further, but I knew something about it from the experience we have had,
but had never thought of it in that light. 'It is a comfort to know there is some prospect
of an end to our darkness anyway,' said Mrs. Dawn, with a long-drawn breath of relief, voicing
the sentiments of all.

"The kind and gracious look Mrs. Pearl gave us as she came in, sent a wave of peace and satisfaction
over me, for I felt that she understood the situation and would lift the curtains and let in
the light.

"After the usual silence, which seemed longer than before, Mrs. Pearl began in a calm clear voice:

"We have come now to a point where it seems necessary to explain the process of growth, and
the phenomenal changes which take place at certain stages of our development, whether known
or unknown to the individual.

"Hitherto we have recognized material ideas, objects and processes. We have looked upon our
physical being as the indisputable creation subject to all changes, circumstances or conditions.
Having experienced a material birth, we conceive of no other as being either possible or necessary,
and like Nicodemus we go in the night of our ignorance to ask the divine Teacher, Truth, questions
concerning spiritual things, only to be told we must be born from above if we would know the
things of the spirit. We are born like the flowers, and blossom like them. 'Consider the lilies
of the field, how they grow.'

"Seed typifies the desire for truth planted in the conscious and unconscious being. The more
constantly and persistently we hold the desire, the more rapid and perfect will be the development
that produces the fruit. The hard little kernel must first lie in the dark earth, while hidden
forces make it swell and sprout until the outer shell dies and falls away, leaving the pure
white germ to push its way up and up through the cold dreary earth. At this period it is very
delicate and tender, and yet it must pass through a trying stage, for when the white spire
just peeps above the ground it has to encounter elements that at first seem bent upon its destruction.

"Will the sun's rays now prove too hot for it? Will the winds be too rough and stormy? Will
the cold air bite, or the storm beat and bruise it unto death? Pointing ever skyward, does
it stop to shiver at the prospect of dark and cold and heat, or windy violence?

"Let us see. Bravely the young shoot goes its way. As soon as it sees the light it displays
new beauty, and the reflected glory clothes it in a brighter robe--the fresh, dainty green
of spring's supernal dress, emblem of everlasting youth. But a storm of wind and rain assails
it. Dense cloud-curtains hide the sun, and the air is cold and chilling. Sometimes for days
this benumbing coldness lasts. But after the storm our little friend is greener and brighter
and larger than ever. It has withstood the storm and wind, by using them for its own advancement.
Everything has been turned into good by recognizing only the good.

"When the sunshine comes again the little slip is baptized with dew and warmth and light, and
joyously springs on toward budding time, and then another and different experience befalls.
Instead of rolling every new leaf outward to be bathed in the light and kissed by the wind,
there is a rolling inward, a curling up and shutting in of the new and delicate leaves. A hard,
unlovely roll or lump now displays itself on the green stem, and every day the roll becomes
larger and harder. The green stalk never questions, though for a time her face is veiled. She
lives in the waiting silence, content with what is. One bright day she looks at her ugly bud
and finds it a rare blossom of surpassing beauty and sweetest fragrance. Thus is born the fair-robed
lily, pure emblem of the child of God.

"But we have many and various symbols of divine thought in the many and various flowers, from
which we learn divine lessons. There are the violets that come so early in the spring, with
their wildwood fragrance and dainty blue cloaks, and the lovely roses of summer, the goldenrods
and asters of autumn, while among the rarer kinds we have the night-blooming cereus, the beautiful
but slow blossoming century plant, and many others. These are types and symbols of ourselves
and our process of birth and unfoldment.

"The new birth is a development from material to spiritual knowledge. The individual corresponds
to one or another plant, but none may know at what particular stage.

"Some blossom early, some late, some manifest a nature like the violet, others the rose, the
water lily or the century plant. I can not tell, you can not tell, none can tell.

"Our trials will be similar in character to the flowers, and the outcome will be the same in
proportion as we follow their example of unquestioning faithfulness.

"The very desire to grow is a challenge to the elements that seem to oppose growth, but the
plant overcomes all obstacles by its non-resistance, and herein lies one of our most valuable
lessons.

"In our progress we meet with many conditions and circumstances that try us, that seem indeed
to call in question our earnestness in thus starting out, with new assumptions. Sometimes these
adverse conditions are called trials of faith and they may come to us in one way or another,
sometimes in sickness, sometimes in misunderstandings, sometimes in grief, sometimes in disagreeable
duties.

"Peculiarities of disposition that we thought overcome, may manifest themselves very unexpectedly
and cause us great annoyance, not only because we may have congratulated ourselves on having
risen above them, but because it would be a mortification to us to have our friends know that
we who believe in the possibility of such high moral attainments, should be guilty of these
old weaknesses and follies. In every way, the tempter--mortal thought--may show us the fallibility
of human nature and tempt us to disbelieve in our high ideals.

"The forty days' temptation in the wilderness is the soul history of every human being who
starts out to lead the life of Jesus. Tempted in everything as we are, he was the type of strength,
purity and faithfulness to principles, which we most earnestly should seek to follow. After
his baptism, 'He was conducted by the spirit into the desert to be tempted by the enemy.'

"We are baptized by the spirit when we have come into the realization of our sonship and daughtership,
our true relation to the divine Father and Mother Love, and have consecrated our lives to the
service of Truth. In order that we may be fully aware of the magnitude of our desire, we are,
as it were, led by the spirit to the desert which literally signifies forsaken, where every
means of comfort and companionship are gone, where we must learn to choose between the ever
present but invisible things of God and the transitory but gratifying pleasures of the visible
world. Having a glimpse of the power and blessedness conferred by the knowledge of Truth, we
are tempted to keep hold of the power, at the same time fellowshipping with the world, which
by our recognition and fellowship will be greatly pleased through the acquisition of our society
and talents.

"When tests are required of us similar to the turning of stones into bread, healing the lepers,
raising the dead, will we realize our dependence on the word of God which is the 'bread of
life?' Temptations to dare the protection of the power, give us an insight to the very same
trial of Jesus, and when we are led up to the mountain of knowledge from which we may view
the pomps and vanities of the world, realizing the superior insight that gives power, then
comes the decisive question--shall God or mammon gain our allegiance? Shall we forego the seductive
allurements of mortal thought (which is really only the negative thought or the false power
called the world's beliefs reflected upon us), or shall we, in ringing tones cry out, 'Get
thee behind me, adversary (or opposer).

"After the long forty days, which with some seem longer than with others, after the darkness
and desolation of a desert night, we are ministered unto by the blessed angels--good thoughts--and
the glory of the Most High shines round about us. The struggle is ended, the Good which is
ever ready to be our guide when we choose, leads us into many sweet experiences that bring
us nearer and nearer to the 'promised land,' the true inheritance of God's children. We begin
the ascent of the mount of transfiguration, and though we come to many steep places, though
we sometimes stumble over rocks of ignorance, though we encounter clouds of doubt that veil
the glorious peak from our longing view for a time, though we meet wild beasts, (untamed human
nature), though we cross shadowy valleys and dark ravines, lighted only by the torch of faith,
we shall have transcendant glimpses of the fair Beyond, shall breathe the perfumed air of Zion's
Hills, and be transported with delight at the never ceasing revelations made to the true seeker
after eternal wisdom.

"After faith, comes knowledge. If we were overcome by the tidal wave, when wading out a little
way from shore, and a rope were thrown us, we should at least catch hold the rope, hoping to
be delivered from the danger. After several successful experiences, we should have faith in
the rope, so when we feel the tidal wave of trial overtaking us, we are to catch hold of our
denials and affirmations which correspond to the saving rope. An invariable rule in Christian
Science is to deny the undesirable and affirm that which can be predicated of spirit. No matter
what inharmony assails you, whether it be pain, poverty, sickness, loneliness, fear or anxiety,
deny it positively and repeatedly and affirm the opposite. Like Jesus, we must speak of that
which is true, but not visible. Thus when called to raise the daughter of Jairus, he said:
'She is not dead but sleepeth.' The appearance of death was denied, and its opposite, life,
affirmed.

"And now let us enter into the silence with one accord, saying: 'For Thy blessed words and
example we thank Thee, O, beloved Master, and with Thy words we enter now into Thy faith.'

"An impressive ten minutes, and then, with reverent voice and gesture, Mrs. Pearl dismissed
us with the words: 'It is finished. We have received that which we asked, and are filled with
the peace that passeth all understanding.'

"While we sat thus, just before she spoke, I had one of those peculiar experiences they tell
about, coming so often in the silence. It seemed as though I was in the cool quiet of early
morning, watching the signs of a summer dawn. All at once the creeping rainbow colors shot
up toward the zenith, and the most glorious sunrise I ever beheld flooded me with a dazzling
glow of gold. The moment she spoke it vanished, but oh, how lovely it was! What could it mean
unless the dawn of the 'Sun of Righteousness?' I must wait and see, for surely the understanding
of these things will come when I am ready for it.

"Several of the class have been having strange signs or hints of something on which they have
been studying deeply. Dr. Bright said that everything turned black before her one day when
she was denying, and when she could see again it seemed as though there were no walls to the
house and she was gazing into empty space. This is on account of denying till material things
seem immaterial, and we begin to realize the reality of spirit.

"The saying of the affirmation for strength, Mrs. Dawn says, makes her body feel almost electrified
with vitality, and she can realize that the words bring to her what they claim.

"One young man, who sits just back of me, told his experience in denying the reality of matter.
He was quite rebellious at first about saying what seemed such a huge lie, but finally concluded
to do the best he could, and so said it over and over one day till he fell asleep. Suddenly
he was awakened by the words sounding in his ears, 'Be not afraid, but trust,' and opening
his eyes, he saw written on the wall the very same words, and immediately a restfulness and
satisfaction came over him, so that he no longer demurred at the thought of saying the words
and, though he did not yet understand, he felt willing to wait.

"Oh, how I wish the great busy world would listen to this beautiful doctrine. It seems that
we must compel it to come to the feast. I think we all feel like a child delightedly showing
its new toy to everybody. But the little experience I have had before, will teach me to withhold
where there is antagonism to the truth, beautiful though it is, because my work at home even
with my cure, did not interest or convince some who would shut their eyes and ears to all.
I remember so well how I felt like shouting to everyone in my joy the glad story of my recovered
health, but the cold, incredulous looks, and the averted faces chilled the tidings on my lips,
and I learned that only when the world is thirsty, will it appreciate the cool and sparkling
waters of truth.

"Well, dear John, I have not answered your letter at all because I was so afraid I would forget
the substance of the lesson to-day, but I am so glad it seems plain to you as I present it,
and it is such a help to know you are glad I came here. How we shall grow together when we
begin together. Continue to write your opinions and ideas of the lessons, for you have such
a clear way of expressing yourself. Don't let Jamie forget to write again when you all write.
Bless his dear little self! I would so like to see him, but then, I know all is well with you,
for Good is everywhere.

  "Good night and good-bye,

    "MARION."

CHAPTER XX.

     "But when every leaf is dropped and the plant stands stripped to
     the uttermost, a new life is even then working in the buds, from
     which shall spring a tenderer foliage and a brighter wealth of
     flowers. So, often, in celestial gardening, every leaf of earthly
     joy must drop before a new and divine bloom visits the
     soul."--Harriet Beecher Stowe.

Saturday no letter came. All the forenoon Grace tried to do her duty by saying her denials
and affirmations while Kate was out giving lessons, but she seemed so stupid and felt so cross
that in despair she resorted to her painting, but only succeeded in spoiling the picture she
had spent hours and days upon before. When Kate came in at the usual hour, feeling so gay and
light-hearted that she scarcely knew how to contain herself, she was astonished to hear Grace say:

"Oh, I am glad you have come at last! Such a day as I have spent! Thought I'd have so much
extra time while you were gone to give Millie's lesson, and here I've wasted the whole afternoon
and spoiled my 'shipwreck' besides, and I'm in a villainous humor. Now, I'm going to pour it
all out on your innocent head." She smiled grimly, as she tossed her painting apron aside and
spitefully turned the picture to the wall.

"What in the world ails you, Grace?" cried the astonished Kate. "Have you lost your senses?
I was congratulating myself coming home on the good time we would have again to-night."

"I anticipated it so vividly this morning I could hardly wait, but really, Kate, I feel ugly,
and perhaps it would be as well not to talk to me. I will go out for a little walk, while you
get the tea," and she went forthwith.

A tumult raged within her that she had not conquered. One moment filled with the most exhilarating
sense of freedom and joy, the next the direst disgust with herself and her failings; one moment
clearly understanding the many problems that had come up for solution the past week, and the
next with no ability to reason about anything. This had been going on all day. She had even
felt unreasonably irritable because Kate had so quickly overcome her prejudices. What right
had she to give away her own for some one else's opinions so easily?

Grace gave her glove an impatient twitch as she thought of it, but the next instant she wished
she, too, might be as childlike and receptive as her companion.

To Kate the Bible was final, unquestioned authority; to Grace it was a corroboration, not a
foundation. It was more interesting, she must confess, than ever before, but then she must
have better reasons than had yet appeared for taking it as Kate did.

After all, perhaps this religion was but another mirage that had come into her moral vision,
as many another had come in all the years she had been seeking truth and happiness. Happiness!
Had she forgotten that for two years that word had been dropped from her vocabulary? That she
had resolved to live on the best intellectual food the world could offer, without tasting its
heart viands? She walked on with an unwonted energy. No, she would not be deceived; the best
and sweetest in life was not for her, but she ought at least, to help poor little Kate.

It was a calm, quiet evening. The sun was just disappearing over the distant hills. The sky
was radiant with delicate pink and blue tints. She was walking toward the east, when, glancing
at the scene in front of her, she saw what seemed to be a brilliant fire, not only in one place
but in many. Somewhat startled, she looked more closely and discovered every window ablaze
with the sun's reflected glory. Like a flash it came: "I am walking away from the glory of
Truth. Oh! how shall I turn my face to God?" she cried, with unspeakable yearning.

An agony of suspense seized her. She looked up at the calm, beautiful sky, and its rays of
radiance seemed to send down upon her a benediction of peace. Like a soft whisper the words,
"Lo, I am with you always," fell upon her ear. Blessed words that filled her with a new-born
awe, but they brought a realizing sense of ever-present nearness of Truth, such as she had
never had before, and she was so filled with peace that all the world looked like a new world.
The turbulent waves of doubt and unrest had been divinely stilled.

She walked on, so filled with her new thoughts that the twilight deepened into starlight before
she thought of home, and then it seemed that every star beam was an angel of love sent to guide
her on her way. She entered quietly as Kate was playing one of Beethoven's symphonies, and
never had music seemed so sweet. It was like a welcome into heaven. It was the heaven within
her that made a heaven without.

To Kate had come such a realization of divine harmony, that her soul poured itself out in music
she had never dreamed of before. All the struggles and pains of the past years, all the disappointments
and unhappiness found expression through the wailing tones of the piano only to be swept away
or swelled into sweeter and more joyous strains. More and more clearly a conception of joy
and peace unspeakable filled her heart. She wandered again, a happy child, in country pastures
gathering violets and buttercups. She could scent the clover and hear the birds. The water
rippled over the pebbles and the air was filled with leaf music. Now, again a child, she "walked
in green pastures and beside the still waters." The sun of love was shining down upon her,
and its rays warmed her, clothed her, fed her. It was the presence of impersonal, omnipresent
Truth, ever flowing into the heart ready for its reception, and though at first it may be but
a tiny stream, it grows to a swelling tide, and all the words in the universe can not name
its sweet influence, or describe its wondrous allness.

Oh, Katie darling, what wouldst thou have put away from thy life, if thou hadst obstinately
refused admittance to this heavenly Guest?... At last the music ceased. She bowed her head
and gave herself up to the inexpressible thoughts that welled into her mind. For some moments
she was not aware that Grace was in the room, but as she finally arose and turned around, she
saw her. Their eyes met, and silently was told the story of experiences too sacred to utter.
A silent understanding and a heartfelt sympathy bound them by closer ties than they had ever
known before. To be at one with Truth is to understand humanity, and understanding is a voiceless
language.

Sunday afternoon they called on Mr. Hayden and found the fourth letter awaiting them.

"I did not send it up because Kate promised you would come over to-day, and now let us have
a little experience meeting," he said, as he found chairs for them, and seated himself, seemingly
awaiting a reply.

"First let us read the letter," suggested Grace, who was more interested than ever since her
yesterday's experience.

"Read it aloud," said Mr. Hayden, settling himself back to enjoy it.

Grace had scarcely begun reading when Jamie came in, screaming that his finger was "boke."

"Never mind, Jamie, it will soon be all right. Shall papa treat it?" taking the child in his lap.

"Teat it, papa," and he laid his little head on papa's breast with perfect confidence that
the pain would soon be gone. A few moments of silence and he looked up innocently, saying with
the brightest smile:

"It's all gone now. Papa telled the good Jamie to tome home," he explained to the girls, "and
here he is, papa," he added, holding up his sweet mouth for a kiss.

"How beautiful is a child's faith," exclaimed Kate, after the little fellow had gone out to
play again.

"Indeed I have learned more than I can tell you from the children," said Mr. Hayden, thoughtfully.
"Mabel is old enough to understand a good deal, but Fred and Jamie are very quick to apply
what they learn. Last night Jamie complained of the stomach ache. Neither of the children knew
that I was near, but I overheard Fred telling his brother that he would treat him if he would
keep still. Jamie consented and I peeped in a moment later, curious to know what they were
doing. Fred sat there grave as an owl, with his hands over his eyes, and Jamie in a chair opposite,
his eyes shut tightly and an air of expectancy on his face."

"Now you're all right," said Fred, very positively, after a few minutes. They were soon playing
and not once did the child complain after that. When going to bed, Jamie told me about it,
and I asked Fred what he did when he treated.

"W'y," he answered, "w'y, I just 'membered what you said to Mabel that everybody has two kinds
o' thoughts, and one kind thinks you're sick, and the other kind knows you're well, so I thinked
about Jamie till I thinked the know thoughts, and course he got well then."

"It was a lesson to me, and I have tried to emulate their receptiveness and childlike trust.
I don't know how well I am succeeding, but it is pretty hard sometimes to get the problems
all worked out."

"We wouldn't have to work them out if we had the faith of a child," said Kate, warmly. These
little incidents touched her deeply.

"Well, there is nothing better to learn from than living examples, and yet we can only take
them as guides, they will not do our work for us. Every one of us must go through his own experience,
and prove his right to an inheritance, by claiming it on trust as the child does. Now, yesterday,"
continued Mr. Hayden, leaning back and stroking his chin, "I worked hard all the forenoon,
and everything seemed to go wrong with me,"--Grace glanced at Kate--"I was not willing to live
a moment at a time, as the child does, with no thought or care as to where its next day's supplies
are to come from, but I was tired and cross all day. The consequence was, in the afternoon
my old enemy, the headache, began to assert itself. Then I got Marion's letter and that helped
me, because it threw some light on the cause, but when I heard Fred's explanation of a treatment
I just applied it. I 'thinked,' till the 'know thoughts came,'" Mr. Hayden concluded with a
grave smile.

"I believe that is what it means to 'work out our own salvation,'" said Grace, "and how beautiful
to have the children learn! It will make different men and women of them."

"Indeed it will; I have already seen some change in the children. But are you not going to
read the letter, Miss Grace?" asked Mr. Hayden.

"Yes, I am anxious to read it, but I have learned a great deal without it."

She took it up again and read without interruption to the end.

"Well, that is quite an explanation of your experience of yesterday, Mr. Hayden," explained
Kate smilingly.

"And mine, too," added Grace. "It is comforting to know that there is a scientific reason for
it though."

"I think my darkness came earlier in the lessons, for yesterday and to-day have been very bright
to me," replied Kate, soberly; "but," she continued, "there is so much about this to admire
and so much to prove that the system is founded on Christ's teachings, I can not see where
doubt could enter."

"We might not doubt the principle where we would often doubt ourselves," suggested Mr. Hayden.

"Yes," said Grace, "I believe that doubts will come as long as we consider it a personal power."

"Which it is not, of course," interrupted Kate.

"Certainly not, but we must grow into a realization of Truth, we can not change our old natures
in a day, and it is only natural at first to feel that it is a personal power because we are
given so much personal responsibility."

"I see what you mean," said Mr. Hayden, quietly, leaning back as if thinking deeply. "You mean
it is hard to forget self, and I agree with you. This mind of the flesh claims so much wisdom
and power of its own that it is hard to attribute everything to a higher power, and let that
power work through you; but when we can do that, we have the kernel of the whole system."

"It is a wonderful thought to me, that we reflect all things spiritual, as we divest ourselves
of our false beliefs," remarked Grace, earnestly.

"In other words, when we know ourselves as we are, and not as we appear, we shall recognize
that all things we desire are already ours," added Mr. Hayden.

"How could it be otherwise? The sun is always shining behind the darkest clouds. All I ask
is that the ignorance may be removed," replied Grace.

"Well, I want to understand and believe truth, but it seems strange, after we have declared
our willingness to believe and acknowledge God to be all, that we should be tempted. Why couldn't
our acknowledgement be sufficient?" queried Kate, in perplexity again.

"Why isn't the simple act of joining the church sufficient to make Christians? Although some
seem to think it all sufficient, it is not. It is the daily life of overcoming, and denial
of self that constitutes true acknowledgement," said Grace, laying her hand upon that of her
friend.

"Not denial of self in the old way, either," said Mr. Hayden, "but denial of the mortal thought,
or as Paul would say, the 'carnal mind.'"

"Yes, and in the temptation of Jesus, we read our own temptations," interrupted Grace, "and
it is all important that we should deal with them as he did. Over and over he met the opposing
thought, represented by the tempter or opposer--error always opposing truth--and gave it either
a plain denial or an emphatic command to get out."

"That is very plain and very true," said Kate, with a little sigh, "but still I can not see
why God should allow us to be tempted after we have fought the battle once as Jesus did."

"But he fought it more than once," explained Mr. Hayden, earnestly. "He was continually overcoming,
and at times found it necessary to withdraw into the mountains where he fasted and prayed."

"That is a good thought to carry home," suggested Grace, rising, "for we need to follow his
example."

"I need it more than anyone else," said Kate, feeling a lack of spiritual understanding, and
wishing she could get on faster.

"You are doing grandly Miss Kate, just think how you opposed it all at first," said Mr. Hayden
encouragingly.

"Yes, I know I did," flushing a little, "but even thus far I have seen enough, or rather experienced
enough to make me anxious to understand it, and I only ask so many questions because I am determined
to get every speck of light I can."

"If everybody would lay aside prejudice as you have, Miss Kate, they would have no difficulty
in seeing the truth as you do," he replied.

The tears came into her eyes. Neither Mr. Hayden nor Grace knew how much it had cost her to
'lay aside prejudice,' but she could thank God that she had done so, and indeed believed it
was Providence that had led her into this study in spite of herself.

"I want the truth," she said simply, and turned away to join Grace, who stood at the open door
waiting for her.

CHAPTER XXI.

  "MARLOW, September ----.

"Dear husband: The first thing I heard when I went into the class to-day was Mrs. Dawn telling
how she had treated a severe belief of headache last evening and how marvelously soon the terrible
pain ceased. She was quite rejoiced because it was the first time she had tried to demonstrate
the principles.

"They all have plenty to tell now, and are growing more and more interested. Every day somebody
has some new experience. Little Mrs. Dexter, who has been so long treated by the old method,
says she fully believes she will be cured, is feeling much better, and has such an assurance
all the time that she has found the true healing. She has had several quite remarkable demonstrations
with others.

"The whole line of argument is unfolding so naturally and beautifully that it seems like a
piece of fine mosaic, with every form and color interwoven with the most exquisite exactness.
Mrs. Pearl gave us a lecture on inspiration and the Bible, which I consider one of the most
useful and interesting of any she has yet given:

"In studying the very fountain springs of Truth, and basing our ideas upon a God who is the
unexpressed and inexpressible essence of Truth itself, with whom is 'no respect of persons,'
and to whom we owe all knowledge, it becomes us to inquire a little into the manner and means
of gaining that knowledge.

"That all peoples in all climes and ages have developed similar ideas and expressed them in
like terms, as philology shows, is an indisputable fact, strengthened and corroborated by our
broader conception and higher understanding of God, the omnipresent Good.

"But how have these ideas come to them? Have they come through what is known as inspiration
or revelation? As the one fountain of Intelligence is open to all alike, this must be the case,
because Truth comes only in this way. Inspiration means an 'inbreathing,' a breathing in of
true knowledge, and because the omnipresent Good comes into every consciousness prepared to
receive it, there is an inbreathing in accordance with the readiness to receive. Intelligence
is like the air, to be breathed by every living being. Thus far, humanity has expanded its
lungs of consciousness only enough to have inhaled fundamental truth, or what is recognized
as such, but we are constantly receiving more, and in proportion as we receive, do we know
what we receive.

"All truth is inspired or revealed, because whatever is true is of the great Truth. This must
be so, yet many people consider inspiration as confined to the authors of the Bible and that
with them, inspiration ceased. The immortal Job said, 'There is a spirit in man and the inspiration
of the Almighty giveth him understanding.' The inbreathing of the Almighty, All-powerful Truth,
giveth understanding. No truer words were ever uttered.

"As inspiration is inhaling or breathing in Truth, we can readily understand that 'God, Truth,
Principle, is no respecter of persons.' That it is a 'miraculous influence which qualifies
man to receive and communicate divine truth,' is in a sense true, for the works of God are
always 'wonderful,' but there can be no setting aside of divine law, as some erroneously suppose,
for the performance of these things that seem unaccountable to human reason. It is a lack of
understanding as to how Truth works, that has caused a belief in supernatural or miraculous
ways. Could a fish judge according to appearances, he would regard the creatures that walk
on land as gifted with supernatural power, because it would be utterly beyond his conception
to know how they could do so.

"Revelation and inspiration are frequently used interchangeably, but that which is revealed,
is the manifested result of inspiration rather than inspiration itself. Whenever we are ready
to breathe or absorb Truth into our consciousness, we get a revealment--'inspiration giveth
understanding.' This breathing-in process lifts us above ordinary knowledge and gives refreshing
glimpses of heavenly Truth, it is like breathing in fresh air, after having been in a close
suffocating room. We say this or that scene, person or object inspires us; we mean that some
beautiful thought or conception of Truth is revealed to us, through or by our seeing these
objects, because they hint of something better and higher, and the moment we get the higher
thought, we are conscious of knowing higher Truth. This is revelation.

"Revelation and inspiration are the usual terms for expressing spiritual processes but are
necessarily inadequate to express accurate spiritual meanings. How ideas are born is a question
of questions. Whether they come from without or within, they must establish the oneness of
God and man in mind and idea. The only 'without' there can be is that which is without the
consciousness, the only 'within' is that which is within the consciousness. They were scarcely more
than half across when Major Fortescue and his squad of soldiers dashed up to the bank. They
ran along the embankment, keeping pace with the boat as it drifted with the tide.

"Halt!" cried the officer; but no one in the boat answered. "Halt, or I shoot!" But Captain
Bellach only paddled the harder.

"Make ready! Take aim!--"

"Down, for your life!" cried Colonel Tilton, sharply, dragging Nancy
down into the bottom of the boat, where Captain Bellach flung himself
beside them.

It was the work of a moment. The next instant--"Fire!" they heard the royalist order, sharply,
from the bank.

"Cra-a-a-ack!" rattled the muskets, and the bullets hummed venomously around the boat like a swarm
of angry hornets.

None of the fugitives were hurt, though two of the bullets struck
the side of the boat; but Nancy's petticoat was entirely ruined by
the mud and water in the bottom.

Before the redcoats could reload, they had reached the further shore, and run into a corn field
near by, in which they were entirely hidden. Captain Bellach wanted to go up the stream and thrash
the drunken ferryman; but the Colonel and Nancy dissuaded him, and they made the best of their
way to Dover, which they reached after a very weary journey.

There Nancy, who considered it safer to absent herself from home while the British retained possession
of Wilmington, found herself the heroine of the hour; and she was fêted and dined and made much
of, until it would have completely turned a less sensible little head than hers.

In after-years, when her husband presented her to President Washington, "Ah, Mistress Tilton,"
said his Excellency, "your husband should indeed value an affection that not only endangered
a life, but even sacrificed a fine silk petticoat, for his sake."

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The Smoke-House was a small stone structure something like a sentry-box,
only with an iron door and grated windows.

In this negroes, petty criminals, vagrants, and drunkards were confined. It stood at the junction
of the two most important streets of the town.

[2] Newcastle County, Delaware, formerly a portion of Penn's Proprietary Government in the
Americas.

Frank found his new work tolerably easy, though it required constant attention, for every joint of
the machinery had to be watched, and oiled afresh the moment it began to get dry and hot. There
being two other oilers, he now stood his regular watch of three hours
at a time, having the rest of the day to himself.

Most of this leisure time was spent in talking with Herrick, or studying the ins and outs
of the machinery; and Frank soon learned to "take a card" as well as any man on board. This is
done as follows: a slip of paper is rolled round a brass tube attached to the valve of the engine
cylinder, and a pencil fixed so as to trace certain curved lines on the paper as it turns, the
shape of which shows the exact working condition of the engine.

On the fourth afternoon of his new duties Austin heard himself hailed from the upper deck by
a familiar voice:

"Hello, Frank, my boy! come up and have a look at Daddy Neptune's pasture-ground."

Up went Frank with all speed; but his first glance around made him start. Instead of the deep
blue water that had surrounded her a few hours before, the ship was now in the midst of a smooth
green plain, extending as far as the eye could reach, and covered,
to all appearance, with coarse grass and broad-leaved plants.

Nothing was wanting, in fact, to complete the picture except a few sheep and cattle.

For a moment our hero really thought he must be dreaming; and then he suddenly recollected his school-book
pictures and stories of the famous Sargasso Sea, where, for thousands of acres together, the water
is quite hidden by a thick growth of "Gulf weed," and knew at once that this must be it.

And certainly this ocean prairie was a wonderful sight. As the steamer ploughed its way through
the matted weeds, Frank could see in the narrow openings their trailing roots hanging far down
into the clear cool depths below. Above these open spaces thousands of sea-birds were hovering
with shrill cries, while ever and anon one of them would swoop down into the water, re-appearing
instantly with a fish wriggling in its beak.

In the purple shadow of the weed beds bright-colored fish were moving lazily to and fro, but these
darted swiftly away at the approach of the steamer.

On every side queer little crabs and turtles were plumping into the water, scared by the plashing
wheels, while, stranger still, birds' nests and eggs were seen here and there amid the huge
broad leaves of the stronger plants, to the great delight of Frank, who thought the idea of
birds nesting in the middle of the Atlantic the finest joke he had ever heard.

A mass of the tangle was hauled on board, and the men amused themselves by stamping on the hollow
air-cells which give the weed its buoyancy, producing a series of cracks like the explosion of
fire-crackers.

"I've heerd tell, though I can't say I've seen it myself," observed a sailor, "as there's places
whar them weeds are so thick and strong that a man can walk on 'em all the same as dry land."

"Well,
they can stop a ship, anyhow, whether they can carry a man or not. A chum of mine as v'y'ged
here in a Portigee steamer told me that she once got reg'lar jammed among the weed, and only
'scaped by reversin' her engines."

"Well, it's a fact that some whar in these seas there's a place they call the Lumber Yard, 'cause
of all the driftwood and floatin' spars and bits o' wreck and sich gittin' jumbled up together;
for all the currents sort o' meet there, like them puzzles whar every
road leads in and none out.

If a ship once gits in there, good-by to her; for there ain't no wind, nor tide, nor nothin',
and you jist stick there till you rot."

Here old Herrick muttered, dreamily, as if speaking to himself, "I've
seen that, and I sha'n't forget it in a hurry."

The men nudged each other, and there was a general silence; for it was but seldom that Herrick
could be got to spin a yarn, and he was now evidently about to "get off" one of his best.

"I was cruising in these waters," he went on, "'bout twenty years ago, when one afternoon we
sighted a sort o' mound in among the thickest of the weed, with somethin'
like a ship's mast standin' up from it.

The 'old man' came out to look at it, and then gave orders to lower the boat, and we pulled
for the wreck with a will.

But as we neared her, the very look of her seemed to strike cold upon us all. Her hull had
such an old-fashioned build that it might ha' been afloat for a hundred
years and more; and all up the sides and over the deck great slimy
coils of weed had trailed, like them eight-armed squids that clutch
men and drag 'em down.

As we came nigher, the very sun clouded over, and all was chill, and gray, and dismal, and the
wreck itself looked so unearthly, with no sign or sound of life about
it, that I guess I wasn't the only one who felt queer when we ran
alongside at last.

"Up we scrambled, our very tread soundin' hollow and uncanny in that awful silence. Not a livin'
thing was there aboard, not even a mouse.

The mainmast was gone, all but a stump, and the moulderin' tackle lay on the deck all of a heap. The
plankin' was rotten and fallin' to bits, and the place on the starn where her name had been was
clean mouldered away.

All at once our coxswain, Bill Grimes, gives a jump and a holler as if he'd trod on a rattlesnake;
and when we ran for'ard, what should we see, half hid among the weeds, but the skeleton of a
man, fastened to the bulwarks by a rusty chain!"

The speaker ceased, and looked round the attentive circle with the air of a man who feels that he has
made a hit.

"A slaver, I reckon," said one, at length.

"Or a pirate."

"Or some craft that had got starved out."

"Ay; but how cum that skeleton there? Did you never find out nothin' 'bout her, old hoss?"

"Never," said the old man, solemnly. "That's how many a gallant ship has ended--just a mark of
'missing' opposite her name in the owner's list, and a few poor souls watchin' and waitin' for
them that'll never come back.

       Ay, boys; for as bright and pretty as these waters look, there's
many a black story hid aneath 'em as'll never be known till the day
when the sea shall give up its dead."

* * * * *

  
    They were now east of the Azores,
  and within four days' run of Gibraltar,
    which was their first halting-place.
  So the men were set to work to
    scrub the deck, polish the
  rails, new paint the boats, mend such
    of the signal flags as were torn, and "smarten" up the vessel generally;
for a sea-captain is as proud of his ship as a lands-man of his wife,
and likes to bring her into port as trim as possible.

  

Frank, always ready to be of use, took his share of the work, though he had plenty to occupy him
without it. He was never tired of watching the sun make rainbows in the spray of the bow, and
the pretty little sea-fairies, called by sailors "Portuguese men-of-war," float past with their
tinted shells and outspread feelers; while at night the moon was so gloriously brilliant, and
the sea so clear and smooth, that he often staid on deck till midnight
to enjoy the spectacle.

But another sight was in store for him, even more to his taste than these.

One evening, just before sunset, two sail (the first for several days) were descried by the look-out,
quite close to each other. Herrick, after eying them keenly for a moment, pronounced them to
be a British steamer and a full-rigged American clipper ship.

"How on earth can you tell that?" asked the wondering Frank, who could
see nothing of the strangers but their topmasts.

"Easy enough. That un's a steamer, by her smoke; and she's a Britisher, by the look o' the smoke,
for they mostly burn soft coal.

T'other's a clipper, by her rig, and the lot o' handkerchiefs [studding sails] she has aloft;
and she's a 'Merican, for nothin' else could hold its own with a
steamer.

But what can they be doin' so close together? Ah! I've got it--they're a-racin'."

When the two vessels came near enough to be signaled, and to reply, Herrick was found to be
right in every particular, and the excitement aboard the Arizona
rose to a height.

The captain himself came out to watch the race, and every man who was not on duty below hastened
on deck.

"See how Johnny Bull's a-pilin' the coal on!" cried old Herrick, pointing to the eddying smoke,
which grew blacker every minute. "But he don't whip that craft--not
much! Canvas agin tea-kettles any day!

Hooray!"

"Right you air, old hoss! Guess some o' them clippers can show as good a record as any steamer
afloat. Why, didn't the old Nabob run 7389 miles in thirty days out
thar in the Indian Ocean?--and that's 246 miles a day for a whole
month, anyhow."

The two racers were now crossing the Arizona's bows, and every one crowded forward to look at
them. The steamer's passengers were seen clustered along the side like bees, while the crew
were bustling to and fro, setting every sail that would draw.

But still on the starboard quarter hung the beautiful clipper, gliding along smoothly and easily,
one great pyramid of snow-white canvas from gunwale to truck, while
the look-out and the two men at the wheel (the only persons visible
on board) grinned from ear to ear at the "Britisher's" vain efforts.

Just as the clipper passed, the Stars and Stripes fluttered out jauntily at her peak.

"Come, boys!" cried Herrick; "let's give the old 'gridiron' a cheer."

Mingling with the hearty shout that followed (in which Frank joined
with a will) came three sharp blasts from the Arizona's steam-whistle,
by way of salute.

Instantly the clipper's crew sprang up from behind the bulwarks, and, waving their caps, sent
back a rousing cheer, answered by the Englishman with a short whistle
of defiance as he swept by.

Little by little the racers, still close together, melted into the
fast-falling shadows of night; but there were not a few who declared
that, when last seen, the clipper was getting the best of it, and
their belief in the superiority of wind over steam was greatly strengthened
thereby.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]

APRIL'S TEARS.

April's tears are happy
tears. Joy when the arbutus sweet Creeps about her dancing feet, When
the violet appears, When the birds begin to sing, When the grass begins
to grow, Makes her lovely eyes o'erflow. She's a tender-hearted thing,
Bonny daughter of the spring.

BILLY'S GREAT SPEECH.

BY WILLIAM O.
STODDARD.

Billy was the youngest member of the debating society;
that is, the other members were all grown-up men, though none of them
were very old, and he was not yet quite fourteen years of age. Some
of the boys he knew told him he had been let in by mistake, and some
said it was a joke; but there he was, week after week, every Friday
evening, sitting on a front bench, and as much a member as the president,
or the secretary, or either of the three vice-presidents.

One of
the names of that village debating society was "The Lyceum," but it
wasn't much used, except when they had distinguished strangers to
lecture for them, and charged twenty-five cents apiece for tickets.

The
regular weekly debates were "free," and so there was always a good
attendance. The ladies, of all ages, were sure to come, and a good
many of the boys. Billy never missed a debate; but he had not yet
made so much as one single solitary speech on any subject. Nobody
knew how often he had entered that hall with a big speech in him,
all ready, or how he had always carried it out again unspoken.

A
little after the Christmas and New-Years' holidays there was a question
proposed for the society to debate that Billy was sure he could handle.
It had something to do with the Constitution of the United States,
and Grandfather Morton said it "was too political altogether"; but
Billy silently determined that at last he would make himself heard.
He read several things in order to get his mind ready, especially
the Life of Benjamin Franklin and Captain Cook's Voyages.

He could
not see just how they helped him, but he knew that was the way to
do it. Then he practiced his speech, too, in the garret, and up in
the pasture lot, and out in the barn, where he was sure nobody could
hear him, and the night before the debate was to be he hardly slept
a wink.

He knew Grandfather Morton and all the family would be there;
and they had scared him out of making more than half a dozen speeches
before, but he made up his mind not to be afraid of them this time.
Speak he would!

He was careful about his dress, as every public speaker
should be, and succeeded in borrowing one of his father's standing
collars. It was dreadfully stiff with starch, but it would not hurt
his ears if he held his head straight.

When he got to the Lyceum
Hall it seemed to him to have grown a good deal since the week before,
and to have a greater multitude of men and women in it than he had
ever dreamed of.

It was warm, too, and grew warmer very fast, and
he wondered why the rest did not take off their overcoats. Perhaps
they would have done so if they had known Billy was going to address
them.

He knew who was to open the debate on both sides, for that
was always arranged beforehand, and his chance would come afterward.

He
listened to them, and could not help thinking how much better they
must feel when their speeches were all spoken. He knew very well what
a troublesome thing a speech was to keep in, and without any cork.

Billy
thought he had never known men to talk so long as they did--two young
lawyers, three young doctors, the tutor of the village academy, the
sub-editor of the Weekly Bugle, Squire Toms's son that was almost
ready to go to college, and the tall young man with red hair who had
just opened the new drug store. Haven't you studied the Bible, Miss Hall?" suddenly turning to
look straight at Grace with some severity.

"I am very much interested in it, Mrs. Dyke, but when I read that 'God's mercy endureth forever,'
and that 'Jesus came to destroy the works of the devil,' I am inclined to think there must
be some mistake about the dreadful wrath that is to last forever," calmly replied Grace.

"And you don't believe in eternal punishment?" cried Mrs. Dyke, in a shrill voice of astonishment.

"Don't believe in eternal punishment?" echoed Mrs. Linberger.

"I did not say that. I do think there is punishment so long as there is sin, but when we believe
Christ has destroyed or can destroy sin, sickness, sorrow or death, which are the devil's works,
they will be destroyed. It must be so if we trust the words of the gospel."

"Well, I am thankful to find Miss Turner in such Christian company at any rate," said Mrs.
Dyke, as she adjusted her veil, preparatory to her departure.

"Yes, indeed; it is a pleasure to see such an earnest young Christian," added Mrs. Linberger,
with a sigh of satisfaction.

"But, ladies," began Grace, "I am not such a----"

"We shall be pleased to have you accompany Miss Turner to our meetings some time, Miss Hall,"
interrupted Mrs. Dyke, not heeding what Grace was saying. "Here is a card announcing the regular
weekly services, and here are some tracts for you to read." She dealt out a liberal supply,
which Grace took as she again started to explain, but a sudden haste had seized her visitors,
and they left, saying they would try and call some other time, when Miss Turner was at home.

As Grace turned to go back to her painting, she caught a glance of her reflection in the glass.
After looking at it a moment with a quizzical expression, she suddenly burst into a merry laugh,
saying: "I did not know you had turned Bible teacher. Well, well, it was funny, but I could
not help it, that she went away with the wrong impression of me, for she would not listen to
my explanation."

When Kate came home she brought another letter from Mrs. Hayden, but before it was read Grace
told her all about the call by the "church committee." Kate looked a little grave at first,
but finally straightening up as she took off her gloves and hat, she said:

"Well, Grace, it is not very pleasant to be waited upon in this fashion, but I suppose if they
take me in hand I can't help myself, and so I will be resigned to fate." She smiled and spoke
cheerily, but a little tremor of the old fear touched her, notwithstanding.

"Let us read the letter now," suggested Grace, thinking that would be the best thing to revive
Kate's dampened courage.

"Yes, I am anxious to read it; Mr. Hayden told me it is on the Bible, and very helpful."

"I am so glad!" she exclaimed, when it was finished. "Now I can interpret more freely myself,
as I plainly see we must use our judgment about the Bible, as well as anything else. But what
does it mean about the creeds?" she added suddenly, appealing to Grace with the old anxious
look in her eyes.

"It means," said Grace, "that the ordinary orthodox interpretation of doctrinal points was
voted upon by bishops, presbyters and laity generally, and because the majority of votes indicated
a preference for a certain interpretation, it was adopted and became the established creed,
and thus we have what is called the Apostles' Creed, which is the basis of all orthodox churches
throughout Christendom. And so with all creeds; they are all established by majority vote."

"I should never have known anything about this," she continued, "if I had not been searching
so eagerly for some religion that would satisfy, and in my rambles I came across this information."

"Are you sure it is reliable?" was Kate's almost feverish question. It seemed that she must
hold on to something or the last straw that bound her to the teachings of childhood, would break.

"It is a matter of history, and you see Mrs. Hayden has touched upon it, though very lightly.
But it is the grandest historical truth I ever read, for it gives personal liberty. I shall
never forget how happy I was to learn that the creeds were simply man-made or man-expressed
opinions, for in that case, I too, had liberty to read and think for myself, just as well as
those who voted upon these various interpretations."

Grace was handsome when filled with enthusiasm, and as Kate looked at her at this moment she
thought her face perfectly angelic, but one more question she must ask of this noble friend,
who knew just what she needed to know and could tell it when she needed it most. "Do you think
Christian Healing does away with the creeds of the church?"

"No, not necessarily. So far as I can see, it merely seeks truth, and whatever of truth is
found anywhere is retained. It is only the husks that are thrown away. Indeed I can see more
in the church than I ever could before I knew anything of Christian Healing," replied Grace,
thoughtfully.

"Why, how is that?" asked Kate in surprise.

"The fundamental oneness in their search after God. What is back of the creed but a desire
to reverence Deity? That was the origin, no matter into what it has degenerated now, and we
must judge according to the spirit, not the letter. Oh, when will the world worship in the
unity of the spirit?" sighed Grace, longing for the time when questionings and controversies
would be at an end.

"Here is Mrs. Dyke, for instance," she resumed, presently, "what is she striving for but to
live the true religion as she understands it? I can respect any honest people who live up to
their belief, and the Christian who moans and sighs and looks doleful because he thinks it
is his duty to do so, is much higher in my estimation than the one who believes it to be right,
but fails to live accordingly."

"The spirit of religion washes away all differences in the letter," concluded Kate, with a
lighter heart than she had when they began their conversation.

The vague terror that had occasionally thrust itself upon her during these last few weeks had
loosened its hold upon her, and she realized, as never before, that fear, more than anything
else, had kept her back; fear of deviating from the traditional and accepted opinions. The
Bible lesson was especially valuable, because it touched these very points, and after this
little conversation with Grace on the subject she was like another person.

When Mrs. Dyke called a few evenings later, after a similar interview to the one with Grace,
she left the battlefield a wiser soldier than when she entered it, for Kate had so beautifully
proven her religious earnestness, and more than all had shown such a Christ-like spirit, that
the "sword was beaten into a plowshare and the spear into a pruning hook."

CHAPTER XXIII.

  "MARLOW, September, ----.

"Dear Husband:

"Your letter was so full of interest. How glad, oh how rejoiced I am that we are privileged
to know this beautiful truth. Don't you ever feel like stopping in the midst of your work and
giving thanks that you were born in this age?

"Oh, divine mystery of childhood, of parenthood, that brings us into closer and sweeter knowledge
of our Father whose love is infinite. Out of the deep silence around us, filled as it is with
the all-abiding presence of God, may we ask for a manifestation of whatever gift we choose
to have. These thoughts filled my mind as I went to class this afternoon, and what was my surprise
and pleasure to find the lesson to be on the subject of prayer.

"There is no theme or word so constantly in the mind and on the lips of the Christ follower
as prayer. The oft-repeated injunction of Jesus was, 'watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation.'
'Pray without ceasing.' As we study more closely into the life of the Master, we find him on
all occasions communing with the Father in prayer. Thus we find that this is the most sacred
and necessary of all branches of our daily work.

"Prayer is the natural turning of the better self to God, in the attitude of thankfulness,
praise, supplication or voiceless desire. 'It must be the spontaneous and almost irrepressible
outpouring of the thoughts and feelings of the soul into the listening ear of a present God,'
said an earnest thinker.

"To what wonderful depths and heights our prayers lead us when they are thus spontaneous and
irrepressible! How well David has expressed the gratitude, the holy trust and majestic praise
common to every devout child of God. 'The Lord is my shepherd,' is blessed affirmation of supreme
trust, the naming of God's glorious gifts, the gratitude for peace, life, love, protection,
friendship, all the heavenly blessings of God's presence in God's house. In this wonderful
psalm we find, no doubt, no thought of waiting for future blessings, but a grand outpouring
of thankfulness for the present. There are no petitions, no supplications, no reserves of praise,
but simply the glad recognition and appreciation of the omnipresence and omnipotence of Good.

"It was the same feeling, tempered with a deeper solemnity, that prompted Jesus to say 'Father,
I thank thee that thou hast heard me,' as he was about to perform the mighty miracle of raising
Lazarus.

"Thanks signify the accomplishment of the desire. His request of the Father was granted before
he had even preferred it, for he knew the law and realized it--that God is life and knows not
death--but the form of words was observed because that makes the law a visible fact.

"Father is the human naming for this divine Love that ever waits for the spoken word in order
to be revealed. To Jesus it was the dearest and best name of all by which to address or speak
to the one great Helper, Guide, Friend. 'Father, I thank thee,' was often on his lips, and
it was to the 'Father who seeth in secret' that he bade his disciples pray.

"In the secret consciousness of oneness with the Father there may be no reservations, no concealments,
no hypocritical bigotry, no thought of self, only a glad going out with all our heart and soul
to the Father, a trustful acknowledgment of the Good. This is the attitude of true prayer.

"The devout soul is always praying, because it consciously lives with God. There are times
of praise, adoration, extolment, when thankfulness is more exuberant, runs over into bursting
joy, and times when longing desire carries us into the very bosom of God. We long for comfort,
for love, for peace, with an unutterable agony of longing, and are met with an unutterable
joy of satisfaction, if we but turn to Him and acknowledge, but an indispensable preliminary
to prayer is fasting. The power of accomplishment in fasting and prayer equals a decree.

"The conditions upon which hinge our use of the divine power are, first,'putting away iniquity'--fasting;
second, turning to God--prayer. Then comes the power to decree; then we see the truth of Jesus'
promise: 'All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe that ye have received them, and
ye shall have them.' Then we look into the face of the Almighty and reflect the same power,
are able to do a like work, make visible the things of His creation by speaking the word of
acknowledgment, that they are already established.

"It was this kind of prayer that enabled the disciples to heal the sick, cast out demons and
do all the wonderful works. Failure was simply a sign of unfaithfulness in prayer. 'Oh, ye
of little faith!' was the Master's explanatory exclamation.

"Here was a most essential requisite--faith in the Father, who alone is the power; faith and
trust in the invisible All. Why do we pray so much with no answer to even our most devout aspirations?
Because, like the disciples, we have too little faith.

"The heart-weary mother has prayed for her son, and he still goes the 'broad way that leadeth
to destruction,' as she thinks; but for her heart-weariness, which is but lack of faith, he
might have been turned into 'paths of righteousness.' With her mind continually burdened with
fear, dire forebodings and anxious doubts, she has asked, begged, beseeched the mighty Ruler
of destinies to soften the heart of her wayward boy. Thankfulness that God has given to her
child the common inheritance to all possible blessings, a pure spiritual nature, the reflection
of the All-Good, has never entered her thought to express. Her mind is divided between a conception
of good and a conception of its opposite--evil. The result is years of hopeless praying, years
of hopeless waiting. 'A house divided against itself can not stand.'

"'Pray, believing that ye have received.' Thus, 'I thank Thee, Father, for the perfect reflection
of Thyself in my son. He is whole because he lives in and of Thy wholeness. I thank Thee that
Thou hast already done more than I could ask. 'It is finished.' Into Thy hands I commend my all.'

"In this is the simple recognition of the All-Father, His love and His omnipotence. And after
this, what? Trust--unwavering, childlike trust. So the burden is truly 'cast upon the Lord,'
evil is overcome, swallowed up in the Good.

"With such mighty faith, what a cleansing there would be! what a sincere, glad rejoicing that
the true relation between God and man were proven, for faith is the bond between the invisible
and the visible, a 'basis of things hoped for, a conviction of things unseen.'

"With what devoutness, then, would we name the needs and aspirations? With what certainty would
we assert that we have 'already received?' Not far off in the intangible somewhere, but here,
there, everywhere may we find the Good, and 'he that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most
High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.'

"To dwell in the secret place, in the pure and righteous thought, is to be always under the
protection of the Most High. To be able to say, 'He is my refuge and my fortress,' is the grand
privilege given to the heir of the King, the heir that has come to the full knowledge of his
inheritance and thankfully uses it.

"'The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much,' wrote the wise and righteous
James. There is an infinite promise of the fulfillment of righteousness in these words. They
contain the key to all accomplishment or all failure. The righteous man is one who 'walketh
righteously, speaketh uprightly, stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, shutteth his eyes
from seeing evil' (prayer and fasting). The righteous man decrees magnificently and trusts
infinitely. He does not approach God like a cringing servant, licking the dust at his master's
feet, but like a Prince who enters his Father's presence with the simple statement of his wants,
and knowing his Father's will takes the glorious gift with thanksgiving and praise.

"Is it health he would have manifested for himself or his neighbor? He confidently acknowledges
the health, even though he can not see it, the health with which all humanity is endowed, if
it would claim its endowment. Is it peace, power, strength he desires, he again goes to the
royal treasury. With the right word he climbs the stair of heaven; with the right faith he
enters his Father's house, where all things abound.

"The righteous man is of one mind, the divine Mind that works through him. Were all the praying
world of one mind, think you a Lincoln would have been martyred, a Garfield sacrificed, or
tender little children lost to our sight?

"God is the same forever. There is no inharmony to come from Harmony. Be of one mind; let the
divine Mind work through you; acknowledge only the divine creation, and then all beliefs in
the opposite of God will be destroyed. The immaculate Christ (Truth) destroys the works of
the evil (error) to-day, even as in the far away centuries of the past, 'if so be you let the
Mind that was in Christ Jesus be in you.'

"The practical naming of daily prayer is denial and affirmation, denying evil or undesirable
conditions, and acknowledging the Good or absolute. To become one with this affirmative Allness,
is to manifest the affirmative condition of Being. It is only by denying and affirming constantly
that we fast and pray, thus fitting ourselves for the cleansing ministry. It is to 'be diligent
in season and out of season,' if we would gain the true reflection from Omnipotence.

  What the sun is to the flower,
  Thou to us art every hour;
  Like the dew on lily's breast
  Fall all blessings from the Best.
  Not alone in day would we
  Turn our faces, Lord, to Thee,
  But through lowering clouds of night
  Would reflect Thy radiant light;
  Thanking Thee for all Thy care,
  May our lives be filled with prayer.

"What an outpouring there was in the silence after this. Such a flood of reverence and trustfulness
filled my heart, and instantly it flashed upon me that God requires no outward forms or ceremonies
of His children, except they be the spontaneous and involuntary expression of an overflowing heart.

"Kneeling in prayer was first prompted by reverence and not the servile form into which it
has too much degenerated. A form is only a sign at best. If there is nothing to prompt the
sign, what a mockery it is! Truly, 'the letter killeth but the spirit giveth life.'

"Exactly how these thoughts came to me I can not tell, but after the silence I knew by a great
and sudden wave of understanding, things that I had never thought of before, and to attempt
to tell them would be like trying to catch the sunshine. The hint I have tried to give seems
very far from the reality of my experience--but what are words compared to thoughts, anyway!...
My heart is too full. I know now what 'inexpressible' means.

  "Good bye, with love to all.

  "MARION.

"P. S. I had just finished my letter when Mrs. Dawn and Miss Singleton came in. They too, had
something wonderful in the silence. It seems too sacred to tell, but to you three who are so
earnestly seeking the way of Truth, I can say what might seem sacrilege to the thoughtless
world. Miss Singleton had realized in those few moments the inexpressible meaning of the Lord's
prayer. 'Why,' she said, 'why, if we could realize what it means, there would be no more sickness,
sin or death. It seemed to me the very heavens opened, and I looked upon a broad white shining
light like a path, only it was broadened and broadened as I looked, till it became wide enough
to cover the whole earth. This is to be wherever the kingdom has come upon earth. Wherever
the thoughts are heavenly and pure there the Father is, there heaven, wholeness, health are,
and I could realize that the light is here, but ignorance keeps it veiled, so that verily the
'light shineth in darkness but the darkness comprehendeth it not.' Talk of sickness, trouble,
sorrow, why, they are nothing! The light is here, the kingdom of heaven has come, and been
here all the time. Jesus knew it, but he had to use language they could understand. He knew
if they prayed faithfully in that spirit, bye and bye the spiritual meanings would flash upon
them. Oh, how much, how much it means! I can never lose this, for it means unutterable things,
and I know there is no reality in sickness for I am well!'

"Miss Singleton is, or has been troubled for years with heart disease and a slight curvature
of the spine.

"It was not very light in the room, and I had not noticed her figure particularly, but as she
spoke, her face fairly shone with a heavenly light (I can think of nothing else to describe
it), and she was straight as any one! She declared over and over that she was well, but more
than all else she appreciated the spiritual uplifting and knowledge that had come.

"Mrs. Dawn had no special revelation to-day, but she seems to be unfolding most beautifully.
We talked a long time, and then sat in the silence. They have just gone. How I wish I could
see you, but it is late and I must again close. Give my love to Grace and Kate. I am so glad
Kate is getting into the light. I felt she would be all right after she begun. Of course, Kate,
you will read this, but you will not care, I am sure.

  "M. H."

CHAPTER XXIV.

     "Not till the soul acts with all its strength, strains its every
     faculty, does prayer begin."--Frances Power Cobbe.

"I have always thought a great deal on the subject of prayer," said Mr. Hayden, drawing his
chair up closer and bending over to look at his listeners, Grace and Kate, who had called to
get the letter which had just been read, "and it appears to me," he continued, "that subject
has been misunderstood."

"Well?" interrogated Grace.

"Well, we have always been taught to pray to a God who could be informed of our wants and needs,
and be induced to change His mind about the method of dealing with them, or be softened in
His judgments concerning His children. Now if God is all-wise and all-powerful, why need we
so carefully instruct Him? If He is all Love why need we ask Him with piteous tears to bless
our sick and afflicted? If He is everywhere present, and no respecter of persons, why need
we ask Him to do for one more than for another? As God is omniscient, is He not all the knowledge
there is?"

"The great mistake has been to regard Deity as Person, instead of Principle," said Grace, as
he paused a moment.

"As God is changeless and eternal, the essence of Love and Life," he went on, not heeding the
interruption, "how can it be otherwise than that we have an influx of this divine Life into
ourselves as we acknowledge its eternal and omnipresent existence, realizing the truth of what
we say?"

"There the trouble has been," said Kate, taking up his thought, "that we have not realized
the divine Presence which we call Truth, because we have not acknowledged it."

"That is exactly the reason, and it needs a constant acknowledgment of the Good to keep us
from admitting false beliefs that beset us because of an acknowledgment of the opposite of
the Good."

"What then is your idea of the true method of prayer?" asked Kate, much interested.

"More of thanksgiving, as Mrs. Pearl teaches. I like her comparison to the servant and prince.
We can not dwell too much on the thought that God is always giving us blessings. They are here,
have been from the beginning of all knowledge, and our part is to take them. Passionately fond
of flowers as she is, suppose some day I should bring her a rare bouquet from the florist's,
and with a smile hold them out to her, saying: 'Here Mabel, are some roses for you!' How would
I feel if she came with the most pathetic expression of longing and misery in her face, and
dropping down on her knees, should beg me to give her one flower? But instead, like a true
child that knows the father love, she would fly to take the beautiful gift and say, 'Oh, thank
you, papa!' as she gives me a rapturous kiss, then runs for a vase to hold her treasures."

"Indeed, that is like the true child we all should become, and give thanks for the beautiful
gifts of God," said Kate, softly, as if to herself.

"What do you think of the Lord's prayer as it was revealed to the lady?" asked Grace, to whom
this part of the letter seemed a little hard to understand.

"I think her revelation far exceeds mine, but I have enough to know that it is as she says:
'We must finally get the inner meaning, but I would uncover the spiritual ideas by clothing
them in more spiritual language.'

"It would be a great help if you would interpret it for us," said Kate, moving her chair closer
in her eagerness to hear.

"Wait a moment," said Mr. Hayden, as he went for the Bible. "I don't know very well how to
word it, but the thought came to me this morning, and became much plainer after I had read
the letter."

He read the Lord's Prayer, then gave his conception of the spiritual meaning.

"All-pervading Father-Mother Spirit, which art in all harmony, revered and holy is Thy name.
Thy peace and love and righteousness is conceived and realized amid earthly environments as
it is in the highest state of harmony.

"Give to us each day the hidden manna, the living word that sustains us, and give us the truth
for error as we in our divine likeness to Thee, give truth for error to those who err against us.

"Leave or let us not in temptation, but preserve us from all thoughts that would dishonor Thee,
for Thine is the kingdom and power and glory forever."

"That is wonderful. Oh, how beautiful it all is," exclaimed Kate with much feeling.

"Isn't it?" added Grace, "and quite in accord with the passage quoted by Mrs. Hayden,'what
things soever ye desire, that--'"

"Same principle, recognizing the omnipresence of all things good, and acknowledging the gift
as already given," interrupted Mr. Hayden, shutting his book and rising to put it away.

"How would you construe the passage where it says, 'with prayer and supplication let your requests
be made known to God?'" asked Kate.

"Oh, but you have not quoted it all: 'With prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving let your
requests be made known,'" replied Mr. Hayden, smiling. "It means, continue to ask, and expect
to receive and give thanks, not only by word, but by proper use of what you already have. 'If
ye continue in my word,' was the condition, so it must be that we continue to ask and give
thanks, even if our petition is not visibly answered at once."

Mr. Hayden had some advantage in his study over the girls, for these things had been more or
less considered by himself and Mrs. Hayden ever since her recovery, and it was no wonder he
could explain so readily.

"After all, how would you apply this way of praying to giving treatments?" asked Grace. "I
am anxious for the practical application."

"Why, it is all practical, as far as the individual is concerned, but the application to others
we have yet to learn, though I imagine it is the same. It is simply being negative to false
conditions, thus putting them off, and affirmative to true conditions, absorbing them as the
flower does the light and heat."

"Well, it is a beautiful idea of prayer at any rate," remarked Grace.

They soon went home, still discussing and deeply pondering the subject.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Grace, what do you suppose I did to-day?" cried Kate, breathlessly, as she rushed in the next
evening.

"Can't imagine, unless you cured little Tim, the newsboy," laughed Grace, making her guess
extravagant enough.

"No, but really, I treated Fannie for a dreadful headache. Of course I said nothing to her,
but she was stumbling so over her music, I asked her what was the matter, and when she told
me I treated her. In just a few moments she brightened up and said she felt better, and before
we got through it was all gone. Wasn't that delightful?"

"Very, and I am so glad. How did you do it?"

"Well, I can hardly tell, but the talk we had yesterday with Mr. Hayden gave me a clearer idea
than I had before, and I just denied the headache and acknowledged the truth that she was spiritually
well; then waited a few moments and gave thanks that it was so."

"How glad we ought to be for the privilege of reading Mrs. Hayden's letters," said Grace, thoughtfully,
as she smoothed her hair and washed her hands.

"Yes, and what a goose I was about it," Kate replied. "I would scarcely take the chance when
it was offered, and if it had been any one but Mrs. Hayden, I do believe I should have refused
point blank."

"We know so little what is right when we judge in the old way," said Grace. "Now, if I actually
hadn't seen that woman cured, and known positively how she was before, nothing would have induced
me to spend my time on this, although, from the first, I rather liked the theory."

"Where is my gingham apron?" called Kate, looking in the dark closet where she had hung it.

"Kate, I'm thoroughly reformed, as you will know when I tell you I am perfectly willing to
perform the culinary duties to-night, and I will be the cook while you discourse some music
for my edification," laughed Grace, as she emerged from the studio with her sleeves rolled
back, and the lost apron pinned around her.

"What!" cried Kate, holding up both hands with a mock-tragic air. "Do you really mean it?"

"Of course, and I will show you what a talent I have for poaching eggs and making toast."

The girls were in the habit of dividing their work according to their personal tastes. Kate
liked to prepare dainty meals and wash dishes, while Grace preferred to sweep and dust, and
arrange things to suit her artistic eye. Each disliked the other's part of the work, so they
were well content to have it so divided.

"Go on, now," ordered Grace, "and play for me. I want some music; but, first of all, tell me
where the eggs are, and how long should they boil?"

"The eggs are in the tin pail on the third shelf in the closet. They should boil till they
are a pretty blue white."

"Very well, now I can dispense with your company."

Kate laughed merrily, and sitting down to the piano, played till Grace called her out to dine.

"It seems rather nice to come home and play lady," she remarked, as she went out where Grace was.

"Well, really, Kate, I was thinking this afternoon that there is not so much difference in
the kinds of work as there is in the thoughts you have when you work, and I resolved, that
to refrain from certain duties because one does not like them is selfish, and makes a person
one-sided. Then I could see no reason why I should dislike to cook, and concluded to try it."

"I believe you are right about the one-sidedness," said Kate, soberly.

"I do want to grow into a rounded character, and am just realizing the necessity of doing things
that lie nearest us, whether it is washing dishes, painting or scrubbing. If I get so I can
think right about things I'm sure I shall like them."

"That is true. I have already noticed a vast difference in my patience in giving lessons. You
know some days I would be so nervous and get so exasperated with Fannie Thornton and Jenny
Miles, I didn't know what to do with myself, but the last few days I have not minded them at
all, in fact I got along better with Fannie than ever before, and it was just because I kept
from thinking she was contrary and stupid."

"Well, that is a practical application of your lesson. I think we ought to apply it to everything
we do," replied Grace.

"One of the chief beauties of this Christianity is that it goes into every thought and action,"
said Kate, thoughtfully, adjusting her hair.

"Oh!" she added a moment later, "I forgot to give you the letter that came to-day." She pulled
it out of her pocket all crumpled and gave it to Grace, who glanced at her name on the envelope
and then grew white about the mouth as she hastily put it into her pocket, remarking in an
ordinary tone, "It will keep a little longer."

Little was said by either for some time. Grace was preoccupied and Kate furtively watched her
face, for this was an unaccountable procedure, although occasionally Grace had been affected
the same way before.

She insisted on washing the dishes, and was glad indeed that she had it to do, while Kate poured
her thoughts into music, feeling that she could best show sympathy for her friend by this,
to her, most expressive way.

As for Grace, she waited till she had quite finished her work and then sat down to read the
letter. She well knew it was from Leon Carrington, a suitor, whom she had rejected on the plea
that she wished to be wedded solely to her art. Pride had forbidden her being frank enough
to tell him the real reason, caused by an impeachment made against his character, by one whom
she implicitly trusted as a friend. Her bitter resolve was the result, and while it was true
she loved and desired to spend her life in pursuing her art, she had compelled herself to think
she loved it best, and so told him it was first choice.

Hers was a proud, deep nature, and rather than admit that she had loved or could love one whom
she considered unworthy, she cut the matter short by a decided rejection. It had cost her a
mighty effort to come to this decision, and when she came out of the trial, she had lost her
faith in all men.

On all other points but this, Grace was sound and sweet in her general disposition, but any
talk on marriage she would never tolerate even with Kate.

This was the third letter he had written in the two years since he went away, and as in the
preceding, he fervently begged her to reconsider.

CHAPTER XXV.

        "Life hath its Tabor heights,
  Its lofty mounts of heavenly recognition,
  Whose unveiled glories flash to earth munition
  Of love, and truth, and clearer intuition:
        Hail! mount of all delights!"

  --I. C. Gilbert.

  "MARLOW, September ----.

"Good morning, dear ones all! I must tell you a little of yesterday before I go to the lesson
to-day. We were not in class, and I staid in my room all day trying to solve the many questions
that present themselves to us all, and to claim a little more understanding. Many points became
very much clearer after my long meditation in the silence. In the evening I ran down to see
Mrs. Dawn, who is several blocks away. We were so interested, so completely absorbed in telling
our thoughts and experiences, that it was after eleven o'clock when I arose to go, and then
she accompanied me home, only intending to come part way, but as we passed a little low house
about half way home, the door suddenly opened and a little girl of ten or twelve years ran
out sobbing, 'The baby is dying! the baby is dying!'

"She was going up an outside stairway to inform a neighbor. We rushed into the house and found
the frantic mother sobbing and wailing over her baby apparently in the last agonies of death.

"'What is it? Can't we do something for you?' we asked, not knowing what else to say.

"'Oh, my baby, my precious baby is dying! Don't you see? she is almost gone.'

"Indeed, for an instant it seemed the little life had gone out, when, like a flash of lightning,
the words came to my inner self, 'There is no death.' 'He that believeth on me shall not see
death;' 'I am the way the truth and the life.' 'Treat,' I whispered to Mrs. Dawn, and soon
the awful lie was denied by us in the peaceful silence of our own souls; for all consciousness
of appearances had vanished as we denied death and its power, till we could command the waves
of mortal thought to subside and say, 'Peace, be still.'

"It was the Master, the Christ within, who spoke for us, and we were filled with the mighty
peace and calmness of Truth that worked through us and was immediately made manifest. The little
face relaxed, the eyes lost their glassy stare, the color returned to the pale lips.

"The mother ceased her mourning and gazed at the precious child in awesome silence. The neighbor
and the little girl who had come in, stood by in hushed amazement. For a while all felt the
presence of the great invisible Power that had wrought so wondrous a work in their midst, although
no one knew but ourselves what had been done. Presently the mother leaned back in her chair
with a sigh of relief, awaiting the doctor, for whom her husband had gone before we entered
the house. We waited till he came, and then quietly slipped out.

"Mrs. Dawn came clear home with me, and we found our thoughts and feelings had been almost
identical in this remarkable experience, showing the oneness of truth. It is something we shall
never forget, for it was indeed from the very depths of our being we were stirred and thrilled
with the mighty Principle.

"This morning I went to see the baby, and found it quite bright and happy, but still breathing
a little heavily. The M. D. had left medicine, and of course, they were giving it 'according
to directions.' I told the mother something of the Healing, and she readily acknowledged that
something mysterious had saved her child's life, because it certainly was dying as much as
the child she had lost years ago.

"'After you left last night, the neighbor who was here said like as not you were Christian
healers or whatever that is, but she did not believe a word in it, and that it was all nonsense,
but I told her I didn't care. I thought you saved my baby, and the doctor said it had grown
much better since he came. 'Well,' says I, 'ef you had seen her condition when the ladies came
in, you would say she is better.'

"'Oh, we won't argue about what made her better, whether medicine or something else; all we
want now is to have the child cured,' said the doctor, very kind-like, and I really thought
a great deal better of him than I had before, for most M. D.'s think they know everything,'
she said.

"I was so glad to find she acknowledged even this much, so I talked a little longer, and explained
the necessity of perfect trust in God, and the consequences of distrust in Him. She seemed
very responsive and ready to believe, but then, who would not believe after such a demonstration?
I have felt awed and hushed all the morning, remembering the mighty something surging through
me. It seems hard to believe that at last my desire to have some grand sign shown me is already
fulfilled.

"Mrs. Pearl talked beautifully this afternoon on understanding. I wish you could hear the lectures
as she gives them, with all her grace and beauty and impressiveness. Here is the essence of
the lesson:

"As we evolve from material to spiritual understanding, we put ourselves more and more into
the divine current of Life, Health, Goodness, which is God. The higher our ideal, the higher
our attainment. Believing in God as supreme Love, we find it impossible to conceive of wrath,
jealousy, revenge, as emanating from or existing in Him, Her or It. As we are filled with love,
it becomes universal. Everybody is judged by its tender charity, everything is tinged with
its warm radiance.

"In proportion as we are freed from the ignorance and narrowness of primitive, ancient opinions
concerning God, we shall rise to broader and tenderer and truer conceptions of Him. To the
warm, sympathetic heart, that knows the deepest needs of humanity, the 'mercy that endureth
forever' is an established fact of the universal Love. To understand this Love is to be at
one with it, to do the works and think the thoughts of Love. It is essential, then, first to
understand the law of effort, then faith, then love, then spiritual understanding, which is
the goal toward which we all hasten--understanding of all spiritual things, understanding of
God, who is all spirit. As we make the effort we receive faith, as we use faith we grow in
the power and capacity of love, and love brings us the fullness of all things, even understanding
of infinite wisdom. Every glimpse of truth we have ever had, every glorious breath of freedom,
is but a hint of what will be when we have 'awakened to righteousness.'

"We gain our knowledge by and through the law of right speaking and consequently right acting.
In the Bible, the New Testament especially, great stress is laid upon the power of words. Solomon
wrote, 'How forcible are right words.' 'Life and death are in the power of the tongue,' and
from St. Paul we hear, 'Hold fast the form of sound words;' and James' admonition, 'Be ye doers
of the word and not hearers only,' show that both considered it necessary to speak the word
if they would manifest its power.

"But there is another and a holier office given to the word and that is the office of atonement.
The original meaning of atone was to 'make at-one, to agree, to be in accordance, to accord.'
To be at-one with a person is to be in such perfect sympathy that the thoughts of both are
the thoughts and feelings of one.

"Another illustration would be to say of a chip thrown into the river, it is at-one with the
current. In this sense we should aim to be so at-one with the divine Principle that we may
say with Jesus, 'I am one with the Father,' for did he not say: 'They are not of this world
even as I am not of this world,' and 'That they may be one even we are one.'

"To speak absolute Truth is to come into the true at-one-ment, to be at one with the divine
Mind, to realize that Christ the Truth is the atoning power. The Christ is the impersonal Word
of Truth which we are to speak, for 'unto us hath been committed the word of reconciliation'
or atonement.

"When we think true thoughts and catch true ideas, when we understand true meanings and love
true knowledge, we are sustained by the living word which sustains all who speak and live it,
because we are truly at one with the divine Word.

"Knowing the meaning of Christ to be Truth, blood to be life or word, and sin to be error,
we catch the spiritual meaning of the phrase 'sins washed away by the blood of Christ,' which
is, sins or errors washed away by the word of Truth.

"In that wonderful sermon in the sixth chapter of John, Jesus used the term blood as a symbol
of his words, and emphatically told his disciples, when they persisted in taking his sayings
literally, 'the flesh profiteth nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and
they are life.'

"That the Bible writers used the figurative language of those times, must be taken into account
when reading points that have been made foundation doctrines. Owing to the ancient custom of
sacrificing animals to appease the wrath of God, whom they regarded as subject to anger, jealousy
or any human passion, they used figurative language when describing Jesus as the Lamb sacrificed
for the sins of the world.

"In one of the inspired moments of the prophet, when he apprehended God as a God of Love, he
cried out, 'I have desired mercy and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt
offering.' It is the knowledge of God, the word of truth, that will save, and the only sacrifice
is the sacrifice of self which makes the atonement possible.

"To fast from all selfishness is to keep the true fast, so beautifully described in the fifty-eighth
chapter of Isaiah. As we understand God we shall be at one with Him, and to be at one with
God is to be whole, for He is Holiness, wholeness, health. 'If thine eye be single, then shall
thy whole body be full of light.' To be single in recognizing the one Mind, one Power, one
Creation, is to be filled with light, which is life, which is health, for as the mind, consciousness,
becomes illuminated, the body responds by recording the history of thought upon the visible
page or body.

"It is the revealment of God that we seek, and our individual relation to Him. What more is
there for us to know after we know Him, for is not He all there really is? He has given many
marvelous signs to His children, who must be taught in simple childish ways and the 'still
small voice' is ever near, speaking to whomsoever will listen. It is the inner guide, the 'spirit
of truth that guides us into all truth.' Then we are 'clothed upon,' we have returned to our
Father's house and the feast is spread, the rejoicing has begun.

"For awhile our only conception of power, is in visible manifestations or feelings, but there
comes a time when 'to be alone with silence is to be alone with God,' when joy is unutterable,
and love the very potency of silence, when we wait with bated breath and let the divine Thought
surge through us, when we put away all material beliefs and stand glorified in the 'secret
of His Presence.' Then indeed are we baptized of the spirit, and in the silent chamber of our
new consciousness may we hear the blessed words, 'Thou art my beloved son.'

"No longer 'Thou shalt and thou shalt not,' but the sweet affirmation of sonship, of daughtership,
of the precious benediction of a Father's love. Then glad light rushes into every dark crevice
of our mind.

  'Wisdom ripens into silence,
    And the lesson she doth teach,
  Is, that life is more than language,
    And that thought is more than speech.'

"How I long for this ultimate experience! How I yearn for the fullness of this knowledge now;
for the ripened wisdom that shall unlock the doors of my own consciousness, but I know, dear,
this will come to us if we are faithful to the few little steps we know, no matter how we stumble
and fall in taking them. Oh, that we may reach out to all the world in the sweet ministry of
'peace on earth, good will to men.'

"You say 'there is a rift in the clouds for you, too, and the vague something which sometimes
loomed up in your horizon is gone.' How glad I am, no words can tell. What a change there will
be! The old past shall be sweetened and sanctified by the new present, and only the good memories
shall remain.

"What a blessed comfort in this thought, 'the Lord shall be thy rear ward.' We have nothing
to do with the past, for it shall be utterly annulled. The Truth has erased it, and it is swallowed
up in the good in proportion as we recognize only the Good. This thought is a great consolation
to me when I recall the hasty words I used to say when my temper got the better of me. Oh,
that old failing! I hope it is forever vanquished--but there, I must not forget to be scientific,
and of course it is not scientific to talk of error in any way.

"Jamie is a dear little scamp, if he did try to break the rules and get something to eat between
meals by playing prairie dog. It must have been very funny to see him sitting in the attitude
of a begging dog, mutely appealing for something, and being obliged at last to suggest that
there was candy on the top shelf. Even my heart would have softened for the innocent little
trickster.

"Well, really, we must try to give the children the liberty we older children desire and insist
upon having in such a headstrong way. Bless my little darlings! They shall realize the absence
of fear, the presence of love in their home, which we must strive more and more to make typical
of the great Home in which we are all members.

"I feel that they are dearer now than ever. My love is more unselfish, and I can really feel
that they are truly consecrated to the Good, because I know how to hold them in the thought
of the Good, how to annul the opposite influences and fill their minds with the sweet, pure,
ennobling realizations of Love. Meekly I say this, because I know not my own strength, or rather
I know not how much divine strength I may recognize and use, but this is the right path, and
I earnestly desire to walk in it.

"You know some people say (in their ignorance, of course) that this free thinking breaks up
families. Oh, if they could only know, on the other hand, how it strengthens the bonds, how
it clears up misunderstandings and falsities, how it teaches us the sacredness of family relations,
and brings us into spiritual oneness, which is the only true marriage.

"Spiritual light has come to me on this subject which can not be put into words, but some time
you will know what I know, and we shall both be blessed by the knowledge.

"Peace be unto all God's children.

  "Your loving

  "MARION."

CHAPTER XXVI.

Grace was in deep perplexity. She pondered her problem over and over, and though in reality
she felt more like flinging pride to the winds than ever before, she was not able to formulate
or even consciously name her thoughts. A strange, unsettled feeling possessed her. She wondered
at herself that she did not contemptuously throw this letter of Leon Carrington's into the
fire, as she had the other two, but for some reason did not do so. All night she was uneasy
and slept but little. The next morning she announced to Kate that she would spend the day at
Rosewood, sketching.

What the trouble was, Kate could only surmise, but wisely held her peace feeling instinctively
that now was no time for questions. She was relieved to hear of the prospective recreation,
for Grace always came back from these trips with so much fresh inspiration, and renewed enthusiasm.

It was a beautiful day, one of those mild, hazy days of October that seem made to teach humanity
some of its most sacred lessons. Nature is the best of teachers if we know how to read her
mystic pages, her many and varied beauties, her wide diversities of expression, her fine subtlety
of language, for she is the handmaid of Truth, inasmuch as she holds before our admiring eyes
pictures of Truth and its wondrous laws. If we can interpret the pictures, we are wiser and
better and happier.

Grace was ever ready to listen to the oracles of nature, but now they held a sweeter message
than ever before, and she keenly anticipated the pleasure in store for her as she seated herself
in the car and disposed of her sketching materials for the half hour's ride to Rosewood, a
pretty little woodland station near Hampton.

She generally walked the mile and a half to the farmhouse in the edge of the woods, where she
had made the acquaintance of a kind hearted old lady, who loaned her a great Newfoundland dog
belonging to the house, for company in her rambles.

Mrs. Clayland was rejoiced to see her, for it had been several weeks since Grace had called,
and she was eager to tell her of the great tree up in the ravine that had been blasted by the
lightning, and about the beautiful little waterfall caused by the Cherry Creek freshet.

Grace listened patiently as she rested, and asked questions that she had asked many times before,
because it pleased the old lady to tell of all the beautiful spots and dainty bits of landscape
in her vicinity. That was next to being the artist.

Prince stood by, looking with intelligent eyes, first at the visitor and then at his mistress,
wagging his tail wistfully as though eager to be off, for he seemed to realize that this was
his holiday too.

"Are you ready to go, Prince?" asked Grace, patting the dog on the head as she looked into
his great brown eyes.

Prince licked his mouth and pushed his nose close under her hand while his tail wagged violently.
"Yes, of course he is. I wish my old limbs would let me go too, but I can't even hobble to-day
for the rheumatism has been dreadful the last week," said Mrs. Clayland, as she wiped her spectacles.

Grace hardly knew what to say, for here was just the place for a little sympathy, and yet she
must shut her eyes to false beliefs and conditions, so she wisely talked of the beautiful day,
the warm air, and what not, while secretly resolving that Mrs. Clayland should be her first
patient if she ever knew how to treat patients according to the Christ method. In the mean
time, she would give her some thoughts.

While Mrs. Clayland volubly rattled on, talking of all her aches and pains, Grace was doing
her best to think of the very opposite statement, that she was well.

At last, however, with Prince trotting gaily in front of her, she began her rambles in earnest.
She knew of a beautiful view from one of the hills near by, and slowly wended her way thitherward.
The hush and quiet of the place seemed such a relief after the troubled hours of the past night,
and as she came to the gentle slope of the grassy hill, she threw herself into the soft warm
grass, in the shade of a stately elm that stood there alone, and gave herself up to thinking--thinking
of the deepest and most sacred problems in human experience.

Prince came and laid himself at her feet. The soft autumn sunshine played here and there upon
her form and face through the leaves, while the occasional note of a bird or hum of an insect
were the only sounds that broke the stillness of the lonely place. What an exquisite pleasure
to lie there and breathe in all this wonderful peace, for it was like a taste of heaven. Far
away from all perplexities and cares, she could have lost herself in sweet forgetfulness but
for this one theme that would persist in thrusting itself upon her. At last it had resolved
itself into the form of a question. Should she or should she not write to Leon Carrington?
Might it not be possible she had been misinformed, and that she was mistaken in her hasty conclusions?

Life presented a different aspect now from what it had two years ago. She was more lenient
in her judgments, more charitable in her opinions, more softened in her pride; changed more
than she ever realized until she began the self examination on this point. To be sure she had
desired to change in these respects, since she had seen a glimpse of the possibilities of Christian
life. She had denied all qualities of character in herself that seemed undesirable, and had
affirmed charitableness, patience, wisdom, but that she could ever have changed her mind on
this subject seemed incredible and utterly inconsistent.

And yet, what could she say to him? She had no answer, certainly no encouragement. The only
thing she could do would be to tell him frankly what her thought and judgment had been, without
going into details, and learn the truth of the matter; but that, she would never do. Whatever
injury she had inflicted through her silent, erroneous thoughts should be as silently redressed
by her best and most generous ones.

Over an hour she lay there, no nearer the solution of her problem than when she began. It was
getting late, and she rose hurriedly, shook the leaves and grass from her dress, and opening
her sketch book, set to work.

An opening to the left in the woods revealed a view of lovely meadows and wooded hills, clothed
in all the gorgeous robes of autumn, with a misty blue haze enshrouding them, and gleams of
a silvery river winding through meadow and woodland. She rapidly sketched the outlines, studied
the beauteous blending of tints, and wondered meanwhile, what particular lesson she could learn
or give by this beautiful picture. Again she looked at the scene before her. Suddenly there
came into her mind some lines she had often admired:

  "Oh, the peace at the heart of Nature,
    Oh, the light that is not of day!
  Why seek it afar forever,
    When it can not be lifted away?"

Ah, here was the key. "The peace of Nature," typical of divine peace, "The Light not of day,"
divine Light itself. How sweet the thought, how precious the lesson; and the divine Peace and
Light are indeed forever here. Could she throw such a divine message into her prospective painting?
Could she make every form and color, every hint of light and shadow, tell the sweet story,
as this living picture told it? Surely, the heart that overflows with an inbreathing of the
divine, must be able to teach the common heart of humanity, else what is the use of inspiration?

On her way back to the house, Grace passed the blasted tree, described by Mrs. Clayland, but
she had no desire to study destruction or death. It was life, living things, that she would
portray. Was there not beauty and grandeur everywhere, hinting of Infinity? Even the noisy
and monotonous waterfall now had a message for her as it rushed forcefully on its course, regardless
of any and all obstructions.

It was quite late when Grace and Prince returned, much later than she supposed, so that she
missed the train and had to wait for the next, several hours later. Mr. Clayland kindly volunteered
to take her to the station, an offer she was very glad to accept.

The lamps were already lighted when she entered the car. She slipped into the first vacant
seat, but caught a glimpse of a face several seats in front of her that made her heart beat
hurriedly and her breath come quick and fast for a few moments.

She resolutely avoided looking anywhere but out of the window, and at the end of her journey
quietly but quickly disappeared in the surging crowd.

CHAPTER XXVII.

  "Let me not dwell so much within
    My bounded heart with anxious heed,
  Where all my searches meet with doubt,
    And nothing satisfies my need;
  It shuts me from the sound and sight
    Of that pure world of life and light
  Which has no breadth, or length, or height."

  --A. L. Waring.

Kate had long ago become accustomed to these uncertain movements of Grace, and was therefore
not alarmed at her prolonged absence. She sat in a cozy chair, reading the last letter from
Mrs. Hayden, when Grace entered.

"What makes you look so sober, Gracious?" she asked, tenderly, after the hat and sketch book
were laid aside and they had settled themselves for their usual chat.

"Oh, Kate, I had a lovely time to-day, with all the beautiful sights out in the country; I
wish you could see how much more there is in nature since we have studied Christian Healing,"
was the evasive reply.

"I think we see more in everything," said Kate, whose curiosity was rather piqued by the evasiveness,
though she made no sign, "because everything stands for something. It is like the x in algebra,
and interesting as the unknown quantity."

Grace smiled a little. She was thinking of a different kind of "unknown quantity."

"Don't you want to hear Mrs. Hayden's letter?" asked Kate, wondering more and more over the
distrait manner and dreamy absorption of her friend.

"The letter, why, of course; where is it?"

"Here; shall I read it?"

"Certainly."

Grace grew more interested as the reading went on. "That is decidedly the most reasonable explanation
of the atonement I have ever heard," she exclaimed at the close.

"Yes, it is reasonable and beautiful I must admit," said Kate, "but when I first read the letter
my old fear came back for a moment that possibly it was all wrong, but I remembered my right
to an interpretation. That one thought has been more helpful to me than any other, for it has
brought such a sense of liberty. Then I looked up the quotation about the 'word of reconciliation,'
and I must say it is so perfectly plain I can not see why it has been so overlooked and neglected
before."

"Where is it? I did not catch that," said Grace, following Kate's finger as she pointed to
the passage in the Bible.

"There is something so sacred in these meanings," resumed Kate, "and if I may only get the
truth, I care not what any one says about it. I see now wherein lies the whole misconception
or misinterpretation rather. It is in the idea of God. If we conceive of Him as limited to
human ways and capacities, as the ancient Hebrews did, we naturally ascribe such works to Him."

"In other words," added Grace, "we judge God entirely by ourselves. If we are broad and loving
in our nature and character it is easy for us to regard God as love. If we are vindictive and
revengeful, we can readily see Him as angry and unrelenting."

"Yes, we are so apt to judge the whole world and God, too, by our moods," replied Kate, thoughtfully.

"As Emerson says, 'we see in others what we are ourselves,'" quoted Grace, removing her jacket
which until now she had retained in order to get warm after her evening journey.

"Oh! what do you think of what Mrs. Hayden says about marriage?" asked Kate, putting her pencil
in her mouth as she held both hands out to assist Grace.

"She doesn't say enough to give an opinion," replied Grace, "but there must be something in
her mind or she would not write about it now."

"Her ideas must be very exalted, and I hope to know what they are, for it is a very important
question," said Kate, with a casual glance toward her companion, as she bit the end of the pencil.

"Mrs. Hayden decidedly denies the imputation laid to Christian Healing, that it is opposed
to marriage, or that it tends to separate families," said Grace, with more interest than Kate
would have thought possible a week ago.

"I did not know any such imputation had been laid to it," rejoined Kate, opening her eyes in
astonishment.

"Oh, yes, I have heard it several times, but people will talk whether they know anything or
not. I am glad Mrs. Hayden mentions it for that is enough to show there is absolutely no foundation
for such statements." Grace moved her chair and put her elbow on the table so she might shade
her eyes with her hand.

"Why, I don't see how people can say such things; surely the tendency is to draw families into
closer bonds of sympathy and affection," exclaimed Kate, in questioning innocence.

"It ought to be," replied Grace, thoughtfully, "and undoubtedly is," she added.

"What do you think of this question, Grace?" Kate ventured to ask. At any other time she would
not have dared approach the subject, but Grace seemed more pliable to-night for some reason.

"What question?" asked Grace, rousing from her reverie. "Oh, marriage. Well, sometimes I have
thought the query going the rounds of the press, 'Is marriage a failure?' a very pertinent
one, but of course that doesn't touch the principle itself. That is right and can never be
otherwise."

"Most people talk and write as seriously as though it does touch the principle."

"That is because they judge the principle by the persons representing it, whereas they should
stop and consider that humanity is prone to weakness and often fails to demonstrate its high
ideals."

"And it is because of failure they think there is something wrong. Take an individual case,
for instance, and there are thousands. If a girl marries unhappily, she thinks there must be
something wrong in the whole system, for she judges everybody's misery by her own," said Kate,
secretly wishing Grace would be more confidential, and not so coldly intellectual.

"Then the way to a happy judgment of this question would be a happy marriage, you think?" laughed
Grace, with a faint blush, looking up inquiringly.

"Don't trifle Grace. You know I said it all earnestly, and really it is no matter to trifle
over, any way."

"Well, that is true, Kate," replied Grace more soberly. "I don't believe anybody takes the
question seriously enough. It is certainly the most important of all things to consider."

"Do you think it right to enter marriage for any other reason than pure and devoted affection?"
persisted Kate.

"No, I do not. Why do you ask?" demanded Grace rather sharply.

"Because that is the solution of the whole problem. If they would begin to talk about love
instead of marriage being a failure, they would get some light on it," a little impatiently.

Grace looked up in surprise.

"I know," continued Kate, "it is because people are mistaken or misled in their reasons for
marriage, that it even has a semblance of failure."

"That is one reason, certainly, and another is that they do not understand each other's motives,
or have not the patience to bear with each other's faults. We can easily see how misunderstandings
can be put away when there is true love, when we determine to see only the good, and learn
to 'resist not evil.' That is one of the strong points in Jesus the Christ's teachings," said
Grace with unwonted earnestness.

"I am so sorry people can't see it in the right light," added Kate, regretfully.

"You can have much charity for them, for it is just what you would have said or thought, if
you had not studied the matter yourself. You remember how Mr. Narrow influenced you and biased
your judgment?"

"Yes, and I see as never before that the 'Truth makes us free.'

  'He is a freeman whom the truth makes free.
  And all are slaves besides,'"

said Grace, as she reached for the sketch book to look over her work of the afternoon.

"It is no use, she never will say anything, even when she might," thought Kate as she reviewed
the events of the past few days. She half reproached herself for allowing anything to take
her mind from the one special theme in which at last she had become thoroughly interested.
She was eager to learn, to search in all directions for the meaning of things. Slowly the little
grain of faith was growing into the mighty tree.

Enchanting Truth so round, so perfect, so beautiful,--no wonder we must reach out in every
direction for the knowledge of thy fair signs that we may more correctly and more fully realize
the perfect revealment of our own divinity.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

     "What a great power is the power of thought! And what a grand being
     is man when he uses it aright; because after all, it is the use
     made of it that is the important thing. Character comes out of
     thought. 'As a man thinketh in his heart, so he is.'"--Sir Walter
     Raleigh.

  "MARLOW, October ----.

"Dear Husband: I was just thinking of you all when the letter carrier came this morning and
gave me a welcome surprise, for your letters usually come in the afternoon. It seems too wonderful
to believe about the children, and yet I can see it is their implicit faith that makes their
words so potent.

"They are doing their part to help too, for every one in the world, large or small helps in
greater or lesser measure to carry out the plans of the invisible Good.

"I dreamed of being at home last night, and it seemed as though you were all so happy and busy.
You did not see me. Even little Jem was busily engaged in some kind of work. I could scarcely
see what it was, but a vague white something like an invisible net was spread between you,
and the thought came that you and Anna were weaving something, and even the children had a
part to fulfill for they flitted to and fro, bringing something to you with faces so full of
light and happiness, I almost cried out with joy.

"When I awoke I was deeply impressed that this was a symbol of united effort in making the
seamless robe of Truth, and the family group represented the members of one body, each with
a work to do to perfect the whole.

"No matter how humble our part may be, no matter how childish and incompetent we feel, by doing
the best we know, with the ability we have, in all joy and earnestness, we shall be serving
the Master and weaving the marvelous robe.

"Mrs. Pearl talked of the mighty power of thought in her lecture to-day.

"Every individual in the universe is inseparably connected with every other individual, and
we are, as it were, 'touching elbows' with the whole world.

"How is it done? Simply by thinking and being susceptible to thought. Every thought of the
individual helps to make or mar the happiness and health of the world. Every negative thought
(and by that I mean opposite the good, which is positive) sent forth, goes into the miasmatic
fog of error, and whoever believes in error or the reality of these thoughts, attracts to himself
this quality of thought, which sooner or later, makes itself manifest in physical inharmony.

"For instance, one who believes in the reality of sickness and the reality of evil is constantly
attracting thoughts that make sickness manifest, but if a knowledge of how to throw off or
counteract those thoughts were used, the cloud would be dispelled before it turned into inharmony
or sickness.

"This is why we are taught to deny every thought or feeling that is not harmonious or desirable,
everything which can not be predicated of spirit. If this is what makes sickness and sin, truly
it is not to be wondered at, for how many are perfectly happy, perfectly unselfish and kind,
one single day at a time?

"Suppose one gets up in the morning with a feeling of crossness and impatience; he goes to
breakfast, impresses the whole family with his discomfort, and so through the entire day leaves
the imprint of his dark forebodings on every person who sees him, besides the untold influence
that goes forth to the unprotected world, inasmuch as thoughts go everywhere.

"He retires at night, disgusted with himself and displeased with the whole world. People were
unkind and unjust. Even inanimate objects were unusually aggravating. He wasted half an hour
trying to untie a knot, hunted for a package of papers which were finally found in their proper
place, had a vexing ten minutes with his office key, etc.

"Every impatient thought, word or action was an expenditure, not only of physical force, but
a loss of moral strength, and just as surely as the world moves, these thoughts, in their revolving
circuit, constantly return to the thinker, 'Whatsoever ye sow, that shall ye also reap.'

"Who knows what dark trains of thought his lowering face suggested? Who knows what headaches
and heartaches were brought on by the unconscious absorption of his impatience or bitterness?
Who can measure the extent of that mysterious burden of depression, so often called 'the blues,'
that crept into the consciousness of somebody under the influence of the dark thoughts sent
out by this one, of whom perchance they know nothing?

"It is this negative quality of thought that holds the world in bondage. To destroy it is to
destroy all inharmony. On the other hand, note the influence of the happy-voiced individual,
who comes to us so running over with the joy and beauty of life that we catch the thrilling
inspiration of his mood and begin to enjoy the same sunshine, see the same beauty and feel
the same happiness.

"One look or one word may often send us off into the most delightful reveries, may inspire
us to write a cheery letter, vibrating with love and hope, or prompt us to spend half an hour
with one who needs the bath of joy our words may bring. Consciously and unconsciously we lighten
the pathway, lift the burdens, sanctify the sorrows of the world by sending out and receiving
this subtle thread of thought, so fine in its essence and quality, that any one and every one
may feel its strengthening presence.

"It is the negative or mortal thought that produces disease. See how grief bends and breaks
the strongest constitutions, furrows the cheek, dims the eye, takes the appetite, impairs the
mind. See how anger cankers everything it touches, how jealousy corrodes the thoughts with
poisoned arrows, until the body is written over with letters of unmistakable meaning.

"The body is what we may call the thermometer of the mind and registers the quality of thought.
Universal beliefs in error find their common expression on the body. Every thought of sickness,
sin or discouragement is recorded or bodied forth.

"With all our belief in and fear of evil, sickness and death, we are continually subjecting
ourselves to false and undesirable conditions, until, as Job said, 'Lo, the thing that I feared
has come upon me.'

"Fear is more quickly productive of disease pictures than any other kind of thought. Some one
has aptly said, 'if the human race were freed from fear, it would be free from sickness,' which
is verily true. Even the most learned doctors of medicine admit that an epidemic takes hold
of those first who are most afraid, and frequently leaves the absolutely fearless unmolested.

"Why is this so? Because fear weakens the power of mental control, and consequently weakens
the body. To leave the doors unlocked, and then watch for the thief, is almost equal to having
the thief in the house.

"The material scientist says an epidemic has a material cause; the Christian healer says it
has a mental cause. Before there is an object to fear there must be the sentiment of fear.
Let scarlet fever appear in a community, and every parent will immediately send out the most
agonizing thoughts of fear. Where will they go? Everywhere, because thoughts can not be restrained.
Their influence goes out in every direction. To the tender children especially, because particularly
directed to them. All who have left the door open to fear, though they may be sleeping in their
unconsciousness of danger, will be liable to receive these uncontrolled thoughts, and some
day when they least expect or fear sickness, it may be upon them.

"So the children, to whom have been directed such thoughts, only prove their susceptibility
to them, by picturing forth fear in the form of scarlet fever, or whatever may have been the
naming of the error. Anybody manifesting sickness without consciousness of fear proves passive
or unconscious fear, while those suffering sickness through a conscious recognition and fear
of sickness are manifesting active or conscious fear.

"There are two departments of mind sometimes spoken of as the conscious and unconscious. The
conscious mind is the conscious thought, which is easily swayed or changed. It has an immediate
or direct influence on the body as is shown by the blood that rushes to or recedes from the
face at some sudden change of thought. The unconscious mind is the aggregation of past individual
and universal conscious thought, and is the character formed, the second nature or instinct.

"As the flesh and bones are more fixed than the ever moving blood, so the unconscious mind
is slower to receive impressions, and slower to show them forth. Our bodies to-day are showing
a harvest of the thoughts of generations or ages of the past. The person manifesting consumptive
tendencies is not only expressing his own conscious thoughts, but is veritably the picture
of the thoughts of his parents, ancestors and the entire race, concerning a belief in consumption.
Year by year the thoughts of this error have been writing themselves in his face, his eyes,
his chest, his very walk and talk and breath. Unless he offsets them with thoughts of absolute
Truth, they press him out of our sight. He yields to the belief of death, because he never
said no to sin or sickness, because he was at one with the world in its false beliefs.

"'The last enemy to be overcome is death!' reads the inspired statement of Paul, confirmed
and strengthened by the Master's never-dying promise, 'If a man keep my saying he shall never
see death.'

"There are certain fixed beliefs inherent in every mind which we call universal beliefs. They
are often referred to as belonging to the unconscious mind; as, for example, the fear of pain
or suffering under certain circumstances will come to the surface of consciousness, proving
that despite every feeling of confidence and fearlessness it has not been destroyed, but sleeps
in the unconscious mind.

"These unconscious beliefs and fears of sickness are ultimately expressed on the body in different
forms of disease, sometimes given one name and sometimes another. The material scientist calls
a certain outshowing on the body cancer, the Christian healer calls it the picture of a belief
of cancer. In this way disease is always the manifestation of both conscious and unconscious
thoughts.

"Special forms of disease are born by constant attention to the thought of disease and their
symptoms. It has been stated on good authority that physicians who make a specialty of certain
diseases are apt to be afflicted with what they have especially fitted themselves to cure.
In a medical journal a case was cited not long since of an eminent physician who read before
a great convention of doctors, what was considered to be the ablest treatise on insanity ever
written. 'On going home from the convention he killed his wife, four children, and then himself,
in a fit of dementia.'

"This reveals a startling fact, which might be corroborated by many others, that the body ultimately
pictures forth the idea. But the thought is not confined to the individual. It not infrequently
finds the most striking expression in some member of the family or in any one under his influence.

"If one man's thoughts so influence himself, family or friend, think of the influence of such
thoughts on those who go to him for advice or treatment, those who deliberately place themselves
under his inspection and allow themselves to be guided both directly and indirectly by his
erroneous opinions. Think of the vast stream of such thoughts going out from all medical colleges,
students and practitioners. No wonder diseases increase as physicians increase, as some of
the best thinkers of the age declare.

"Not that one class of people is more to be reflected upon than another, for some kind or degree
of erroneous thought is held by all classes. Physicians talk sickness and death, ministers
preach evil and punishment, the entire race believe in and suffer for sins.

"It is centuries since it was first discovered that ideas were transmitted without the ordinarily
accepted means of communication, but, to-day it is positively and repeatedly, yes, continually
proven that thought transference is not only possible or probable, but an every-day occurrence.
To realize that

      'Thoughts are things.
  Endowed with being, breath and wings,
  And that we send them forth to fill
    The world with good results or ill,'

is to be mightily responsible for what we think. To know that we are verily our brother's keeper,
and that every thought makes misery or happiness for the whole world as well as for the individual,
is something that should engage our deepest and most earnest consideration.

"All thinking is for the weal or woe of the world that is yet in its infancy of knowledge.
As consciousness of truth takes the place of consciousness of error, thoughts become light
and beautiful and true with corresponding conditions.

"Let us no longer slumber in the arms of indifference and ignorance, but awake to truth and
righteousness. 'Better be unborn than untaught; for ignorance is the root of misfortune.'"

CHAPTER XXIX.

     "Blessed influence of one true, loving soul on another. Not
     calculable by algebra, not deductible by logic, but mysterious,
     effectual, mighty as the hidden process by which the tiny seed is
     quickened, and bursts forth into tall stem and broad leaf, and
     glowing tasseled flower."--George Eliot.

"Oh dear!" exclaimed Kate as she laid down the letter containing the lesson on Thought. "I
didn't know we were so responsible for every little thing that comes into our mind."

"Or goes out of it," said Grace, smiling, as she finished tinting a dainty plaque. "Now we
can understand that 'where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise,'" she added rather absent-mindedly.

"Yes, but I think I prefer the wisdom to the bliss. Do you understand this lecture as well
as the rest?" asked Kate, again glancing at the letter.

"Why shouldn't we? It is plainly told, and is a natural sequence to the others. I should think
it very helpful, and if there really is so much power in thought, it is time people knew it."

"But what of the people who do not know it? Are they utterly defenseless?"

"As long as they believe in the reality of sin, sickness and death, they must suffer from them,"
replied Grace, picking a loose hair from her blender.

"Then they ought to know how to learn and understand these things, but I could not tell anybody."

"We can solve any problem by going back and reasoning from the premise. If any shock of sin
or sickness come over us, we have simply to remember the spiritual, which is the only real
creation."

"It is not so easily done though. To-day I met the most miserable looking cripple sliding along
without any limbs. I held my skirts aside as he passed, and forgot to even think of him as
God's child," confessed Kate, in a regretful tone.

"Anything takes time, and we can't expect to leap into perfection at once, but what did you
do after he had passed?" asked Grace, with some curiosity.

"I pitied the poor creature and wondered what made him so."

"That was the very way to keep him in the same condition," said Grace, rapidly mixing some
paint. "This last lesson very clearly explains that every thought has an influence, and that
you help to make the body manifest whatever you think of it. If you think the real and true,
you help to make that show forth, if you only think of the external or apparent trouble or
defect, and regard it as the real, you are harming instead of helping."

"I can readily see that we may affect ourselves, but it seems hard to believe that we affect
everybody," protested Kate, incredulously.

"It is because we cannot realize the law of thought transference. I was reading just last week
about that. An instance of Stuart C. Cumberland's mind-reading was cited. It was wonderful.
And then long ago I read an old book written by Cornelius Agrippa about it, but I was not very
much interested, and did not understand nor believe it at the time, so my memory is not worth
much concerning it."

"Then you really think I added another weight to that unhappy creature's burden of trouble?"
cried Kate, in sharp surprise.

"It would be best for you to deny his apparent conditions and affirm his real ones, and instead
of thoughts of pity, which are only weakening, you could think of happiness and contentment.
I truly believe we can learn to think of people this way, if we only catch ourselves for correction
every time we think wrong."

"How shall I ever learn to bridle my thoughts?" was Kate's despairing wail.

"By learning to bridle your tongue; I found a splendid text to-day on that very theme. It is
in James iii: 2. 'If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle
the whole body.'

"Why, it tells in those few words the substance of all we have learned in these lessons," exclaimed
Kate.

"Only we would never have had sense enough to understand without the lessons," added Grace,
with a smile.

"They may be likened to a golden key that opens royal gates," said Kate, going to the piano
to play while Grace was putting away her paints and brushes.

A little later Grace went out to mail a letter. As she turned from the post-box, she found
herself face to face with--whom but Leon Carrington?

"Ah, an unexpected pleasure, Miss Hall!" he said, extending his hand and warmly grasping the
one she slowly held out to him. He looked searchingly into her face, with clear, questioning eyes.

She dropped her lashes and drew back with a touch of the old haughtiness, murmuring something
he could not hear.

"May I have the pleasure of a little walk with you?" he asked, suiting his step to hers and
ignoring her apparent coldness.

"Certainly. How long since you returned to Hampton, Mr. Carrington?" recovering herself as
they walked.

"Only a few days ago. I was called here on business for my uncle, and will probably be detained
several weeks." He glanced at her as he spoke, but she gave no sign, only remarking it was
a lovely season of the year for a visit. They walked along, talking only commonplaces, until
they neared her home.

"Did you receive my letter, Miss Gra--Miss Hall?" he asked, with some unsteadiness in his voice.

"Yes," she replied, shortly. She did not understand herself any more than he did, and was vexed
to find it so impossible to throw off her old proud ways, for she really intended to relent
enough, at least, to have an explanation, and possibly--her thoughts could never go farther
than this, and here she was, in the same imperious way, shutting her better self away from
even a fair consideration of duty. These thoughts flashed through her mind while she walked
on, apparently with the greatest indifference to either his words or his presence. But with
a great effort she compelled herself to say again, with more warmth, "I received it, and intended
to answer before this, but--" She stopped abruptly.

He gratefully caught the morsel she had given, and asked if he might not call the next day.

"Yes, you may come at three," she said, careful to set a time when Kate would surely be out.

At the door they parted, and as she went up the stairs, she wondered more than ever at her
hardness, for almost unconsciously she had given up all doubts of his honor as a gentleman.
What was it all about anyway? Nothing but a report that he was engaged to a young lady at the
time he proposed to her, and on the testimony of a single friend, she had allowed herself to
be miserable, and make another miserable, through this foolish pride that she would conquer
by to-morrow afternoon.

What! would she compel herself to so utterly ignore her own nature? She leaned against the
wall half way up the stairway, startled at this revelation of herself. She did not know she
was capable of such changes, and yet the last two weeks had greatly modified her opinions in
many things.... Why should it not be so? If it were right she could be glad, and she reverently
felt that it was right to let the Truth erase all errors and right all wrongs. To-night she
would deny away every fault in her character, especially pride, deny every obstacle to understanding,
and then earnestly ask for guidance, and wait till it came, for this was truly a crisis in
her life.

The next day she received her guest with a perceptibly softened manner. The hour was spent
in mutual explanations, and the renewal of a more friendly relation on her part, much to the
satisfaction of Mr. Carrington, whose perseverance was surely worthy this much reward, but
Grace would go no further, although she gave him permission to call again. She must know herself
fully before another word on the subject were said. Marriage was a vague and solemn theme,
something to be pondered over days and nights and months perhaps, she thought, and said to him.

Mr. Carrington was a man of earnest aim and high purpose, thoughtful, intellectual and cultured,
in every way congenial to her, and she was glad to accept his friendship. That he had loved
her through all her coldness and neglect, she no longer doubted, which fact was of no small
import in his chances for her favor. Finding how absolutely false had been the report that
had caused her misjudgment, she was anxious to prove herself at least, a friend.

After he was gone she reviewed the situation. Had she gone too far? No. All was well. She was
content. Even if it should end in marriage, for marriage was the highest symbol of perfection
and--. What the symbol meant was yet to be revealed, but she already knew that it had a profound
and sacred meaning.

CHAPTER XXX.

     "The study of Heredity, spiritual anatomy and physiology is
     highest of all. The key to this study is your own soul. Study
     yourself; gain possession and mastery of your own spirit and you
     hold the key not only to the heights of liberty, but the key that
     unlocks imprisoned souls."--Mary Weeks Burnett M. D.

  "MARLOW, October----.

"My dear husband: Gradually the vision broadens and we become more accustomed to the light.
It is as though we were put into a beautiful room filled with all manner of lovely forms and
dainty colors, flowers and perfumes, where we have groped blindfolded from one thing to another,
trying to form some conception of the surpassing loveliness, when gradually the bandage is
removed, layer by layer until the whole enchanting scene, radiant with light is revealed to
our wondering gaze, showing the vast difference between supposition and reality.

"The light grew clearer than ever to-day, for we had our first practical hint on healing, inasmuch
as we were told how to take up a case for treatment.

"We must never forget that we are, and wish to remain as little children, in our desire to
apprehend and understand Truth. The natural attitude of the child-mind is one of receptivity
and eager interest. Under the guidance of wise parents he will always be willing and anxious
to learn more and more, continually growing in wisdom and love.

"Back to the zeal and innocence of childhood we go then, to learn the ever mysterious but ever
charming alphabet of Truth, which leads us into the kingdom.

"As we present ourselves in the great school room of life, and take or recognize our appointed
place beside the ever present School-master, we learn the letters of the grand knowledge that
shall teach us how to read the most learned books, understand the deepest philosophy, the profoundest
science, the divinest religion. We would learn the ministry of healing, that will set free
the 'spirits in prison;' we would be glad messengers of the gospel of peace. The door to great
attainments is faithfulness in small ones.

"There are three kinds or modes of healing. The first or lowest, is the intellectual; the second
or next higher, the intuitional; the third and highest, the spiritual. The first only can be
taught, the other two are attained by individual development. The first comes by reason, the
second by faith, the third by understanding. The first is by argument or a system of reasoning,
the second by implicit trust or confidence in the Principle, the third by the realization of
Truth and the speaking of the word or perchance, by one's very presence.

"But there is nothing arbitrary about this. The person who never heard of Christ's teaching
till yesterday may have so caught the fire of Truth that to-day he stands at the altar a priest
instead of communicant, a teacher instead of pupil.

"Many just beginning their study of this method of healing require explicit directions and
explanations of details, in order to apply the principle, feeling that they have no intuitional
leadings and can not depend upon the invisible power because they know so little about it.

"Wait; be patient; trust. Remember that 'he who is faithful in little, shall be made ruler
over much.' You need not learn the rule if you learn the principle, and only so long as you
are ignorant of the principle will you need the rule. To use the rule, as the child uses the
chair in learning to walk, is to grow strong, and able to dispense with it; to use it as spectacles
are used, is to make it indispensable.

"If we can not yet learn through divine ways, let us learn through human ways. The human is
inadequate to express the divine, but many nameless hints and light-gleams and sudden illuminations
will flash upon the faithful worker all along the way. Words are signs of ideas and ideas are
signs of God. When we think or speak true words, we have begun our mission of healing or helpfulness,
and from words we go on to the inexpressible thrill of realization.

"We can not tell when we may thus change from the letter to the spirit, can not tell when we
come into the exalted condition of a spiritual understanding, and having received the illumination,
we are not to feel that we have grown above the use of argument, for it may be necessary to
go back to the rule with the very next treatment.

"Above all else must the student of this Truth guard against what may be called spiritual pride.
No thought of supremacy or greater advancement should be harbored for a moment. All such things
are clouds that obscure the light as much as other material beliefs.

"To gauge ourselves by that inimitable thirteenth chapter of I. Corinthians is to maintain
the perfect equilibrium of a loving, charitable heart, that can heal and bless all human-kind,
for 'love never faileth.'

"We become, as it were, the cleansed window pane, through which shines the divine light of
Truth. Could we always be the cleansed pane, Truth would melt away all error, just as the sun
melts the frostwork, but being still in the current of human thought we must wait patiently
for further power to reveal the God-likeness.

"Wrong thought as the real cause of disease, opens new avenues of information; but we continue
to explore and discover. Any kind of thought opposite the good is sure to break forth into
some form of disease-pictures, and the question is, what kind of thought is it which thus reflects
itself upon the patient's body? All error will produce pictures of error. The world's naming
of the belief in heredity is the naming of its greatest error, or belief in sin, because that
implies all sins of the flesh as manifested in the body.

"Back of all effect is a cause; the disease is the effect, the wrong thought is the cause.
One of the great causes of disease is sensual beliefs, the appetites and passions of the carnal
man.

"It is error to suppose he is subject to conditions unlike God, the Source. 'He that is born
of God, can not sin, because his seed remaineth in him.' Being in and controlled by the universal
thought current, the error of supposition, he manifests it in his condition. Supposing consumption
hereditary, he suffers from the supposition; supposing impurities of the blood transmitted
through the flesh, he finds it even so. Supposition, false thinking, being at the bottom of
all erroneous conditions, we proceed to deal with them as we do with any other errors or lies.

"When we seek for anything with a desire to gain happiness, it is because we hope to gain what
our previous efforts have failed to bring us, so the one who comes to be healed by Christian
Truth, comes with a hope at least that this will bring the health he has sought in vain from
other sources. He has turned in all directions in response to the advice received from this
or that one of the friendly advisers, so ready to constitute themselves the body guard of the
world. He has tried doctors of every school; he has traveled east, west, north and south; he
has plunged into healing waters of all kinds and had all kinds of healing waters plunged into
him; he has been burned and steamed and pounded and starved, till he is finally disgusted enough
to want something that will not harm if it will not cure, so he drags himself before us with
possibly a gleam of hope, possibly the faithlessness of despair, and asks for a treatment.

"And now you wish to know in what a treatment consists; simply in silently telling the patient
the truth about himself as God's child, in giving him the principles we have learned concerning
God and man, and with earnest gladness assuring him of his freedom. For the benefit of the
young practitioner, we will give a few directions or suggestive treatments.

"We ask the patient for a statement of his belief, which he is only too glad to give with elaborate
and vivid details. We meet every statement with an emphatic mental denial.

"The faithful student who has fasted and prayed (denied and affirmed), is now the embodiment
of one vast negative that should wipe out the positive belief of any inharmony. The patient,
being in the belief of false conditions, is of one mind with the world, and so reflects the
beliefs of mankind. That we may be sure of meeting all classes of false beliefs, we deny for
him the reflection of any false conceptions of himself from the race, his parents and ancestors,
his friends and associates, himself and ourself, for we are still one with humanity.

"Everybody has a conscious or unconscious belief in heredity, and since it is one of, if not
the most formidable of human beliefs, we deal with it first as the possible cause of our patient's
belief in suffering.

"After he has finished the statement of his condition, we say to him mentally: 'James Martin!
Hear what I say, for I tell you absolute truth. Not one word of all this you have told me about
dyspepsia is true, because the carnal mind, to which you have been listening, is not subject
to the law of God, and you, the spiritual, immortal you, are subject to the mind of the spirit
which recognizes the spiritual creation, therefore your spiritual self can not be sick or suffer
from any inharmony.

"'This carnal mind belief named dyspepsia is not a condition of your real self. The belief
of the race, ancestors, daily associates, yourself or myself in heredity and the sensual appetites
can not be pictured forth by your body in the form of dyspepsia, because the real you is spiritual
and not subject to material beliefs. It is utterly impossible for you, who are spiritual, to
be influenced by any thought that is opposite the spiritual, as it is impossible for the light
to coalesce with darkness.

"'You are God's child, made in His image and likeness, and must be perfect like Him, for His
conditions are changeless and eternal. Listen to this glad message that tells you absolute
Truth. Realize that as God's child you can not suffer, for spirit knows no suffering. You can
not be weak, for God is your strength; you can not fear anything, for God is your refuge and
fortress. 'God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of love and of power and of sound mind.'

"'Listen to me!--The 'Truth sets free.'--Now, you are free. You gladly acknowledge the truth,
and prove it in every thought, word and deed. Like the Master, I say unto you, 'Lazarus, come
forth!' Come out of the errors in which you have been so long entombed, throw off the grave
clothes of mortal thought, and rise to new thoughts, new conditions, a new life! Rejoice that
you are whole, and let the world rejoice with you.... It is finished. In the hands of omnipresent
Good, in the name of immaculate Truth, I leave you.

"'So may this be established, yea, it is already established. I thank Thee, Father, that thou
hast heard me.'

       *       *       *       *       *

"This lesson, John, is very hard to report. I find so many questions suggested to my mind,
and so many if's and but's.

"Mrs. Pearl desired us each to take up a case for absent treatment, some one we would like
to help, and from whom we could hear every day or so, or who would be under our personal notice.
I am going to treat a little boy in the house where I board. It is quite a severe case of catarrh.

"I wish you would take a case, too. Just try this form of treatment that I have given. It may
not seem clear to you at first, but it is not the words you are to remember so much as the
ideas. Get the thought firmly fixed in your mind, and the words will come of themselves.

"You readily see it is using the same principle with the patient that has been applied in self
training. First, the denial of all error, and then the affirmation of truth. This treatment
is for any chronic condition, and is given twice a day, in the morning and at night.

"Now, I must say good-night. It is nearly eleven, and I really ought to say my denials and
affirmations some more, besides giving my patient the treatment.

"With many kisses to the dear ones,

  "I am your loving MARION."

CHAPTER XXXI.

     "Once let friendship be given that is born of God, nor time nor
     circumstance can change it to a lessening; it must be mutual
     growth, increasing trust, widening faith, enduring patience,
     forgiving love, unselfish ambition and an affection built before
     the Throne, which will bear the test of time and trial."

     --Allen Throckmorton.

"It seems to me, Grace, you have been touching up your complexion with some of the same paint
as that in your roses," exclaimed Kate, playfully, as she inspected Grace rather critically.

"Really, Kate, you must be more careful, or I shall add the sin of vanity to my other faults,"
answered Grace, looking out of the window and smiling pleasantly, with the least touch of absent
mindedness in her manner.

"No danger of that, you dear old Gracious, but if you should say secretiveness, I might be
willing to stop," said Kate, boldly, yet hardly daring to look toward the window.

Grace did not answer, but continued looking out of the window for several minutes. "What makes
you say that, Kate?" she asked at last, turning around soberly, while the rosy flush crept
up to her temples and back of her ears.

"Oh, I don't know, Gracious, only it seems to me you are like a pure white lily bell, and I
want to creep into your heart and live in its fragrance, but--" She stopped abruptly. It seemed
as though the almost imperceptible veil of reserve was falling lower than ever.

Oh, why could she not gain Grace's confidence? These thoughts passed rapidly through her mind
while she stood as if transfixed, waiting for Grace to break the interminable silence. If she
had only known it, Grace was nearer to her at that moment than ever before, but with her eyes
cast down, she saw not the yearning look on the face of her friend.

Grace spoke at last:

"But what, Kate?" she asked, taking up Kate's words where they had dropped.

"But the petals will not open, and I am left out," finished Kate, determined to be frank.

Grace looked out of the window again, and was about to reply, when a rap at the door startled
them both. It was a boy with a note. "Miss Grace Hall?" he said, handing it to her.

Grace looked at the letter and then at the boy inquiringly. "I am to wait for an answer," he said.

"Oh," she murmured, in a dazed way, and hastened to find pen and paper for reply.

"More mystery! I declare, it is getting interesting," thought Kate, recovering herself, as
she furtively watched the rosy face of Grace.

"Any answer?" asked the boy as he took the note.

"No." The door was shut and Grace sat down beside the picture she had been working upon, but
presently arose and began pacing the room. Kate looked up at her as she passed, but said nothing.
She could see that some deep thought was struggling for utterance, and wondered much.

After a few moments Grace stopped beside her. "I wish I might speak freely to you, Kathie,
but--" she hesitated, "but it has never been natural for me to be confidential, and--"

She began her promenade again, but presently came back, and drawing her chair close up to Kate,
told her the whole story, with long pauses and much hesitating speech.

"And now he is in the city; he--wants an answer. He has invited me to--ride with him--to-morrow."

"Surely, you will not refuse him that privilege?" cried the impetuous Kate, with visions of
a romance unfolding in thrilling chapters before her very eyes.

"No, of course not," in a low tone, "but how shall I answer him?" The last was scarcely audible.
It seemed almost as though she spoke to herself. With her forefinger she idly traced some hieroglyphics
on her lap.

"What says your heart, my Lilybell?" asked Kate, softly, as she caressed the hand that was
at liberty.

"'The prisoned bird doth ofttimes sing, but never at the bidding of its jailer,'" was the low
reply, with a faint smile, but tearful eyes.

"Poor Lilybell; she can not bloom before her time. I can wait for her to open now, for I am
close to her throbbing heart. Wait, dear Grace. Let us sit silently and ask the Father for
guidance."

Sweet and solemn moment, when with one accord, they waited for the Spirit to pour out the full
vials of love and wisdom. It was a precious time of sweet communion, of giving and receiving
the best, a consecration of self to better efforts, higher aims, holier living; a baptism of
strength and peace and lovely thoughts.

Grace had entered upon a new epoch. The past, with its longings and struggles, its loneliness
and bitterness, was already fading into the background of memory like some dark, ill-favored
picture, and in its place came the present, with its balmy atmosphere and dainty colorings,
promising joy and peace. The morning looked fair. How would be the noon and eventide?

Ah, no questioning when you ask the Father's guidance! Have you not asked, dear heart?

Wait till the answer comes. Wait till the soundless message is delivered into your heart's
safe keeping....

The last beams of the setting sun came through the window and bathed them in its red-gold glory.
In her exalted mood, it seemed to Kate like a heavenly vision. She saw Grace glorified with
a divine radiance, baptized with a new peace. White-winged angels hovered near, like pure thoughts
personified. Every glinting sunbeam seemed a golden shaft of love.

The glory paled into a mellow twilight. The enchanting picture faded, but the essence of its
beauty changed into a heart-melody of softened sacred joy. What but music could speak in this
hallowed moment?

Kate's very soul would utter itself. She went to the piano as in a dream. Soft, low notes,
faint and sweet, breathed of tender questionings and tremulous doubts; then a higher, more
triumphant strain of victory swelled the notes that lingered but a moment, ere a tone of sadness
and regret struck the keys, whispering of sacred duty and solemn responsibility.... Again the
music changed. Now peace and joy thrilled and rippled through the melodious chords....

Dearer than ever was the friendship thus cemented. They had been caught up to heaven, as it
were, and that which had been bound on earth was now bound in heaven.

They sat till late into the night, discussing and considering all phases of life and its problems.

Kate read Mrs. Hayden's letter, which in the agitation and excitement of the first part of
the evening she had quite forgotten. Because of their deep earnestness they were well prepared
to catch the healing mood. This experience seemed indeed the shower that most opened the blossom
of understanding, and ere they slept, each had taken some poor suffering mortal into her care
as a patient. The blessings they had received were already being passed to the waiting neighbor.

It is the deep, unselfish God-love that takes the world in its embrace. To perceive, feel,
live the divine Love, is to have broken the old shell of selfishness, when we may begin to
send the tender rootlets of being into the ready soil of the universe.

CHAPTER XXXII.

  "The power to bind and loose to Truth is given!
  The mouth that speaks it is the mouth of Heaven.
  The power, which in a sense belongs to none,
  Thus understood belongs to every one."

  --Abraham Coles.

  "Thro' envy, thro' malice, thro' hating,
    Against the world, early and late,
  No jot of our courage abating--
    Our part is to work and to wait."

  --Anon.

  MARLOW, October ----.

"Dear ones at home: Your letters were all received this afternoon. Am pleased to know that
Mabel is so interested, for it will help her so much in her studies and work. I must begin
my daily report at once, as there is not much time before class.

"There was no lesson yesterday, and about noon Mrs. Dawn came after me to go with her and Mrs.
Browning, her hostess, to the dentist's, as Mrs. Browning had to have a tooth extracted. We
started, treating her all the way with the quieting, reassuring thoughts that allay fear. Before
she went in we agreed to hold that thought.

"When Mrs. Browning went into the office, we remained in the waiting room thinking as intently
as possible:

"'There is not a thing to fear, Lida Browning, there is no tooth-ache with your real self,
there is no sensation in matter. You can entertain nothing but the One Life. The One Mind thinks,
and you are His idea, perfect as your Creator. Good is all, Love is all, Peace is already with
you, for you are one with the Father.'

... "It was done. The dentist was so amazed that he hardly remembered to give his patient a
glass of water.

"'Well, I never knew a cuspidate to come so hard. Didn't it hurt terribly?' he asked sympathetically.

"'Not a bit except when you first put on the forceps,' was her prompt reply as she rinsed out
her mouth....

"I need say no more. You can imagine our pleasure at this victory. We never know how little
our faith till we see how astonished we are at the demonstration.

"You ask if Mrs. Pearl has explained your queries. A few questions were handed in yesterday,
but I had not time to put them in my letter. One that always puzzled us, was: What is the origin
of evil? The questions are written on slips of paper and laid on the table. She answers them
before giving the regular lesson. When she read this slip there was not a little stir among
the fifty eager questioners. 'What is the origin of evil?' she repeated. 'It has no origin,'
was the unsatisfactory answer, after a momentary silence. Oh! the blankness of those faces!
'But,' she resumed presently, 'if you ask how seeming evil originated, I may give you the ideas
that came to me as a solution of that mortal mind question.'

"You know we might ask questions of each other forever, but unless our thoughts are tinged
with same quality, or run in the same direction, the satisfactory answer to one may not be
at all satisfactory to another. In other words, we will not recognize the same phase of truth,
unless we are in the same stage of development, so if you are not willing to take my explanation
as true, it may be that you are not yet where you can perceive it, or it may be, you require
a different illustration to convey the same thought, or, there may be innumerable reasons,
but of this one blessed fact be assured: if you hold yourself in the receptive attitude, and
sincerely expect to be guided by the spirit of truth, some day the answer will come to you
with such irresistible force and plainness that you can not forget it, or ever be in doubt
upon that point again.

"It was in this way the light came to me. That question had puzzled me more than all else,
and I asked every healer whom I met as to the correct solution. For several months I pondered
and fretted over it. At last, in despair, I let it alone, resolving I would not be further
troubled. But one day it unfolded itself so clearly and beautifully I was completely satisfied.

"Here it is: Taking the first account of creation, we find man made in the image and likeness
of God, given dominion over all things. If we believe man to be spiritual and not material,
if we know that spirit can not change its character or quality, we must know that spiritually
man never fell, but that he seemed to fall through our misconception and misunderstanding of
appearances.

"Man now manifests what he believes in; his consciousness of truth is not fully developed and
he mistakes appearances for realities. Having all possibilities of recognizing only the good,
he is perfect. For every mistake that is made he manifests error, the fallen, or rather the
undeveloped state. The Truth and Love that he manifests in his life, is the revealment of his
God-like nature. In the glimpses of his true self he recognizes his inheritance of power, and
in his mistaken conceptions forgets to acknowledge God. He then judges according to appearances,
and says things are true because they appear true to the senses.

"The creating principle of life is perfect, but man neglects to acknowledge this divine power
in proportion to his selfishness. It is therefore his selfishness that prevents him from recognizing
the Good, and causes him to see, name and believe in matter and its consequences; and he thus
becomes materially minded, and is known as the 'Adam' in 'whom all die.'

"Adam signifies error, clay, unreality. Christ signifies Truth, Spirit, Reality. If we believe
in things that appear to be the creation, we are believing in nothingness, which so proves
itself by death and disintegration. If we believe appearances to be the sign of the real, we
are acknowledging the spiritual to be the all, hence it proves itself by making even the body
its sign, manifest life, health, perfection.

"If we cast out all selfishness, pure love takes its place. We must be purified from the beliefs
of the world in selfishness and its consequences by recognizing that our 'sufficiency is of God.'

"This was very plain to me, John, and I hope you will find it so too, but if you do not, wait,
and as soon as you are ready for it, the answer will come to you.

"The lesson to-day was on deception and personal influences. The whole world has been deceived
into believing man is fleshly instead of spiritual, so many false thoughts and beliefs have
arisen, which are the cause of all disease and trouble. "Gentlemen," said Nancy, as they sat or stood
around drinking their hot coffee, "I suppose you have no desire to retain our afflicted friend
a prisoner? The doctor, who is with him at present, thinks it might benefit him to be removed
to the country.

I spoke to my friend whom I saw this morning, and he promised to send a coach. May he depart
peaceably when the coach comes?"

"Faith," said the young Irish officer, "he may depart. He shall not be molested. I command
here at present."

"What is the matter with the invalid?" inquired another officer.

  "He appeareth to have the dropsy,"
  answered Nancy, gravely.

In about half an hour an old-fashioned coach, as large as a small dwelling-house, and raised
high from the ground on great wheels, lumbered up to the door. The steps were let down, or unfolded,
until they made a kind of step-ladder, by which the passenger ascended
to the coach which loomed above.

The door stuck, in consequence of being swelled by the late rains, and was with difficulty opened.
The officers stood around, waiting the appearance of the invalid, and the young Irishman who
had been Nancy's escort waited at the door to help her in, for she was to accompany her afflicted relative
to the ferry.

The house door opened, and she appeared, bearing a pillow and blanket to make the sick man comfortable.
She arranged these, and stepped back into the house to see him moved. Then, with a shuffling
of feet, the pretended victim of dropsy appeared, dressed in plain clothes, and so enormously puffed
out that there was scarcely room for him in the passageway. The so-called doctor, dressed in
black, and wearing a pair of black glass spectacles, assisted the invalid on one side, and Nancy supported
him on the other. The dropsical one groaned at every step, and groaned louder than ever as they
pushed, squeezed, and crowded him up the steps and into the coach.

Nancy and the doctor followed, and the Irish officer put up the steps and clapped to the door, while
Nancy smiled a farewell through the window to him as the great coach rumbled away toward the
Christiana River.

"Oddzooks!" exclaimed one of the officers, "that is the fattest Quaker I ever saw."

He would have been surprised if he had seen the fat Quaker draw a stout pillow from under his
waistcoat after the coach had moved away, while the doctor stripped some black court-plaster
from the back of his spectacles, and instead of the invalid and the physician appeared two decidedly
military-looking gentlemen.

The coach and its occupants had lumbered out of sight for some time,
and the young officer still remained lounging near the door of Mistress
Hanson's house, when an orderly, splashed with mud from galloping
over yesterday's battle-field, clattered up to the group.

"Which is Major Fortescue?" he asked, in his sharp military voice.

"I am," answered the young Irish officer.

"Order for you, sir;" and he reached the Major a folded paper, sealed with a blotch of wax as red
as blood. He opened it, and read:
"You will immediately arrest two men, officers in the rebel army,
known respectively as Colonel Tilton and Captain Bellach. Information
has been lodged at head-quarters that they are now lying concealed
at Mistress Elizabeth Hanson's in Wilmington town. You will report
answer at once. By order of

Colonel ROBERT WYCHERLY, R. A., Com.
5th Div. H. M. A. in the Province of Pennsylvania.

To Major ALLAN
FORTESCUE, Commander at Wilmington, in the Lower County of Newcastle."[2]

"Stop
them!" roared Major Fortescue, as soon as he could catch his breath.
He gave a sharp order to the soldiers lounging near; they seized their
arms, and the whole party started at double quick for the ford of
the Christiana River, half a mile away, whither the coach had directed
its course.

* * * * *

Meanwhile the fugitives had arrived at the
bank of the river, where they found that the ferryman was at the other
side, and his boat with him. He was lying on the stern seat, in the
sun, and an empty whiskey bottle beside him sufficiently denoted the
reason of his inertia. When the Colonel called to him, he answered
in endearing terms, but moved not; and when the officer swore, the
ferryman reproved him solemnly. Affairs were looking gloomy, when
Captain Bellach, who had been running up and down the embankment that
kept the river from overflowing the marsh-lands that lay between it
and the hill on which the town stood, gave a shout which called the
Colonel and Nancy to him.

"You remember when she gave her parlor lecture at Mrs. Haight's, she said: 'Everything that
did not come from her teacher was mesmerism, that it was altogether false, and it was so much
of a power that it was indeed to be feared, for there was no telling what its subtlety and
cunning would suggest and execute; that no cure effected by it was permanent, but that the
patients would sooner or later be worse than before.'

"Oh, dear, I must not rehearse it, for of course you remember how my old headache overtook
me when I got home, and how wrought up I was all night. Now I know what caused it, and now
I know the difference.

"In the first place, these people are taught the pure and beautiful foundation of pure Christian
Healing, but instead of holding to their premise that all is good, they begin to talk about
people and things that are not good, imputing false motives, and giving false power to those
who, as they say, are not in the truth.

"If they would only remember that counterfeits can have no power except as it is delegated
to them, that unreal thoughts must disappear in the presence of true thoughts, they would not
be troubled and puzzled. Adhering to the law, they would recognize and talk about the Good only.

"Ah, John, here is the secret of Jesus' words, 'Resist not evil.' If we resist anything, we
recognize it as something. If we regard evil as an entity, we can not help fearing or fighting
it, but if we know it is nothingness claiming to be something, we deal with it accordingly.

"Whoever resists evil or calls evil a power, has not denied the reality of evil faithfully
enough. To talk of anything as having power, is to believe in the power and become entangled
in its meshes. That explains Mrs. Fuller's remark that she was 'actually afraid to meet one
of those false teachers on the street, and always took pains to warn people against them.'
I speak of Mrs. Fuller because you know so well what she did and said, that you will understand
this explanation better.

"Another remark she made was, that 'this power of mortal mind is wholly ignored by these false
teachers, although they secretly use it so effectually and disastrously.' Because they do not
talk so much of evil, she thinks they ignore it, while really they silently but earnestly and
vigorously deny it, thereby getting a sure control over it. She was taught to call this seeming
power of mortal thought Mesmerism, and Animal Magnetism, and after giving it such formidable
names, and so mighty a place, it is most natural for her to say that it affects herself and
family or her patients, causing them to be slow in yielding to treatment. Thus you can readily
see how she accounts for her failures.

"Mrs. Pearl teaches that we can deal with this influence of carnal or mortal mind, by denying
for the patient the conscious or unconscious reflection of it from these five different sources.
To the patient who is ignorant of truth, mortal thought has a power, because he has acknowledged
it as having power, but in our silent conviction of its powerlessness, we speak the true word
that sets him free. The whole secret lies in our own freedom from belief in this false power.

"The name Mesmerism or Magnetism makes it seem like some awful monster, lurking in every corner,
ready to devour us, while, as Mrs. Pearl says, we go our way, quietly denying all appearance
of evil, proving the law of Good by recognizing only the Good in thought and speech.

"How beautiful this teaching is! and how wonderfully the spirit leads us into all truth. But
it can not teach us if we talk error, or deliberately judge others. Never till we are faithful
in acknowledging the one Principle of Life will it prove itself the only power over us.

"After the questions, Mrs. Pearl spoke of the third treatment. We treat for everything we might
have missed in the first two treatments. Sometimes this is called the sin treatment, for it
takes up so many things that belong more or less to everybody, according to the world's belief. You
have heard what I have said.

You know that I regret having caused inconvenience to my innocent victims. They would forgive
me for my innocent intentions. I only wished to save everybody by blowing everybody up.

The Court generally. Yes, yes!

Prisoner. Well, I have just done. And now what say the Jury? Where are they?

Foreman of the Jury (white with fear). I am, Sir,--very pleased to see you, Sir,--hope you are well,
Sir?

Prisoner (condescendingly). Tol lol. And now what do you say? am I Guilty or Not Guilty?

Foreman of the Jury. Yes, Sir. Thank you, Sir. We will talk it over, Sir--if you don't mind,
Sir.

Prisoner.

I need not tell you that my friends outside take the greatest possible interest in your proceedings.

Foreman
(promptly). Why, yes, Sir! The fact is we have all had anonymous letters daily, saying that we
shall be blown out of house and home if we harm you.

Prisoner (laughing). Oh, be under no apprehension. It is merely the circular of my friends.
Only a compilation of hints for the guidance of the Gentlemen of the Jury.

Foreman. Just so, Sir. We accepted it in that spirit.

Prisoner. You were wise. Now, Gentlemen, you have surely had time to make up your minds. Do you
find me Guilty or Not Guilty?

Foreman (earnestly). Why, Not Guilty, to be sure.

Judge. Release the accused! Sir, you have my congratulations. Pray accept my distinguished consideration.

Prisoner
(coldly). You are very good. And now adieu, and off to breakfast with what appetite ye may!

The Entire Court (falling on their knees, and raising their hands
in supplication).

  Mercy, Sir!

For pity's sake, mercy!

Ex-Prisoner (fiercely). Mercy! What, after
I have been arrested! Mercy! after I have been cast into gaol!

Judge
(in tears.) They thought they were right. They were, doubtless, wrong,
but it was to save the remainder of the row of houses! Can you not
consider this a plea for extenuating circumstances?

Ex-Prisoner (sternly).
No. It was my business, not theirs. It was I who paid for the dynamite--not
they. (Preparing to leave the Court.) Good bye. You may hear from
me and from my friends!

Judge (following him to the door). Nay, stay!
See us--we kneel to you. (To audience.) Kneel, friends, kneel! (Everybody
obeys the direction.) One last appeal! (In a voice broken with emotion.)
We all have Mothers!

Ex-Prisoner (thunder-stricken). You all have
Mothers! I knew not this. I pardon you! [The audience utter shouts
of joy, and the Ex-Prisoner extends his hands towards them in the
attitude of benediction. Scene closes in upon this tableaux.

* *
* * *

* * * * *

MR. PUNCH'S ROYAL ACADEMY GUIDE, PHILOSOPHER, AND
VERY FAMILIAR FRIEND FOR THE R.A. SEASON.

No. 16. It is called "A
Toast. By AGNES E. WALKER." It should be called "A Toast without a
Song," as it seems to represent an eminent tenor unavoidably prevented
by cold, &c., when staying at home, and taking the mixture as before.

No.
19.

  "Comfort our souls with love,
    Love of all human kind;
  Love special, close in which, like sheltered dove,
    Each weary heart its own safe nest may find;
  And love that turns above
    Adoringly; contented to resign
  All loves, if need be, for the love divine."

  --D. M. Mulock Craik.

Grace looked very lovely, as she stepped into the carriage, when Mr. Carrington called for
her. A suggestion of reserved feeling gave an added lustre to her beautiful eyes, and the faintest
wild-rose tint in her cheeks made her a fit study for any artist.

She looks like Psyche just awakened. Can it be possible, that with all her charms, she was
sleeping, before to-day? he thought as he took his seat beside her, thrilled with new hope.

He drove into one of the broad, quiet avenues that led out of the city and into a country road.
"I thought you would like to visit 'The Glen,' and see its autumn dress," he said, as they
came in view of the river over which lay the "Glen" road.

"I have been wishing I might go there, before the leaves fell, and this is exactly what I enjoy,"
replied Grace, looking out over the scene before her with a keen pleasure.

"Perhaps this is an answer to your wish. Sometimes I think our wishes are answered because
of their intensity," said Mr. Carrington, looking meaningly into her face.

"George Eliot says: 'The very intensity keeps them from being answered.'" What gave him the
sudden, triumphant certainty that he could bide his time? She had lost all her haughtiness,
apparently. He had never seen her in the mood of to-day.

"Apropos of wishes," he resumed, "which are properly thoughts, I have two friends in Boston,
who can communicate with each other, no matter how far apart they may be. They call it the
power of thought."

"Yes, thought transference. I am quite interested and fully believe it," said Grace, glad to
have the opportunity of sounding him on this and kindred themes.

He glanced at her in polite surprise. "Indeed," he said, "are you acquainted with the subject?"

"Somewhat; I have seen enough to know it is founded on law," she replied, briefly.

"What law?" he asked, wonderingly, with a slight smile of incredulity lighting his face.

"Mental law, of course."

She then went on to explain to him something of her study of mental healing. At first he was
rather skeptical, but on seeing her seriousness, he very soon grew sober and gave the most
respectful and apparently absorbed attention. By the time she finished, he was really interested.

"I have often thought that some day there would be more light upon the philosophy of thought,
but I was not aware it was so close upon us," he finally said.

"It is certainly much needed now," she replied, looking dreamily at the white clouds floating
in the bits of blue above the trees. She was thinking how much it had been worth to her in
her trial last night. He noticed the far-away look and wished he might know her thoughts.

What would have been his surprise, could he have been told at this moment how much he was already
indebted to Christian Science? for had it not softened the cruel pride that had so encrusted
her before? He knew nothing of this. He perceived a change in her manner and even character
since he last saw her two years before, although even then his great love had been able to
condone all weaknesses, or what others would call weaknesses. To him they were part of her
lovableness.

When she so coldly rejected him, unlike most men, he had determined to wait patiently for her
indifference to turn into reciprocation. He had recognized but one thing, the simple, supreme
fact that he loved Grace Hall. In regard to her, there was and never could be any other thought.
Inspired with such love as this, such sublime patience, such infinite hope, is it any wonder
he looked into her eyes and read a hint of victory?

The time was drawing near. His two years of waiting surely gave him liberty to ask, and the
right to receive.... As for that, love, such love as his, had royal rights and it would win
its own way when the moment came. He would approach the subject gradually, talking about his
coming departure, although he had mentioned that in his note, had even dared to tell her this
must be his excuse for requesting an answer sooner than she wished to give it.

"Oh, what a lovely group of colors!" exclaimed Grace, involuntarily, pointing to a tree decked
in the most gorgeous foliage.

"Shall I get some leaves for you?" he asked, anticipating her desire, and descended from the
carriage.

Presently he returned, with his hands full of small branches. "They are lovely hues. Is there
not something else you would like? I saw some beautiful ferns over yonder," he said, pointing
to the spot.

"Will we have time? I would like to get out," she exclaimed eagerly.

"Time! 'There's time for all things,' Shakespeare says," laughed Mr. Carrington, as he assisted
her to alight.

Grace was in her element amid the speaking grandeur of Nature's hills.

"Have you a sharp pencil, Mr. Carrington? I seem to have lost the one I always carry with me,
and that grand oak tree I must have as a model."

He quickly sharpened one and gave it to her.

How beautiful she looked! He delighted to watch every movement of the deft fingers, to study
every expression of the beautiful eyes and mobile mouth. He revelled in her beauty, because
to him she was the personification of all that was lovely and noble and great. Her character
he would have loved just as much had she been plain instead of beautiful, for his ideal was
the inward, not the outward beauty, except as the two blended into one, as they did with her.

"You seem to be partial to the oak, Miss Hall. Is there any reason for it?"

"Yes, I am. It is a grand symbol of strength and firmness of character," she replied, still
sketching rapidly. "I like to paint trees, for they express so much. Some show such kindly
benevolence, with their broad, spreading branches and friendly shade, some are so graceful,
with their tall trunks and delicately veined leaves, as though showing a fine, tender nature;
while others are stunted and rough, with coarse, thick foliage. I place each one as to character
and station, and they teach me many beautiful lessons."

"And they will teach me many after this, Miss Grace."

He wanted to say something more, but she was so innocently unconscious of anything but her
work that he must wait for a better opportunity.

Having finished her sketch, Grace looked up. The self-consciousness that had scarcely left
her, save these past few moments, now returned with painful suddenness. Her eyes met his, and
a vivid flush overspread her face, but she said nothing.

"Shall we go?" he asked, holding out his hand to assist her. His eyes expressed the question
his lips could not frame, but she did not see them. They went to the carriage in silence.

The road presently left the woods and turned into a broad country lane. Both had forgotten
the proposed trip to "The Glen," but it made no difference. At last the undercurrent of feeling
had burst through all reserves.

Mr. Carrington awaited the final answer, and what did she say?

It was the sacred page in a maiden's life that is read but once.

       *       *       *       *       *

Grace had found in her lover a man who was broadminded and liberal enough to fairly consider
these matters from a woman's standpoint. They freely discussed a married woman's rights and
privileges, and both agreed that a wife should have an individuality after marriage as well
as before. "I desired to express myself on this point before, my dear Grace," said Mr. Carrington,
"because to my mind it is a mutual life, and should be a mutual development."

"It is, indeed. I have never looked at it in the right way, till the last few weeks. I used
to feel that marriage was degrading rather than elevating, because it seemed as though a woman
had to give up so much that really belonged to her, her name, her property, her freedom as
an individual. But now I see that true marriage should bring freedom in the fullest sense of
the word."

"In love there is no bondage," he replied, admiring her independent thought.

"Yes, but the world has a faint conception of love, the love that saves to the uttermost, and
endures forever," said Grace.

"With such love there would be no danger of marriage degrading the individual, no need of divorce."

He spoke strongly for he felt strongly. Any one speaking from the depths of a heart-conviction,
speaks with authority.

"The world needs to be lifted to a higher standard on these matters. The subject of marriage
is too sacred to jest about, and people in general think it no harm to toy with the word and
all that pertains to it with the utmost carelessness."

Grace was more like herself now. She was very happy in the thought that Mr. Carrington understood
this as she did, but she was not a little surprised to find herself giving such free expression
to her opinions.

"Indifference and laxity is the result of the trifling. My theory is that these things should
be sacredly spoken of in the family, when boys and girls are growing up. That is the way my
mother did," said Mr. Carrington reverently.

"Yes, the family is more responsible than society, for it makes society," she replied, secretly
touched by the allusion to his mother.

She felt more and more confidence in Mr. Carrington. It seemed surprising to find how rapidly
her love for him had increased since she gave it permission to grow. She did not realize that
it had been a smothered plant before, trying to live without sunshine. Now it could grow in
the warmth and brightness of beautiful day.

It was early twilight when they returned. Kate was waiting for her. The joyous light in Grace's
eyes, though she tried to veil it, told the story. Kate put her arms about her, saying, as
she caressed the rosy cheek:

"Lilybell is bloomed at last."

CHAPTER XXXIV.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Before the curing of a strong disease,
  Even in the instant of repair and health
  The fit is strongest; evils that take leave,
  On their departure most of all show evil."

  --Shakespeare.

For two days no letter came, and then Mr. Hayden received two, which he handed to the girls
as he met them on the street the same evening.

"Can you spare them both?" said Kate, holding out her hand eagerly.

"Oh, yes; I am especially engaged to-night, and besides they are better together. I am rather
glad for the delay. I was afraid the first one had miscarried," he replied.

The waiting had only increased their interest, and on reaching home they at once sat down to
read the the two letters handed them by Mr. Hayden.

  "MARLOW, October ----.

"Dear John: I suppose you, like the rest of us, are anxious to know how the patient feels after
such a vigorous denial of the seven evils. It is quite necessary to know what to do at this stage.

"After the treatment for special sins, James Martin comes with bitter complaints that he is
worse instead of better. He tells a doleful story of how he suffered all night; had chills
and fever exactly as when he had the ague long ago; how he coughed and choked and broke out
with something like measles, and was all the while so vilely sick it seemed as though he was
about to die.

"As he is telling his pitiful tale, with perhaps a gleam of hatred, disgust or helpless anguish
in his eyes, we are to sit calmly by and very soothingly give him the mental information that
'there is nothing to fear.'

"When he concludes his mournful story, we assure him in quiet tones that there is no occasion
for alarm, as we know how to deal with these symptoms. Then, very gently and slowly, with a
most self-possessed attitude of mind, we talk to him mentally something after this fashion:

"'There! James Martin, it is all right. Oh, no; nothing has hurt you, nor can hurt you. You
are not afraid of anything; you know there is no reality in sickness; you are not suffering
any inharmony because of fear or remorse for sin. It can not be possible for you to reflect
fear or remorse from your parents, or the race or your daily associates. Neither is it possible
for you to suffer from your own fear or remorse, nor mine. Remember, you are spiritual and
not material, and can fear nothing. God is your intelligence, and you know that truth is all-powerful.
Now, listen! You are happy, you are content, you are filled with blessed peace, 'the peace
that passeth all understanding.' You know the Lord is your shepherd. He leadeth you beside
the still waters. He maketh you to lie down in green pastures now, this moment. There is no
future to God's promises; they are in the eternal present. There! James Martin, a sweet ease
comes to you, the burden is taken away; you are in the gentle care of Truth, which ever whispers,
'Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.' Sh--h! Gently
the arms enfold you, sweetly peace and love embrace you, and you are at rest; sleep if you
like. Softly come sweet words of divine love to your waiting ear, 'fear not, fear not, for
I am with thee.' Peace ... peace be with you, Amen.'

"This stage is called chemicalization, because our words of truth, dropped into the mind filled
with error, produce a fermentation similar to the effect produced by the union of different
chemicals. Sometimes the patient chemicalizes after the first treatment, in which case the
second and third treatments are omitted.

"When the patient first comes to be treated, he might be likened to a last year's garden. His
mind is filled with the roots and rubbish of the beliefs he has sown, and some of them are
noxious weeds, deeply rooted in the mental soil.

"Cutting and keen are the words of Truth, and like a burnished plowshare, it enters the unsightly
field and uproots everything in its path. We now do not mention sickness, because his mind
is so unsettled and his active beliefs of disease all on the surface, so we gently soothe him
into forgetfulness of his trouble, and quietly assure him there is no occasion for alarm of
any kind. Thus, with the word of peace and assurance we smooth the rough, uneven soil, until
it is pulverized and prepared for the new seeds which are to grow and blossom into fair truth-flowers.

"To deny errors for him who believes so absolutely in them, is to dig down into the unconscious
mind and rake up even the memories that are imbedded, hence his symptoms of ague, or measles
or whatever beliefs he may have had.

"Because mortality dislikes to be told of its faults and consciously or unconsciously resents
such telling, the violence of chemicalization only marks the degree of conscious or unconscious
mental opposition, of which the bodily symptoms are the picture. There is no law for chemicalization,
for some patients pass through this period without even noticing it.

"Sometimes instead of an excited feverish condition, which requires the soothing quieting thought,
the patient is dull and sluggish, perhaps unconscious, as in fainting, spasms or something
similar; then vigorous, rousing thoughts should be given--sharp, decisive and emphatic, as
when awaking a heavy sleeper.

"When called to treat any one suffering from fever or any acute condition, we give the soothing,
or peace treatment as it is sometimes called. Little children may be compared to mirrors, reflecting
every thought around them. In treating them it is necessary to make the law--and the true word
is always law--that they do not or can not reflect fear or belief of disease from their parents
or relatives, taking pains to name each person strongly holding thoughts of fear for the little
one. If it is a contagious and dangerous sickness, according to mortal thought, besides the
near ones in the family, deny that any thought of fear from the neighborhood or world can be
reflected upon the child or manifested in this belief of sickness.

"Sometimes children are treated entirely through the parents, that is, the parents are quieted
and assured of the truth concerning their little one--that it is living in the current of infinite
Love, where no fear can touch it, no sickness come near it, no pain destroy it.

"Such cases require frequent or long-continued treatments, or rather long-continued thought
of the Good, mostly affirmation, for very little denial is needed to cut the chains of error
from a babe. Denial is to be applied more to the parents--the denial of fear.

"If we feel at all doubtful or fearful concerning our work, we are not at one with the divine
Love, and must treat ourselves before we treat the patient. Be at one with omnipotent Law,
and the Law will prove itself through you. Know truth and do not tamely believe it, then you
may have marvelous proof of the difference between knowledge and belief, God-like understanding
and blind faith.

"Mrs. Pearl very clearly answered the question which was asked concerning the meaning of Bible
passages implying eternal punishment.

"There is always punishment so long as we are in mortal belief, but it is only in mortal belief
we can suffer, for the spirit made in the image and likeness of God can not suffer, neither
know suffering.

"The word everlasting should be translated age-lasting, to give the original meaning. Fire
is a symbol of purification, and in the language of ancient times it was customary to use strong
figures of speech.

"In the fifteenth chapter of John, wherein Jesus explains about the vine and branches, what
could be plainer than his illustration of the dead branches? Falsity or evil, being nothingness,
can not exist because it is not of the real creation and is necessarily cast into the fire
of purification, an illustration well understood at the time, since all the city refuse was
taken to Gehenna, a place outside Jerusalem, where fire was always kept for the purpose of
burning this waste matter.

"'Every branch that beareth fruit is purged'--that is, if you are a mixture of good and evil
beliefs, you will have to be cleansed of the evil, before you can do much with the good. This
cleansing process is quite properly named purging. This is what we undergo in suffering.

"'He whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,' means the good in us chastens us, cleanses us for
the further working of the Good. Punishment, then, there must be, just as long as we believe
in, and fellowship with error.

"Mrs. McClaren, a staunch Presbyterian, did not seem satisfied with this explanation, but Mrs.
Pearl told her not to let the question trouble her, for if she would do the best she could
with what she knew, in due time the solution would come to her.

"In the night it came. After she retired, the question kept pressing upon her so that she could
not sleep.

"About two o'clock it seemed as though a great flood of light came, and with it the clearance
of the whole problem. The texts on that theme became illumined as it were, and she could see
how impossible it is for the spirit to suffer or be punished when it is like God who can not
'behold evil.' She came over this morning and told me about it. I will give you her explanation
of Matt. xxv: 31, 32.

"This is the key to the rest of the chapter, and it is in the same line with Mrs. Pearl's explanation,
but Mrs. McClaren is delighted that it came to her. Now she feels as though a mountain had
been lifted from her heart, so great has been her fear that Christian Healing would make her
disbelieve in eternal punishment, which she had learned was an incontrovertible doctrine. Now
she realizes that nothing but Truth itself is being revealed to her, and it seems that her
heart will burst for joy. This may seem extravagant, but it is just what she said, and after
all, you are used to enthusiasm since your wife is an enthusiast.

"Is it not wonderful? I ask myself over and over, and echo answers 'wonderful'! But oh, how
ignorant we ever will be, unless we stop and wait for the spirit to tell us what is true! It
is ignorance and foolishness that we have to contend with as much as anything else, for it
is one of the thickest clouds that hide knowledge. Until we have learned to turn to the hidden
fountain of wisdom, we are helplessly bound to error's ways.

"Even after we go forth from a class, and feel that we have been baptized with the spirit,
we are afraid we will not be wise enough to answer the world's questionings of our faith, are
afraid we may not know just how to proceed with a certain problem, afraid we will be too weak
to do the things that come to us to be done.

"'Oh ye of little faith,' says the rebuking Christ within us--'why doubt your knowledge, when
God is your wisdom? Why doubt your intelligence, when God is your intelligence? Why doubt your
strength, when God is your strength?'

"As we realize there is but one Mind, and that it is omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent,
the influence of all other thoughts will fade quite away. It is because we recognize the carnal
mind whose thoughts are frivolous, vain, wretched or miserable, that we are unsettled and dissatisfied.
There can be no foundation, no sense of security, to the one who is continually listening to
other than the Good.

"Know all wisdom through the universal Mind, and whoever draws his knowledge by inspiration
from this source shall become as one with you, and we all shall be as one with the supreme Mind.

"There is an indelible but invisible stamp of truth marking the utterance of those through
whom this Mind is expressed, and the invisible something within us, sometimes called the 'Spirit
itself,' sometimes the 'light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world,' will recognize
and appropriate its own. If we keep this judgment faculty unbiased, it will lead us to choose
the books we read and teach us how to separate the wheat from the chaff. It is best to read
the thoughts of one writer until we understand the root, branch and growth of his inspiration.
It is not well to go from one author to another while we are young in the thought, any more
than it would be well to take a music lesson from a different teacher every week.

"We must remember that 'he that doeth the will shall know of the doctrine,' and to start out
with the Divine will as our guide, as we do when we say, 'God works through me to will and
to do,' is to grow in knowledge of all that pertains to the doctrine of the blessed truth that
sets us free.

"Never talk of failures, or be discouraged by them, because many times the discouraging outlook
is but the prelude to a bounteous harvest. Work with an undaunted faith in the mighty Invisible,
knowing that you serve the only Power, are governed by the one Principle, Infinite Justice,
that ever rewards according to service. Doing your best, the Best rewards you.

"Under all circumstances we declare our unfailing wisdom because we ask of the Good. We can
not foolishly be led away because judgment to do is always with us.

"This is the fifth stage in the patient's progress, and we treat him for ignorance and foolishness
as possibly reflected from the five different sources. Deny that he can be ignorant of the
truth, or foolish in believing error. Affirm all strength and courage and steadfastness. He
comes to-day with an uncertain ring in his voice. He is undecided as to what to do; is weak
and nerveless; can not tell whether he is better or worse. The treatment for strength and courage
will bring him back to Truth, and he will brighten and revive under the warm influence of your
sunny faith.

"One more lesson! I shall be glad, yet sorry, when it is over. Oh, what an experience this
has been! Surely, I shall never be such a weak, impatient woman again. Thank God! Now I know
what there is for me in this beautiful world.

  "Good bye,

  "MARION." 

He spoke with a slight brogue, for he was an Irish gentleman.

  
  
  "We have a friend with us," said Nancy,
  "who hath been compelled for a time to keep his bed.
  He was brought here last night on account
  of the battle, and was too weary to go
  further. Our neighbor Friend John Stapler, across
  the street, hath thick stockings, and I desire to get, if I can,
a pair from him, as, thee may know, in cases of dropsy the legs are
always cold.

  I am afraid to cross the street with these soldiers in it.

  

"I suppose this is the last letter I will write on the lessons in Christian Healing, but I
will be faithful as ever, even though I tell it all over again when I see you.

"Everybody looked regretful enough when they went into the class room to-day, but a hundred
fold more so when we went out and the good-byes were said. It means so much to us all. We have
passed through twelve lessons which may symbolize twelve epochs or stages through which we
proceed from ignorance to understanding, and understanding to complete demonstration.

"We have been together scarcely three weeks, and yet so much has been uncovered that we stand
face to face with our real selves. All that was conventional has been laid aside in our intercourse,
and the best and sweetest and most sacred phases of our lives laid bare, so that we have had
a clear glimpse of God's children as they are, not as they usually appear; and indeed it gives
us better courage and stronger faith to go forth into the world again, knowing that the possibilities
of one are the possibilities of all, for 'God is no respecter of persons.'

"I know, perhaps better than some of the rest, that we shall be walking in the valleys many
times when our eyes are on the sun-crowned heights, but if we can be patient and earnest, our
feet shall reach the fertile slopes and sunny grass lands of well attained effort. My experience
of the past shall be only a stronger incentive to perseverance in the future, and while it
seems human to fall, it is divine to rise, and knowing the divine privilege of proving divinity,
I trust God to work through me in my daily effort. So said we all when we left the class room
to-day, and with a holy consecration to our new-born faith, we trust we shall ever grow in
grace and wisdom as God's children, according to the promise.

