In view of such facts as these, is it reasonable to suppose that Bolshevism is a pro-Jewish
conspiracy? Is it less than ridiculous to suggest that the system which has reduced hundreds
of thousands of Jews to abject poverty, broken up thousands of Jewish homes and families, confiscated
billions of Jewish wealth, imprisoned thousands of prominent Jews, and murdered numerous others,
is part of a Jewish conspiracy? Surely, every intelligent person must see that any such conspiracy
must necessarily require, as the first condition of its success, a degree of racial solidarity
never yet attained by any people at any time in the history of the world. That solidarity could
only be obtained by assuring to the Jews their complete exemption from the suffering and oppression
imposed upon the non-Jewish population. Had there been any thought of securing the solidarity
of the Jewish people of Russia against the non-Jewish population, it would have been effectively
thwarted by the imposition of such burdens of poverty and suffering upon the Jews, and their
resulting resentment. Not the smallest particle of evidence has ever yet been adduced to show
that the Jews in Russia have been exempted from any of the oppressive features of Bolshevism.
As Mr. Wells reminds us, the Bolsheviki have suppressed the Hebrew language, the historic language
of Judaism, to preserve which Jews in all lands and during many centuries have made such vast
sacrifices. Do we need any further evidence?

FOOTNOTES:

[2] The full account of this eyewitness appeared in the Odesskiya Novosti, September 27, 1919.

[3] Statement by Dr. M. Zitron, Dos Yiddishe Volk, of Warsaw, July 11, 1919.

VII

THE VICIOUS ROLE OF ANTI-SEMITISM

Precisely such propaganda as that which the Dearborn Independent has been carrying on is responsible
for many of the blackest and most shameful pages in history. Wherever and whenever there has
been an organized propaganda of anti-Semitism it has invariably been closely intertwined with
every other contemporary reactionary oppressive and contemptible force. To those who know the
history of anti-Semitism in Russia, in Poland, and in Rumania, even in quite recent years,
this statement will seem so trite as not to require any demonstration. This close association
with other forms of reaction and brutal oppression is not peculiar to anti-Semitism, but is
a common characteristic of every form of race prejudice and hatred. Among the Turks organized
prejudice and hatred of Armenians has invariably been found to be closely associated with all
the other evil forces in the Turkish Empire. In our own country, discrimination against and
injustice to the negro goes hand in hand with almost every other form of reaction and oppression.

It is quite useless to pretend that such articles as those published in the Dearborn Independent
and the London Morning Post are not really anti-Semitic propaganda, but merely a legitimate
discussion of a great and serious problem. Such specious pleading will not deceive any intelligent,
honest person. The only possible object of the articles is to convince the people who read
them that civilized society is threatened by a great world-wide secret conspiracy of the Jews;
that this virile and highly intelligent people, scattered throughout the civilized world, and
numbering, it is estimated, about sixteen millions, is secretly organized and led by an "invisible
government" composed of some of the ablest and keenest minds in the world, to the end of bringing
all the governments of the earth, together with all industry and commerce, under the absolute
rule and dominion of a dynasty to be set up by an aristocratic Jewish Sanhedrin.

