That the angels possess power cannot be comprehended by those who know nothing about the spiritual
world and its influx into the natural world. Such think that angels can have no power because
they are spiritual and are even so pure and unsubstantial that no eye can see them. But those
who look more interiorly into the causes of things take a different view. Such know that all
the power that a man has is from his understanding and will (for apart from these he is powerless
to move a particle of his body), and his understanding and will are his spiritual man. This
moves the body and its members at its pleasure; for whatever it thinks the mouth and tongue
speak, and whatever it wills the body does; and it bestows its strength at pleasure. As man's
will and understanding are ruled by the Lord through angels and spirits, so also are all things
of his body, because these are from the will and understanding; and if you will believe it,
without influx from heaven man cannot even move a step. That this is so has been shown me by
much experience. Angels have been permitted to move my steps, my actions, and my tongue and
speech, as they pleased, and this by influx into my will and thought; and I have learned thereby
that of myself I could do nothing. I was afterwards told by them that every man is so ruled,
and that he can know this from the doctrine of the church and from the Word, for he prays that
God may send His angels to lead him, direct his steps, teach him, and inspire in him what to
think and what to say, and other like things; although he says and believes otherwise when
he is thinking by himself apart from doctrine. All this has been said to make known what power
angels have with man.

229. But so great is the power of angels in the spiritual world that
if I should make known all that I have witnessed in regard to it it
would exceed belief. Any obstruction there that ought to be removed
because it is contrary to Divine order the angels cast down or
overthrow merely by an effort of the will and a look. Thus I have
seen mountains that were occupied by the evil cast down and
overthrown, and sometimes shaken from end to end as in earthquakes;
also rocks cleft asunder to their bottoms, and the evil who were upon
them swallowed up. I have seen also hundreds of thousands of evil
spirits dispersed by angels and cast down into hell. Numbers are of
no avail against them; neither are devices, cunning, or combinations;
for they see through them all, and disperse them in a moment. (But
more may be seen on this subject in the account of The Destruction of
Babylon.) Such power do angels have in the spiritual world. It is
evident from the Word that they have like power in the natural world
also when it is permitted; for instance, that they have given to
destruction entire armies; and that they brought on a pestilence from
which seventy thousand men died. And David saw the angel that smote the
     people (2 Samuel 24:16, 17);

besides other passages. Because the angels have such power they are called powers; as in David:

     Bless Jehovah, ye angels, mighty in power (Psalm 103:20).

230. But it must be understood that the angels have no power whatever from themselves, but
that all their power is from the Lord; and that they are powers only so far as they acknowledge
this. Whoever of them believes that he has power from himself instantly becomes so weak as
not to be able to resist even a single evil spirit. For this reason angels ascribe no merit
whatever to themselves, and are averse to all praise and glory on account of any thing they
do, ascribing all the praise and glory to the Lord.

231. It is the Divine truth that goes forth from the Lord that has all power in the heavens,
for the Lord in heaven is Divine truth united to Divine good (see n. 126-140). To the extent
that angels are receptions of this truth they are powers.{1} Moreover each one is his own truth
and his own good because each one is such as his understanding and will are. The understanding
pertains to truth because everything of it is from truths, and the will pertains to good because
everything of it is from goods; for whatever any one understands he calls truth, and whatever
he wills he calls good. From this it is that everyone is his own truth and his own good.{2}
Therefore so far as an angel is truth from the Divine and good from the Divine he is a power,
because to that extent the Lord is in him. And as no one's good and truth are wholly like or
the same as another's, since in heaven, as in the world, there is endless variety (n. 20),
so the power of one angel is not like the power of another. Those who constitute the arms in
the Greatest Man, or heaven, have the greatest power because such are more in truths than others,
and into their truths good flows from the entire heaven. Moreover, the power of the whole man
passes into the arms, and by means of these the whole body exercises its powers. It is for
this reason that in the Word "arms" and "hand" signify powers.{3} Sometimes on this account
a naked arm is seen in heaven so powerful as to be able to break in pieces everything in its
way, even though it were a great rock on the earth. Once it was moved towards me, and I perceived
that it was able to crush my bones to atoms.

  {Footnote 2} A man or an angel is his own good and his own
  truth, thus his own love and his own faith (n. 10298, 10367).
  He is his own understanding and his own will, for everything of
  life is there from; the life of good is from the will, and the
  life of truth is from the understanding (n. 10076, 10177,
  10264, 10284).

  {Footnote 3} The correspondence of the hands, arms, and
  shoulders, with the Greatest man or heaven (n. 4931-4937). In
  the Word, "arms" and hands signify power (n. 878, 3091, 4932,
  4933, 6947, 10019).

232. It has been shown above (n. 137) that the Divine truth that goes forth from the Lord has
all power, and that angels have power to the extent that they are receptions of Divine truth
from the Lord. But angels are so far receptions of Divine truth as they are receptions of Divine
good, for truths have all their power from good, and none apart from good. So, too, good has
all its power through truths, and none apart from truths. Power springs from the conjunction
of these two. The same is true of faith and love; for it is the same whether you say truth
or faith, since everything of faith is truth; also it is the same whether you say good or love,
since everything of love is good.{1} The great power that angels have by means of truths from
good is shown also from this, that when an evil spirit is merely looked at by the angels he
falls into a swoon, and does not appear like a man, and this until the angel turns away his
eyes. Such an effect is produced by the look of the eyes of angels, because the sight of angels
is from the light of heaven, and the light of heaven is Divine truth (see above, n. 126-132).
Moreover, the eyes correspond to truths from good.{2}

  {Footnote 1} All power in heaven is the power of truth from
  good, thus of faith from loves (n. 3091, 3563, 6423, 8304,
  9643, 10019, 10182). All power is from the Lord, because from
  Him is every truth of faith and every good of love (n. 9327,
  9410). This power is meant by the keys given to Peter (n.
  6344). It is Divine truth going forth from the Lord that has
  all power (n. 6948, 8200). This power of the lord is what is
  meant by "sitting at the right hand of Jehovah" (n. 3387, 4592,
  4933, 7518, 7673, 8281, 9133). The right had means power (n.
  10019).

  {Footnote 2} The eyes correspond to truths from good
  (n. 4403-4421, 4523-4534, 6923).

