Ide sat motionless while she spoke. Go home where you belong! Don't you know this is private
property? Do you think I am keeping a circus here for all the dirty brats in the country to
look at? Get out, I tell you, or I'll--"
With frantic speed the two children fled down the hill.

"What do you suppose such words as you've been using--'society,' 'tradition,' and the rest--mean
to all the life out there?"

She came and stood by him in the window. "Less than nothing, of course. But you and I are not
out there. We're shut up in a little tight round of habit and association, just as we're shut
up in this room. Remember, I thought I'd got out of it once; but what really happened was that
the other people went out, and left me in the same little room. The only difference was that
I was there alone. Oh, I've made it habitable now, I'm used to it; but I've lost any illusions
I may have had as to an angel's opening the door."

Ide again laughed impatiently. "Well, if the door won't open, why not let another prisoner
in? At least it would be less of a solitude--"

She turned from the dark window back into the vividly lighted room.

"It would be more of a prison. You forget that I know all about that. We're all imprisoned,
of course--all of us middling people, who don't carry our freedom in our brains. But we've
accommodated ourselves to our different cells, and if we're moved suddenly into new ones we're
likely to find a stone wall where we thought there was thin air, and to knock ourselves senseless
against it. I saw a man do that once."

Ide, leaning with folded arms against the windowframe, watched her in silence as she moved
restlessly about the room, gathering together some scattered books and tossing a handful of
torn letters into the paperbasket. When she ceased, he rejoined: "All you say is based on preconceived
theories. Why didn't you put them to the test by coming down to meet your old friends? Don't
you see the inference they would naturally draw from your hiding yourself when they arrived?
It looked as though you were afraid of them--or as though you hadn't forgiven them. Either
way, you put them in the wrong instead of waiting to let them put you in the right. If Leila
had buried herself in a desert do you suppose society would have gone to fetch her out? You
say you were afraid for Leila and that she was afraid for you. Don't you see what all these
complications of feeling mean? Simply that you were too nervous at the moment to let things
happen naturally, just as you're too nervous now to judge them rationally." He paused and turned
his eyes to her face. "Don't try to just yet. Give yourself a little more time. Give me a little
more time. I've always known it would take time."

He moved nearer, and she let him have her hand.

With the grave kindness of his face so close above her she felt like a child roused out of
frightened dreams and finding a light in the room.

"Perhaps you're right--" she heard herself begin; then something within her clutched her back,
and her hand fell away from him.

"I know I'm right: trust me," he urged. "We'll talk of this in Florence soon."

She stood before him, feeling with despair his kindness, his patience and his unreality. Everything
he said seemed like a painted gauze let down between herself and the real facts of life; and
a sudden desire seized her to tear the gauze into shreds.

