Hardest of all is it for people whose only experience of religion is of Puritan inheritance
to comprehend how, in the fifteenth century, the strong intellect was strengthened, and the
stout heart fortified, by the thought of hosts of saints and angels hovering above a man's
incomings and outgoings to guide and protect him.  Yet in an age that really had the gift of
faith, in which religion was real and vital, and part of the business of every man's daily
life; in which it stood honoured in the world, loaded with riches, crowned with learning, wielding
government both temporal and spiritual, it was a very brave panoply for the soul of man.  The
little boy in Genoa, with the fair hair and blue eyes and grave freckled face that made him
remarkable among his dark companions, had no doubt early received and accepted the vast mysteries
of the Christian faith; and as that other mystery began to grow in his mind, and that idea
of worlds that might lie beyond the sea-line began to take shape in his thoughts, he found
in the holy wisdom of the prophets, and the inspired writings of the fathers, a continual confirmation
of his faith.  The full conviction of these things belongs to a later period of his life; but
probably, during his first voyagings in the Mediterranean, there hung in his mind echoes of
psalms and prophecies that had to do with things beyond the world of his vision and experience.
The sun, whose going forth is to the end of heaven, his circuit back to the end of it, and
from whose heat there is nothing hid; the truth, holy and prevailing, that knows no speech
nor language where its voice is not heard; the great and wide sea, with its creeping things
innumerable, and beasts small and great--no wonder if these things impressed him, and if gradually,
as his way fell clearer before him, and the inner light began to shine more steadily, he came
to believe that he had a special mission to carry the torch of the faith across the Sea of
Darkness, and be himself the bearer of a truth that was to go through all the earth, and of
words that were to travel to the world's end.

In this faith, then, and with this equipment, and about the year 1465, Christopher Columbus
began his sea travels.  His voyages would be doubtless at first much along the coasts, and
across to Alexandria and the Islands.  There would be returnings to Genoa, and glad welcomings
by the little household in the narrow street; in 1472 and 1473 he was with his father at Savona,
helping with the wool-weaving and tavern-keeping; possibly also there were interviews with
Benincasa, who was at that time living in Genoa, and making his famous sea-charts.  Perhaps
it was in his studio that Christopher first saw a chart, and first fell in love with the magic
that can transfer the shapes of oceans and continents to a piece of paper.  Then he would be
off again in another ship, to the Golden Horn perhaps, or the Black Sea, for the Genoese had
a great Crimean trade.  This is all conjecture, but very reasonable conjecture; what we know
for a fact is that he saw the white gum drawn from the lentiscus shrubs in Chio at the time
of their flowering; that fragrant memory is preserved long afterwards in his own writings,
evoked by some incident in the newly-discovered islands of the West.  There are vague rumours
and stories of his having been engaged in various expeditions --among them one fitted out in
Genoa by John of Anjou to recover the kingdom of Naples for King Rene of Provence; but there
is no reason to believe these rumours: good reason to disbelieve them, rather.

The lives that the sea absorbs are passed in a great variety of adventure and experience, but
so far as the world is concerned they are passed in a profound obscurity; and we need not wonder
that of all the mariners who used those seas, and passed up and down, and held their course
by the stars, and reefed their sails before the sudden squalls that came down from the mountains,
and shook them out again in the calm sunshine that followed, there is no record of the one
among their number who was afterwards to reef and steer and hold his course to such mighty
purpose. For this period, then, we must leave him to the sea, and to the vast anonymity of
sea life.

CHAPTER IV

DOMENICO

Christopher is gone, vanished over that blue horizon; and the tale of life in Genoa goes on
without him very much as before, except that Domenico has one apprentice less, and, a matter
becoming of some importance in the narrow condition of his finances, one boy less to feed and
clothe.  For good Domenico, alas! is no economist.  Those hardy adventures of his in the buying
and selling line do not prosper him; the tavern does not pay; perhaps the tavern-keeper is
too hospitable; at any rate, things are not going well.  And yet Domenico had a good start;
as his brother Antonio has doubtless often told him, he had the best of old Giovanni's inheritance;
he had the property at Quinto, and other property at Ginestreto, and some ground rents at Pradella;
a tavern at Savona, a shop there and at Genoa--really, Domenico has no excuse for his difficulties.
In 1445 he was selling land at Quinto, presumably with the consent of old Giovanni, if he was
still alive; and if he was not living, then immediately after his death, in the first pride
of possession.

In 1450 he bought a pleasant house at Quarto, a village on the sea-shore about a mile to the
west of Quinto and about five miles to the east of Genoa.  It was probably a pure speculation,
as he immediately leased the house for two years, and never lived in it himself, although it
was a pleasant place, with an orchard of olives and figs and various other trees--'arboratum
olivis ficubus et aliis diversis arboribus'.  His next recorded transaction is in 1466, when
he went security for a friend, doubtless with disastrous results.  In 1473 he sold the house
at the Olive Gate, that suburban dwelling where probably Christopher was born, and in 1474
he invested the proceeds of that sale in a piece of land which I have referred to before, situated
in the suburbs of Savona, with which were sold those agreeable and useless wine-vats.  Domenico
was living at Savona then, and the property which he so fatuously acquired consisted of two
large pieces of land on the Via Valcalda, containing a few vines, a plantation of fruit-trees,
and a large area of shrub and underwood.  The price, however, was never paid in full, and was
the cause of a lawsuit which dragged on for forty years, and was finally settled by Don Diego
Columbus, Christopher's son, who sent a special authority from Hispaniola.

Owing, no doubt, to the difficulties that this un fortunate purchase plunged him into, Domenico
was obliged to mortgage his house at St. Andrew's Gate in the year 1477; and in 1489 he finally
gave it up to Jacob Baverelus, the cheese-monger, his son-in-law.  Susanna, who had been the
witness of his melancholy transactions for so many years, and possibly the mainstay of that
declining household, died in 1494; but not, we may hope, before she had heard of the fame of
her son Christopher. Domenico, in receipt of a pension from the famous Admiral of the Ocean,
and no doubt talking with a deal of pride and inaccuracy about the discovery of the New World,
lived on until 1498; when he died also, and vanished out of this world.  He had fulfilled a
noble destiny in being the father of Christopher Columbus.

CHAPTER V

SEA THOUGHTS

The long years that Christopher Columbus spent at sea in making voyages to and from his home
in Genoa, years so blank to us, but to him who lived them so full of life and active growth,
were most certainly fruitful in training and equipping him for that future career of which
as yet, perhaps, he did not dream.  The long undulating waves of the Mediterranean, with land
appearing and dissolving away in the morning and evening mists, the business of ship life,
harsh and rough in detail, but not too absorbing to the mind of a common mariner to prevent
any thoughts he might have finding room to grow and take shape; sea breezes, sea storms, sea
calms; these were the setting of his knowledge and experience as he fared from port to port
and from sea to sea.  He is a very elusive figure in that environment of misty blue, very hard
to hold and identify, very shy of our scrutiny, and inaccessible even to our speculation. 
If we would come up with him, and place ourselves in some kind of sympathy with the thoughts
that were forming in his brain, it is necessary that we should, for the moment, forget much
of what we know of the world, and assume the imperfect knowledge of the globe that man possessed
in those years when Columbus was sailing the Mediterranean.

That the earth was a round globe of land and water was a fact that, after many contradictions
and uncertainties, intelligent men had by this time accepted.  A conscious knowledge of the
world as a whole had been a part of human thought for many hundreds of years; and the sphericity
of the earth had been a theory in the sixth century before Christ.  In the fourth century Aristotle
had watched the stars and eclipses; in the third century Eratosthenes had measured a degree
of latitude, and measured it wrong;--[Not so very wrong.  D.W.]--in the second century the
philosopher Crates had constructed a rude sort of globe, on which were marked the known kingdoms
of the earth, and some also unknown.  With the coming of the Christian era the theory of the
roundness of the earth began to be denied; and as knowledge and learning became gathered into
the hands of the Church they lost something of their clarity and singleness, and began to be
used arbitrarily as evidence for or against other and less material theories.  St. Chrysostom
opposed the theory of the earth's roundness; St. Isidore taught it; and so also did St. Augustine,
as we might expect from a man of his wisdom who lived so long in a monastery that looked out
to sea from a high point, and who wrote the words 'Ubi magnitudo, ibi veritas'.  In the sixth
century of the Christian era Bishop Cosmas gave much thought to this matter of a round world,
and found a new argument which to his mind (poor Cosmas!) disposed of it very clearly; for
he argued that, if the world were round, the people dwelling at the antipodes could not see
Christ at His coming, and that therefore the earth was not round.  But Bede, in the eighth
century, established it finally as a part of human knowledge that the earth and all the heavenly
bodies were spheres, and after that the fact was not again seriously disputed.

What lay beyond the frontier of the known was a speculation inseparable from the spirit of
exploration.  Children, and people who do not travel, are generally content, when their thoughts
stray beyond the paths trodden by their feet, to believe that the greater world is but a continuation
on every side of their own environment; indeed, without the help of sight or suggestion, it
is almost impossible to believe anything else.  If you stand on an eminence in a great plain
and think of the unseen country that lies beyond the horizon, trying to visualise it and imagine
that you see it, the eye of imagination can only see the continuance or projection of what
is seen by the bodily sight.  If you think, you can occupy the invisible space with a landscape
made up from your own memory and knowledge: you may think of mountain chains and rivers, although
there are none visible to your sight, or you may imagine vast seas and islands, oceans and
continents.  This, however, is thought, not pure imagination; and even so, with every advantage
of thought and knowledge, you will not be able to imagine beyond your horizon a space of sea
so wide that the farther shore is invisible, and yet imagine the farther shore also.  You will
see America across the Atlantic and Japan across the Pacific; but you cannot see, in one single
effort of the imagination, an Atlantic of empty blue water stretching to an empty horizon,
another beyond that equally vast and empty, another beyond that, and so on until you have spanned
the thousand horizons that lie between England and America.  The mind, that is to say, works
in steps and spans corresponding to the spans of physical sight; it cannot clear itself enough
from the body, or rise high enough beyond experience, to comprehend spaces so much vaster than
anything ever seen by the eye of man.  So also with the stretching of the horizon which bounded
human knowledge of the earth.  It moved step by step; if one of Prince Henry's captains, creeping
down the west coast of Africa, discovered a cape a hundred miles south of the known world,
the most he could probably do was to imagine that there might lie, still another hundred miles
farther south, another cape; to sail for it in faith and hope, to find it, and to imagine another
possibility yet another hundred miles away.  So far as experience went back, faith could look
forward.  It is thus with the common run of mankind; yesterday's march is the measure of to-morrow's;
as much as they have done once, they may do again; they fear it will be not much more; they
hope it may be not much less.

The history of the exploration of the world up to the day when Columbus set sail from Palos
is just such a history of steps.  The Phoenicians coasting from harbour to harbour through
the Mediterranean; the Romans marching from camp to camp, from country to country; the Jutes
venturing in their frail craft into the stormy northern seas, making voyages a little longer
and more daring every time, until they reached England; the captains of Prince Henry of Portugal
feeling their way from voyage to voyage down the coast of Africa--there are no bold flights
into the incredible here, but patient and business-like progress from one stepping-stone to
another.  Dangers and hardships there were, and brave followings of the faint will-o'-the-wisp
of faith in what lay beyond; but there were no great launchings into space.  They but followed
a line that was the continuance or projection of the line they had hitherto followed; what
they did was brave and glorious, but it was reasonable.  What Columbus did, on the contrary,
was, as we shall see later, against all reason and knowledge.  It was a leap in the dark towards
some star invisible to all but him; for he who sets forth across the desert sand or sea must
have a brighter sun to guide him than that which sets and rises on the day of the small man.

Our familiarity with maps and atlases makes it difficult for us to think of the world in other
terms than those of map and diagram; knowledge and science have focussed things for us, and
our imagination has in consequence shrunk.  It is almost impossible, when thinking of the earth
as a whole, to think about it except as a picture drawn, or as a small globe with maps traced
upon it.  I am sure that our imagination has a far narrower angle--to borrow a term from the
science of lenses--than the imagination of men who lived in the fifteenth century.  They thought
of the world in its actual terms--seas, islands, continents, gulfs, rivers, oceans.  Columbus
had seen maps and charts--among them the famous 'portolani' of Benincasa at Genoa; but I think
it unlikely that he was so familiar with them as to have adopted their terms in his thoughts
about the earth.  He had seen the Mediterranean and sailed upon it before he had seen a chart
of it; he knew a good deal of the world itself before he had seen a map of it.  He had more
knowledge of the actual earth and sea than he had of pictures or drawings of them; and therefore,
if we are to keep in sympathetic touch with him, we must not think too closely of maps, but
of land and sea themselves.

The world that Columbus had heard about as being within the knowledge of men extended on the
north to Iceland and Scandinavia, on the south to a cape one hundred miles south of the Equator,
and to the east as far as China and Japan.  North and South were not important to the spirit
of that time; it was East and West that men thought of when they thought of the expansion and
the discovery of the world.  And although they admitted that the earth was a sphere, I think
it likely that they imagined (although the imagination was contrary to their knowledge) that
the line of West and East was far longer, and full of vaster possibilities, than that of North
and South.  North was familiar ground to them--one voyage to England, another to Iceland, another
to Scandinavia; there was nothing impossible about that.  Southward was another matter; but
even here there was no ambition to discover the limit of the world.  It is an error continually
made by the biographers of Columbus that the purpose of Prince Henry's explorations down the
coast of Africa was to find a sea road to the West Indies by way of the East.  It was nothing
of the kind. There was no idea in the minds of the Portuguese of the land which Columbus discovered,
and which we now know as the West Indies.  Mr. Vignaud contends that the confusion arose from
the very loose way in which the term India was applied in the Middle Ages.  Several Indias
were recognised.  There was an India beyond the Ganges; a Middle India between the Ganges and
the Indus; and a Lesser India, in which were included Arabia, Abyssinia, and the countries
about the Red Sea.  These divisions were, however, quite vague, and varied in different periods.
In the time of Columbus the word India meant the kingdom of Prester John, that fabulous monarch
who had been the subject of persistent legends since the twelfth century; and it was this India
to which the Portuguese sought a sea road.  They had no idea of a barrier cape far to the south,
the doubling of which would open a road for them to the west; nor were they, as Mr. Vignaud
believes, trying to open a route for the spice trade with the Orient.  They had no great spice
trade, and did not seek more; what they did seek was an extension of their ordinary trade with
Guinea and the African coast.  To the maritime world of the fifteenth century, then, the South
as a geographical region and as a possible point of discovery had no attractions.

To the west stretched what was known as the Sea of Darkness, about which even the cool knowledge
of the geographers and astronomers could not think steadily.  Nothing was known about it, it
did not lead anywhere, there were no people there, there was no trade in that direction.  The
tides of history and of life avoided it; only now and then some terrified mariner, blown far
out of his course, came back with tales of sea monsters and enchanted disappearing islands,
and shores that receded, and coasts upon which no one could make a landfall.  The farthest
land known to the west was the Azores; beyond that stretched a vague and impossible ocean of
terror and darkness, of which the Arabian writer Xerif al Edrisi, whose countrymen were the
sea-kings of the Middle Ages, wrote as follows:

     "The ocean encircles the ultimate bounds of the inhabited earth, and
     all beyond it is unknown.

