For some minutes she stood as if in a trance, her eyes fastened upon the floating shadow, her
whole form trembling, bent, her body swaying. Only when the sacristan moved a few paces ahead
to hold open the swinging door, and the shadow of the cross faded, did she awake from the spell.

Then, recovering herself slowly, she bowed reverently, crossed herself, drew the boy closer,
and, with his hand in hers, passed out into the cool starlit night.

III

The following morning I was sitting under the Noah's-ark trees, watching the people pass and
repass, when a man in a suit of white flannel, carrying a light cane, and wearing a straw hat
with a red band, and a necktie to match, stopped a flower-girl immediately in front of me,
and affixed an additional dot of blood-color to his buttonhole.

In the glare of the daylight he was even more yellow than when under the blaze of the gas-jets.
His eyes were still glassy and brilliant, but the rims showed red, as if for want of sleep,
and beneath the lower lids lay sunken half-circles of black. He moved with his wonted precision,
but without that extreme gravity of manner which had characterized him the night of the game.
Looked at as a mere passer-by, he would have impressed you as a rather debonair, overdressed
habitué, who was enjoying his morning stroll under the trees, without other purpose in life
than the breathing of the cool air and enjoyment of the attendant exercise. His spider-ship
had doubtless seen me when he entered the walk,--I was still an untrapped fly,--and had picked
out this particular flower-girl beside me as a safe anchorage for one end of his web. I turned
away my head; but it was too late.

"Monsieur did not play last night?" the croupier asked deferentially.

"No; I did not know the game." Then an idea struck me. "Sit down; I want to talk to you." He
touched the edge of his hat with one finger, opened a gold cigarette-case studded with jewels,
offered me its contents, and took the seat beside me.

"Pardon the abruptness of the inquiry, but who was the woman in black?" I asked.

He looked at me curiously.

"Ah, you mean madame with the bag?"

"Yes."

"She was once the Baroness Frontignac."

"Was once! What is she now?"

"Now? Ah, that is quite a story." He stopped, shut the gold case with a click, and leaned forward,
flicking the pebbles with the point of his cane. "If madame had had a larger bag she might
have broken the bank. Is it not so?"

"You know her, then?" I persisted.

"Monsieur, men of my profession know everybody. Sooner or later they all come to us--when they
are young, and their francs have wings; when they are gray-haired and cautious; when they are
old and foolish."

"But she did not look like a gambler," I replied stiffly.

He smiled his old cynical, treacherous smile.

"Monsieur is pleased to be very pronounced in his language. A gambler! Monsieur no doubt means
to say that madame has not the appearance of being under the intoxication of the play." Then
with a positive tone, still flicking the pebbles, "The baroness played for love."

"Of the cards?" I asked persistently. I was determined to drive the nail to the head.

The croupier looked at me fixedly, shrugged his shoulders, laughed between his teeth, a little,
hissing laugh that sounded like escaping steam, and said slowly:--

"No; of a man."

Then, noticing my increasing interest, "Monsieur would know something of madame?"

He held up his hand, and began crooking one finger after another as he recounted her history.
These bent keys, it seemed, unlocked secrets as well.

"Le voilà! the drama of Madame la Baronne! The play opens when she is first a novice in the
convent of Saint Ursula, devoted to good works and the church. Next you find her a grand dame
and rich, the wife of Baron Alphonse de Frontignac, first secretary of legation at Vienna.
Then a mother with one child,--a boy, now six or seven years old, who is hardly ever out of
her arms." He stopped, toyed for a moment with his match-safe, slipped it into his pocket,
and said carelessly, "So much for Act I."

Then, after a pause during which he traced again little diagrams in the gravel, he said suddenly:--

"Does this really interest you, monsieur?"

"Unquestionably."

"You know her, then?" This with a glance of suspicion as keen as it was unexpected by me.

"Never saw her in my life before," I answered frankly, "and never shall again. I leave for
Paris to-day, and sail from Havre on Saturday."

He drew in the point of his cane, looked me all over with one of those comprehensive sweeps
of the eye, as if he would read my inmost thought, and then, with an expression of confidence
born doubtless of my evident sincerity, continued:--

"In the next act Frontignac gets mixed up in some banking scandals,--he would, like a fool,
play roulette--baccarat was always his strong game,--disappears from Vienna, is arrested at
the frontier, escapes, and is found the next morning under a brush-heap with a bullet through
his head. This ends the search. Two years later--this is now Act III.--Madame la Baronne, without
a sou to her name, is hard at work in the hospitals of Metz. The child is pensioned out near by.

"Now comes the grand romance. An officer attached to the 13th Cuirassiers--a regiment with
not men enough left after Metz to muster a company--is picked up for dead, with one arm torn
off, and a sabre-slash over his head, and brought to her ward. She nurses him back to life,
inch by inch, and in six months he joins his regiment. Now please follow the plot. It is quite
interesting. Is it not easy to see what will happen? Tender and beautiful, young and brave!
Vive le bel amour! It is the old story, but it is also une affaire de coeur--la grande passion.
In a few months they are married, and he takes her to his home in Rouen. There he listens to
her entreaties, and resigns his commission.

"This was five years ago. To-day he is a broken-down man, starving on his pension; a poor devil
about the streets, instead of a general commanding a department; and all for love of her. Some,
of course, said it was the sabre-cut; some that he could no longer hold his command, he was
so badly slashed. But it is as I tell you. You can see him here any day, sitting under the
trees, playing with the child, or along the lake front, leaning on her arm."

Here the croupier rose from the bench, looked critically over his case of cigarettes, selected
one carefully, and began buttoning his coat as if to go.

By this time I had determined to know the end. I felt that he had told me the truth as far
as he had gone; but I felt, also, that he had stopped at the most critical point of her career.
I saw, too, that he was familiar with its details.

"Go on, please. Here, try a cigar." My interest in my heroine had even made me courteous. My
aversion to him, too, was wearing off. Perhaps, after all, croupiers were no worse than other
people. "Now, one thing more. Why was she in your gambling-house?"

He lighted the cigar, touched his hat with his forefinger, and again seated himself.

"Well, then, monsieur, as you will. I always trust you Americans. When you lose, you pay; when
you win, you keep your mouths shut. Besides,"--this was spoken more to himself,--"you have
never seen him, and never will. Le voilà. One night,--this only a year ago, remember,--in one
of the gardens at Baden, a hand touched the baroness's shoulder.

"It was Frontignac's.

"The body under the brush-heap had been that of another man dressed in Frontignac's clothes.
The bullet-hole in his head was made by a ball from Frontignac's pistol. Since then he had
been hiding in exile.

"He threatened exposure. She pleaded for her boy and her crippled husband. She could, of course,
have handed him over to the nearest gendarme; but that meant arrest, and arrest meant exposure.
At their home in Vienna, let me tell you, baccarat had been played nightly as a pastime for
their guests. So great was her luck that 'As lucky as the Baronne Frontignac' was a byword.
Frontignac's price was this: she must take his fifty louis and play that stake at the Casino
that night; when she brought him ten thousand francs he would vanish.

"That night at Baden--I was dealing, and know--she won twelve thousand francs in as many minutes.
Here her slavery began. It will continue until Frontignac is discovered and captured; then
he will put a second bullet into his own head. When I saw her enter my room I knew he had turned
up again. As she staggered out, one of my men shadowed her. I was right; Frontignac was skulking
in the garden."

All my disgust for the croupier returned in an instant. He was still the same bloodless spider
of the night before. I could hardly keep my hands off him.

"And you permit this, and let this woman suffer these tortures, her life made miserable by
this scoundrel, when a word, even a look, from you would send him out of the country and"--

"Softly, monsieur, softly. Why blame me? What business is it of mine. Do I love the cripple?
Have I robbed the bank and murdered my double? This is not my game; it is Frontignac's. Would
you have me kick over his chess board?"

JONATHAN

He was so ugly,--outside, I mean: long and lank, flat-chested, shrunken, round-shouldered,
stooping when he walked; body like a plank, arms and legs like split rails, feet immense, hands
like paddles, head set on a neck scrawny as a picked chicken's, hair badly put on and in patches,
some about his head, some around his jaws, some under his chin in a half moon,--a good deal
on the back of his hands and on his chest. Nature had hewn him in the rough and had left him
with every axe mark showing.

He wore big shoes tied with deer hide strings and nondescript breeches that wrinkled along
his knotted legs like old gun covers. These were patched and repatched with various hues and
textures,--parts of another pair,--bits of a coat and fragments of tailor's cuttings. Sewed
in their seat was half of a cobbler's apron,--for greater safety in sliding over ledges and
logs, he would tell you. Next came a leather belt polished with use, and then a woolen shirt,--any
kind of a shirt,--cross-barred or striped,--whatever the store had cheapest, and over that
a waistcoat with a cotton back and some kind of a front, looking like a state map, it had so
many colored patches. There was never any coat,--none that I remember. When he wore a coat
he was another kind of a Jonathan,--a store-dealing Jonathan, or a church-going Jonathan, or
a town-meeting Jonathan,--not the "go-a-fishin'," or "bee-huntin'," or "deer-stalkin'" Jonathan
whom I knew.

There was a wide straw hat, too, that crowned his head and canted with the wind and flopped
about his neck, and would have sailed away down many a mountain brook but for a faithful leather
strap that lay buried in the half-moon whiskers and held on for dear life. And from under the
rim of this thatch, and half hidden in the matted masses of badly adjusted hair, was a thin,
peaked nose, bridged by a pair of big spectacles, and somewhere below these, again, a pitfall
of a mouth covered with twigs of hair and an underbrush of beard, while deep-set in the whole
tangle, like still pools reflecting the blue and white of the sweet heavens above, lay his
eyes,--eyes that won you, kindly, twinkling, merry, trustful, and trusting eyes. Beneath these
pools of light, way down below, way down where his heart beat warm, lived Jonathan.

I know a fruit in Mexico, delicious in flavor, called Timburici, covered by a skin as rough
and hairy as a cocoanut; and a flower that bristles with thorns before it blooms into waxen
beauty; and there are agates encrusted with clay and pearls that lie hidden in oysters. All
these things, somehow, remind me of Jonathan.

His cabin was the last bit of shingle and brick chimney on that side of the Franconia Notch.
There were others, farther on in the forest, with bark slants for shelter, and forked sticks
for swinging kettles; but civilization ended with Jonathan's store-stove and the square of
oil-cloth that covered his sitting-room floor. Upstairs, under the rafters, there was a guest-chamber
smelling of pine boards and drying herbs, and sheltering a bed gridironed with bed-cord and
softened by a thin layer of feathers encased in a ticking and covered with a cotton quilt.
This bed always made a deep impression upon me mentally and bodily. Mentally, because I always
slept so soundly in it whenever I visited Jonathan,--even with the rain pattering on the roof
and the wind soughing through the big pine-trees; and bodily, because--well, because of the
cords. Beside this bed was a chair for my candle, and on the floor a small square plank, laid
loosely over the stovepipe hole which, in winter, held the pipe.

In summer mornings Jonathan made an alarm clock of this plank, flopping it about with the end
of a fishing-rod poked up from below, never stopping until he saw my sleepy face peering down
into his own. There was no bureau, only a nail or so in the scantling, and no washstand, of
course; the tin basin at the well outside was better.

Then there was an old wife that lived in the cabin,--an old wife made of sole leather, with
yellow-white hair and a thin, pinched face and a body all angles,--chest, arms, everywhere,--outlined
through her straight up and down calico dress. When she spoke, however, you stopped to listen,--it
was like a wood sound, low and far away,--soft as a bird call. People living alone in the forests
often have these voices.

Last there was a dog,--a mean, sniveling, stump-tailed dog, of no particular breed or kidney.
One of those dogs whose ancestry went to the bad many generations before he was born. A dog
part fox,--he got all his slyness here; and part wolf, this made him ravenous; and part bull-terrier,
this made him ill-tempered; and all the rest poodle, that made him too lazy to move.

The wife knew this dog, and hung the bacon on a high nail out of his reach, and covered with
a big dish the pies cooling on the bench; and the neighbors down the road knew him and chased
him out of their dairy-cellars when he nosed into the milk-pans and cheese-pots; and even the
little children found out what a coward he was, and sent him howling home to his hole under
the porch, where he grumbled and pouted all day like a spoiled child that had been half whipped.
Everybody knew him, and everybody despised him for a low-down, thieving, lazy cur,--everybody
except Jonathan. Jonathan loved him,--loved his weepy, smeary eyes, and his rough, black hair,
and his fat round body, short stumpy legs, and shorter stumpy tail,--especially the tail. Everything
else that the dog lacked could be traced back to the peccadillos of his ancestors,--Jonathan
was responsible for the tail.

"Ketched in a b'ar-trap I hed sot up back in thet green timber on Loon Pond Maountin' six year
ago last fall, when he wuz a pup," he would say, holding the dog in his lap,--his favorite
seat. "I swan, ef it warn't too bad! Thinks I, when I sot it, I'll tell the leetle cuss whar
it wuz; then--I must hev forgot it. It warn't a week afore he wuz runnin' a rabbet and run
right into it. Wall, sir, them iron jaws took thet tail er his'n off julluk a knife. He's allus
been kinder sore ag'in me sence, and I dunno but he's right, fur it wuz mighty keerless in
me. Wall, sir, he come yowlin' hum, and when he see me he did look saour,--no use talkin',--jest
ez ef he wuz a-sayin', 'Yer think you're paowerful cunnin' with yer b'ar-traps, don't ye? Jest
see what it's done to my tail. It's kinder sp'ilt me for a dog.' All my fault, warn't it, George?"
patting his head. (Only Jonathan would call a dog George.)

Here the dog would look up out of one eye as he spoke,--he hadn't forgotten the bear-trap,
and never intended to let Jonathan forget it either. Then Jonathan would admire ruefully the
end of the stump, stroking the dog all the while with his big, hairy, paddle-like hands, George
rooting his head under the flap of the party-colored waistcoat.

One night, I remember, we had waited supper,--the wife and I,--we were obliged to wait, the
trout being in Jonathan's creel,--when Jonathan walked in, looking tired and worried.

"Hez George come home, Marthy?" he asked, resting his long bamboo rod against the porch rail
and handing the creel of trout to the wife. "No? Wall, I'm beat ef thet ain't cur'us. Guess
I got ter look him up." And he disappeared hurriedly into the darkening forest, his anxious,
whistling call growing fainter and fainter as he was lost in its depths. Marthy was not uneasy,--not
about the dog; it was the supper that troubled her. She knew Jonathan's ways, and she knew
George. This was a favorite trick of the dog's,--this of losing Jonathan.

The trout were about burnt to a crisp and the corn-bread stone cold when Jonathan came trudging
back, George in his arms,--a limp, soggy, half-dead dog, apparently. Marthy said nothing. It
was an old story. Half the time Jonathan carried him home.

"Supper's ready," she said quietly, and we went in.

George slid out of Jonathan's arms, smelt about for a soft plank, and fell in a heap on the
porch, his chin on his paws, his mean little eyes watching lazily,--speaking to nobody, noticing
nobody, sulking all to himself. There he stayed until he caught a whiff of the fragrant, pungent
odor of fried trout. Then he cocked one eye and lifted an ear. He must not carry things too
far. Next, I heard a single thump of his six-inch tail. George was beginning to get pleased;
he always did when there were things to eat.

All this time Jonathan, tired out, sat in his big splint chair at the supper-table. He had
been thrashing the brook since daylight,--over his knees sometimes. I could still see the high-water
mark on his patched trousers. Another whiff of the frying-pan, and George got up. He dared
not poke his nose into Marthy's lap,--there were too many chunks of wood within easy reach
of her hand. So he sidled up to Jonathan, rubbing his nose against his big knees, whining hungrily,
looking up into his face.

"I tell ye," said Jonathan, smiling at me, patting the dog as he spoke, "this yere George hez
got more sense'n most men. He knows what's become of them trout we ketched. I guess he's gittin'
over the way I treated him to-day. Ye see, we wuz up the East Branch when he run a fox south.
Thinks I, the fox'll take a whirl back and cross the big runway; and, sure enough, it warn't
long afore I heard George a-comin' back, yippin' along up through Hank Simons' holler. So I
whistled to him and steered off up onto the maountin' to take a look at Bog-eddy and try and
git a pickerel. When I come daown ag'in, I see George warn't whar I left him, so I hollered
and whistled ag'in. Then, thinks I, you're mad 'cause I left ye, an' won't let on ye kin hear;
so I come along hum without him. When I went back a while ago a-lookin' for him, would yer
believe it, thar he wuz a-layin' in the road, about forty rod this side of Hank Simons' sugar
maples, flat onto his stummick an' disgusted an' put out awful. It wuz about all I could do
ter git him hum. I knowed the minute I come in fust time an' see he warn't here thet his feelin's
wuz hurt 'cause I left him. I presaume mebbe I oughter hollered ag'in afore I got so fer off.
Then I thought, of course, he knowed I'd gone to Bog-eddy. Beats all, what sense some dogs hez."

I never knew Jonathan to lose patience with George but once: that was when the dog tried to
burrow into the hole of a pair of chipmunks whom Jonathan loved. They lived in a tree blanketed
with moss and lying across the wood road. George had tried to scrape an acquaintance by crawling
in uninvited, nearly scaring the little fellows to death, and Jonathan had flattened him into
the dry leaves with his big, paddle-like hands. That was before the bear-trap had nipped his
tail, but George never forgot it.

He was particularly polite to chipmunks after that. He would lie still by the hour and hear
Jonathan talk to them without even a whine of discontent. I watched the old man one morning
up beneath the ledges, groping, on his hands and knees, filling his pockets with nuts, and
when he reached the wood road, emptying them in a pile near the chipmunk's tree, George looking
on good-naturedly.

"Guess you leetle cunnin's better hurry up," he said, while he poured out the nuts on the ground,
his knees sticking up as he sat, like some huge grasshopper's. "Guess ye ain't got more 'n
time to fill yer cubbud,--winter's a-comin'! Them leetle birches on Bog-eddy is turnin' yeller,--that's
the fust sign. 'Fore ye knows it snow'll be flyin'. Then whar'll ye be with everything froze
tighter'n Sampson bound the heathen, you cunnin' leetle skitterin' pups. Then I presaume likely
ye'll come a-drulin' raound an' want me an' George should gin ye suthin to git through th'
winter on,--won't they, George?"

"Beats all," he said to me that night, "how thoughtful some dogs is. Hadn't been fer George
to-day, I'd clean forgot them leetle folks. I see him scratching raound in the leaves an' I
knowed right away what he wuz thinkin' of."

Often when I was sketching in the dense forest, Jonathan would lie down beside me, the old
flop of a hat under his head, his talk rambling on.

"I don't wonder ye like to paint 'em. Thar hain't nothin' so human as trees. Take thet big
hemlock right in front er yer. Hain't he led a pretty decent life? See how praoud an' tall
he's growed, with them arms of his'n straight aout an' them leetle chillen of his'n spraouting
up raound him. I tell ye them hemlocks is pretty decent people. Now take a look at them two
white birches down by thet big rock. Ain't it a shame the way them fellers hez been goin' on
sence they wuz leetle saplin's, makin' it so nothin' could grow raound 'em,--with their jackets
all ragged an' tore like tramps, an' their toes all out of their shoes whar ther roots is stickin'
clear of the bark,--ain't they a-ketchin' it in their ole age? An' then foller on daown whar
thet leetle bunch er silver maples is dancin' in the sunlight, so slender an' cunnin',--all
aout in their summer dresses, julluk a bevy er young gals,--ain't they human like? I tell ye,
trees is the humanest things thet is." 

She resided principally at Florence, where she died in 1781; having
married secondly, after the death of Lord Orford, the Hon. Sewallis
Shirley.

She was a woman of bad character, as well as Half mad: which last quality she to communicated
to her unfortunate son George, third Earl of Orford. She succeeded, in her own right, to the
baronies of Clinton and Say, upon the death, in 1751, of Hugh, Earl and Baron Clinton.-D.
(This lady was married to Lord Walpole in 1724. In a letter to the Countess of mar, written
in that year, Lady Mary Wortley Montagu says:- "I have so good an
opinion of your taste, to believe harlequin in person will not make
you laugh so much as the Earl of Stair's furious passion for Lady
Walpole, aged fourteen and some months.

Mrs. Murray undertook to bring the business to bear, and provided the opportunity, a great
ingredient You'll Say but the young lady proved skittish. She did not only turn his heroic flame
into present ridicule, but exposed all his generous sentiments, to
divert her Husband and father-in-law."

Works, vol. ii. p. 188.]

(546) A villa belonging to the Great Duke, where Prince Craon resided
in summer.

(547) "April 2. In the Commons, 500,000 pounds voted for the Queen of Hungary; I believe nem.
con. Sir John Barnard moved it; which, Mr. Sandys told me, was that day making himself the
chancellor of the exchequer. He told me, also, the King was unwilling to grant the Prince 50,000
pounds a-year; and I am told from other hands, that he saith he never
promised it.

       The Bishop of Sarum (Sherlock) says, Sir Robert Walpole told him,
the King would give 30,000 pounds, but no more.

Mr. Sandys appeared determined against admitting Tories, and said it was wonderful their union
had held so long, and could not be expected to hold longer; that he could not imagine why every
body spoke against Lord Carteret, but that he had better abilities than any body; that as soon
as foreign affairs could be settled, they would endeavour to reduce the expenses of the crown
and interest of the debts." Secker MS.

(548) William Fielding, fifth Earl of Denbigh, died 1755.-D.

(549) Philip, second Earl Stanhope, eldest son of the general and statesman, who founded this
branch of the Stanhope family.

Earl Philip was a man of retired habits, and much devoted to scientific pursuits. He died in
1786.-D.

(550) Lady Mary Walpole, daughter of Sir R. W.

(551) This Mr. Clutterbuck had been raised by Lord Carteret, when Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
whom he betrayed to Sir R. Walpole; the latter employed him, but
never would trust him.

He then ingratiated himself with Mr. Pelham, under a pretence of
candour and integrity, and was continually infusing scruples into
him on political questions, to distress Sir R. On the latter's quitting
the ministry, he appointed a board of treasury at his own house, in
order to sign some grants; Mr. Clutterbuck made a pretence to slip
away, and never returned.

He was a friend, too, of the Speaker's: when Sir R. W. was told that Mr. Onslow had resigned his
place, and that Mr. Clutterbuck was to succeed him, said, "I remember that the Duke of Roxburgh,
who was a great pretender to conscience, persuaded the Duke of Montrose to resign the seals of'
Secretary of state, on some scruple, and begged them himself the next day." Mr. Clutterbuck
died very soon after this transaction. [Mr. Clutterbuck was appointed treasurer of the navy
in May, and died in November following.]
(552) John, second and last Duke of Montagu, of the first creation. Only the old wife and worthless, lazy dog, and the rod and the creel! Only
the blessed sunshine and fresh, sweet air, and the cool touch of deep woods.

No, there is no story--only Jonathan.

ALONG THE BRONX

Hidden in our memories there are quaint, quiet nooks tucked away at the end of leafy lanes;
still streams overhung with feathery foliage; gray rocks lichen-covered; low-ground meadows,
knee-deep in lush grass; restful, lazy lakes dotted with pond-lilies; great, wide-spreading
trees, their arms uplifted in song, their leaves quivering with the melody.

I say there are all these delights of leaf, moss, ripple, and shade stored away somewhere in
our memories,--dry bulbs of a preceding summer's bloom, that need only the first touch of spring,
the first glorious day in June, to break out into flower. When they do break out, they are
generally chilled in the blooming by the thousand and one difficulties of prolonged travel,
time of getting there and time of getting back again, expense, and lack of accommodations.

If you live in New York--and really you should not live anywhere else!--there are a few buttons
a tired man can touch that will revive for him all these delights in half an hour's walk, costing
but a car-fare, and robbing no man or woman of time, even without the benefits of the eight-hour
law.

You touch one of these buttons when you plan to spend an afternoon along the Bronx.

There are other buttons, of course. You can call up the edges of the Palisades, with their
great sweep of river below, the seething, steaming city beyond; or, you can say "Hello!" to
the Upper Harlem, with its house-boats and floating restaurants; or you can ring up Westchester
and its picturesque waterline. But you cannot get them all together in half an hour except
in one place, and that is along the Bronx.

The Bronx is the forgotten, the overlooked, the "disremembered," as the provincial puts it.
Somebody may know where it begins--I do not. I only know where it ends. What its early life
may be, away up near White Plains, what farms it waters, what dairies it cools, what herds
it refreshes, I know not. I only know that when I get off at Woodlawn--that City of the Silent--it
comes down from somewhere up above the railroad station, and that it "takes a header," as the
boys say, under an old mill, abandoned long since, and then, like another idler, goes singing
along through open meadows, and around big trees in clumps, their roots washed bare, and then
over sandy stretches reflecting the flurries of yellow butterflies, and then around a great
hill, and so on down to Laguerre's.

Of course, when it gets to Laguerre's I know all about it. I know the old rotting landing-wharf
where Monsieur moors his boats,--the one with the little seat is still there; and Lucette's
big eyes are just as brown, and her hair just as black, and her stockings and slippers just
as dainty on Sundays as when first I knew her. And the wooden bench is still there, where the
lovers used to sit; only Monsieur, her father, tells me that François works very late in the
big city,--three mouths to feed now, you see,--and only when le petit François is tucked away
in his crib in the long summer nights, and Lucette has washed the dishes and put on her best
apron, and the Bronx stops still in a quiet pool to listen, is the bench used as in the old
time when Monsieur discovered the lovers by the flash of his lantern.

Then I know where it floats along below Laguerre's, and pulls itself together in a very dignified
way as it sails under the brand-new bridge,--the old one, propped up on poles, has long since
paid tribute to a spring freshet,--and quickens its pace below the old Dye-house,--also a wreck
now (they say it is haunted),--and then goes slopping along in and out of the marshes, sousing
the sunken willow roots, oozing through beds of weeds and tangled vines.

But only a very little while ago did I know where it began to leave off all its idle ways and
took really to the serious side of life; when it began rushing down long, stony ravines, plunging
over respectable, well-to-do masonry dams, skirting once costly villas, whispering between
dark defiles of rock, and otherwise disporting itself as becomes a well-ordered, conventional,
self-respecting mountain stream, uncontaminated by the encroachments and frivolities of civilized
life.

All this begins at Fordham. Not exactly at Fordham, for you must walk due east from the station
for half a mile, climb a fence, and strike through the woods before you hear its voice and
catch the gleam of its tumbling current.

They will all be there when you go--all the quaint nooks, all the delights of leaf, moss, ripple,
and shade, of your early memories. And in the half-hour, too,--less if you are quick-footed,--from
your desk or shop in the great city.

No, you never heard of it. I knew that before you said a word. You thought it was the dumping-ground
of half the cast-off tinware of the earth; that only the shanty, the hen-coop, and the stable
overhung its sluggish waters, and only the carpet shaker, the sod gatherer, and the tramp infested
its banks.

I tell you that in all my wanderings in search of the picturesque, nothing within a day's journey
is half as charming. That its stretches of meadow, willow clumps, and tangled densities are
as lovely, fresh, and enticing as can be found--yes, within a thousand miles of your door.
That the rocks are encrusted with the thickest of moss and lichen, gray, green, black, and
brilliant emerald. That the trees are superb, the solitude and rest complete. That it is finer,
more subtle, more exquisite than its sister brooks in the denser forest, because that here
and there it shows the trace of some human touch,--and nature is never truly picturesque without
it,--the broken-down fence, the sagging bridge, and vine-covered roof.

But you must go now.

Now, before the grip of the great city has been fastened upon it; before the axe of the "dago"
clears out the wilderness of underbrush; before the landscape gardener, the sanitary engineer,
and the contractor pounce upon it and strangle it; before the crimes of the cast-iron fountain,
the varnished grapevine arbor, with seats to match, the bronze statues presented by admiring
groups of citizens, the rambles, malls, and cement-lined caverns, are consummated; before the
gravel walk confines your steps, and the granite curbing imprisons the flowers, as if they,
too, would escape.

Now, when the tree lies as it falls; when the violets bloom and are there for the picking;
when the dogwood sprinkles the bare branches with white stars, and the scent of the laurel
fills the air.

Touch the button some day soon for an hour along the Bronx.

ANOTHER DOG

Do not tell me dogs cannot talk. I know better. I saw it all myself. It was at Sterzing, that
most picturesque of all the Tyrolean villages on the Italian slope of the Brenner, with its
long, single street, zigzagged like a straggling path in the snow,--perhaps it was laid out
in that way,--and its little open square, with shrine and rude stone fountain, surrounded by
women in short skirts and hobnailed shoes, dipping their buckets. On both sides of this street
ran queer arcades sheltering shops, their doorways piled with cheap stuffs, fruit, farm implements,
and the like, and at the far end, it was almost the last house in the town, stood the old inn,
where you breakfast. Such an old, old inn! with swinging sign framed by fantastic iron work,
and decorated with overflows of foaming ale in green mugs, crossed clay pipes, and little round
dabs of yellow-brown cakes. There was a great archway, too, wide and high, with enormous, barn-like
doors fronting on this straggling, zigzag, sabot-trodden street. Under this a cobble-stone
pavement led to the door of the coffee-room and out to the stable beyond. These barn-like doors
keep out the driving snows and the whirls of sleet and rain, and are slammed to behind horse,
sleigh, and all, if not in the face, certainly in the very teeth of the winter gale, while
the traveler disentangles his half-frozen legs at his leisure, almost within sight of the blazing
fire of the coffee-room within.

Under this great archway, then, against one of these doors, his big paws just inside the shadow
line,--for it was not winter, but a brilliant summer morning, the grass all dusted with powdered
diamonds, the sky a turquoise, the air a joy,--under this archway, I say, sat a big St. Bernard
dog, squat on his haunches, his head well up, like a grenadier on guard. His eyes commanded
the approaches down the road, up the road, and across the street; taking in the passing peddler
with the tinware, and the girl with a basket strapped to her back, her fingers knitting for
dear life, not to mention so unimportant an object as myself swinging down the road, my iron-shod
alpenstock hammering the cobbles.

He made no objection to my entering, neither did he receive me with any show of welcome. There
was no bounding forward, no wagging of the tail, no aimless walking around for a moment, and
settling down in another spot; nor was there any sudden growl or forbidding look in the eye.
None of these things occurred to him, for none of these things was part of his duty. The landlord
would do the welcoming, the blue-shirted porter take my knapsack and show me the way to the
coffee-room. His business was to sit still and guard that archway. Paying guests, and those
known to the family,--yes! But stray mountain goats, chickens, inquisitive, pushing peddlers,
pigs, and wandering dogs,--well, he would look out for these.

While the cutlets and coffee were being fried and boiled, I dragged a chair across the road
and tilted it back out of the sun against the wall of a house. I, too, commanded a view down
past the blacksmith shop, where they were heating a huge iron tire to clap on the hind wheel
of a diligence, and up the street as far as the little square where the women were still clattering
about on the cobbles, their buckets on their shoulders. This is how I happened to be watching
the dog.

The more I looked at him, the more strongly did his personality impress me. The exceeding gravity
of his demeanor! The dignified attitude! The quiet, silent reserve! The way he looked at you
from under his eyebrows, not eagerly, nor furtively, but with a self-possessed, competent air,
quite like a captain of a Cunarder scanning a horizon from the bridge, or a French gendarme,
watching the shifting crowds from one of the little stone circles anchored out in the rush
of the boulevards,--a look of authority backed by a sense of unlimited power. Then, too, there
was such a dignified cut to his hairy chops as they drooped over his teeth beneath his black,
stubby nose. His ears rose and fell easily, without undue haste or excitement when the sound
of horses' hoofs put him on his guard, or a goat wandered too near. Yet one could see that
he was not a meddlesome dog, nor a snarler, no running out and giving tongue at each passing
object, not that kind of a dog at all! He was just a plain, substantial, well-mannered, dignified,
self-respecting St. Bernard dog, who knew his place and kept it, who knew his duty and did
it, and who would no more chase a cat than he would bite your legs in the dark. Put a cap with
a gold band on his head and he would really have made an ideal concierge. Even without the
band, he concentrated in his person all the superiority, the repose, and exasperating reticence
of that necessary concomitant of Continental hotel life.

Suddenly I noticed a more eager expression on his face. One ear was unfurled, like a flag,
and almost run to the masthead; the head was turned quickly down the road. A sound of wheels
was heard below the shop. His dogship straightened himself and stood on four legs, his tail
wagging slowly.

Another dog was coming.

A great Danish hound, with white eyes, black-and-tan ears, and tail as long and smooth as a
policeman's night-club;--one of those sleek and shining dogs with powerful chest and knotted
legs, a little bowed in front, black lips, and dazzling, fang-like teeth. He was spattered
with brown spots, and sported a single white foot. Altogether, he was a dog of quality, of
ancestry, of a certain position in his own land,--one who had clearly followed his master's
mountain wagon to-day as much for love of adventure as anything else. A dog of parts, too,
who could perhaps, hunt the wild boar, or give chase to the agile deer. He was certainly not
an inn dog. He was rather a palace dog, a chateau, or a shooting-box dog, who, in his off moments,
trotted behind hunting carts filled with guns, sportsmen in knee-breeches, or in front of landaus
when my lady went an-airing.

