465]

(295)

I.  Livia, having married Augustus when she was pregnant, was within three months afterwards
delivered of Drusus, the father of Claudius Caesar, who had at first the praenomen of Decimus,
but afterwards that of Nero; and it was suspected that he was begotten in adultery by his father-in-law.
The following verse, however, was immediately in every one's mouth:

    Tois eutychousi kai primaena paidia.

    Nine months for common births the fates decree;
    But, for the great, reduce the term to three.

This Drusus, during the time of his being quaestor and praetor, commanded in the Rhaetian and
German wars, and was the first of all the Roman generals who navigated the Northern Ocean [466].
He made likewise some prodigious trenches beyond the Rhine [467], which to this day are called
by his name.  He overthrew the enemy in several battles, and drove them far back into the depths
of the desert.  Nor did he desist from pursuing them, until an apparition, in the form of a
barbarian woman, of more than human size, appeared to him, and, in the Latin tongue, forbad
him to proceed any farther.  For these achievements he had the honour of an ovation, and the
triumphal ornaments.  After his praetorship, he immediately entered on the office of consul,
and returning again to Germany, died of disease, in the summer encampment, which thence obtained
the name of "The Unlucky Camp."  His corpse was carried to Rome by the principal persons of
the several municipalities and colonies upon the road, being met and received by the recorders
of each place, and buried in the Campus Martius.  In honour of his (296) memory, the army erected
a monument, round which the soldiers used, annually, upon a certain day, to march in solemn
procession, and persons deputed from the several cities of Gaul performed religious rites.
The senate likewise, among various other honours, decreed for him a triumphal arch of marble,
with trophies, in the Appian Way, and gave the cognomen of Germanicus to him and his posterity.
In him the civil and military virtues were equally displayed; for, besides his victories, he
gained from the enemy the Spolia Opima [468], and frequently marked out the German chiefs in
the midst of their army, and encountered them in single combat, at the utmost hazard of his
life.  He likewise often declared that he would, some time or other, if possible, restore the
ancient government.  In this account, I suppose, some have ventured to affirm that Augustus
was jealous of him, and recalled him; and because he made no haste to comply with the order,
took him off by poison.  This I mention, that I may not be guilty of any omission, more than
because I think it either true or probable; since Augustus loved him so much when living, that
he always, in his wills, made him joint-heir with his sons, as he once declared in the senate;
and upon his decease, extolled him in a speech to the people, to that degree, that he prayed
the gods "to make his Caesars like him, and to grant himself as honourable an exit out of this
world as they had given him." SER ÆQ. MONET HIC AD QVI LOCIT JVLIA ADEPTA CONJUNX ET PERPETUA
FILIA D.S.D.

The most ancient money which has been found in and about this city,
is the little coin of Mark Antony; on one side of which is represented
the Triumvirate; on the other, a Lion, with the word Lugudani under
it; on each side of the Lion are the letters A and XL.

The antiquarians here think those letters marked the value of the piece, and that it was about
forty sous; but is it not more probable, that this was only the mint-master's touch?
  He was named Tiberius Claudius Drusus, but soon afterwards, (297) upon the adoption
of his elder brother into the Julian family, he assumed the cognomen of Germanicus.  He was
left an infant by his father, and during almost the whole of his minority, and for some time
after he attained the age of manhood, was afflicted with a variety of obstinate disorders,
insomuch that his mind and body being greatly impaired, he was, even after his arrival at years
of maturity, never thought sufficiently qualified for any public or private employment.  He
was, therefore, during a long time, and even after the expiration of his minority, under the
direction of a pedagogue, who, he complains in a certain memoir, "was a barbarous wretch, and
formerly superintendent of the mule-drivers, who was selected for his governor, on purpose
to correct him severely on every trifling occasion."  On account of this crazy constitution
of body and mind, at the spectacle of gladiators, which he gave the people, jointly with his
brother, in honour of his father's memory, he presided, muffled up in a pallium--a new fashion.
When he assumed the manly habit, he was carried in a litter, at midnight, to the Capitol, without
the usual ceremony.

III.  He applied himself, however, from an early age, with great assiduity to the study of
the liberal sciences, and frequently published specimens of his skill in each of them.  But
never, with all his endeavours, could he attain to any public post in the government, or afford
any hope of arriving at distinction thereafter.  His mother, Antonia, frequently called him
"an abortion of a man, that had been only begun, but never finished, by nature."  And when
she would upbraid any one with dulness, she said, "He was a greater fool than her son, Claudius."
His grandmother, Augusta, always treated him with the utmost contempt, very rarely spoke to
him, and when she did admonish him upon any occasion, it was in writing, very briefly and severely,
or by messengers.  His sister, Livilla, upon hearing that he was about to be created emperor,
openly and loudly expressed her indignation that the Roman people should experience a fate
so severe and so much below their grandeur.  To exhibit the opinion, both favourable and otherwise,
entertained concerning him by Augustus, his great-uncle, I have here subjoined some extracts
from the letters of that emperor.

IV.  "I have had some conversation with Tiberius, according (298) to your desire, my dear Livia,
as to what must be done with your grandson, Tiberius, at the games of Mars.  We are both agreed
in this, that, once for all, we ought to determine what course to take with him.  For if he
be really sound and, so to speak, quite right in his intellects [470], why should we hesitate
to promote him by the same steps and degrees we did his brother?  But if we find him below
par, and deficient both in body and mind, we must beware of giving occasion for him and ourselves
to be laughed at by the world, which is ready enough to make such things the subject of mirth
and derision.  For we never shall be easy, if we are always to be debating upon every occasion
of this kind, without settling, in the first instance, whether he be really capable of public
offices or not.  With regard to what you consult me about at the present moment, I am not against
his superintending the feast of the priests, in the games of Mars, if he will suffer himself
to be governed by his kinsman, Silanus's son, that he may do nothing to make the people stare
and laugh at him.  But I do not approve of his witnessing the Circensian games from the Pulvinar.
He will be there exposed to view in the very front of the theatre.  Nor do I like that he should
go to the Alban Mount [471], or be at Rome during the Latin festivals.  For if he be capable
of attending his brother to the mount, why is he not made prefect of the city?  Thus, my dear
Livia, you have my thoughts upon the matter.  In my opinion, we ought to (299) settle this
affair once for all, that we may not be always in suspense between hope and fear.  You may,
if you think proper, give your kinsman Antonia this part of my letter to read."  In another
letter, he writes as follows: "I shall invite: the youth, Tiberius, every day during your absence,
to supper, that he may not sup alone with his friends Sulpicius and Athenodorus.  I wish the
poor creature was more cautious and attentive in the choice of some one, whose manners, air,
and gait might be proper for his imitation:

    Atuchei panu en tois spoudaiois lian.
    In things of consequence he sadly fails.

Where his mind does not run astray, he discovers a noble disposition." In a third letter, he
says, "Let me die, my dear Livia, if I am not astonished, that the declamation of your grandson,
Tiberius, should please me; for how he who talks so ill, should be able to declaim so clearly
and properly, I cannot imagine."  There is no doubt but Augustus, after this, came to a resolution
upon the subject, and, accordingly, left him invested with no other honour than that of the
Augural priesthood; naming him amongst the heirs of the third degree, who were but distantly
allied to his family, for a sixth part of his estate only, with a legacy of no more than eight
hundred thousand sesterces.

V.  Upon his requesting some office in the state, Tiberius granted him the honorary appendages
of the consulship, and when he pressed for a legitimate appointment, the emperor wrote word
back, that "he sent him forty gold pieces for his expenses, during the festivals of the Saturnalia
and Sigillaria."  Upon this, laying aside all hope of advancement, he resigned himself entirely
to an indolent life; living in great privacy, one while in his gardens, or a villa which he
had near the city; another while in Campania, where he passed his time in the lowest society;
by which means, besides his former character of a dull, heavy fellow, he acquired that of a
drunkard and gamester.

VI.  Notwithstanding this sort of life, much respect was shown him both in public and private.
The equestrian (300) order twice made choice of him to intercede on their behalf; once to obtain
from the consuls the favour of bearing on their shoulders the corpse of Augustus to Rome, and
a second time to congratulate him upon the death of Sejanus.  When he entered the theatre,
they used to rise, and put off their cloaks.  The senate likewise decreed, that he should be
added to the number of the Augustal college of priests, who were chosen by lot; and soon afterwards,
when his house was burnt down, that it should be rebuilt at the public charge; and that he
should have the privilege of giving his vote amongst the men of consular rank.  This decree
was, however, repealed; Tiberius insisting to have him excused on account of his imbecility,
and promising to make good his loss at his own expense.  But at his death, he named him in
his will, amongst his third heirs, for a third part of his estate; leaving him besides a legacy
of two millions of sesterces, and expressly recommending him to the armies, the senate and
people of Rome, amongst his other relations.

VII.  At last, Caius [473], his brother's son, upon his advancement to the empire, endeavouring
to gain the affections of the public by all the arts of popularity, Claudius also was admitted
to public offices, and held the consulship jointly with his nephew for two months.  As he was
entering the Forum for the first time with the fasces, an eagle which was flying that way;
alighted upon his right shoulder.  A second consulship was also allotted him, to commence at
the expiration of the fourth year. He sometimes presided at the public spectacles, as the representative
of Caius; being always, on those occasions, complimented with the acclamations of the people,
wishing him all happiness, sometimes under the title of the emperor's uncle, and sometimes
under that of Germanicus's brother.

