Antipas jumped as though a hound under the table had bitten him on the leg. He turned to the
procurator, who regarded him indifferently, and to the emir, who was toying with Mary’s agate-nailed
hand. He had given his word, however; the people had heard. About his ears the perspiration
started; from purple he had grown very gray.

Salomè still stood, balancing herself on one foot, the point of her tongue just visible, while
from the gallery beyond, in whose shadows he divined the instigating presence of Herodias,
came the grave music of an Hebraic hymn.

“So be it,” he groaned.

The order was given, and a tear trickled down through the paint and furrows of his cheek. On
the hall a silence had descended. The guests were waiting, and the throb of the harp accentuated
the suspense. Presently there was the clatter of men-at-arms, and a negro, naked to the waist,
appeared, an axe in one hand, the head of the prophet in the other.

He presented it deferentially to Antipas, who motioned it away, his face averted. Salomè smiled.
She took it, and then, while she resumed her veil, she put it down before the emir, who eyed
it with the air of one that has seen many another object such as that.

But in a moment the veil was adjusted, and with the trophy the girl disappeared.

The harp meanwhile had ceased to sob, the guests were departing; already the procurator had
gone. The emir looked about for Mary, but she also had departed; and, with the expectation,
perhaps, of finding her without, he too got up and left the hall.

Antipas was alone. Through the lattice at his side he could see the baaras in the basalt emitting
its firefly sparks of flame. From an adjacent corridor came the discreet click-clack of a sandal,
and in a moment the head of the prophet was placed on the table at which he lay. The tetrarch
leaned over and gazed into the unclosed eyes. They were haggard and dilated, and they seemed
to curse.

He put his hand to his face and tried to think—to forget rather, and not to remember; but his
ears were charged with rustlings that extended indefinitely and lost themselves in the future;
his mind peopled itself with phantoms of the past. Perhaps he dozed a little. When he looked
up again the head was no longer there, and he told himself that Herodias had thrown it to the
swine.

                               CHAPTER III.

                                   III.

In the distance the white and yellow limestone of the mountains rose. Near by was a laughter
of flowers, a tumult of green. Just beyond, in a border of sedge and rushes, a lake lay, a
mirror to the sky. In the background were the blue and white terraces of Magdala, and about
a speaker were clustered a handful of people, a group of laborers and of fishermen.

He was dressed as a rabbi, but he looked like a seer. In his face was the youth of the world,
in his eyes the infinite. As he spoke, his words thrilled and his presence allured. “Repent,”
he was saying; “the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” And as the resplendent prophecy continued,
you would have said that a bird in his heart had burst into song.

A little to one side, in an attitude of amused contempt, a few of the tetrarch’s courtiers
stood; they were dressed in the Roman fashion, and one, Pandera, a captain of the guard, wore
a cuirass that glittered as he laughed. He was young and very handsome. He had white teeth,
red lips, a fair skin, a dark beard, and, as he happened to be stationed in the provinces,
an acquired sneer. Dear old Rome, how vague it was! And as he jested with his comrades he thought
of its delights, and wished himself either back again in the haunts he loved, or else, if he
must be separated from them, then, instead of vegetating in a tiresome tetrarchy, he felt that
it would be pleasant to be far off somewhere, where the uncouth Britons were, a land which
it took a year of adventures to reach; on the banks of the Betis, whence the girls came that
charmed the lupanars; in Numidia, where the hunting was good; or in Thrace, where there was
blood in plenty—anywhere, in fact, save on the borders of the beautiful lake where he happened
to be.

It was but the restlessness of youth, perhaps, that disturbed him so, for in Galilee there
were oafs as awkward as any that Britannia could show; there was game in abundance; blood,
too, was not as infrequent as it might have been; and as for women, there at his side stood
one as appetizing as Rome, Spain even, had produced. He turned to her now, and plucked at his
dark beard and showed his white teeth; he had caught a phrase of the rabbi in which the latter
had mentioned the kingdoms of the earth, and the phrase amused him.

“I like that,” he said. “What does he know about the kingdoms of the earth? Mary, I wager what
you will that he has never been two leagues from where he stands. Let’s ask and see.”

But Mary did not seem to hear. She was engrossed in the rabbi, and Pandera had to tug at her
sleeve before she consented to return to a life in which he seemingly had a part.

“What do you say?” he asked.

Mary shook her head. She had the air of one whose mind is elsewhere. Into her face a vacancy
had come; she seemed incapable of reply; and as the guardsman scrutinized her it occurred to
him that she might be on the point of having an attack of that catalepsy to which he knew her
to be subject. But immediately she reassured him.

“Come, let us go.”

And, the guardsman at her side, the others in her train, she ascended the little hill on which
her castle was, and where the midday meal awaited.

It was a charming residence. Built quadrangularwise, the court held a fountain which was serviceable
to those that wished to bathe. The roof was a garden. The interior façade was of teak wood,
carved and colored; the frontal was of stone. Seen from the exterior it looked the fortress
of some umbrageous prince, but in the courtyard reigned the seduction of a woman in love. From
without it menaced, within it soothed.

Her title to it was a matter of doubt. According to Pandera, who at the mess-table at Tiberias
had boasted his possession of her confidence, it was a heritage from her father. Others declared
that it had been given her by her earliest lover, an old man who since had passed away. Yet,
after all, no one cared. She kept open house; the tetrarch held her in high esteem; she was
attached to the person of the tetrarch’s wife; only a little before, the emir of Tadmor had
made a circuitous journey to visit her; Vitellius, the governor of the province, had stopped
time and again beneath her roof; and—and here was the point—to see her was to acquire a new
conception of beauty. Of human flowers she was the most fair.

Yet now, during the meal that followed, Mary, the toast of the tetrarchy, she whose wit and
brilliance had been echoed even in Rome, wrapped herself in a mantle of silence. The guardsman
jested in vain. To the others she paid as much attention as the sun does to a torch; and when
at last Pandera, annoyed, perhaps, at her disregard of a quip of his, attempted to whisper
in her ear, she left the room.

The nausea of the hour may have affected her, for presently, as she threw herself on her great
couch, her thoughts forsook the present and went back into the past, her childhood returned,
and faces that she had loved reappeared and smiled. Her father, for instance, Theudas, who
had been satrap of Syria, and her mother, Eucharia, a descendant of former kings.

But of these her memories were slight—they had died when she was still very young—and in their
place came her sister, Martha, kind of heart and quick of temper, obdurate, indulgent, and
continually perplexed; Simon, Martha’s husband, a Libyan, born in Cyrene, called by many the
Leper because of a former whiteness of his skin, a whiteness which had long since vanished,
for he was brown as a date; Eleazer, her brother, younger than herself, a delicate boy with
blue pathetic eyes; and with them came the delight of Bethany, that lovely village on the oriental
slope of the Mount of Olives, where the rich of Jerusalem had their villas, and where her girlhood
had been passed.

From the lattice at which she used to sit she could see the wide white road begin its descent
to the Jordan, a stretch of almond trees and oleanders; and just beyond, in a woody hollow,
a little house in which Sephôrah lived—a woman who came from no one knew where, and to whom
Martha had forbidden her to speak.

She could see her still, a gaunt, gray creature, with projecting cheek-bones, a skin of brick,
and a low, insinuating voice. The fascination which she had exercised over her partook both
of wonder and of fear, for it was rumored that she was a sorceress, and as old as the world.
To Mary, who was then barely nubile, and inquisitive as only fanciful children are, she manifested
a great affection, enticing her to her dwelling with little cakes that were sweet to the tooth
and fabulous tales that stirred the heart: the story of Stratonice and Combabus, for instance,
which Mary did not in the least understand, but which seemed to her intensely sad.

“And then what?” she would ask when the tale was done; and the woman would tell her of Ninus
and Semiramis, of Sennachereb, of Sardanapalus, Belsarazzur, of Dagon, the fish-god of Philistia,
by whom Goliath swore and in whose temple Samson died, or of Sargon, who, placed by his mother
in an ark of rushes, was set adrift in the Euphrates, yet, happily discovered by a water-carrier,
afterwards became a leader of men.

“Why, that was Moses!” the child would exclaim.

“No, no,” the woman invariably answered, “it was Sargon.”

But that which pleasured Mary more highly even than these tales were the legends of Hither
Asia, the wonderlands of Babylon, and particularly the story of the creation, for always the
human mind has wished to read the book of God.

“Where did they say the world came from?” she would ask.

And Sephôrah, drawing a long breath, would answer: “Once all was darkness and water. In this
chaos lived strange animals, and men with two wings, and others with four wings and two faces.
Some had the thighs of goats, some had horns, and some had horses’ feet, or were formed behind
like a horse and in front like a man; there were bulls with human faces, and men with the heads
of dogs, and other animals of human shape with fins like fishes, and fishes like sirens, and
dragons, and creeping things, and serpents, and fierce creatures, the images of which are preserved
in the temple of Bel.

“Over all these ruled the great mother, Um Uruk. But Bel, whom your people call Baal, divided
the darkness and clove the woman asunder. Of one part he made the earth, and of the other the
sun, the moon, the planets. He drew off the water, apportioned it to the land, and prepared
and arranged the world. The creatures on it could not endure the light of day and became extinct.

“Now when Bel saw the land fruitful yet uninhabited, he cut off his head and made one of the
gods mingle the blood which flowed from it with earth and form therewith men and animals that
could endure the sun. Presently Chaldæa was plentifully populated, but the inhabitants lived
like animals, without order or rule. Then there appeared to them from the sea a monster of
the name of Yan. Its body was that of a fish, but under its head another head was attached,
and on its fins were feet, and its voice was that of a man. Its image is still preserved. It
came at morning, passed the day, and taught language and science, the harvesting of seeds and
of fruits, the rules for the boundaries of land, the mode of building cities and temples, arts
and writing and all that pertains to civilized life, and for four hundred and thirty-two thousand
years the world went very well.

“Then in a dream Bel revealed to Xisuthrus that there would be a great storm, and men would
be destroyed. He bade him bury in Sepharvaim, the city of the sun, all the ancient, mediæval,
and modern records, and build a ship and embark in it with his kindred and his nearest friends.
He was also to take food and drink into the ship, and pairs of all creatures winged and four-footed.

“Xisuthrus did as he was bidden, and from the ends of heaven the storm began to blow. Bin thundered;
Nebo, the Revealer, came forth; Nergal, the Destroyer, overthrew; and Adar, the Sublime, swept
in his brightness across the earth. The storm devoured the nations, it lapped the sky, turned
the land into an ocean, and destroyed everything that lived. Even the gods were afraid. They
sought refuge in the heaven of Anu, sovereign of the upper realms. As hounds draw in their
tails, they seated themselves on their thrones, and to them Mylitta, the great goddess, spake:
‘The world has turned from me, and ruin I have proclaimed.’ She wept, and the gods on their
thrones wept with her.

“On the seventh day Xisuthrus perceived that the storm had abated and that the sea had begun
to fall. He sent out a dove, it returned; next, a swallow, which also returned, but with mud
on its feet; and again, a raven, which saw the corpses in the water and ate them, and returned
no more. Then the boat was stayed and settled upon Mount Nasir. Xisuthrus went out and worshipped
the recovered earth. When his companions went in search of him he had disappeared, but his
voice called to them saying that for his piety he had been carried away; that he was dwelling
among the gods; and that they were to return to Sepharvaim and dig up the books and give them
to mankind. Which they did, and erected many cities and temples, and rebuilt Babylon and Mylitta’s
shrine.”

“It is simpler in Genesis,” Mary said, the first time she heard this marvellous tale. For to
her, as to Martha and Eleazer, the khazzan, the teacher of the synagogue, had read from the
great square letters in which the Pentateuch was written another account of the commingling
of Chaos and of Light.

At the mention of the sacred canon, Sephôrah would smile with that indulgence which wisdom
brings, and smooth her scanty plaits, and draw the back of her hand across her mouth.

“Burned on tiles in the land of the magi are the records of a million years. In the unpolluted
tombs of Osorapi the history of life and of time is written on the cerements of kings. Where
the bells ring at the neck of the camels of Iran is a stretch of columns on which are inscribed
the words of those that lived in Paradise. On a wall of the temple of Bel are the chronicles
of creation; in the palace of Assurbanipal, the narrative of the flood. It is from these lands
and monuments the Thorah comes; its verses are made of their memories; it gathered whatever
it found, and overlooked the essential, immortal life.”

And Sephôrah added in a whisper, “For we are descended from gods, and immortal as they.”

The khazzan had disclosed to Mary no such prospect as that. To him as to all orthodox expounders
of the Law man was essentially evanescent; he lived his little day and disappeared forever.
God alone was immortal, and an immortal being would be God. The contrary beliefs of the Egyptians
and the Aryans were to them abominations, and the spiritualistic doctrine inaugurated by Juda
Maccabæus and accepted by the Pharisees, an impiety. The Pentateuch had not a word on the subject.
Moses had expressly declared that secret things belong to the Lord, and only visible things
to man. The prophets had indeed foretold a terrestrial immortality, but that immortality was
the immortality of a nation; and the realization of their prophecy the entire people awaited.
Apart from that there was only Sheol, a sombre region of the under-earth, to which the dead
descended, and there remained without consciousness, abandoned by God.

“Immortal!” Mary, with great wondering eyes, would echo. “Immortal!”

“Yes; but to become so,” Sephôrah replied, “you must worship at another shrine.”

“Where is it?”

Sephôrah answered evasively. Mary would find it in time—when the spring came, perhaps; and
meanwhile she had a word or two to say of Baal to such effect even that Mary questioned the
khazzan.

“However great the god of the Gentiles has been imagined,” the khazzan announced, “he is bounded
by the earth and the sky. His feet may touch the one, his head the other, but of nature he
is a part, and, to the Eternal, nature is not even a garment, it is a substance He made, and
which He can remould at will. It is not in nature, it is in light, He is: in the burning bush
in which He revealed Himself; in the stake at which Isaac would have died; in the lightning
in which the Law was declared, the column of fire, the flame of the sacrifices, and the gleaming
throne in which Isaiah saw Him sit—it is there that He is, and His shadow is the sun.”

Of this Mary repeated the substance to her friend, and Sephôrah mused.

“No,” she said at last—“no, he is not in light, but in the desert where nature is absent, and
where the world has ceased to be. The threats of a land that never smiled are reflected in
his face. The sight of him is death. No, Baal is the sun-god. His eyes fecundate.”

And during the succeeding months Sephôrah entertained Mary with Assyrian annals and Egyptian
lore. She told her more of Baal, whose temple was in Babylon, and of Baaltis, who reigned at
Ascalon. She told her of the women who wept for Tammuz, and explained the reason of their tears.
She told her of the union of Ptah, the unbegotten begetter of the first beginning, and of Neith,
mother of the sun; of the holy incest of Isis and Osiris; and of Luz, called by the patriarchs
Bethel, the House of God, the foothold of a straight stairway which messengers ceaselessly
ascended and descended, and at whose summit the Elohim sat.

She told her of these things, of others as well; and now and then in the telling of them a
fat little man with beady eyes would wander in, the smell of garlic about him, and stare at
Mary’s lips. His name was Pappus; by Sephôrah he was treated with great respect, and Mary learned
that he was rich and knew that Sephôrah was poor.

When the Passover had come and gone, Sephôrah detected that Mary had ceased to be a child;
and of the gods and goddesses with whose adventures she was wont to entertain her, gradually
she confined herself to Mylitta; and in describing the wonderlands which she knew so well,
she spoke now only of Babylon, where the great tower was, and the gardens that hung in the air.

It was all very marvellous and beautiful, and Sephôrah described it in fitting terms. There
was the Temple of the Seven Spheres, where the priests offered incense to the Houses of the
Planets, to the whole host of heaven, and to Bel, Lord of the Sky. There was the Home of the
Height, a sheer flight of solid masonry extending vertiginously, and surmounted by turrets
of copper capped with gold. In its utmost pinnacle were a sanctuary and a dazzling couch. There
the priests said that sometimes Bel came and rested. For the truth of that statement, however,
Sephôrah declined to vouch. She had never seen him; but the hanging gardens she had seen, long
before they were demolished. She had walked in them, and she described their loveliness, and
related that they were erected to pleasure a Persian princess whose eyes had wearied of the
monotony of the Babylonian plain.

Once when Pappus was present—and latterly he had been often there—she passed from the gardens
to the grove where the temple of Mylitta stood. At the steps of the shrine, she declared, were
white-winged lions, and immense bulls with human heads. Within were dovecotes and cisterns,
the emblems of fecundity, and a block of stone which she did not describe. Without, among the
terebinths and evergreens, were little cabins and an avenue bordered by cypress trees, in which
men with pointed hats and long embroidered gowns passed slowly, for there the maidens of Babylon
sat, chapleted with cords, burning bran for perfume, awaiting the will of the first who should
toss a coin in their lap and in the name of Mylitta invite them to perform the sacred rite.

“That,” said Sephôrah, “is the worship Mylitta exacts.” As she spoke she drew herself up, her
height increased, an unnatural splendor filled her eyes. “I,” she continued, “am her priestess.
I sacrificed at Byblus, but you may sacrifice here. There is a dovecote, yonder is a cistern,
beyond are the cypress and the evergreens that she loves. Mary, do you wish to be immortal?
Do you see the way?”

Mary smiled vaguely, and with the serenity of one worshipping a divinity she suffered the fat
Jerusalemite to take her in his arms.

And now as she lay on her great couch these things returned to her, and subsequent episodes
as well. There had been the lamentable grief of Martha, the added pathos in her brother’s eyes.
The estate of her father had been divided, and the castle of Magdala had fallen to her share.
Meanwhile she had been at Jerusalem, and from there she had journeyed to Antioch, where she
had heard the beasts roar in the arena. She had looked on blood, on the honey-colored moon
that effaced the stars, and everywhere she had encountered love.

Since then her hours had been grooved in revolving circles of alternating delights, and delights
to which no shadow of regret had come. To her, youth had been a chalice of aromatic wine. She
had drained it and found no dregs. Day had been interwoven with splendors, and night with the
rays of the sun. Where she passed she conquered; when she smiled there were slaves ready-made.
There had been hot brawls where she trod, the gleam of white knives. Men had killed each other
because of her eyes, and women had wept themselves to death. For her a priest had gone mad,
and a betrothed had hid herself in the sea. In Hierapolis the galli had fancied her Ashtaroth;
and at Capri, where Tiberius lounged, a villa awaited her will.

Her life had indeed been full, yet that morning its nausea had mounted to her heart. At the
words of the rabbi the horizon had expanded, the dream of immortality returned. It had been
forgot long since and abandoned, but now, for the first time since her childhood, something
there was which admonished her that perhaps she still might stroll through lands where dreams
come true. The path was not wholly clear as yet, and as in her troubled mind she tried to disentangle
the past from the present the sun went down behind the castle, the crouching shadows elongated
and possessed the walls.

An echo came to her, Repent, and the prophecy continuing danced in her ears; yet still the
way was obscure. In the echo she divined merely that the past must be put from her like a garment
that is stained. The rest was vague. Then suddenly she was back again in Machærus, and she
heard the ringing words of John. Could this be the Messiah her nation awaited? was there a
kingdom coming, and immortality too?

Her thoughts entangled and grew confused. There was a murmur of harps in the distance, and
she wondered whence it could come. Some one was speaking; she tried to rouse herself and listen.
The room was filled with bats that changed to butterflies. The murmur of harps continued, and
through the wall before her issued a litter in which a woman lay.

A circle of slaves surrounded her. She was pale, and her eyes closed languorously. “I am Indolence,”
she said. “Sleep is not softer than my couch. My lightest wish is law to kings. I live on perfumes;
my days are as shadows on glass. Mary, come with me, and I will teach you to forget.”

She vanished, and where the litter had been stood a eunuch. “I am Envy,” he said, and his eyes
drooped sullenly. “I separate those that love; I dismantle altars and dismember nations. I
corrode and corrupt; I destroy, and I never rebuild. My joy is malice, and my creed false-witnessing.
Mary, come with me, and you will learn to hate.”

He disappeared, and where his slime had dripped stood a being with fingers intertwisted and
a back that bent. “I am Greed,” it said. “I sap the veins of youth; I drain the hearts of women;
I bring contention where peace should be. I make fathers destroy their sons, and daughters
betray their mother. I never forget, and I never release. I am the master. Mary, come with
me, and you shall own the world.”

The fetor of the presence went, and in its place came one whose footsteps thundered. “I am
Anger,” he declared. “I exterminate and rejoice. I batten on blood. In my heart is suspicion,
in my hand is flame. It is I that am war and disaster and regret. My breath consumes, and my
voice affrights. Mary, come with me, and you will learn to quell.”

He dissolved, and in the shadows stood one whose hands were ample, and whose wide mouth laughed.
“I am Gluttony,” he announced, and as he spoke his voice was thick. “I fatten and forsake.
I offer satrapies for one new dish. I invite and alienate, I welcome and repel. It is I that
bring disease and disorders. I am the harbinger of Death. Mary, come with me, and you shall
taste of Life.”

He also disappeared, and two heralds entered with trumpets on which they blew, and one exclaimed,
“Make way for Assurbanipal, ruler of land and of sea.” Then, with horsemen riding royally,
Sardanapalus advanced through the fissure in the wall. On his head a high and wonderful tiara
shone with zebras that had wings and horns. His hair was long, and his beard curled in overlapping
rings. His robe dazzled, and the close sleeves were fastened over his knuckles with bracelets
of precious stones. In one hand he held a sceptre, in the other a chart.

“I,” he cried—“I am Assurbanipal; the progeny of Assur and of Baaltis, son of the great king
Riduti, whom the lord of crowns, in days remote prophesying in his name, raised to the kingdom,
and in the womb of his mother created to rule. The man of war, the joy of Assur and of Istar,
the royal offspring, am I. When the gods seated me on the throne of the father my begetter,
Bin poured down his rain, Hea feasted the people. My enemies I destroyed, and their gods glorified
me before my camp. The god of their oracles, whose image no man had seen, I took, and the goddesses
whom the kings worshipped I dishonored.”

He paused and looked proudly about, then he continued:

“That which is in the storehouse of heaven is kindled, and to the city of cities my glory flies.
The queens above and below proclaim my glory. I am Glory, and I am Pride. Mary, come with me,
and you shall disdain the sky.”

But Mary gave no sign. The clattering horses vanished, and two men dressed in women’s clothes
appeared. They bowed to the ground and chanted:

“The holy goddess, our Lady Mylitta, whose sacrificants we are.”

Then came a form so luminous that Mary hid her face and listened merely.

