TABLE OF CONTENTS

  CHAPTER XIII

  1844                                                      PAGES

    Duc de Bordeaux--Hanoverian Orders--Domestic happiness--Death
    of the Duke of Coburg--Lord Melbourne on old age--Recall
    of Lord Ellenborough--Uncle and niece--Lord Ellenborough's
    honours--Prince de Joinville's brochure--The Emperor
    Nicholas--A great review--At the Opera--The Emperor's
    character--The Emperor and Belgium--Crisis in Parliament--The
    King of Saxony--Lord Ellenborough and India--England,
    France, and Russia--France and Tahiti--King Louis Philippe
    expected--Arrangements for the visit--Queen Louise's
    solicitude--Arrival of King Louis Philippe--A successful
    visit--The King's departure--Opening of the Royal
    Exchange--Gift to the Prince of Wales--Education in India 1-29

  CHAPTER XIV

  1845

    The Spanish marriages--Position of the Prince--Title of King
    Consort--Purchase of Osborne--Maynooth grant--Religious
    bigotry--Public executions--Birthday letter--Princess
    Charlotte--Vacant Deanery--Wine from Australia--King of
    Holland--Projected visit to Germany--Question of Lords
    Justices--Visit to the Château d'Eu--Spanish marriages--The
    Prince criticised--Governor-Generalship of Canada--Corn
    Laws--Cabinet dissensions--Interview with Sir Robert
    Peel--Lord John Russell suggested--Attitude of Lord
    Melbourne--The Queen's embarrassment--Attitude of Sir Robert
    Peel--Lord Stanley resigns--The Commandership-in-Chief--Duke
    of Wellington-- King Louis Philippe--Anxiety for the
    future--Insuperable difficulties--Lord Grey and Lord
    Palmerston--Lord John Russell fails--Chivalry of Sir Robert
    Peel--He resumes office--Cordial support--The Queen's
    estimate of Sir Robert Peel--Lord Stanley--The Prince's
    Memorandum--Comprehensive scheme--The unemployed--Lord
    Palmerston's justification--France and the Syrian War--Letter
    to King Louis Philippe--Ministry reinstated             30-70

  CHAPTER XV

  1846

    Sir Robert Peel's speech--Extension of Indian Empire--Bravery
    of English troops--Death of Sir Robert Sale--Memorandum by
    the Prince--Celebration of victory--Letter from King Louis
    Philippe--Irish Crimes Bill--Attack on Sir Robert Peel--His
    resignation--Intrigues--End of Oregon dispute--Sir Robert
    Peel's tribute to Cobden--New Government--Cobden and the
    Whigs--Parting with the Ministers--Whig jealousies--A
    weak Ministry--Anxieties--French Royal Family--Spanish
    marriages--Portugal--Prerogative of dissolution--Views of Lord
    Melbourne--The Prince and Sir Robert Peel--Proposed visit
    to Ireland--Government of Canada--Wellington statue--Lord
    Palmerston and Spain--Instructions to Mr Bulwer--Don
    Enrique--Sudden decision--Double engagement--The Queen's
    indignation--Letter to the Queen of the French--View of
    English Government--Letter to King Leopold--Baron Stockmar's
    opinion--Letter to Queen Louise--Lord Palmerston and
    the French--Princess of Prussia--England and the Three
    Powers--Interruption of entente cordiale--Spanish
    marriages--Peninsular medal--Duke of Wellington's
    view--England and Portugal--The Queen's decision on Peninsular
    medal--Cracow                                           71-114

  CHAPTER XVI

  1847

    England and Portugal--Peaceable policy advised--Spain and
    Portugal--Sir Hamilton Seymour--Septennial Act--Church
    preferments--Jenny Lind--Wellington statue--Prosperity in
    India--General election--Earldom of Strafford--Mission to the
    Vatican--Portugal--Crisis in the City--Lord-Lieutenancy of
    Ireland--Mr Cobden--Foreign policy--Queen of Spain--Queen
    of Portugal--Hampden controversy--Lord Palmerston's
    despatches--Civil war in Switzerland--Letter from King of
    Prussia--The Queen's reply--The Bishops and Dr Hampden 115-140

  CHAPTER XVII

  1848

    Death of Madame Adélaïde--Grief of Queen Louise--The
    Queen's sympathy--England and the Porte--Improvements
    at Claremont--Revolution in France--Flight of the Royal
    Family--Letter from King of Prussia--Anarchy in Paris--Queen
    Louise's anxiety--Revolution foreseen--England's
    hospitality--New French Government--British Consul's
    plan--Escape of the King and Queen--Graphic narrative--Plan
    successful--Arrival in England--Reception at Claremont--Letter
    of gratitude--Flight of Guizot--Royal fugitives--Orleanist
    blunders--Letter to Lord Melbourne--The Czar on the
    situation--State of Germany--Chartist demonstration--Prince
    Albert and the unemployed--Chartist fiasco--Alarming state of
    Ireland--Conduct of the Belgians--Events in France--Anxiety
    in Germany--Italy--Spain--The French Royal Family--Affairs
    in Lombardy--Sir Henry Bulwer--Lord Palmerston's
    justification--Instructions to Sir H. Seymour--Lord
    Palmerston's drafts--England and Italy--Lord Minto's
    mission--Duchesse de Nemours--Commissions in the
    Army--Northern Italy--Irish rebellion--Minor German states--An
    ambassador to France--The Queen's displeasure--Opening the
    Queen's letters--Lord Palmerston and Italy--Austria declines
    mediation--Austria and Italy--In the Highlands--The Queen
    and Lord Palmerston--Affairs in the Punjab--Hostility of
    the Sikhs--Greece--State of Germany--Letter of the Prince
    of Leiningen--Sir Harry Smith at the Cape--Governorship of
    Gibraltar--Mediation in Italy--Death of Lord Melbourne--The
    Orleans family--Letter from the Pope--The French
    President--Relations with France--England slighted     141-207

  CHAPTER XVIII

  1849

    Letter to the Pope--Letter from President of French
    Republic--Lord Palmerston and Naples--The army in India--State
    of the Continent--France and the President--Gaelic and
    Welsh--Lord Gough superseded--End of the Sikh War--Courage
    of Mrs G. Lawrence--Letter from King of Sardinia--Novara--The
    Queen fired at by Hamilton--Annexation of the Punjab--Drafts
    and despatches--Schleswig-Holstein Question--Proposed visit
    to Ireland--Irish title for the young Prince--Cork and
    Waterford--The Irish visit--Enthusiasm in Ireland--Brevet
    promotions--New Coal Exchange--Critical position of
    Germany--Death of Queen Adelaide                      208-230

  CHAPTER XIX

  1850

    Grand Duchess Stéphanie--The Draft to Greece--Lord
    Palmerston's explanation--Lord John Russell's plan--Suggested
    rearrangement--Status quo maintained--Baron Stockmar's
    Memorandum--State of France--The Prince's speech--Lord
    Palmerston and Spain--Lord Howden--The Koh-i-noor diamond--A
    change imminent--Lord John Russell's report--Sunday delivery
    of letters--Prince George of Cambridge--The Earldom
    of Tipperary--Mr Roebuck's motion--Lord Stanley's
    motion--Holstein and Germany--Lord Palmerston's
    explanation--The Protocol--Christening of Prince Arthur--Don
    Pacifico Debate--Sir Robert Peel's accident--Letter from King
    of Denmark--Death of Sir Robert Peel--The Queen assaulted
    by Pate--Death of Duke of Cambridge--Prince of Prussia--The
    Foreign Office--Denmark and Schleswig--Sir Charles Napier's
    resignation--Lord Palmerston--Lord Clarendon's opinion--Duke
    of Bedford's opinion--Lord John Russell's report--Press
    attacks on Lord Palmerston--Duties of Foreign Secretary--Death
    of King Louis Philippe--Visit to Scotland--Illness of Queen
    Louise--Attack on General Haynau--Note to Baron Koller--The
    Draft gone--Lord Palmerston rebuked--Holstein--A great
    grief--Mr Tennyson made Poet Laureate--Ritualists and
    Roman Catholics--Unrest in Europe--England and
    Germany--Constitutionalism in Germany--Austria and
    Prussia--Religious strife--England and Rome--Lady Peel--The
    Papal aggression--Ecclesiastical Titles Bill            231-282

  CHAPTER XX

  1851

    Life Peerages--Diplomatic arrangements--Peril of the
    Ministry--Negotiations with Sir J. Graham--Defeat of the
    Government--Ministerial crisis--The Premier's
    statement--Lord Lansdowne consulted--Lord Stanley sent
    for--Complications--Fiscal policy--Sir James Graham--Duke
    of Wellington--Difficulties--Lord Aberdeen consulted--Lord
    Stanley to be sent for--His letter--Lord Stanley's
    difficulties--Mr Disraeli--Question of dissolution--
    Explanations--Lord Stanley resigns--His reasons--The Papal
    Bill--Duke of Wellington--Appeal to Lord Lansdowne--Still
    without a Government--Lord Lansdowne's views--Further
    difficulties--Coalition impossible--Income Tax--Free Trade
    --Ecclesiastical Titles Bill--Confusion of Parties--New
    National Gallery--The great Exhibition--Imposing
    ceremony--The Prince's triumph--Enthusiasm in the City--Danish
    succession--The Orleans Princes--Regret at leaving
    Scotland--Extension of the Franchise--Louis Kossuth--Lord
    Palmerston's intentions--A dispute--Lord Palmerston
    defiant--He gives way--The Queen's anxiety--Lord Palmerston's
    conduct--The Queen's comment--Death of King of Hanover--The
    Suffrage--The Coup d'État--Louis Bonaparte--Excitement
    in France--Lord Palmerston and Lord Normanby--State of
    Paris--Lord Palmerston's approval--Birthday wishes--The
    crisis--Dismissal of Lord Palmerston--Inconsistency of
    Lord Palmerston--The Prince's Memorandum--Lord
    Clarendon--Discussion on new arrangements--Count Walewski
    informed--Lord Granville's appointment--The Queen's view of
    foreign affairs--Our policy reviewed--Difficulty of fixed
    principles--Prince Nicholas of Nassau--Te Deum at Paris
                                                      283-355

  CHAPTER XXI

  1852

    Denmark--Possible fusion of parties--Orleans family--Draft of
    the Speech--Women and politics--New Houses of Parliament--Lord
    Palmerston's discomfiture--M. Thiers--The Prince and the
    Army--Pressure of business--Defeat on Militia Bill--Interview
    with Lord John Russell--Resignation of the Ministry--The Queen
    sends for Lord Derby--Lord Derby and Lord Palmerston--New
    appointments--New Foreign Secretary--Interview with
    Lord Derby--Louis Napoleon--Audiences--Ladies of the
    Household--Lord Derby and the Church--Adherence to
    treaties--The Sovereign "People"--New Militia Bill--England
    and Austria--Letter from Mr Disraeli--"Necessary"
    measures--Question of dissolution--Lord Derby
    hopeful--Progress of democracy--England and Italy--Militia
    Bill carried--France and the Bourbons--Louis Napoleon's
    position--Excitement at Stockport--The Queen inherits
    a fortune--Death of Duke of Wellington--Military
    appointments--Nation in mourning--Funeral
    arrangements--Anecdote of Napoleon III.--England and the
    Emperor--National defences--Financial arrangements--Lord
    Dalhousie's tribute--Funeral ceremony--Confusion of
    parties--Lord Palmerston's position--Mr Disraeli and Mr
    Gladstone--Recognition of the Empire--Budget speech--Letter to
    the French Emperor--Secret protocol--Difficult situation--The
    Queen's unwillingness to decide--Injunctions to
    Lord Derby--Defeat of the Government--Lord Derby's
    resignation--Lord Aberdeen sent for--His interview with
    the Queen--Lord Aberdeen in office--Lord John Russell's
    hesitation--Letter from Mr. Disraeli--The Queen's
    anxiety--Christmas presents--Lord Derby's intentions--New
    Government--Mr Gladstone at the Exchequer--The Emperor's
    annoyance--Appointments--Protracted crisis--The Cabinet--Lord
    Derby takes leave--Letter from Lady Derby--Change of
    seals--Peace restored--A strong Cabinet               356-430

  CHAPTER XXII

  1853

    The Emperor's annoyance--Headmastership of Eton--Marriage of
    Emperor of the French--Mademoiselle Eugénie de Montijo--Baron
    Beyens on the situation--Emperor of Russia and the Turkish
    Empire--Lord John Russell and leadership of House of
    Commons--Count Buol and refugees--Kossuth and Mazzini
    proclamations--Want of arms for the Militia--Russian fleet at
    Constantinople--French irritation--Russia's demands--Russia
    and England--Liberation of the Madiai--Letter from Emperor
    of Russia--Birth of Prince Leopold--Mr Gladstone's budget
    speech--Congratulations from the Prince--India Bill--Emperor
    of Austria--Church of England in the Colonies--Oriental
    Question--Death of Lady Dalhousie--Lord Palmerston and Lord
    Aberdeen--Russia, Austria, and Turkey--England's policy--The
    Queen's views on the Eastern despatches--Proposed terms of
    settlement--Lord John Russell's retirement--Letter from the
    Emperor of Russia--Lord Stratford's desire for war--Letter to
    the Emperor of Russia--France and the Eastern Question--Letter
    from the Emperor of Russia--Reform Bill--Lord Palmerston's
    position--Lord Lansdowne's influence--Resignation of Lord
    Palmerston--Lord Stratford's despatch--Draft to Vienna--Return
    of Lord Palmerston to office                          431-472

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  H.M. QUEEN VICTORIA, 1843. From the picture by
  F. Winterhalter at Windsor Castle      Frontispiece

  H.M. MARIE AMÉLIE, QUEEN OF THE FRENCH, 1828.
  From the miniature by Millet at Windsor Castle
                                          Facing p. 104

  "THE COUSINS." H.M. Queen Victoria and the
  Duchess of Nemours, who was a Princess of
  Saxe-Coburg and first cousin to the Queen and
  the Prince Consort. From the picture by F.
  Winterhalter at Buckingham Palace             "    168

  BARON STOCKMAR. From the portrait by John Partridge
  at Buckingham Palace                          "    240

  Field-Marshal THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON, K.G.
  Believed to be by Count d'Orsay. From a
  miniature at Apsley House                     "    392

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

TO CHAPTER XIII

The new year (1844) opened with signs of improved trade, and a feeling of confidence, partly
due to the friendly entente with France. In Ireland, soon after the collapse of the Clontarf
meeting, O'Connell and some of his associates were indicted for seditious conspiracy, and convicted.
The conviction was subsequently quashed on technical grounds, but O'Connell's political influence
was at an end. In Parliament, owing chiefly to the exertions of Lord Ashley (afterwards Earl
of Shaftesbury), an important Bill was passed restricting factory labour, and limiting its
hours. The Bank Charter Act, separating the issue and banking departments, as well as regulating
the note issue of the Bank of England in proportion to its stock of gold, also became law.
Meanwhile the dissensions in the Conservative party were increasing, and the Ministry were
defeated on a motion made by their own supporters to extend the preferential treatment of colonial
produce. With great difficulty the vote was rescinded and a crisis averted; but the Young England
section of the Tory party were becoming more and more an embarrassment to the Premier. Towards
the end of the year the new Royal Exchange was opened amid much ceremony by the Queen.

The services rendered by Sir Charles Napier in India were the subject of votes of thanks in
both Houses, but shortly afterwards Lord Ellenborough, the Governor-General, was recalled by
the Directors of the East India Company: their action was no doubt due to his overbearing methods
and love of display, but it was disapproved by the Ministry, and Lord Ellenborough was accorded
an Earldom.

During the year there was a recrudescence of the friction between this country and France,
due partly to questions as to the right of search of foreign ships, partly to a brochure issued
by the Prince de Joinville, a son of Louis Philippe, partly to the assumption of French sovereignty
over Tahiti and the seizure of the English consul there by the French authorities. Reparation
however was made, and the ill-feeling subsided sufficiently to enable the King of the French
to visit Queen Victoria,--the first friendly visit ever paid by a French king to the Sovereign
of England. Louis Philippe was cordially received in this country.

Another historic royal visit also took place in 1844, that of the Emperor Nicholas, who no
doubt was so much impressed with his friendly reception, both by the Court and by Aberdeen,
the Foreign Secretary, that nine years later he thought he could calculate on the support of
England under Aberdeen (then Premier) in a scheme for the partition of Turkey.

No events of special interest took place in other parts of Europe; the condition of affairs
in the Peninsula improved, though the announcement of the unfortunate marriage of the Queen
Mother with the Duke of Rianzares was not of hopeful augury for the young Queen Isabella's
future; as a matter of fact, the marriage had taken place some time previously.

CHAPTER XIII

1844

Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians.

WINDSOR CASTLE, 9th January 1844.

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I had the pleasure of receiving your kind letter of the 4th, which is written
from Ardenne, where I grieve to see you are again gone without my beloved Louise.

Charlotte is the admiration of every one, and I wish much I could have seen the three dear
children en représentation.

Our fat Vic or Pussette learns a verse of Lamartine by heart, which ends with "le tableau se
déroule à mes pieds"; to show how well she had understood this difficult line which Mdlle.
Charier had explained to her, I must tell you the following bon mot. When she was riding on
her pony, and looking at the cows and sheep, she turned to Mdlle. Charier and said: "Voilà
le tableau qui se déroule à mes pieds." Is not this extraordinary for a little child of three
years old? It is more like what a person of twenty would say. You have no notion what a knowing,
and I am sorry to say sly, little rogue she is, and so obstinate. She and le petit Frère accompany
us to dear old Claremont to-day; Alice remains here under Lady Lyttelton's care. How sorry
I am that you should have hurt your leg, and in such a provoking way; Albert says he remembers
well your playing often with a pen-knife when you talked, and I remember it also, but it is
really dangerous.

I am happy that the news from Paris are good; the really good understanding between our two
Governments provokes the Carlists and Anarchists. Bordeaux[1] is not yet gone; I saw in a letter
that it was debated in his presence whether he was on any favourable occasion de se présenter
en France!Do you think that possible? Then again the papers say that there are fortifications
being made on the coast of Normandy for fear of an invasion; is this so? These are many questions,
but I hope you will kindly answer them, as they interest me. With Albert's love. Believe me,
ever, your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 1: The Duc de Bordeaux, only son of the Duc de
    Berri, had by the death of Charles X. and the renunciation
    of all claims to the French Throne on the part of the Duc
    d'Angoulême, become the representative of the elder branch of
    the Bourbons. He had intended his visit to England to have a
    private character only.]

[Pageheading: THE SPANISH MARRIAGE]

Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen.

CLAREMONT, 10th January 1844.

The Queen understands that there is a negotiation with Sweden and Denmark pending about the
cessation of their tribute to Morocco, likewise that Prince Metternich has sent a despatch
condemning as unfair the understanding come to between us and France about the Spanish marriage;[2]
that there is a notion of exchanging Hong Kong for a more healthy colony.

The Queen, taking a deep interest in all these matters, and feeling it her duty to do so, begs
Lord Aberdeen to keep her always well informed of what is on the tapis in his Department.

    [Footnote 2: See ante, vol. i. p. 487.]

Queen Victoria to the Earl of Aberdeen.

CLAREMONT, 13th January 1844.

The Queen has received Lord Aberdeen's letter of the 10th, and returns him the papers which
he sent her, with her best thanks. She does not remember to have seen them before.

The Queen takes this opportunity to beg Lord Aberdeen to cause the despatches to be sent a
little sooner from the Foreign Office, as drafts in particular have often come to the Queen
a week or a fortnight after they had actually been sent across the sea.

With respect to the Hanoverian Orders, Lord Aberdeen has not quite understood what the Queen
meant. It was Sir C. Thornton and others to whom the Queen had refused permission to accept
the favour, on a former occasion, by which the King of Hanover was much affronted. The Queen
would not like to have herself additionally fettered by any new regulation, but Lord Aberdeen
will certainly concur with the Queen that it would not be expedient to give to the King of
Hanover a power which the Queen herself does not possess, viz. that of granting orders as favours,
or for personal services; as the number of the different classes of the Guelphic Order bestowed
on Englishmen is innumerable, it would actually invest the King with such a power, which, considering
how much such things are sought after, might be extremely inconvenient.

The Queen will not give a final decision upon this case until she returns to Windsor, where
she has papers explanatory of the reasons which caused her to decline the King of Hanover's
application in 1838.

[Pageheading: A CARRIAGE ACCIDENT]

Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians.

CLAREMONT, 16th January 1844.

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--Many thanks for your kind letter of the 11th. Louise can give you the details
of the little upset I and Lady Douro had, and which I did not think worth while to mention.[3]
It was the strangest thing possible to happen, and the most unlikely, for we were going quite
quietly, not at all in a narrow lane, with very quiet ponies and my usual postillion; the fact
was that the boy looked the wrong way, and therefore did not perceive the ditch which he so
cleverly got us into.

We leave dear Claremont, as usual, with the greatest regret; we are so peaceable here; Windsor
is beautiful and comfortable, but it is a palace, and God knows how willingly I would always
live with my beloved Albert and our children in the quiet and retirement of private life, and
not be the constant object of observation, and of newspaper articles. The children (Pussette
and Bertie) have been most remarkably well, and so have we, in spite of the very bad weather
we had most days. I am truly and really grieved that good excellent Nemours is again not to
get his dotation.[4] Really we constitutional countries are too shabby.

Now, dearest Uncle, I must bid you adieu, begging you to believe me, ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 3: On the 5th of January the Queen's phaeton was
    overturned at Horton, near Dachet, while driving to the meet
    of Prince Albert's Harriers.]

    [Footnote 4: On the occasion of the marriage of the Duc and
    Duchesse de Nemours (1840), the proposal made by the Soult
    Government for a Parliamentary grant of 500,000 francs had
    been rejected.]

[Pageheading: FRANCE AND ENGLAND]

Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians.

WINDSOR CASTLE, 30th January 1844.

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I must begin by thanking you for your kind letter of the 26th, and by wishing
you joy that the fête went off so well. I am glad Leo will appear at the next ball; he is nearly
nine years old, and it is good to accustom children of his rank early to these things.

Guizot's speech is exceedingly admired, with the exception of his having said more than he
was justified to do about the right of search.[5] Our speech has been very difficult to frame;
we should like to have mentioned our visits to France and Belgium, but it has been found impossible
to do so; France is mentioned, and it is the first time since 1834!

To-morrow we go up to Town "pour ce bore," as the good King always said to me; whenever there
were tiresome people to present he always said: "Je vous demande pardon de ce bore."

I have had a tiresome though not at all violent cold which I was alarmed might spoil the sonorousness
of my voice for the speech on Thursday, but it promises well now.

I own I always look with horror to the beginning of a Parliamentary campaign.

With Albert's love. Ever your devoted Niece,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 5: He insisted that French trade must be kept under
    the exclusive surveillance of the French flag.]

[Pageheading: DEATH OF THE DUKE OF COBURG]

Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians.

WINDSOR CASTLE, 6th February 1844.

MY DEARLY BELOVED UNCLE,--You must now be the father to us poor bereaved, heartbroken children.[6]
To describe to you all that we have suffered, all that we do suffer, would be difficult; God
has heavily afflicted us; we feel crushed, overwhelmed, bowed down by the loss of one who was
so deservedly loved, I may say adored, by his children and family; I loved him and looked on
him as my own father; his like we shall not see again; that youth, that amiability, and kindness
in his own house which was the centre and rendezvous for the whole family, will never be seen
again, and my poor Angel's fondest thought of beholding that dearly beloved Vaterhaus--where
his thoughts continually were--again is for ever gone and his poor heart bleeds to feel this
is for ever gone. Our promised visit, our dearest Papa's, and our fondest wish, all is put
an end to. The violence of our grief may be over, but the desolate feeling which succeeds it
is worse, and tears are a relief. I have never known real grief till now, and it has made a
lasting impression on me. A father is such a near relation, you are a piece of him in fact,--and
all (as my poor deeply afflicted Angel says) the earliest pleasures of your life were given
you by a dear father; that can never be replaced though time may soften the pang. And indeed
one loves to cling to one's grief; I can understand Louise's feeling in her overwhelming sorrows.

Let me now join my humble entreaties to Albert's, relative to the request about dearest Louise,
which he has made. It is a sacrifice I ask, but if you knew the sacrifice I make in letting
and urging Albert to go, I am sure, if you can you will grant it. I have never been separated
from him even for one night, and the thought of such a separation is quite dreadful; still,
I feel I could bear it,--I have made up my mind to it, as the very thought of going has been
a comfort to my poor Angel, and will be of such use at Coburg. Still, if I were to remain quite
alone I do not think I could bear it quietly. Therefore pray do send me my dearly beloved Louise;
she would be such a comfort to me; if you could come too--or afterwards (as you promised us
a longer visit), that would be still more delightful. I may be indiscreet, but you must think
of what the separation from my all and all, even only for a fortnight, will be to me!

We feel some years older since these days of mourning. Mamma is calm, but poor Aunt Julia[7]
is indeed much to be pitied. Ever, dearest Uncle, your devoted and unhappy Niece and Child,

VICTORIA R.

    [Footnote 6: The Duke of Saxe-Coburg Gotha died on 29th
    January.]

    [Footnote 7: The Grand Duchess Constantine of Russia,
    sister of the Duchess of Kent and of the deceased Duke of
    Saxe-Coburg.]

[Pageheading: BEREAVEMENT]

Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians.

WINDSOR CASTLE, 13th February 1844.

MY DEAREST UNCLE,--I received your dear, kind but sad letter of the 8th on Sunday, and thank
you much for it. God knows, poor dear Uncle, you have suffered enough in your life, but you
should think, dearest Uncle, of that blessed assurance of eternity where we shall all meet
again never to part; you should think (as we constantly do now) that those whom we have lost
are far happier than we are, and love us still, and in a far more perfect way than we can do
in this world! When the first moments and days of overwhelming grief are over these reflections
are the greatest balm, the greatest consolation to the bleeding heart.

I hope you will kindly let me have a few lines of hope by the Tuesday's messenger. Ever your
truly devoted Niece and Child,

VICTORIA R.

P.S.--O'Connell's being pronounced guilty is a great triumph.[8]

    [Footnote 8: He had been indicted with Charles Gavan Duffy and
    others for seditious conspiracy.]

Viscount Melbourne to Queen Victoria.

SOUTH STREET, 3rd April 1844. Lord Melbourne believes that your Majesty is quite right in saying
that Lord Melbourne has still some health left, if he will but take care of it. Lord Melbourne
told Dr Holland, without mentioning your Majesty's name, that this had been said to him by
a friend, and Dr Holland immediately said that it was very just and true, and very well expressed,
and quite what he should have said himself. At the same time, the change from strength to weakness
and the evident progress of decadence is a very hard and disagreeable trial. Lord Melbourne
has been reading Cicero on old age, a very pretty treatise, but he does not find much consolation
after it; the principal practical resources and alleviations which he recommends are agriculture
and gardening, to both of which, but more particularly to the latter, Lord Melbourne has already
had recourse. It is certainly, as your Majesty says, wrong to be impatient and to repine at
everything, but still it is difficult not to be so. Lady Uxbridge's death[9] is a shocking
event, a dreadful loss to him and to all. Lord Melbourne always liked her. Lord Melbourne is
going down to Brocket Hall to-morrow, and will try to get Uxbridge and the girls to come over
and dine.

Lord Melbourne has felt very much for the grief which your Majesty must feel at a separation,
even short and temporary, from the Prince, and it is extremely amiable to feel comforted by
the recollection of the extreme pleasure which his visit will give to his and your Majesty's
relations. It is, of course, impossible that your Majesty should in travelling divest yourself
of your character and dignity.

Lord Melbourne has just driven round the Regent's Park, where there are many almond trees in
bloom, and looking beautiful.

    [Footnote 9: Henrietta Maria, daughter of Sir Charles Bagot,
    G.C.B.]

[Pageheading: RECALL OF LORD ELLENBOROUGH]

Sir Robert Peel to Queen Victoria.

WHITEHALL, 23rd April 1844.

Buckingham Palace, 23rd April 1844.

The Queen has heard with the greatest regret from Sir R. Peel that the Court of Directors,
after all, mean to recall Lord Ellenborough. She cannot but consider this very unwise at this
critical moment, and a very ungrateful return for the eminent services Lord Ellenborough has
rendered to the Company in India. They ought not to forget so soon in what state Lord Ellenborough
found affairs in 1842. The Queen would not be sorry if these gentlemen knew that this is her
opinion.

The King of the Belgians to Queen Victoria.

Laeken, 3rd May 1844.

MY DEAREST VICTORIA,--Whenever you wish to make me truly happy, you will have the power of
doing so by repeating expressions as kind and affectionate as those contained in your dear
little letter of the 30th. I have ever had the care and affection of a real father for you,
and it has perhaps even been freer from many drawbacks which occasionally will exist betwixt
parents and children, be they ever so well and affectionately together. With me, even from
the moment in January 1820, when I was called by a messenger to Sidmouth, my care for you has
been unremitting, and never has there been a cloud between us.... A thing which often strikes
me, in a very satisfactory manner, is that we never had any bitter words, a thing which happens
even with people who are very lovingly together; and the little row which we had in 1838 you
remember well, and do not now think that I was wrong.[11] De pareilles relations sont rares;
may they ever continue!

I cannot leave this more serious topic without adding that though you were always warm-hearted
and right-minded, it must strike yourself how matured every kind and good feeling is in your
generous heart. The heart, and not the head, is the safest guide in positions like yours, and
this not only for this earthly and very short life, but for that which we must hope for hereafter.
When a life draws nearer its close, how many earthly concerns are there that appear still in
the same light? and how clearly the mind is struck that nothing has been and is still of real
value, than the nobler and better feelings of the heart; the only good we can hope to keep
as a precious store for the future. What do we keep of youth, beauty, richness, power, and
even the greatest extent of earthly possessions? NOTHING!

Sir Robert Peel, with his humble duty to your Majesty, and believing that he is acting in accordance
with your Majesty's own opinion, begs leave to submit to your Majesty that it may be advisable
that he should by the present mail inform Lord Ellenborough that it is your Majesty's intention
to confer on him, at a very early period, as a mark of your Majesty's approval of Lord Ellenborough's
conduct and services in India, the rank of an Earl and the Grand Cross of the Bath.

Lord Ellenborough may be at liberty (should your Majesty approve) to notify this publicly in
India--and thus make it known that the general line of policy recently pursued has had the
full sanction of your Majesty, and will not be departed from.

These were the honours conferred upon Lord Auckland.

If they were conferred on the instant, it might rather seem a rebuke to the East India Company
than a deliberate approval of the conduct of Lord Ellenborough, but these honours might shortly
follow the conclusion of the affair respecting the selection of Lord Ellenborough's successor,
and any discussion that may arise in Parliament.

[Pageheading: THE PRINCE DE JOINVILLE'S BROCHURE]

Queen Victoria to the King of the Belgians.

CLAREMONT, 24th May 1844.

