There was nothing more said between Isa and her mother on the subject, and for two days the
matter remained as it then stood. Madame Heine had been deeply grieved at hearing those last
words which her daughter had spoken.  To her also that state of quiescence which Isa had so
long affected seemed to be the proper state at which a maiden's heart should stand till after
her marriage vows had been pronounced.  She had watched her Isa, and had approved of everything,--of
everything till this last avowal had been made.  But now, though she could not approve, she
expressed no disapproval in words.  She pressed her daughter's hand and sighed, and then the
two said no more upon the matter.  In this way, for two days, there was silence in the apartments
in the Ludwigs Strasse; for even when the father returned from his work, the whole circle felt
that their old family mirth was for the present necessarily laid aside.

On the morning of the third day, about noon, Madame Heine returned home from the market with
Isa, and as they reached the landing, Agnes met them with a packet.  "Fritz brought it from
the bank," said Agnes.  Now Fritz was the boy who ran messages and swept out the office, and
Madame Heine put out her hand for the parcel, thinking, not unnaturally, that it was for her.
But Agnes would not give it to her mother, "It is for you, Isa," she said.  Then Isa, looking
at the address, recognised the handwriting of her uncle. "Mamma," she said, "I will come to
you directly;" and then she passed quickly away into her own room.

The parcel was soon opened, and contained a note from her uncle, and a stiff, large document,
looking as though it had come from the hands of a lawyer.  Isa glanced at the document, and
read some few of the words on the outer fold, but they did not carry home to her mind any clear
perception of their meaning.  She was flurried at the moment, and the words, perhaps, were
not very plain.  Then she took up her note, and that was plain enough.  It was very short,
and ran as follows:-

"My dear Niece,

You told me on Monday that I was stern, and harsh, and unjust. Perhaps I was.  If so, I hope
the enclosed will make amends, and that you will not think me such an old fool as I think myself.

"Your affectionate uncle, "HATTO HEINE.

"I have told nobody yet, and the enclosed will require my brother's signature; but I suppose
he will not object."

* * *

"But he does not know it, mamma," said Isa.  "Who is to tell him? Oh, mamma, you must tell him."

"Nay, my dear; but it must be your own present to him."

"I could not give it him.  It is Uncle Hatto's present Mamma, when I left him I thought that
his eye was kind to me."

"His heart, at any rate, has been very kind."  And then again they looked over the document,
and talked of the wedding which must now be near at hand.  But still they had not as yet decided
how Herbert should be informed.

At last Isa resolved that she herself would write to him.  She did write, and this was her letter:-

"Dear Herbert,

"Mamma and I wish to see you, and beg that you will come up to us this evening.  We have tidings
for you which I hope you will receive with joy.  I may as well tell you at once, as I do not
wish to flurry you.  Uncle Hatto has sent to us a document which admits you as a partner into
the bank.  If; therefore, you wish to go on with our engagement, I suppose there is nothing
now to cause any very great delay.

"ISA."

The letter was very simple, and Isa, when she had written it, subsided into all her customary
quiescence.  Indeed, when Herbert came to the Ludwigs Strasse, not in the evening as he was
bidden to do, but instantly, leaving his own dinner uneaten, and coming upon the Heines in
the midst of their dinner, she was more than usually tranquil.  But his love was, as she had
told him, boisterous.  He could not contain himself, and embraced them all, and then scolded
Isa because she was so calm.

"Why should I not be calm," said she, "now that I know you are happy?"

The house in the Schrannen Platz still goes by the name of Heine Brothers, but the mercantile
world in Bavaria, and in some cities out of Bavaria, is well aware that the real pith and marrow
of the business is derived from the energy of the young English partner.