After the king's landing at Holderness in 1471 the king-maker, declining a contest, occupied
the town for the Lancastrians, and Edward passing on to London soon after turned and defeated
the earl at Barnet. After Tewkesbury Edward paid the city another visit, and in return for
its disloyalty seized its liberties and franchises, and only restored them for a fine of 500
marks. Royal visits still continued. Richard III came in 1483 to see the plays at the Feast
of Corpus Christi; in 1485 Henry VII stayed at the mayor's house after his victory at Bosworth
Field; and in 1487 kept St. George's Day at the Monastery, when the Prior at the service cursed,
by "bell, book, and candle," all who should question the king's right to the throne. The importance
of the Gilds is shown by the king and queen being made a brother and sister of the Trinity
Gild; and the part that pageantry played in the lives of all men is seen in the many occasions
on which kings and princes came hither to be entertained, not only with the plays "acted by
the Grey Friars" but those in which the "hard-handed men" of, for instance, the Gild of the
Sheremen and Tailors, "toil'd their unbreathed memories" in setting forth such subjects as
the Birth of Christ and the Murder of the Innocents. Matting

Two pieces of matting of distinct types were preserved in the collection. They probably were
saved by Dr. Palmer as samples of the types in the cave.

One of the pieces (139544) is sewed, or threaded, rush matting (pl. 16, d). The lengths of rush
(Juncus acutus var. phaerocarpus), which form the warp are pierced at intervals of about 10 cm.
by the sewing thread which is a continuous length of cord, probably of agave. This sewing element,
which serves as the weft, consists of 2-ply Z-twist cord with a medium-to-hard
twist. Each single ply is Z-twisted in medium degree. Total size of
this well-preserved fragment is about 50 cm. by 21 cm. The one selvage
which has been preserved would indicate that the width of the mat
at least was set when the worker began the sewing process.

The yearly revenue had been certified in the valuation at £731 19s. 5d. Deducting a Fee-Ferme
rent to the Crown, reserved by Roger de Montalt, and other annual payments, the clear remainder
was £499 7s. 4d. Bishop Rowland Lee, writing to "my singular good Lord Cromwell," implies that
he had a promise from him to spare the church. "My good Lord," he says, "help me and the City
both in this and that the church may stand, whereby I may keep my name, and the City have commodity
and ease to their desire, which shall follow if by your goodness it might be brought to a collegiate
church, as Lichfield, and so that fair City shall have a perpetual comfort of the same, as
knoweth the Holy Trinity, who preserve your Lordship in honour to your heart's comfort."

But his entreaties, and those of the mayor and corporation, were all in vain, the church and
monastic buildings were dismantled and destroyed piecemeal, and like so many other magnificent
structures became a mere quarry for mean buildings and the mending of roads.

The site having been granted by Henry VIII to two gentlemen named Combes and Stansfield, passed
soon into the hands of John Hales, the founder of the Free School, and in Elizabeth's reign
was purchased by the Corporation.

The changes in religious opinion of the successive sovereigns were felt here by many poor victims.
Seven persons were burnt in 1519 for having in their possession the Lord's Prayer, the Ten
Commandments, and the Creed in English, and for refusing to obey the Pope or his agents, opinions
and acts that would have been counted meritorious twenty years later. In 1555 Queen Mary burnt
three Protestants in the old quarry in Little Park--Laurence Saunders, a well-known preacher,
Robert Glover, M.A., and Cornelius Bongey.

