I recall one striking instance. Lieutenant Gardner, already mentioned, had received six or
eight hundred dollars in Confederate currency as the price of a gold watch. But like the prodigal
in Scripture he was now in a far country, and had wasted his substance in what he called "righteous"
living. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in that corner of the lower
room, and he began to be in want. And he would fain have filled his belly with corn-cob-meal
bread, or spoiled black beans, or the little potatoes which the swine didn't eat. And no man
gave him enough. And he determined to go to hospital. He gave out that he was desperately sick.
I at this time had "quarters" on the floor above. Word was brought to me that my friend was
mortally ill, and would thank me to come down and take his last message to his relatives. Alarmed,
I instantly went down. I found him with two or three splitting a small log of wood!

"Gardner, I hear you are a little 'under the weather.'"

"Dying, Colonel, dying!"

"What appears to be your disease?"

"Flag-o'-truce-on-the-brain!"

"Ah, you've got the exchange fever?"

"Yes; bad."

"Pulse run high?"

"Three hundred a minute."

"Anything I can do for you?"

"Yes, Colonel, beseech that fool doctor to send me to hospital. Tell him I'm on my last legs.
Tell him I only want to die there. Appeal to him in behalf of my poor wife and babies." (Gardner,
as I well knew, was a bachelor, and had no children--to speak of.)

"Well, Lieutenant, I'll do anything I properly can for you. Is there anything else?"

"Yes, Colonel; lend me your overcoat to wear to hospital; I'll send it back at once."

"But, Lieutenant, you can't get into the hospital. Your cheeks are too rosy; you're the picture
of health."

"I'm glad you mentioned that, Colonel. I'll fix that. You'll see."

Next morning he watched at the window, and when he saw the doctor coming, he swallowed a large
pill of plug tobacco. The effect was more serious than he expected. In a few minutes he became
sick in earnest, and was frightened. A deathlike pallor supervened. When the doctor reached
him, there was a genuine fit of vomiting. The story runs that Captain Tiemann made a pathetic
appeal in behalf of the imaginary twin babies, that the doctor diagnosed it as a clear case
of puerperal (which he pronounced "puerp[=e]rial") fever complicated with symptoms of cholera
infantum, and ordered him to hospital at once! I loaned the patient my overcoat, which he sent
back directly. His recovery seemed miraculous. In a week or two he returned from his delightful
outing. This was in the latter part of November.

Previously, for some weeks, Captain Howe and three or four other strong and determined officers
managed to get into the cellar of a one-story building contiguous to ours and thence to excavate
a tunnel out beyond the line on which the sentinels were perpetually pacing to and fro. I was
too feeble to join in the enterprise, but hoped to improve the opportunity to escape when the
work was done. Unfortunately the arching top of the tunnel was too near the surface of the
ground, and the thin crust gave way under the weight of a sentry. He yelled "Murder!" Two or
three of our diggers came scurrying back. The guard next to him shouted, "You Yanks! you G--d
d--d Yanks!" and fired into the deep hole. No more tunneling at Danville.[8]

More successful and more amusing were several attempts by individual officers one at a time.
The water parties of four to eight went under a strong guard two or three times a day down
a long hill to the river Dan. On the slope alongside the path were a number of large brick
ovens,[9] in which, we were told, the Confederates used to bake those big squares of corn bread.
The iron doors when we passed were usually open. On the way back from the river, one officer
on some pretense or other would lag behind the rearmost soldier of the guard, who would turn
to hurry him up. The next officer, as soon as the soldier's back was turned, would dodge into
an open oven, and the careless guards now engaged in a loud and passionate controversy about
slavery or secession would not miss him! Then, as night came on, the negroes in the vicinity,
who, like all the rest of the colored people, were friendly to us, would supply the escaped
officer with food and clothing, and pilot him on his way rejoicing toward the Union lines.
One by one, six officers escaped in that way, and many of us began to look forward to the time
when our turn would come to try the baking virtues of those ovens!

But it was important that the escaped officer should not be missed. How should we deceive the
nondescript that we called "the roll-call sergeant"? Morning and evening he carefully counted
every one. How make the census tally with the former enumerations? Yankee ingenuity was here
put to a severe test; but Lieutenant Titus, before mentioned, solved the problem. With his
table-knife saw he cut a hole about two feet square in the floor near the northeast corner
of the upper room. A nicely fitting trapdoor completed the arrangement. Through this hole,
helped by a rude rope ladder of strips of rags, and hoisted to the shoulders of a tall man
by strong arms from below, a nimble officer could quickly ascend. Now those in the lower room
were counted first. When they broke ranks, and the human automaton faced to the west and moved
slowly towards the stairs with three or four "Yanks" clustering at his side in earnest conversation,
the requisite number of spry young prisoners would "shin up" the ladder, emerge, "deploy,"
and be counted over again in the upper room! The thing worked to a charm. Not one of the six
was missed.

Unfortunately, however, two or three of them were recaptured and again incarcerated in Libby.
The Richmond authorities thereupon telegraphed to Colonel Smith, asking how those officers
escaped from Danville. Smith, surprised, ordered a recount. The trapdoor did its duty. "All
present!" Finally he answered, "No prisoner has escaped from Danville." The rebel commissary
of prisons at Richmond, Gen. J. H. Winder, then telegraphed the names of the recaptured officers.
Smith looks on his books: there are those names, sure enough! The mystery must be solved. He
now sends his adjutant to count us about noon. We asked him what it meant. He told us it was
reported that several officers had escaped. We replied, "That's too good to be true." He counted
very slowly and with extraordinary precision. He kept his eye on the staircase as he approached
it. Six officers flew up the ladder as we huddled around him. It was almost impossible to suppress
laughter at the close, when he declared, "I'll take my oath no prisoner has escaped from this
prison." But there were those names of the missing, and there was our ill-disguised mirth.
Smith resorted to heroic measures. He has arrived in London but that very night, after an absence
of more than four years. He has arrived from the sea-side on foot; see, his shoes are worn into
holes. He has not yet found a shelter for the night. He has been directed towards that quarter,
thronged with adventurers, native and foreign, for a shelter, safe, if squalid. It is somewhere
near that court at the mouth of which he stands. He looks round: the policeman is baffled; the
coast clear. The professor of mathematics promised
to bring me a Geometry. About two weeks later, November 24th, he brought me a copy of Davies's
Legendre.

On the 9th of December, while our senior officer, General Hayes, was sick in hospital, the
next in rank, Gen. A. N. Duffié, of the First Cavalry Division of Sheridan's army, fresh from
the French service, with which he had campaigned in Algeria, where he was wounded nine times,
suddenly conceived a plot to break out and escape. Two companies of infantry had arrived in
the forenoon and stacked their arms in plain sight on the level ground about twenty rods distant.
Duffié's plan was to rush through the large open door when a water party returning with filled
buckets should be entering, seize those muskets, overpower the guard, immediately liberate
the thousand or fifteen hundred Union prisoners in the three other Danville prisons, and push
off to our lines in East Tennessee. He had Sheridan's élan, not Grant's cool-headed strategy.
With proper preparation and organization, such as Hayes would have insisted upon, it might
have been a success. He called us, field officers about twenty, together and laid the matter
before us. No vote was taken, but I think a majority were opposed to the whole scheme. He was
disposed to consider himself, though a prisoner, as still vested with authority to command
all of lower rank, and he expected them to obey him without question. In this view many acquiesced,
but others dissented. By his request, though doubtful of his right to command and in feeble
health, I drew up a pledge for those to sign who were willing to engage in the projected rising
and would promise to obey. It was found that at least one hundred and fifty could be counted
on. Colonel Ralston, previously mentioned, was the chief opponent of the outbreak, but he recognized
Duffié's authority and insisted upon our submission to it. Similar appeared to be the attitude
of the following colonels:

Gilbert H. Prey, 104th N. Y.

James Carle, 191st Pa.

T. B. Kaufman, 209th Pa.

W. Ross Hartshorne, 190th Pa.

Of the lieutenant-colonels, most of the following doubted the success, but would do their best
to promote it, if commanded:

Charles H. Tay, 10th N. J.

Theodore Gregg, 45th Pa.

G. A. Moffett, 94th N. Y.

J. S. Warner, 121st Pa.

George Hamett, 147th N. Y.

Charles H. Hooper, 24th Mass.

Homer B. Sprague, 13th Conn.

So the following majors: A. W. Wakefield, 49th Pa.; G. S. Horton, 58th Mass.; E. F. Cooke,
2d N. Y. Cav.; John G. Wright, 51st N. Y.; J. V. Peale, 4th Pa. Cav.; John W. Byron, 88th N.
Y.; David Sadler, 2d Pa. Heavy Art.; John Byrne, 155th N. Y.; E. O. Shepard, 32d Mass.; J.
A. Sonders, 8th Ohio Cav.; Charles P. Mattocks, 17th Maine; E. S. Moore, Paymaster; Wm. H.
Fry, 16th Pa. Cav.; Milton Wendler, 191st Pa.; James E. Deakins, 8th Tenn. Cav.; Geo. Haven
Putnam, Adjt. and later Bvt.-Major, 176th N. Y.

All of the foregoing then present and not on the sick list should have been most thoroughly
instructed as to their duties, and should have been enabled to communicate all needed information
to the forty-six captains and one hundred and thirty-three lieutenants, who, though many were
sadly reduced in vitality, were accounted fit for active service. I had repeatedly noticed
in battle the perplexity of company, regimental, or even brigade commanders, from lack of information
as to the necessary movements in unforeseen emergencies. It is not enough to say, as one corps
commander (Hancock?) is said to have done during the Battle of the Wilderness in May, 1864,
to a newly arrived colonel with his regiment, who inquired, "Where shall I go in?" "Oh, anywhere;
there's lovely fighting all along the line!"

Here the step most vital to success, the sine qua non, was to keep that outside door open for
the outrush of two hundred men. To this end, eight of our strongest and most determined, under
a dashing leader like Colonel Hartshorne or Lieutenant-Colonel Gregg, should have been sent
out as a water party. Instead, Captain Cook, who was brave enough, but then physically weak,
hardly able to carry a pail of water, was the leader of an average small squad, "the spirit
indeed willing, but the flesh weak."

