What is the Bible? It might have sufficed, accepted as a book of revelation, for all the purposes
of moral guidance, spiritual consolation, and systematized authority, if it had been a collection
of precepts, a dry code of morals, an arsenal of judgments, and a treasury of promises. We
are accustomed to think of the Pilgrims as training their intellectual faculties in the knottiest
problems of human responsibility and destiny, toughening their mental fibre in wrestling with
dogmas and the decrees of Providence, forgetting what else they drew out of the Bible: what
else it was to them in a degree it has been to few peoples many age. For the Bible is the unequaled
record of thought and emotion, the reservoir of poetry, traditions, stories, parables, exaltations,
consolations, great imaginative adventure, for which the spirit of man is always longing. It
might have been, in warning examples and commands, all-sufficient to enable men to make a decent
pilgrimage on earth and reach a better country; but it would have been a very different book
to mankind if it had been only a volume of statutes, and if it lacked its wonderful literary
quality. It might have enabled men to reach a better country, but not, while on earth, to rise
into and live in that better country, or to live in a region above the sordidness of actual
life. For, apart from its religious intention and sacred character, the book is so written
that it has supremely in its history, poetry, prophecies, promises, stories, that clear literary
quality that supplies, as certainly no other single book does, the want in the human mind which
is higher than the want of facts or knowledge.

The Bible is the best illustration of the literature of power, for it always concerns itself
with life, it touches it at all points. And this is the test of any piece of literature--its
universal appeal to human nature. When I consider the narrow limitations of the Pilgrim households,
the absence of luxury, the presence of danger and hardship, the harsh laws--only less severe
than the contemporary laws of England and Virginia--the weary drudgery, the few pleasures,
the curb upon the expression of emotion and of tenderness, the ascetic repression of worldly
thought, the absence of poetry in the routine occupations and conditions, I can feel what the
Bible must have been to them. It was an open door into a world where emotion is expressed,
where imagination can range, where love and longing find a language, where imagery is given
to every noble and suppressed passion of the soul, where every aspiration finds wings. It was
history, or, as Thucydides said, philosophy teaching by example; it was the romance of real
life; it was entertainment unfailing; the wonder-book of childhood, the volume of sweet sentiment
to the shy maiden, the sword to the soldier, the inciter of the youth to heroic enduring of
hardness, it was the refuge of the aged in failing activity. Perhaps we can nowhere find a
better illustration of the true relation of literature to life than in this example.

