Accordingly he sailed for Canada. During her first cruise on that station the ALBEMARLE captured
a fishing schooner which contained in her cargo nearly all the property that her master possessed,
and the poor fellow had a large family at home, anxiously expecting him. Nelson employed him
as a pilot in Boston Bay, then restored him the schooner and cargo, and gave him a certificate
to secure him against being captured by any other vessel. The man came off afterwards to the
ALBEMARLE, at the hazard of his life, with a present of sheep, poultry, and fresh provisions.
A most valuable supply it proved, for the scurvy was raging on board: this was in the middle
of August, and the ship's company had not had a fresh meal since the beginning of April. The
certificate was preserved at Boston in memory of an act of unusual generosity; and now that
the fame of Nelson has given interest to everything connected with his name, it is regarded
as a relic. The ALBEMARLE had a narrow escape upon this cruise. Four French sail of the line
and a frigate, which had come out of Boston harbour, gave chase to her; and Nelson, perceiving
that they beat him in sailing, boldly ran among the numerous shoals of St. George's Bank, confiding
in his own skill in pilotage. Captain Salter, in the STA. MARGARETTA, had escaped the French
fleet by a similar manoeuvre not long before. The frigate alone continued warily to pursue
him; but as soon as he perceived that this enemy was unsupported, he shortened sail and hove
to; upon which the Frenchman thought it advisable to give over the pursuit, and sail in quest
of his consorts.

At Quebec Nelson became acquainted with Alexander Davison, by whose interference he was prevented
from making what would have been called an imprudent marriage. The ALBEMARLE was about to leave
the station, her captain had taken leave of his friends, and was gone down the river to the
place of anchorage; when the next morning, as Davison was walking on the beach, to his surprise
he saw Nelson coming back in his boat. Upon inquiring the cause of this reappearance, Nelson
took his arm to walk towards the town, and told him that he found it utterly impossible to
leave Quebec without again seeing the woman whose society had contributed so much to his happiness
there, and offering her his hand. "If you do," said his friend, "your ruin must inevitably
follow." "Then let it follow," cried Nelson, "for I am resolved to do it" "And I," replied
Davison, "am resolved you shall not." Nelson, however, upon this occasion, was less resolute
than his friend, and suffered himself to be led back to the boat.

The ALBEMARLE was under orders to convoy a fleet of transports to New York. "A very pretty
job" said her captain, "at this late season of the year" (October was far advanced), "for our
sails are at this moment frozen to the yards." On his arrival at Sandy Hook, he waited on the
commander-in-chief, Admiral Digby, who told him he was come on a fine station for making prize-money.
"Yes, sir," Nelson made answer, "but the West Indies is the station for honour." Lord Hood,
with a detachment of Rodney's victorious fleet, was at that time at Sandy Hook: he had been
intimate with Captain Suckling; and Nelson, who was desirous of nothing but honour, requested
him to ask for the ALBEMARLE, that he might go to that station where it was most likely to
be obtained. Admiral Digby reluctantly parted with him. His professional merit was already
well known; and Lord Hood, on introducing him to Prince William Henry, as the Duke of Clarence
was then called, told the prince, if he wished to ask any questions respecting naval tactics,
Captain Nelson could give him as much information as any officer in the fleet. The Duke--who,
to his own honour, became from that time the firm friend of Nelson--describes him as appearing
the merest boy of a captain he had ever seen, dressed in a full laced uniform, an old-fashioned
waistcoat with long flaps, and his lank unpowdered hair tied in a stiff Hessian tail of extraordinary
length; making altogether so remarkable a figure, that, says the duke, "I had never seen anything
like it before, nor could I imagine who he was, nor what he came about. But his address and
conversation were irresistibly pleasing; and when he spoke on professional subjects, it was
with an enthusiasm that showed he was no common being."

It was expected that the French would attempt some of the passages between the Bahamas; and
Lord Hood, thinking of this, said to Nelson, "I suppose, sir, from the length of time you were
cruising among the Bahama Keys, you must be a good pilot there." He replied, with that constant
readiness to render justice to every man which was so conspicuous in all his conduct through
life, that he was well acquainted with them himself, but that in that respect his second lieutenant
was far his superior. The French got into Puerto Cabello, on the coast of Venezuela. Nelson
was cruising between that port and La Guapra, under French colours, for the purpose of obtaining
information; when a king's launch, belonging to the Spaniards, passed near, and being hailed
in French, came alongside without suspicion, and answered all questions that were asked concerning
the number and force of the enemy's ships. The crew, however, were not a little surprised when
they were taken on board and found themselves prisoners. One of the party went by the name
of the Count de Deux-Ponts. He was, however, a prince of the German empire, and brother to
the heir of the Electorate of Bavaria: his companions were French officers of distinction,
and men of science, who had been collecting specimens in the various branches of natural history.
Nelson, having entertained them with the best his table could afford, told them they were at
liberty to depart with their boat, and all that it contained: he only required them to promise
that they would consider themselves as prisoners if the commander-in-chief should refuse to
acquiesce in their being thus liberated: a circumstance which was not likely to happen. Tidings
soon arrived that the preliminaries of peace had been signed; and the ALBEMARLE returned to
England and was paid off. Nelson's first business, after he got to London, even before he went
to see his relations, was to attempt to get the wages due to his men for the various ships
in which they had served during the war. "The disgust of seamen to the navy," he said, "was
all owing to the infernal plan of turning them over from ship to ship; so that men could not
be attached to their officers, nor the officers care the least about the men." Yet he himself
was so beloved by his men that his whole ship's company offered, if he could get a ship, to
enter for her immediately. He was now, for the first time, presented at court. After going
through this ceremony, he dined with his friend Davison at Lincoln's Inn. As soon as he entered
the chambers, he threw off what he called his iron-bound coat; and, putting himself at ease
in a dressing gown, passed the remainder of the day in talking over all that had befallen them
since they parted on the shore of the River St. Lawrence.

CHAPTER II

1784 - 1793

Nelson goes to France--Reappointed to the BOREAS at the Leeward Islands in the BOREAS--His
firm conduct concerning the American Interlopers and the Contractors--Marries and returns to
England--Is on the point of quitting the Service in Disgust--Manner of Life while unemployed--Appointed
to the AGAMEMNON on the breaking out of the War of the French Revolution.

"I HAVE closed the war," said Nelson in one of his letters, "without a fortune; but there is
not a speck in my character. True honour, I hope, predominates in my mind far above riches."
He did not apply for a ship, because he was not wealthy enough to live on board in the manner
which was then become customary. Finding it, therefore, prudent to economise on his half-pay
during the peace, he went to France, in company with Captain Macnamara of the navy, and took
lodgings at St. Omer's. The death of his favourite sister, Anne, who died in consequence of
going out of the ball-room at Bath when heated with dancing, affected his father so much that
it had nearly occasioned him to return in a few weeks. Time, however, and reason and religion,
overcame this grief in the old man; and Nelson continued at St. Omer's long enough to fall
in love with the daughter of an English clergyman. This second attachment appears to have been
less ardent than the first, for upon weighing the evils of a straitened income to a married
man, he thought it better to leave France, assigning to his friends something in his accounts
as the cause. This prevented him from accepting an invitation from the Count of Deux-Ponts
to visit him at Paris, couched in the handsomest terms of acknowledgment for the treatment
which he had received on board the ALBEMARLE.

The self-constraint which Nelson exerted in subduing this attachment made him naturally desire
to be at sea; and when, upon visiting Lord Howe at the Admiralty, he was asked if he wished
to be employed, he made answer that he did. Accordingly in March, he was appointed to the BOREAS,
twenty-eight guns, going to the Leeward Islands as a cruiser on the peace establishment. Lady
Hughes and her family went out with him to Admiral Sir Richard Hughes, who commanded on that
station. His ship was full of young midshipmen, of whom there were not less than thirty on
board; and happy were they whose lot it was to be placed with such a captain. If he perceived
that a boy was afraid at first going aloft, he would say to him in a friendly manner, "Well,
sir, I am going a race to the mast-head, and beg that I may meet you there." The poor little
fellow instantly began to climb, and got up how he could,--Nelson never noticed in what manner,
but when they met in the top, spoke cheerfully to him, and would say how much any person was
to be pitied who fancied that getting up was either dangerous or difficult. Every day he went
into the school-room to see that they were pursuing their nautical studies; and at noon he
was always the first on deck with his quadrant. Whenever he paid a visit of ceremony, some
of these youths accompanied him; and when he went to dine with the governor at Barbadoes, he
took one of them in his hand, and presented him, saying, "Your Excellency must excuse me for
bringing one of my midshipmen. I make it a rule to introduce them to all the good company I
can, as they have few to look up to, besides myself, during the time they are at sea."

When Nelson arrived in the West Indies, he found himself senior captain, and consequently second
in command on that station. Satisfactory as this was, it soon involved him in a dispute with
the admiral, which a man less zealous for the service might have avoided. He found the LATONA
in English Harbour, Antigua, with a broad pendant hoisted; and upon inquiring the reason, was
presented with a written order from Sir R. Hughes, requiring and directing him to obey the
orders of Resident Commissioner Moutray during the time he might have occasion to remain there;
the said resident commissioner being in consequence, authorised to hoist a broad pendant on
board any of his Majesty's ships in that port that he might think proper. Nelson was never
at a loss how to act in any emergency.

"I know of no superior officers," said he, "besides the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty,
and my seniors on the post list." Concluding, therefore, that it was not consistent with the
service for a resident commissioner, who held only a civil situation, to hoist a broad pendant,
the moment that he had anchored he sent an order to the captain of the LATONA to strike it,
and return it to the dock-yard. He went on shore the same day, dined with the commissioner,
to show him that he was actuated by no other motive than a sense of duty, and gave him the
first intelligence that his pendant had been struck. Sir Richard sent an account of this to
the Admiralty; but the case could admit of no doubt, and Captain Nelson's conduct was approved.

He displayed the same promptitude on another occasion. While the BOREAS, after the hurricane
months were over, was riding at anchor in Nevis Roads, a French frigate passed to leeward,
close along shore. Nelson had obtained information that this ship was sent from Martinico,
with two general officers and some engineers on board, to make a survey of our sugar islands.
This purpose he was determined to prevent them from executing, and therefore he gave orders
to follow them. The next day he came up with them at anchor in the roads of St. Eustatia, and
anchored at about two cables' length on the frigate's quarter. Being afterwards invited by
the Dutch governor to meet the French officers at dinner, he seized that occasion of assuring
the French captain that, understanding it was his intention to honour the British possessions
with a visit, he had taken the earliest opportunity in his power to accompany him, in his Majesty's
ship the BOREAS, in order that such attention might be paid to the officers of his Most Christian
Majesty as every Englishman in the islands would be proud to show. The French, with equal courtesy,
protested against giving him this trouble; especially, they said, as they intended merely to
cruise round the islands without landing on any. But Nelson, with the utmost politeness, insisted
upon paying them this compliment, followed them close in spite of all their attempts to elude
his vigilance, and never lost sight of them; till, finding it impossible either to deceive
or escape him, they gave up their treacherous purpose in despair, and beat up for Martinico.

A business of more serious import soon engaged his attention. The Americans were at this time
trading with our islands, taking advantage of the register of their ships, which had been issued
while they were British subjects. Nelson knew that, by the Navigation Act, no foreigners, directly
or indirectly, are permitted to carry on any trade with these possessions. He knew, also, that
the Americans had made themselves foreigners with regard to England; they had disregarded the
ties of blood and language when they acquired the independence which they had been led on to
claim, unhappily for themselves before they were fit for it; and he was resolved that they
should derive no profit from those ties now. Foreigners they had made themselves, and as foreigners
they were to be treated. "If once," said he, "they are admitted to any kind of intercourse
with our islands, the views of the loyalists, in settling at Nova Scotia, are entirely done
away; and when we are again embroiled in a French war, the Americans will first become the
carriers of these colonies, and then have possession of them. Here they come, sell their cargoes
for ready money, go to Martinico, buy molasses, and so round and round. The loyalist cannot
do this, and consequently must sell a little dearer. The residents here are Americans by connection
and by interest, and are inimical to Great Britain. They are as great rebels as ever were in
America, had they the power to show it." In November, when the squadron, having arrived at
Barbadoes, was to separate, with no other orders than those for examining anchorages, and the
usual inquiries concerning wood and water, Nelson asked his friend Collingwood, then captain
of the MEDIATOR, whose opinions he knew upon the subject, to accompany him to the commander-in-chief,
whom he then respectfully asked, whether they were not to attend to the commerce of the country,
and see that the Navigation Act was respected--that appearing to him to be the intent of keeping
men-of-war upon this station in time of peace? Sir Richard Hughes replied, he had no particular
orders, neither had the Admiralty sent him any Acts of Parliament. But Nelson made answer,
that the Navigation Act was included in the statutes of the Admiralty, with which every captain
was furnished, and that Act was directed to admirals, captains, &c., to see it carried into
execution. Sir Richard said he had never seen the book. Upon this Nelson produced the statutes,
read the words of the Act, and apparently convinced the commander-in-chief, that men-of-war,
as he said, "were sent abroad for some other purpose than to be made a show of." Accordingly
orders were given to enforce the Navigation Act.

Major-General Sir Thomas Shirley was at this time governor of the Leeward Islands; and when
Nelson waited on him, to inform him how he intended to act, and upon what grounds, he replied,
that "old generals were not in the habit of taking advice from young gentlemen." "Sir," said
the young officer, with that confidence in himself which never carried him too far, and always
was equal to the occasion, "I am as old as the prime minister of England, and I think myself
as capable of commanding one of his Majesty's ships as that minister is of governing the state."
He was resolved to do his duty, whatever might be the opinion or conduct of others; and when
he arrived upon his station at St. Kitt's, he sent away all the Americans, not choosing to
seize them before they had been well apprised that the Act would be carried into effect, lest
it might seem as if a trap had been laid for them. The Americans, though they prudently decamped
from St. Kitt's, were emboldened by the support they met with, and resolved to resist his orders,
alleging that king's ships had no legal power to seize them without having deputations from
the customs. The planters were to a man against him; the governors and the presidents of the
different islands, with only a single exception, gave him no support; and the admiral, afraid
to act on either side, yet wishing to oblige the planters, sent him a note, advising him to
be guided by the wishes of the president of the council. There was no danger in disregarding
this, as it came unofficially, and in the form of advice. But scarcely a month after he had
shown Sir Richard Hughes the law, and, as he supposed, satisfied him concerning it, he received
an order from him, stating that he had now obtained good advice upon the point, and the Americans
were not to be hindered from coming, and having free egress and regress, if the governor chose
to permit them. An order to the same purport had been sent round to the different governors
and presidents; and General Shirley and others informed him, in an authoritative manner, that
they chose to admit American ships, as the commander-in-chief had left the decision to them.
These persons, in his own words, he soon "trimmed up, and silenced;" but it was a more delicate
business to deal with the admiral: "I must either," said he, "disobey my orders, or disobey
Acts of Parliament. I determined upon the former, trusting to the uprightness of my intentions,
and believing that my country would not let me be ruined for protecting her commerce." With
this determination he wrote to Sir Richard; appealed again to the plain, literal, unequivocal
sense of the Navigation Act; and in respectful language told him, he felt it his duty to decline
obeying these orders till he had an opportunity of seeing and conversing with him. Sir Richard's
first feeling was that of anger, and he was about to supersede Nelson; but having mentioned
the affair to his captain, that officer told him he believed all the squadron thought the orders
illegal, and therefore did not know how far they were bound to obey them. It was impossible,
therefore, to bring Nelson to a court-martial, composed of men who agreed with him in opinion
upon the point in dispute; and luckily, though the admiral wanted vigour of mind to decide
upon what was right, he was not obstinate in wrong, and had even generosity enough in his nature
to thank Nelson afterwards for having shown him his error.

Collingwood in the MEDIATOR, and his brother, Wilfred Collingwood, in the RATTLER, actively
co-operated with Nelson. The custom-houses were informed that after a certain day all foreign
vessels found in the ports would be seized; and many were, in consequence, seized, and condemned
in the Admiralty Court. When the BOREAS arrived at Nevis, she found four American vessels deeply
laden, and what are called the island colours flying--white, with a red cross. They were ordered
to hoist their proper flag, and depart within 48 hours; but they refused to obey, denying that
they were Americans. Some of their crews were then examined in Nelson's cabin, where the Judge
of Admiralty happened to be present. The case was plain; they confessed that they were Americans,
and that the ships, hull and cargo, were wholly American property; upon which he seized them.
This raised a storm: the planters, the custom-house, and the governor, were all against him.
Subscriptions were opened, and presently filled, for the purpose of carrying on the cause in
behalf of the American captains; and the admiral, whose flag was at that time in the roads,
stood neutral. But the Americans and their abettors were not content with defensive law. The
marines, whom he had sent to secure the ships, had prevented some of the masters from going
ashore; and those persons, by whose depositions it appeared that the vessels and cargoes were
American property, declared that they had given their testimony under bodily fear, for that
a man with a drawn sword in his hand had stood over them the whole time. A rascally lawyer,
whom the party employed, suggested this story; and as the sentry at the cabin door was a man
with a drawn sword, the Americans made no scruple of swearing to this ridiculous falsehood,
and commencing prosecutions against him accordingly. They laid their damages at the enormous
amount of L40,000; and Nelson was obliged to keep close on board his own ship, lest he should
be arrested for a sum for which it would have been impossible to find bail. The marshal frequently
came on board to arrest him, but was always prevented by the address of the first lieutenant,
Mr. Wallis. Had he been taken, such was the temper of the people that it was certain he would
have been cast for the whole sum. One of his officers, one day, in speaking of the restraint
which he was thus compelled to suffer, happened to use the word PITY! "Pity!" exclaimed Nelson:
"Pity! did you say? I shall live, sir, to be envied! and to that point I shall always direct
my course." Eight weeks remained in this state of duresse. During that time the trial respecting
the detained ships came on in the court of Admiralty. He went on shore under a protection for
the day from the judge; but, notwithstanding this, the marshal was called upon to take that
opportunity of arresting him, and the merchants promised to indemnify him for so doing. The
judge, however, did his duty, and threatened to send the marshal to prison if he attempted
to violate the protection of the court. Mr. Herbert, the president of Nevis, behaved with singular
generosity upon this occasion. Though no man was a greater sufferer by the measures which Nelson
had pursued, he offered in court to become his bail for L10,000 if he chose to suffer the arrest.
The lawyer whom he had chosen proved to be an able as well as an honest man; and notwithstanding
the opinions and pleadings of most of the counsel of the different islands, who maintained
that ships of war were not justified in seizing American vessels without a deputation from
the customs, the law was so explicit, the case so clear, and Nelson pleaded his own cause so
well, that the four ships were condemned. During the progress of this business he sent a memorial
home to the king, in consequence of which orders were issued that he should be defended at
the expense of the crown. And upon the representation which he made at the same time to the
Secretary of State, and the suggestions with which he accompanied it, the Register Act was
framed. The sanction of Government, and the approbation of his conduct which it implied, were
highly gratifying to him; but he was offended, and not without just cause, that the Treasury
should have transmitted thanks to the commander-in-chief for his activity and zeal in protecting
the commerce of Great Britain. "Had they known all," said he, "I do not think they would have
bestowed thanks in that quarter, and neglected me. I feel much hurt that, after the loss of
health and risk of fortune, another should be thanked for what I did against his orders. I
either deserved to be sent out of the service, or at least to have had some little notice taken
of what I had done. They have thought it worthy of notice, and yet have neglected me. If this
is the reward for a faithful discharge of my duty, I shall be careful, and never stand forward
again. But I have done my duty, and have nothing to accuse myself of."

The anxiety which he had suffered from the harassing uncertainties of law is apparent from
these expressions. He had, however, something to console him, for he was at this time wooing
the niece of his friend the president, then in her eighteenth year, the widow of Dr. Nisbet,
a physician. She had one child, a son, by name Josiah, who was three years old. One day Mr.
Herbert, who had hastened half-dressed to receive Nelson, exclaimed, on returning to his dressing-room,
"Good God! if I did not find that great little man, of whom everybody is so afraid, playing
in the next room, under the dining-table, with Mrs. Nisbet's child!" A few days afterwards
Mrs. Nisbet herself was first introduced to him, and thanked him for the partiality which he
had shown to her little boy. Her manners were mild and winning; and the captain, whose heart
was easily susceptible of attachment, found no such imperious necessity for subduing his inclinations
as had twice before withheld him from marrying. They were married on March 11, 1787: Prince
William Henry, who had come out to the West Indies the preceding winter, being present, by
his own desire, to give away the bride. Mr. Herbert, her uncle, was at this time so much displeased
with his only daughter, that he had resolved to disinherit her, and leave his whole fortune,
which was very great, to his niece. But Nelson, whose nature was too noble to let him profit
by an act of injustice, interfered, and succeeded in reconciling the president to his child.

"Yesterday," said one of his naval friends the day after the wedding, "the navy lost one of
its greatest ornaments by Nelson's marriage. It is a national loss that such an officer should
marry: had it not been for this, Nelson would have become the greatest man in the service."
The man was rightly estimated; but he who delivered this opinion did not understand the effect
of domestic love and duty upon a mind of the true heroic stamp.

"We are often separate," said Nelson, in a letter to Mrs. Nisbet a few months before their
marriage; "but our affections are not by any means on that account diminished. Our country
has the first demand for our services; and private convenience or happiness must ever give
way to the public good. Duty is the great business of a sea officer: all private considerations
must give way to it, however painful." "Have you not often heard," says he in another letter,
"that salt water and absence always wash away love? Now I am such a heretic as not to believe
that article, for, behold, every morning I have had six pails of salt water poured upon my
head, and instead of finding what seamen say to be true, it goes on so contrary to the prescription,
that you may, perhaps, see me before the fixed time." More frequently his correspondence breathed
a deeper strain. "To write letters to you," says he, "is the next greatest pleasure I feel
to receiving them from you. What I experience when I read such as I am sure are the pure sentiments
of your heart, my poor pen cannot express; nor, indeed, would I give much for any pen or head
which could express feelings of that kind. Absent from you, I feel no pleasure: it is you who
are everything to me. Without you, I care not for this world; for I have found, lately, nothing
in it but vexation and trouble. These are my present sentiments. God Almighty grant they may
never change! Nor do I think they will. Indeed there is, as far as human knowledge can judge,
a moral certainty that they cannot; for it must be real affection that brings us together,
not interest or compulsion." Such were the feelings, and such the sense of duty, with which
Nelson became a husband.

During his stay upon this station he had ample opportunity of observing the scandalous practices
of the contractors, prize-agents, and other persons in the West Indies connected with the naval
service. When he was first left with the command, and bills were brought him to sign for money
which was owing for goods purchased for the navy, he required the original voucher, that he
might examine whether those goods had been really purchased at the market price; but to produce
vouchers would not have been convenient, and therefore was not the custom. Upon this Nelson
wrote to Sir Charles Middleton, then Comptroller of the Navy, representing the abuses which
were likely to be practised in this manner. The answer which he received seemed to imply that
the old forms were thought sufficient; and thus, having no alternative, he was compelled, with
his eyes open, to submit to a practice originating in fraudulent intentions. Soon afterwards
two Antigua merchants informed him that they were privy to great frauds which had been committed
upon government in various departments; at Antigua, to the amount of nearly L500,000; at Lucie,
L300,000; at Barbadoes, L250,000; at Jamaica, upwards of a million. The informers were both
shrewd sensible men of business; they did not affect to be actuated by a sense of justice,
but required a percentage upon so much as government should actually recover through their
means. Nelson examined the books and papers which they produced, and was convinced that government
had been most infamously plundered. Vouchers, he found, in that country, were no check whatever:
the principle was, that "a thing was always worth what it would bring;" and the merchants were
in the habit of signing vouchers for each other, without even the appearance of looking at
the articles. These accounts he sent home to the different departments which had been defrauded;
but the peculators were too powerful, and they succeeded not merely in impeding inquiry, but
even in raising prejudices against Nelson at the Board of Admiralty, which it was many years
before he could subdue.

Owing probably, to these prejudices, and the influence of the peculators, he was treated, on
his return to England, in a manner which had nearly driven him from the service. During the
three years that the BOREAS had remained upon a station which is usually so fatal, not a single
officer or man of her whole complement had died. This almost unexampled instance of good health,
though mostly, no doubt, imputable to a healthy season, must in some measure, also, be ascribed
to the wise conduct of the captain. He never suffered the ships to remain more than three or
four weeks at a time at any of the islands; and when the hurricane months confined him to English
Harbour, he encouraged all kinds of useful amusements--music, dancing, and cudgelling among
the men; theatricals among the officers; anything which could employ their attention, and keep
their spirits cheerful. The BOREAS arrived in England in June. Nelson, who had many times been
supposed to be consumptive when in the West Indies, and perhaps was saved from consumption
by that climate, was still in a precarious state of health; and the raw wet weather of one
of our ungenial summers brought on cold, and sore throat, and fever; yet his vessel was kept
at the Nore from the end of June till the end of November, serving as a slop and receiving
ship. This unworthy treatment, which more probably proceeded from inattention than from neglect,
excited in Nelson the strongest indignation. During the whole five months he seldom or never
quitted the ship, but carried on the duty with strict and sullen attention. On the morning
when orders were received to prepare the BOREAS for being paid off, he expressed his joy to
the senior officer in the Medway, saying, "It will release me for ever from an ungrateful service;
for it is my firm and unalterable determination never again to set my foot on board a king's
ship. Immediately after my arrival in town I shall wait on the First Lord of the Admiralty,
and resign my commission." The officer to whom he thus communicated his intentions behaved
in the wisest and most friendly manner; for finding it in vain to dissuade him in his present
state of feeling, he secretly interfered with the First Lord to save him from a step so injurious
to himself, little foreseeing how deeply the welfare and honour of England were at that moment
at stake. This interference produced a letter from Lord Howe the day before the ship was paid
off, intimating a wish to see Captain Nelson as soon as he arrived in town; when, being pleased
with his conversation, and perfectly convinced, by what was then explained to him, of the propriety
of his conduct, he desired that he might present him to the king on the first levee-day; and
the gracious manner in which Nelson was then received effectually removed his resentment.

Prejudices had been, in like manner, excited against his friend, Prince William Henry. "Nothing
is wanting, sir," said Nelson, in one of his letters, "to make you the darling of the English
nation but truth. Sorry am I to say, much to the contrary has been dispersed." This was not
flattery, for Nelson was no flatterer. The letter in which this passage occurs shows in how
wise and noble a manner he dealt with the prince. One of his royal highness's officers had
applied for a court-martial upon a point in which he was unquestionably wrong. His royal highness,
however, while he supported his own character and authority, prevented the trial, which must
have been injurious to a brave and deserving man. "Now that you are parted," said Nelson, "pardon
me, my prince, when I presume to recommend that he may stand in your royal favour as if he
had never sailed with you, and that at some future day you will serve him. There only wants
this to place your conduct in the highest point of view. None of us are without failings--his
was being rather too hasty; but that, put in competition with his being a good officer, will
not, I am bold to say, be taken in the scale against him. More able friends than myself your
royal highness may easily find, and of more consequence in the state; but one more attached
and affectionate is not so easily met with: Princes seldom, very seldom, find a disinterested
person to communicate their thoughts to: I do not pretend to be that person; but of this be
assured, by a man who, I trust, never did a dishonourable act, that I am interested only that
your royal highness should be the greatest and best man this country ever produced."

Encouraged by the conduct of Lord Howe, and by his reception at court, Nelson renewed his attack
upon the peculators with fresh spirit. He had interviews with Mr. Rose, Mr. Pitt, and Sir Charles
Middleton, to all of whom he satisfactorily proved his charges. In consequence, if is said,
these very extensive public frauds were at length put in a proper train to be provided against
in future; his representations were attended to; and every step which he recommended was adopted;
the investigation was put into a proper course, which ended in the detection and punishment
of some of the culprits; an immense saving was made to government, and thus its attention was
directed to similar peculations in other arts of the colonies. But it is said also that no
mark of commendation seems to have been bestowed upon Nelson for his exertion. It has been
justly remarked that the spirit of the navy cannot be preserved so effectually by the liberal
honours bestowed on officers when they are worn out in the service, as by an attention to those
who, like Nelson at this part of his life, have only their integrity and zeal to bring them
into notice. A junior officer, who had been left with the command at Jamaica, received an additional
allowance, for which Nelson had applied in vain. Double pay was allowed to every artificer
and seaman employed in the naval yard: Nelson had superintended the whole business of that
yard with the most rigid exactness, and he complained that he was neglected. "It was most true,"
he said, "that the trouble which he took to detect the fraudulent practices then carried on
was no more than his duty; but he little thought that the expenses attending his frequent journeys
to St. John's upon that duty (a distance of twelve miles) would have fallen upon his pay as
captain of the BOREAS." Nevertheless, the sense of what he thought unworthy usage did not diminish
his zeal. "I," said he, "must buffet the waves in search of--What? Alas! that they called honour
is thought of no more. My fortune, God knows, has grown worse for the service; so much for
serving my country! But the devil, ever willing to tempt the virtuous, has made me offer, if
any ships should be sent to destroy his Majesty of Morocco's ports, to be there; and I have
some reason to think that, should any more come of it, my humble services will be accepted.
I have invariably laid down, and followed close, a plan of what ought to be uppermost in the
breast of an officer,--that it is much better to serve an ungrateful country than to give up
his own fame. Posterity will do him justice. A uniform course of honour and integrity seldom
fails of bringing a man to the goal of fame at last."

The design against the Barbary pirates, like all other designs against them, was laid aside;
and Nelson took his wife to his father's parsonage, meaning only to pay him a visit before
they went to France; a project which he had formed for the sake of acquiring a competent knowledge
of the French language. But his father could not bear to lose him thus unnecessarily. Mr. Nelson
had long been an invalid, suffering under paralytic and asthmatic affections, which, for several
hours after he rose in the morning, scarcely permitted him to speak. He had been given over
by his physicians for this complaint nearly forty years before his death; and was, for many
of his latter years, obliged to spend all his winters at Bath. The sight of his son, he declared,
had given him new life. "But, Horatio," said he, "it would have been better that I had not
been thus cheered, if I am so soon to be bereaved of you again. Let me, my good son, see you
whilst I can. My age and infirmities increase, and I shall not last long." To such an appeal
there could be no reply. Nelson took up his abode at the parsonage, and amused himself with
the sports and occupations of the country. Sometimes he busied himself with farming the glebe;
sometimes spent the greater part of the day in the garden, where he would dig as if for the
mere pleasure of wearying himself. Sometimes he went a birds'-nesting, like a boy; and in these
expeditions Mrs. Nelson always, by his expressed desire, accompanied him. Coursing was his
favourite amusement. Shooting, as he practised it, was far too dangerous for his companions;
for he carried his gun upon the full cock, as if he were going to board an enemy; and the moment
a bird rose, he let fly without ever putting the fowling-piece to his shoulder. It is not,
therefore, extraordinary that his having once shot a partridge should be remembered by his
family among the remarkable events of his life.

But his time did not pass away thus without some vexatious cares to ruffle it. The affair of
the American ships was not yet over, and he was again pestered with threats of prosecution.
"I have written them word," said he, "that I will have nothing to do with them, and they must
act as they think proper. Government, I suppose, will do what is right, and not leave me in
the lurch. We have heard enough lately of the consequences of the Navigation Act to this country.
They may take my person; but if sixpence would save me from a prosecution, I would not give
it." It was his great ambition at this time to possess a pony; and having resolved to purchase
one, he went to a fair for that purpose. During his absence two men abruptly entered the parsonage
and inquired for him: they then asked for Mrs. Nelson; and after they had made her repeatedly
declare that she was really and truly the captain's wife, presented her with a writ, or notification,
on the part of the American captains, who now laid their damages at L20,000, and they charged
her to give it to her husband on his return. Nelson, having bought his pony, came home with
it in high spirits. He called out his wife to admire the purchase and listen to all its excellences:
nor was it till his glee had in some measure subsided that the paper could be presented to
him. His indignation was excessive; and in the apprehension that he should be exposed to the
anxieties of the suit and the ruinous consequences which might ensue, he exclaimed, "This affront
I did not deserve! But I'll be trifled with no longer. I will write immediately to the Treasury,
and if government will not support me, I am resolved to leave the country." Accordingly, he
informed the Treasury that, if a satisfactory answer were not sent him by return of post, he
should take refuge in France. To this he expected he should be driven, and for this he arranged
everything with his characteristic rapidity of decision. It was settled that he should depart
immediately, and Mrs. Nelson follow, under the care of his elder brother Maurice, ten days
after him. But the answer which he received from government quieted his fears: it stated that
Captain Nelson was a very good officer, and needed to be under no apprehension, for he would
assuredly be supported.

Here his disquietude upon this subject seems to have ended. Still he was not at ease; he wanted
employment, and was mortified that his applications for it produced no effect. "Not being a
man of fortune," he said, "was a crime which he was unable to get over, and therefore none
of the great cared about him." Repeatedly he requested the Admiralty that they would not leave
him to rust in indolence. During the armament which was made upon occasion of the dispute concerning
Nootka Sound, he renewed his application; and his steady friend, Prince William, who had then
been created Duke of Clarence, recommended him to Lord Chatham. The failure of this recommendation
wounded him so keenly that he again thought of retiring from the service in disgust; a resolution
from which nothing but the urgent remonstrances of Lord Hood induced him to desist. Hearing
that the RAISONNABLE, in which he had commenced his career, was to be commissioned, he asked
for her. This also was in vain; and a coolness ensued, on his part, toward Lord Hood, because
that excellent officer did not use his influence with Lord Chatham upon this occasion. Lord
Hood, however, had certainly sufficient reasons for not interfering; for he ever continued
his steady friend. In the winter of 1792, when we were on the eve of the revolutionary war,
Nelson once more offered his services, earnestly requested a ship, and added, that if their
lordships should be pleased to appoint him to a cockle-boat he should feel satisfied. He was
answered in the usual official form: "Sir, I have received your letter of the 5th instant,
expressing your readiness to serve, and have read the same to my Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty." On the 12th of December he received this dry acknowledgment. The fresh mortification
did not, however, affect him long; for, by the joint interest of the Duke and Lord Hood, he
was appointed, on the 30th of January following, to the AGAMEMNON, of sixty-four guns.

CHAPTER III

1793 - 1795

The AGAMEMNON sent to the Mediterranean --Commencement of Nelson's Aquaintance with Sir W.
Hamilton--He is sent to Corsica, to cooperate with Paoli--State of Affairs in that Island--Nelson
undertakes the Siege of Bastia, and reduces it--Takes a distinguished Part in the Siege of
Calvi, where he loses an Eye--Admiral Hotham's Action--The AGAMEMNON ordered to Genoa, to co-operate
with the Austrian and Sardinian Forces--Gross Misconduct of the Austrian General.

"THERE are three things, young gentleman," said Nelson to one of his midshipmen, "which you
are constantly to bear in mind. First, you must always implicitly obey orders, without attempting
to form any opinion of your own respecting their propriety; secondly, you must consider every
man your enemy who speaks ill of your king; and, thirdly, you must hate a Frenchman as you
do the devil." With these feelings he engaged in the war. Josiah, his son-in-law, went with
him as a midshipman.

The AGAMEMNON was ordered to the Mediterranean under Lord Hood. The fleet arrived in those
seas at a time when the south of France would willingly have formed itself into a separate
republic, under the protection of England. But good principles had been at that time perilously
abused by ignorant and profligate men; and, in its fear and hatred of democracy, the English
Government abhorred whatever was republican. Lord Hood could not take advantage of the fair
occasion which presented itself; and which, if it had been seized with vigour, might have ended
in dividing France:--but he negotiated with the people of Toulon, to take possession provisionally
of their port and city; which, fatally for themselves, was done. Before the British fleet entered,
Nelson was sent with despatches to Sir William Hamilton, our envoy at the Court of Naples.
Sir William, after his first interview with him, told Lady Hamilton he was about to introduce
a little man to her, who could not boast of being very handsome; but such a man as, he believed,
would one day astonish the world. "I have never before," he continued, "entertained an officer
at my house; but I am determined to bring him here. Let him be put in the room prepared for
Prince Augustus." Thus that acquaintance began which ended in the destruction of Nelson's domestic
happiness. It seemed to threaten no such consequences at its commencement. He spoke of Lady
Hamilton, in a letter to his wife, as a young woman of amiable manners, who did honour to the
station to which she had been raised; and he remarked, that she had been exceedingly kind to
Josiah. The activity with which the envoy exerted himself in procuring troops from Naples,
to assist in garrisoning Toulon, so delighted him, that he is said to have exclaimed, "Sir
William, you are a man after my own heart!--you do business in my own way:" and then to have
added, "I am now only a captain; but I will, if I live, be at the top of the tree." Here, also,
that acquaintance with the Neapolitan court commenced, which led to the only blot upon Nelson's
public character. The king, who was sincere at that time in his enmity to the French, called
the English the saviours of Italy, and of his dominions in particular. He paid the most flattering
attentions to Nelson, made him dine with him, and seated him at his right hand.

Having accomplished this mission, Nelson received orders to join Commodore Linzee at Tunis.
On the way, five sail of the enemy were discovered off the coast of Sardinia, and he chased
them. They proved to be three forty-four gun frigates, with a corvette of twenty-four and a
brig of twelve. The AGAMEMNON had only 345 men at quarters, having landed part of her crew
at Toulon, and others being absent in prizes. He came near enough one of the frigates to engage
her, but at great disadvantage, the Frenchman manoeuvring well and sailing greatly better.
A running fight of three hours ensued, during which the other ships, which were at some distance,
made all speed to come up. By this time the enemy was almost silenced, when a favourable change
of wind enabled her to get out of reach of the AGAMEMNON's guns; and that ship had received
so much damage in the rigging that she could not follow her. Nelson, conceiving that this was
but the forerunner of a far more serious engagement, called his officers together, and asked
them if the ship was fit to go into action against such a superior force without some small
refit and refreshment for the men. Their answer was, that she certainly was not. He then gave
these orders,--"Veer the ship, and lay her head to the westward: let some of the best men be
employed in refitting the rigging, and the carpenter in getting crows and capstan-bars to prevent
our wounded spars from coming down: and get the wine up for the people, with some bread, for
it may be half an hour good before we are again in action." But when the French came up, their
comrade made signals of distress, and they all hoisted out their boats to go to her assistance,
leaving the AGAMEMNON unmolested.

Nelson found Commodore Linzee at Tunis, where he had been sent to expostulate with the dey
upon the impolicy of his supporting the revolutionary government of France. Nelson represented
to him the atrocity of that government. Such arguments were of little avail in Barbary; and
when the Dey was told that the French had put their sovereign to death, he drily replied, that
"Nothing could be more heinous; and yet, if historians told the truth, the English had once
done the same." This answer had doubtless been suggested by the French about him: they had
completely gained the ascendancy, and all negotiation on our part proved fruitless. Shortly
afterward, Nelson was detached with a small squadron, to co-operate with General Paoli and
the Anti-Gallican party in Corsica.

Some thirty years before this time the heroic patriotism of the Corsicans, and of their leader
Paoli, had been the admiration of England. The history of these brave people is but a melancholy
tale. The island which they inhabit has been abundantly blessed by nature; it has many excellent
harbours; and though the MALARIA, or pestilential atmosphere, which is so deadly in many parts
of Italy and of the Italian islands, prevails on the eastern coast, the greater part of the
country is mountainous and healthy. It is about 150 miles long, and from 40 to 50 broad; in
circumference, some 320; a country large enough, and sufficiently distant from the nearest
shores, to have subsisted as an independent state, if the welfare and happiness of the human
race had ever been considered as the end and aim of policy. The Moors, the Pisans, the kings
of Aragon, and the Genoese, successively attempted, and each for a time effected its conquest.
The yoke of the Genoese continued longest, and was the heaviest. These petty tyrants ruled
with an iron rod; and when at any time a patriot rose to resist their oppressions, if they
failed to subdue him by force they resorted to assassination. At the commencement of the last
century they quelled one revolt by the aid of German auxiliaries, whom the Emperor Charles
VI. sent against a people who had never offended him, and who were fighting for whatever is
most dear to man. In 1734 the war was renewed; and Theodore, a Westphalian baron, then appeared
upon the stage. In that age men were not accustomed to see adventurers play for kingdoms, and
Theodore became the common talk of Europe. He had served in the French armies; and having afterwards
been noticed both by Ripperda and Alberoni, their example, perhaps, inflamed a spirit as ambitious
and as unprincipled as their own. He employed the whole of his means in raising money and procuring
arms; then wrote to the leaders of the Corsican patriots, to offer them considerable assistance,
if they would erect Corsica into an independent kingdom, and elect him king. When he landed
among them, they were struck with his stately person, his dignified manners, and imposing talents.
They believed the magnificent promises of foreign assistance which he held out, and elected
him king accordingly. Had his means been as he represented them, they could not have acted
more wisely than in thus at once fixing the government of their country, and putting an end
to those rivalries among the leading families, which had so often proved pernicious to the
public weal. Of late years, however--that is, since Tevkin had espoused the cause of Zionism or
nationalism--he had insisted on the Passover feast every year. He contended that to him it was
not a religious ceremony, but merely a "national custom," but about this his children were beginning
to have their doubts. It seemed to them that the older their father grew the less sure he was
of his free thought. They suspected that he was getting timid about it, fearful of the hereafter.
As a rule, they saw only the humorous side of the change that was apparently coming over him, but
sometimes they would awaken to the pathos of it

As we all sat in the library, waiting to be called to the great feast, he delivered himself of
a witticism at the expense of the prospective ceremony

"You needn't take his atheism seriously, Mr. Levinsky," said Anna, the sound of my name on her
lips sending a thrill of delight through me. "'Way down at the bottom of his heart father is getting
to be really religious, I'm afraid." And, as though taking pity on him, she crossed over to
where he sat and nestled up to him in a manner that put a choking
sensation into my throat and filled me with an impulse to embrace
them both

At last the signal was given and we filed down into the
dining-room.

A long table, flanked by two rows of chairs, with a sofa, instead of the usual arm-chair, at
its head, was set with bottles of wine, bottles of mead, wine-glasses, and little piles of matzos
(thin, flat cakes of unleavened bread). The sofa was cushioned with two huge Russian pillows, inclosed
in fresh white cases, for the master of the house to lean on, in commemoration of the freedom
and ease which came to the Children of Israel upon their deliverance from Egypt. Placed on three
covered matzos, within easy reach of the master, were a shank bone, an egg, some horseradish, salt
water, and a mush made of nuts and wine. These were symbols, the shank bone being a memorial of
the pascal lamb, and the egg of the other sacrifices brought during the festival in ancient times,
while the horseradish and the salt water represented the bitter work that the Sons of Israel
had to do for Pharaoh, and the mush the lime and mortar from which they made brick for him. A
small book lay in front of each seat. That was the Story of the Deliverance, in the ancient
Hebrew text, accompanied by an English translation

Moissey, the uncompromising atheist and Internationalist, was demonstratively absent, much to
the distress of his mother and resentment of his father. His Biblical-looking wife was at
the table. So were Elsie and Emil. They were as uncompromising in their atheism as Moissey, but
they had consented to attend the quaint supper to please their parents. As to Anna, Sasha, and George,
each of them had his or her socialism "diluted" with some species of nationalism, so they were
here as a matter of principle, their theory being that the Passover feast was one of the things
that emphasized the unity of the Jews of all countries. But even they, and even Tevkin himself,
treated it all partly as a joke. In the case of the poet, however, it was quite obvious that his
levity was pretended. For all his jesting and frivolity, he looked nervous. I could almost see
the memories of his childhood days which the scene evoked in his mind. I could feel the solemnity
that swelled his heart.

It appeared that this time he had decided to add to the ceremony certain features which he had
foregone on the previous few Passover festivals he had observed. He was now bent upon having a Passover
feast service precisely like the one he had seen his father conduct, not omitting even the white
shroud which his father had worn on the occasion. As a consequence, several of these details
were a novel sight to his children. A white shroud lay ready for him on his sofa, and as he
slipped it on, with smiles and blushes, there was an outburst of mirth

"Oh, daddy!" Anna shouted

"Father looks like a Catholic priest," said Emil

"Don't say that, Emil," I rebuked him

Fun was made of the big white pillows upon which Tevkin leaned, "king-like," and of the piece of
unleavened bread which he "hid" under them for Gracie to "steal."

As he raised the first of the Four Cups of wine he said, solemnly, with an effort of shaking
off all pretense of flippancy: "Well, let us raise our glasses. Let us drink the First Cup."

We
all did so, and he added, "This is the Fourth of July of our unhappy people." After the glasses
were drained and refilled he said: "Scenes like this bind us to the
Jews of the whole world, and not only to those living, but to the
past generations as well.

This is no time for speaking of the Christian religion, but as I look at this wine an idea strikes
me which I cannot help submitting: The Christians drink wine, imagining that it is the blood of
Jesus. Well, the wine we are drinking to-night reminds me of the martyr blood of our massacred
brethren of all ages."

Anna gave me a merry wink. I felt myself one of the family. I was in the seventh heaven. She
seemed to be particularly attentive to me this evening

"I shall speak to her to-night," I decided. "I sha'n't wait another day." And the fact that she
was a nationalist and not an unqualified socialist, like Elsie, for instance, seemed to me a
new source of encouragement. I was in a quiver of blissful excitement

The Four Questions are usually asked by the youngest son, but Emil, the Internationalist, could
not be expected to take an active part in the ceremony, so Sasha, the Zionist, took his place.
Sasha, however, did not read Hebrew, and old Tevkin had to be content with having the Four Questions
read in English, the general answer to them being given by Tevkin and myself in Hebrew. It reminded
me of an operatic performance in which the part of Faust, for instance, is sung in French, while that
of Margarita is performed in some other language. We went on with the Story of the Deliverance.
Tevkin made frequent pauses to explain and comment upon the text, often with a burst of oratory.
Mrs. Tevkin and some of the children were obviously bored.

Gracie pleaded hunger

Finally the end of the first part of the story was reached and supper
was served.

It was a typical Passover supper, with matzo balls, and it was an excellent repast. Everybody
was talkative and gay. I addressed some remarks to Anna, and she received them all cordially

By
way of attesting her recognition of Passover as a "national holiday" she was in festive array,
wearing her newest dress, a garment of blue taffeta embroidered in old rose, with a crêpe collar
of gray. It mellowed the glow of her healthful pink complexion. She was the most beautiful
creature at the table, excluding neither her picturesque younger brother nor her majestic old
mother. She shone. She flooded my soul with ecstasy

Tevkin's religion was Judaism, Zionism. Mine was Anna. The second half of the story is usually
read with less pomp and circumstance than the first, many a passage in it being often skipped altogether.
So Tevkin dismissed us all, remaining alone at the table to chant the three final ballads, which
he had characterized to his children as "charming bits of folk-lore."

When Mrs. Tevkin, the children, and myself were mounting the stairs leading up from the dining-room,
I was by Anna's side, my nerves as taut as those of a soldier waiting
for the command to charge.

I charged sooner than I expected.

"Sasha asked the Four Questions," I found myself saying. "There is one question which I should
like to ask of you, Miss Tevkin."

I said it so simply and at a moment so little suited to a proposal of marriage that the trend
of my words was lost upon her

"Something about Jewish nationalism?" she asked

"About that and about something else."

We were passing through the hallway now. When we entered the library I took her into a corner, and
before we were seated I said: "Well, my question has really nothing to do with nationalism.
It's quite another thing I want to ask of you. Don't refuse me. Marry me. Make me happy."

She listened like one stunned

"I am terribly in love with you," I added

"Oh!" she then exclaimed. Her delicate pink skin became a fiery red. She looked down and shook
her head with confused stiffness.

"I see you're taken aback. Take a seat; get your bearings," I said, lightly, pulling up a chair
that stood near by, "and say, 'Yes.'"

"Why, that's impossible!" she said, with an awkward smile, without seating herself. "I need not
tell you that I have long since changed my mind about you--"

"I am no more repellent, am I?" I jested

"No. Not at all," she returned, with another smile. "But what you say is quite another thing. I am
very sorry, indeed." She made to move away from me, but I checked her

"That does not discourage me," I said. "I'll just go on loving you and waiting for a favorable
answer. You are still unjust to me. You don't know me well enough. Anyhow, I can't give you
up. I won't give you up. ("That's it," I thought. "I am speaking like a man of firm purpose.")
"I am resolved to win you."

"Oh, that's entirely out of the question," she said, with a gesture of impatience and finality.
And, bursting into tears of child-like indignation, she added: "Father assured me you would
never hint at such a thing--never.

If you mean to persist, then--"

The sentence was left eloquently unfinished. She turned away, walked over to her mother and took
a seat by her side, like a little girl mutely seeking her mamma's protection

The room seemed to be in a whirl. I felt the cold perspiration break out on my forehead. I
was conscious of Mrs. Tevkin's and Elsie's glances. I was sick at heart. Anna's bitter resentment
was a black surprise to me. I had a crushing sense of final defeat

BOOK XIV

EPISODES OF A LONELY LIFE

CHAPTER I

IT was a severe blow. It caused me indescribable suffering. It would not have been unnatural to
attribute my fiasco to my age. Had I been ten years younger, Anna's attitude toward me might
have been different. But this point of view I loathed to accept. Instead, I put the blame on Anna's
environment.

"I was in the 'enemy's country' there," I would muse. "The atmosphere around her was against me."
I hated the socialists with a novel venom. Finally I pulled myself together. Then it was that
I discovered the real condition of my affairs. I had gone into those speculations far deeper
than I could afford. There were indications that made me seriously uneasy. Things were even worse
than Bender imagined.

Ruin stared me in the face. I was panic-stricken. One day I had the head of a large woolen concern
lunch with me in a private dining-room of a well-known hotel. He was dignifiedly steel-gray and
he had the appearance of a college professor or successful physician rather than of a business
man. He liked me. I had long been one of his most important customers and I had always sought to
build up a good record with him. For example: other cloak-manufacturers would exact allowances
for merchandise that proved to have some imperfection. I never do so. It is the rule of my
house never to put in a claim for such things. In the majority of cases the goods can be cut so
as to avoid any loss of material, and if it cannot, I will sustain the small loss rather than incur
the mill's disfavor. In the long run it pays. And so this cloth merchant was well disposed toward
me. He had done me some favors before. He addressed me as Dave. (There was a note of condescension
as well as of admiration in this "Dave" of his. It implied that I was a shrewd fellow and an
excellent customer, singularly successful and reliable, but that I was his inferior, all the same--a
Jew, a social pariah. At the bottom of my heart I considered myself his superior, finding
an amusing discrepancy between his professorial face and the crudity of his intellectual interests;
but he was a Gentile, and an American, and a much wealthier man than I, so I looked up to him.) To make
my appeal as effective as possible I initiated him into the human side of my troubles. I told
him of my unfortunate courtship as well as of the real-estate ventures into which it had led
me

He was interested and moved, and, as he had confidence in me, he granted my request at once.

"It's all right, Dave," he said, slapping my back, a queer look in his eye.

"You can always count on me.

Only throw that girl out of your mind."

I grasped his hand silently. I wanted to say something, but the words stuck in my throat. He helped
me out of my difficulties and I devoted myself to the cloak business with fresh energy. The
agonies of my love for Anna were more persistent than those I had suffered after I moved out of Dora's
house.

But, somehow, instead of interfering with my business activities, these agonies stimulated them.
I was like the victim of a toothache who seeks relief in hard work. I toiled day and night,
entering into the minutest detail of the business and performing duties that were ordinarily
left to some inferior employee.

Business was good. Things went humming. Bender, who now had an interest in my factory, was happy

Some
time later the same woolen man who had come to my assistance did me another good turn, one
that brought me a rich harvest of profits. A certain weave was in great vogue that season,
the demand far exceeding the output, and it so happened that the mill of the man with the professorial
face was one of the very few that produced that fabric. So he let me have a much larger supply
of it than any other cloak-manufacturer in the country was able to obtain. My business then
took a great leap, while my overhead expenses remained the same. My net profits exceeded two
hundred thousand dollars that year

One afternoon in the summer of the same year, as I walked along Broadway in the vicinity of Canal
Street, my attention was attracted by a shabby, white-haired, feeble-looking
old peddler, with a wide, sneering mouth, who seemed disquietingly
familiar and in whom I gradually recognized one of my Antomir teachers--one
of those who used to punish me for the sins of their other pupils.

The past suddenly sprang into life with detailed, colorful vividness. The black pit of poverty
in which I had been raised; my misery at school, where I had been treated as an outcast and
a scapegoat because my mother could not afford even the few pennies that were charged for
my tuition; the joy of my childish existence in spite of that gloom and martyrdom--all this rose
from the dead before me

The poor old peddler I now saw trying to cross Broadway was Shmerl the Pincher, the man with whom
my mother had a pinching and hair-pulling duel after she found the marks of his cruelty on my
young body. He had been one of the most heartless of my tormentors, yet it was so thrillingly
sweet to see him in New York! In my schooldays I would dream of becoming a rich and influential
man and wreaking vengeance upon my brutal teachers, more especially upon Shmerl the Pincher and
"the Cossack," the man whose little daughter, Sarah-Leah, had been the heroine of my first romance.
I now rushed after Shmerl, greatly excited, one of the feelings in my heart being a keen desire
to help him

A tangle of wagons and trolley-cars caused me some delay. I stood gazing at him restively as he
picked his weary way. I had known him as a young man, although to my childish eye he had looked
old--a strong fellow, probably of twenty-eight, with jet-black side-whiskers and beard, with
bright, black eyes and alert movements. At the time I saw him on Broadway he must have been about
sixty, but he looked much older

As I was thus waiting impatiently for the cars to start so that I could cross the street and greet him,
a cold, practical voice whispered to me: "Why court trouble? Leave him alone."

My exaltation was gone. The spell was broken.

The block was presently relieved, but I did not stir. Instead of crossing the street and accosting
the old man, I stood still, following him with my eyes until he vanished from view. Then I resumed
my walk up Broadway. As I trudged along, a feeling of compunction took hold of me. By way of
defending myself before my conscience, I tried to think of the unmerited beatings he used to
give me. But it was of no avail. The idea of avenging myself on this decrepit, tattered old
peddler for what he had done more than thirty years before made me feel small. "Poor devil! I must
help him," I said to myself.

I was conscious of a desire to go back and to try to overtake him; but I did not. The desire
was a meandering, sluggish sort of feeling. The spell was broken irretrievably

CHAPTER II

THE following winter chance brought me together with Matilda. On this occasion our meeting
was of a pleasanter nature than the one which had taken place at Cooper Institute. It was in
a Jewish theater. She and another woman, accompanied by four men, one of whom was Matilda's
husband, were occupying a box adjoining one in which were the Chaikins
and myself and from which it was separated by a low partition.

The performance was given for the benefit of a society in which Mrs. Chaikin was an active member,
and it was she who had made me pay for the box and solemnly promise to attend the performance.
Not that I maintained a snobbish attitude toward the Jewish stage. I went to see Yiddish plays
quite often, in fact, but these were all of the better class (our stage has made considerable
headway), whereas the one that had been selected by Mrs. Chaikin's society was of the "historical-opera"
variety, a hodge-podge of "tear-wringing" vaudeville and "laughter-compelling" high tragedy. I
should have bought ten boxes of Mrs.

Chaikin if she had only let me stay away from the performance, but
her heart was set upon showing me off to the other members of the
organization, and I had to come

It was on a Monday evening. As I
entered the box my eyes met Matilda's and, contrary to my will, I
bowed to her. To my surprise, she acknowledged my salutation heartily

The
curtain rose. Men in velvet tunics and plumed hats were saying something,
but I was more conscious of Matilda's proximity and of her cordial
recognition of my nod than of what was going on on the stage.

Presently
a young man and a girl entered our box and occupied two of our vacant
chairs. Mrs. Chaikin thought they had been invited by me, and when
she discovered that they had not there was a suppressed row, she calling
upon them to leave the box and they nonchalantly refusing to stir
from their seats, pleading that they meant to stay only as long as
there was no one else to occupy them. Our box was beginning to attract
attention. There were angry outcries of "'S-sh!" "Shut up!" Matilda
looked at me sympathetically and we exchanged smiles. Finally an usher
came into our box and the two intruders were ejected

When the curtain
had dropped on the first act Matilda invited me into her box. When
I entered it she introduced me to her husband and her other companions
as "a fellow-townsman" of hers

Seen at close range, her husband looked
much younger than she, but it did not take me long to discover that
he was wrapped up in her. His beard was smaller and more neatly trimmed
than it had looked at the Cooper Institute meeting, but it still ill
became him. He had an unsophisticated smile, which I thought suggestive
of a man playing on a flute and which emphasized the discrepancy between
his weak face and his reputation for pluck

An intermission in a Jewish
theater is almost as long as an act. During the first few minutes
of our chat Matilda never alluded to Antomir nor to what had happened
between us at Cooper Institute. She made merry over the advertisements
on the curtain and over the story of the play explaining that the
box had been forced on one of her companions and that they had all
come to see what "historic opera" was like. She commented upon the
musicians, who were playing a Jewish melody, and on some of the scenes
that were being enacted in the big auditorium. The crowd was buzzing
and smiling good-humoredly, with a general air of family-like sociability,
some eating apple or candy. The faces of some of the men were much
in need of a shave.

Most of the women were in shirt-waists. Altogether
the audience reminded one of a crowd at a picnic. A boy tottering
under the weight of a basket laden with candy and fruit was singing
his wares. A pretty young woman stood in the center aisle near the
second row of seats, her head thrown back, her eyes fixed on the first
balcony, her plump body swaying and swaggering to the music. One man,
seated in a box across the theater from us, was trying to speak to
somebody in the box above ours. We could not hear what he said, but
his mimicry was eloquent enough. Holding out a box of candy, he was
facetiously offering to shoot some of its contents into the mouth
of the person he was addressing. One woman, in an orchestra seat near
our box, was discussing the play with a woman in front of her. She
could be heard all over the theater. She was in ecstasies over the
prima donna

"I tell you she can kill a person with her singing,"
she said, admiringly.

"She tugs me by the heart and makes it melt.
I never felt so heartbroken in my life. May she live long."

This
was the first opportunity I had had to take a good look at Matilda
since she had come to New York; for our first meeting had been so
brief and so embarrassing to me that I had come away from it without
a clear impression of her appearance

At first I found it difficult
to look her in the face. The passionate kisses I had given her twenty-three
years before seemed to be staring me out of countenance. She, however,
was perfectly unconstrained and smiled and laughed with contagious
exuberance. As we chatted I now and again grew absent-minded, indulging
in a mental comparison between the woman who was talking to me and
the one who had made me embrace her and so cruelly trifled with my
passion shortly before she raised the money for my journey to America.
The change that the years had wrought in her appearance was striking,
and yet it was the same Matilda. Her brown eyes were still sparkingly
full of life and her mouth retained the sensuous expression of her
youth. This and her abrupt gestures gave her provocative charm

Nevertheless,
she left me calm. It was an indescribable pleasure to be with her,
but my love for her was as dead as were the days when I lodged in
a synagogue. She never alluded to those days. To listen to her, one
would have thought that we had been seeing a great deal of each other
all along, and that small talk was the most natural kind of conversation
for us to carry on

All at once, and quite irrelevantly, she said:
"I am awfully glad to see you again. I did not treat you properly
that time--at the meeting, I mean.

Afterward I was very sorry."

"Were
you?" I asked, flippantly.

"I wanted to write you, to ask you to
come to see me, but--well, you know how it is. Tell me something about
yourself. At this minute the twenty-three years seem like twenty-three
weeks. But this is no time to talk about it.

One wants hours, not
a minute or two. I know, of course, that you are a rich man. Are you
a happy man? But, no, don't answer now. The curtain will soon rise.
Go back to your box, and come in again after the next act. Will you?"

She
ordered me about as she had done during my stay at her mother's house,
which offended and pleased me at once. During the whole of the second
act I looked at the stage without seeing or hearing anything. The
time when I fell in love with Matilda sprang into life again. It really
seemed as though the twenty-three years were twenty-three weeks. My
mother's death, her funeral; Abner's Court; the uniformed old furrier
with the side-whiskers, his wife with her crutches; Naphtali with
his curly hair and near-sighted eyes; Reb Sender, his wife, the bully
of the old synagogue; Matilda's mother, and her old servant--all the
human figures and things that filled the eventful last two years of
my life at home loomed up with striking vividness before me

Matilda's
affable greeting and her intimate brief talk were a surprise to me. The climate
proved more destructive than the service; for this was during the lion sun, as they call our
season of the dog-days. Of 2000 men, above half were sick, and the rest like so many phantoms.
Nelson described himself as the reed among the oaks, bowing before the storm when they were
laid low by it. "All the prevailing disorders have attacked me," said he, "but I have not strength
enough for them to fasten on." The loss from the enemy was not great; but Nelson received a
serious injury: a shot struck the ground near him, and drove the sand and small gravel into
one of his eyes. He spoke of it slightly at the time: writing the same day to Lord Hood, he
only said that he had got a little hurt that morning, not much; and the next day, he said,
he should be able to attend his duty in the evening. In fact, he suffered it to confine him
only one day; but the sight was lost.

After the fall of Calvi, his services were, by a strange omission, altogether overlooked; and
his name was not even mentioned in the list of wounded. This was no ways imputable to the admiral,
for he sent home to government Nelson's journal of the siege, that they might fully understand
the nature of his indefatigable and unequalled exertions. If those exertions were not rewarded
in the conspicuous manner which they deserved, the fault was in the administration of the day,
not in Lord Hood. Nelson felt himself neglected. "One hundred and ten days," said he, "I have
been actually engaged at sea and on shore against the enemy; three actions against ships, two
against Bastia in my ship, four boat actions, and two villages taken, and twelve sail of vessels
burnt. I do not know that any one has done more. I have had the comfort to be always applauded
by my Commander-in-Chief, but never to be rewarded; and, what is more mortifying, for services
in which I have been wounded, others have been praised, who, at the same time, were actually
in bed, far from the scene of action. They have not done me justice. But never mind, I'll have
a GAZETTE of my own." How amply was this second-sight of glory realised!

The health of his ship's company had now, in his own words, been miserably torn to pieces by
as hard service as a ship's crew ever performed: 150 were in their beds when he left Calvi;
of them he lost 54 and believed that the constitutions of the rest were entirely destroyed.
He was now sent with despatches to Mr. Drake, at Genoa, and had his first interview with the
Doge. The French had, at this time, taken possession of Vado Bay, in the Genoese territory;
and Nelson foresaw that, if their thoughts were bent on the invasion of Italy, they would accomplish
it the ensuing spring. "The allied powers," he said, "were jealous of each other; and none
but England was hearty in the cause." His wish was for peace on fair terms, because England
he thought was draining herself to maintain allies who would not fight for themselves. Lord
Hood had now returned to England, and the command devolved on Admiral Hotham. The affairs of
the Mediterranean wore at this time a gloomy aspect. The arts, as well as the arms of the enemy,
were gaining the ascendancy there. Tuscany concluded peace relying upon the faith of France,
which was, in fact, placing itself at her mercy. Corsica was in danger. We had taken that island
for ourselves, annexed it formally to the crown of Great Britain, and given it a constitution
as free as our own. This was done with the consent of the majority of the inhabitants; and
no transaction between two countries was ever more fairly or legitimately conducted: yet our
conduct was unwise;--the island is large enough to form an independent state, and such we should
have made it, under our protection, as long as protection might be needed; the Corsicans would
then have felt as a nation; but when one party had given up the country to England, the natural
consequence was that the other looked to France. The question proposed to the people was, to
which would they belong? Our language and our religion were against us; our unaccommodating
manners, it is to be feared, still more so. The French were better politicians. In intrigue
they have ever been unrivalled; and it now became apparent that, in spite of old wrongs, which
ought never to have been forgotten nor forgiven, their partisans were daily acquiring strength.
It is part of the policy of France, and a wise policy it is, to impress upon other powers the
opinion of its strength, by lofty language: and by threatening before it strikes; a system
which, while it keeps up the spirit of its allies, and perpetually stimulates their hopes,
tends also to dismay its enemies. Corsica was now loudly threatened. "The French, who had not
yet been taught to feel their own inferiority upon the seas, braved us in contempt upon that
element." They had a superior fleet in the Mediterranean, and they sent it out with express
orders to seek the English and engage them. Accordingly, the Toulon fleet, consisting of seventeen
ships of the line and five smaller vessels, put to sea. Admiral Hotham received this information
at Leghorn, and sailed immediately in search of them. He had with him fourteen sail of the
line, and one Neapolitan seventy-four; but his ships were only half-manned, containing but
7650 men, whereas the enemy had 16,900. He soon came in sight of them: a general action was
expected; and Nelson, as was his custom on such occasions, wrote a hasty letter to his wife,
as that which might possibly contain his last farewell. "The lives of all," said he, "are in
the hand of Him who knows best whether to preserve mine or not; my character and good name
are in my own keeping."

But however confident the French government might be of their naval superiority, the officers
had no such feeling; and after manoeuvring for a day in sight of the English fleet, they suffered
themselves to be chased. One of their ships, the CA IRA, of eighty-four guns, carried away
her main and fore top-masts. The INCONSTANT frigate fired at the disabled ship, but received
so many shot that she was obliged to leave her. Soon afterwards a French frigate took the CA
IRA in tow; and the SANS-CULOTTES, one hundred and twenty, and the JEAN BARRAS, seventy-four,
kept about gunshot distance on her weather bow. The AGAMEMNON stood towards her, having no
ship of the line to support her within several miles. As she drew near, the CA IRA fired her
stern guns so truly, that not a shot missed some part of the ship; and latterly, the masts
were struck by every shot. It had been Nelson's intention not to fire before he touched her
stern; but seeing how impossible it was that he should be supported, and how certainly the
AGAMEMNON must be severely cut up if her masts were disabled, he altered his plan according
to the occasion. As soon, therefore, as he was within a hundred yards of her stern, he ordered
the helm to be put a-starboard, and the driver and after-sails to be brailed up and shivered;
and, as the ship fell off, gave the enemy her whole broadside. They instantly braced up the
after-yards, put the helm a-port, and stood after her again. This manoeuvre he practised for
two hours and a quarter, never allowing the CA IRA to get a single gun from either side to
bear on him; and when the French fired their after-guns now, it was no longer with coolness
and precision, for every shot went far ahead. By this time her sails were hanging in tatters,
her mizen-top-mast, mizen-top-sail, and cross-jack-yards shot away. But the frigate which had
her in tow hove in stays, and got her round. Both these French ships now brought their guns
to bear, and opened their fire. The AGAMEMNON passed them within half-pistol shot; almost every
shot passed over her, for the French had elevated their guns for the rigging, and for distant
firing, and did not think of altering the elevation. As soon as the AGAMEMNON's after-guns
ceased to bear, she hove in stays, keeping a constant fire as she came round; and being worked,
said Nelson, with as much exactness as if she had been turning into Spithead. On getting round,
he saw that the Sans-Culottes, which had wore, with many of the enemy's ships, was under his
lee bow, and standing to leeward. The admiral, at the same time, made the signal for the van
ships to join him. Upon this Nelson bore away, and prepared to set all sail; and the enemy,
having saved their ship, hauled close to the wind, and opened upon him a distant and ineffectual
fire. Only seven of the AGAMEMNON's men were hurt--a thing which Nelson himself remarked as
wonderful: her sails and rigging were very much cut, and she had many shots in her hull, and
some between wind and water. The CA IRA lost 110 men that day, and was so cut up that she could
not get a top-mast aloft during the night.

At daylight on the following morning, the English ships were taken aback with a fine breeze
at N.W., while the enemy's fleet kept the southerly wind. The body of their fleet was about
five miles distant; the CA IRA and the CENSEUR, seventy-four, which had her in tow, about three
and a half. All sail was made to cut these ships off; and as the French attempted to save them,
a partial action was brought on. The AGAMEMNON was again engaged with her yesterday's antagonist;
but she had to fight on both sides the ship at the same time. The CA IRA and the CENSEUR fought
most gallantly: the first lost nearly 300 men, in addition to her former loss; the last, 350.
Both at length struck; and Lieutenant Andrews, of the AGAMEMNON, brother to the lady to whom
Nelson had become attached in France, and, in Nelson's own words, "as gallant an officer as
ever stepped a quarter-deck," hoisted English colours on board them both. The rest of the enemy's
ships' behaved very ill. As soon as these vessels had struck, Nelson went to Admiral Hotham
and proposed that the two prizes should be left with the ILLUSTRIOUS and COURAGEUX, which had
been crippled in the action, and with four frigates, and that the rest of the fleet should
pursue the enemy, and follow up the advantage to the utmost. But his reply was--"We must be
contented: we have done very well."--"Now," said Nelson, "had we taken ten sail, and allowed
the eleventh to escape, when it had been possible to have got at her, I could never have called
it well done. Goodall backed me; I got him to write to the admiral; but it would not do. We
should have had such a day as, I believe, the annals of England never produced." In this letter
the character of Nelson fully manifests itself. "I wish," said he, "to be an admiral, and in
the command of the English fleet: I should very soon either do much, or be ruined: my disposition
cannot bear tame and slow measures. Sure I am, had I commanded on the 14th, that either the
whole French fleet would have graced my triumph, or I should have been in a confounded scrape."
What the event would have been, he knew from his prophetic feelings and his own consciousness
of power; and we also know it now, for Aboukir and Trafalgar have told it.

The CA IRA and CENSEUR probably defended themselves with more obstinacy in this action, from
a persuasion that, if they struck, no quarter would be given; because they had fired red-hot
shot, and had also a preparation sent, as they said, by the convention from Paris, which seems
to have been of the nature of the Greek fire; for it became liquid when it was discharged,
and water would not extinguish its flames. This combustible was concealed with great care in
the captured ships; like the red-hot shot, it had been found useless in battle. Admiral Hotham's
action saved Corsica for the time; but the victory had been incomplete, and the arrival at
Toulon of six sail of the line, two frigates, and two cutters from Brest, gave the French a
superiority which, had they known how to use it, would materially have endangered the British
Mediterranean fleet. That fleet had been greatly neglected at the Admiralty during Lord Chatham's
administration: and it did not, for some time, feel the beneficial effect of his removal. Lord
Hood had gone home to represent the real state of affairs, and solicit reinforcements adequate
to the exigencies of the time, and the importance of the scene of action. But that fatal error
of under-proportioning the force to the service; that ruinous economy, which, by sparing a
little, renders all that is spent useless, infected the British councils; and Lord Hood, not
being able to obtain such reinforcements as he knew were necessary, resigned the command. "Surely,"
said Nelson, "the people at home have forgotten us." Another Neapolitan seventy-four joined
Admiral Hotham, and Nelson observed with sorrow that this was matter of exultation to an English
fleet. When the store-ships and victuallers from Gibraltar arrived, their escape from the enemy
was thought wonderful; and yet, had they not escaped, "the game," said Nelson, "was up here.
At this moment our operations are at a stand for want of ships to support the Austrians in
getting possession of the sea-coast of the king of Sardinia; and behold our admiral does not
feel himself equal to show himself, much less to give assistance in their operations." It was
reported that the French were again out with 18 or 20 sail. The combined British and Neapolitan
were but sixteen; should the enemy be only eighteen, Nelson made no doubt of a complete victory;
but if they were twenty, he said, it was not to be expected; and a battle, without complete
victory, would have been destruction, because another mast was not to be got on that side Gibraltar.
At length Admiral Man arrived with a squadron from England. "What they can mean by sending
him with only five sail of the line," said Nelson, "is truly astonishing; but all men are alike,
and we in this country do not find any amendment or alteration from the old Board of Admiralty.
They should know that half the ships in the fleet require to go to England; and that long ago
they ought to have reinforced us."

About this time Nelson was made colonel of marines; a mark of approbation which he had long
wished for rather than expected. It came in good season, for his spirits were oppressed by
the thought that his services had not been acknowledged as they deserved; and it abated the
resentful feeling which would else have been excited by the answer to an application to the
War-office. During his four months' land service in Corsica, he had lost all his ship furniture,
owing to the movements of a camp. Upon this he wrote to the Secretary at War, briefly stating
what his services on shore had been, and saying, he trusted it was not asking an improper thing
to request that the same allowance might be made to him which would be made to a land officer
of his rank, which, situated as he was, would be that of a brigadier-general: if this could
not be accorded, he hoped that his additional expenses would be paid him. The answer which
he received was, that "no pay had ever been issued under the direction of the War-office to
officers of the navy serving with the army on shore."

He now entered upon a new line of service. The Austrian and Sardinian armies, under General
de Vins, required a British squadron to co-operate with them in driving the French from the
Riviera di Genoa; and as Nelson had been so much in the habit of soldiering, it was immediately
fixed that the brigadier should go. He sailed from St. Fiorenzo on this destination; but fell
in, off Cape del Mele, with the enemy's fleet, who immediately gave his squadron chase. The
chase lasted four-and-twenty hours; and, owing to the fickleness of the wind, the British ships
were sometimes hard pressed; but the want of skill on the part of the French gave Nelson many
advantages. Nelson bent his way back to St. Fiorenzo, where the fleet, which was in the midst
of watering and refitting, had, for seven hours, the mortification of seeing him almost in
possession of the enemy, before the wind would allow them to put out to his assistance. The
French, however, at evening, went off, not choosing to approach nearer the shore. During the
night, Admiral Hotham, by great exertions, got under weigh; and, having sought the enemy four
days, came in sight of them on the fifth. Baffling winds and vexatious calms, so common in
the Mediterranean, rendered it impossible to close with them; only a partial action could be
brought on; and then the firing made a perfect calm. The French being to windward, drew inshore;
and the English fleet was becalmed six or seven miles to the westward. L'ALCIDE, of seventy-four
guns, struck; but before she could be taken possession of, a box of combustibles in her fore-top
took fire, and the unhappy crew experienced how far more perilous their inventions were to
themselves than to their enemies. So rapid was the conflagration, that the French in their
official account say, the hull, the masts, and sails, all seemed to take fire at the same moment;
and though the English boats were put out to the assistance of the poor wretches on board,
not more than 200 could be saved. The AGAMEMNON, and Captain Rowley in the CUMBERLAND, were
just getting into close action a second time, when the admiral called them off, the wind now
blowing directly into the Gulf of Frejus, where the enemy anchored after the evening closed.

Nelson now proceeded to his station with eight sail of frigates under his command. Arriving
at Genoa, he had a conference with Mr. Drake, the British envoy to that state; the result of
which was, that the object of the British must be to put an entire stop to all trade between
Genoa, France, and the places occupied by the French troops; for unless this trade were stopped,
it would be scarcely possible for the allied armies to hold their situation, and impossible
for them to make any progress in driving the enemy out of the Riviera di Genoa. Mr. Drake was
of opinion that even Nice might fall for want of supplies, if the trade with Genoa were cut
off. This sort of blockade Nelson could not carry on without great risk to himself. A captain
in the navy, as he represented to the envoy, is liable to prosecution for detention and damages.
This danger was increased by an order which had then lately been issued; by which, when a neutral
ship was detained, a complete specification of her cargo was directed to be sent to the secretary
of the Admiralty, and no legal process instituted against her till the pleasure of that board
should be communicated. This was requiring an impossibility. The cargoes of ships detained
upon this station, consisting chiefly of corn, would be spoiled long before the orders of the
Admiralty could be known; and then, if they should happen to release the vessel, the owners
would look to the captain for damages. Even the only precaution which could be taken against
this danger, involved another danger not less to be apprehended: for if the captain should
direct the cargo to be taken out, the freight paid for, and the vessel released, the agent
employed might prove fraudulent, and become bankrupt; and in that case the captain became responsible.
Such things had happened: Nelson therefore required, as the only means for carrying on that
service, which was judged essential to the common cause, without exposing the officers to ruin,
that the British envoy should appoint agents to pay the freight, release the vessels, sell
the cargo, and hold the amount till process was had upon it: government thus securing its officers.
"I am acting," said Nelson. "not only without the orders of my commander-in-chief, but, in
some measure, contrary to him. However, I have not only the support of his Majesty's ministers,
both at Turin and Genoa, but a consciousness that I am doing what is right and proper for the
service of our king and country. Political courage, in an officer abroad, is as highly necessary
as military courage."

This quality, which is as much rarer than military courage as it is more valuable, and without
which the soldier's bravery is often of little avail, Nelson possessed in an eminent degree.
His representations were attended to as they deserved. Admiral Hotham commended him for what
he had done; and the attention of government was awakened to the injury which the cause of
the allies continually suffered from the frauds of neutral vessels. "What changes in my life
of activity!" said the indefatigable man. "Here I am, having commenced a co-operation with
an old Austrian general, almost fancying myself charging at the head of a troop of horse! I
do not write less than from ten to twenty letters every day; which, with the Austrian general
and aides-de-camp, and my own little squadron, fully employ my time. This I like; active service
or none." It was Nelson's mind which supported his feeble body through these exertions. He
was at this time almost blind, and wrote with very great pain. "Poor AGAMEMNON," he sometimes
said, "was as nearly worn out as her captain; and both must soon be laid up to repair."

When Nelson first saw General de Vins, he thought him an able man, who was willing to act with
vigour. The general charged his inactivity upon the Piedmontese and Neapolitans, whom, he said,
nothing could induce to act; and he concerted a plan with Nelson for embarking a part of the
Austrian army, and landing it in the rear of the French. But the English commodore soon began
to suspect that the Austrian general was little disposed to any active operations. In the hope
of spurring him on, he wrote to him, telling him that he had surveyed the coast to the W. as
far as Nice, and would undertake to embark 4000 or 5000 men, with their arms and a few days'
provisions, on board the squadron, and land them within two miles of St. Remo, with their field-pieces.
Respecting further provisions for the Austrian army, he would provide convoys, that they should
arrive in safety; and if a re-embarkation should be found necessary, he would cover it with
the squadron. The possession of St. Remo, as headquarters for magazines of every kind, would
enable the Austrian general to turn his army to the eastward or westward. The enemy at Oneglia
would be cut off from provisions, and men could be landed to attack that place whenever it
was judged necessary. St. Remo was the only place between Vado and Ville Franche where the
squadron could lie in safety, and anchor in almost all winds. The bay was not so good as Vado
for large ships; but it had a mole, which Vado had not, where all small vessels could lie,
and load and unload their cargoes. This bay being in possession of the allies, Nice could be
completely blockaded by sea. General de Vins affecting, in his reply, to consider that Nelson's
proposal had no other end than that of obtaining the bay of St. Remo as a station for the ships,
told him, what he well knew, and had expressed before, that Vado Bay was a better anchorage;
nevertheless, if MONSIEUR LE COMMANDANT NELSON was well assured that part of the fleet could
winter there, there was no risk to which he would not expose himself with pleasure, for the
sake of procuring a safe station for the vessels of his Britannic Majesty. Nelson soon assured
the Austrian commander that this was not the object of his memorial. He now began to suspect
that both the Austrian Court and their general had other ends in view than the cause of the
allies. "This army," said he, "is slow beyond all description; and I begin to think that the
Emperor is anxious to touch another L4,000,000 of English money. As for the German generals,
war is their trade, and peace is ruin to them; therefore we cannot expect that they should
have any wish to finish the war. The politics of courts are so mean, that private people would
be ashamed to act in the same way; all is trick and finesse, to which the common cause is sacrificed.
The general wants a loop-hole; it has for some time appeared to me that he means to go no further
than his present position, and to lay the miscarriage of the enterprise against Nice, which
has always been held out as the great object of his army, to the non-cooperation of the British
fleet and of the Sardinians."

To prevent this plea, Nelson again addressed De Vins, requesting only to know the time, and
the number of troops ready to embark; then he would, he said, dispatch a ship to Admiral Hotham,
requesting transports, having no doubt of obtaining them, and trusting that the plan would
be successful to its fullest extent. Nelson thought at the time that, if the whole fleet were
offered him for transports, he would find some other excuse; and Mr. Drake, who was now appointed
to reside at the Austrian headquarters, entertained the same idea of the general's sincerity.
It was not, however, put so clearly to the proof as it ought to have been. He replied that,
as soon as Nelson could declare himself ready with the vessels necessary for conveying 10,000
men, with their artillery and baggage, he would put the army in motion. But Nelson was not
enabled to do this: Admiral Hotham, who was highly meritorious in leaving such a man so much
at his own discretion, pursued a cautious system, ill according with the bold and comprehensive
views of Nelson, who continually regretted Lord Hood, saying that the nation had suffered much
by his resignation of the Mediterranean command. The plan which had been concerted, he said,
would astonish the French, and perhaps the English.

There was no unity in the views of the allied powers, no cordiality in their co-operation,
no energy in their councils. The neutral powers assisted France more effectually than the allies
assisted each other. The Genoese ports were at this time filled with French privateers, which
swarmed out every night, and covered the gulf; and French vessels were allowed to tow out of
the port of Genoa itself, board vessels which were coming in, and then return into the mole.
This was allowed without a remonstrance; while, though Nelson abstained most carefully from
offering any offence to the Genoese territory or flag, complaints were so repeatedly made against
his squadron, that, he says, it seemed a trial who should be tired first; they of complaining,
or he of answering their complaints. But the question of neutrality was soon at an end. An
Austrian commissary was travelling from Genoa towards Vado; it was known that he was to sleep
at Voltri, and that he had L10,000 with him--a booty which the French minister in that city,
and the captain of a French frigate in that port, considered as far more important than the
word of honour of the one, the duties of the other, and the laws of neutrality. The boats of
the frigate went out with some privateers, landed, robbed the commissary, and brought back
the money to Genoa. The next day men were publicly enlisted in that city for the French army:
700 men were embarked, with 7000 stand of arms, on board the frigates and other vessels, who
were to land between Voltri and Savona. There a detachment from the French army was to join
them, and the Genoese peasantry were to be invited to insurrection--a measure for which everything
had been prepared. The night of the 13th was fixed for the sailing of this expedition; the
Austrians called loudly for Nelson to prevent it; and he, on the evening of the 13th, arrived
at Genoa. His presence checked the plan: the frigate, knowing her deserts, got within the merchant-ships,
in the inner mole; and the Genoese government did not now even demand of Nelson respect to
the neutral port, knowing that they had allowed, if not connived at, a flagrant breach of neutrality,
and expecting the answer which he was prepared to return, that it was useless and impossible
for him to respect it longer.

But though this movement produced the immediate effect which was designed, it led to ill consequences,
which Nelson foresaw, but for want of sufficient force was unable to prevent. His squadron
was too small for the service which it had to perform. He required two seventy-fours and eight
or ten frigates and sloops; but when he demanded this reinforcement, Admiral Hotham had left
the command. Sir Hyde Parker had succeeded till the new commander should arrive; and he immediately
reduced it to almost nothing, leaving him only one frigate and a brig. This was a fatal error.
While the Austrian and Sardinian troops, whether from the imbecility or the treachery of their
leaders, remained inactive, the French were preparing for the invasion of Italy. Not many days
before Nelson was thus summoned to Genoa, he chased a large convoy into Alassio. Twelve vessels
he had formerly destroyed in that port, though 2000 French troops occupied the town. This former
attack had made them take new measures of defence; and there were now above 100 sail of victuallers,
gun-boats, and ships of war. Nelson represented to the Admiral how important it was to destroy
these vessels; and offered, with his squadron of frigates, and the CULLODEN and COURAGEUX,
to lead himself in the AGAMEMNON, and take or destroy the whole. The attempt was not permitted;
but it was Nelson's belief that, if it had been made, it would have prevented the attack upon
the Austrian army, which took place almost immediately afterwards.

General de Vins demanded satisfaction of the Genoese government for the seizure of his commissary;
and then, without waiting for their reply, took possession of some empty magazines of the French,
and pushed his sentinels to the very gates of Genoa. Had he done so at first, he would have
found the magazines full; but, timed as the measure was, and useless as it was to the cause
of the allies, it was in character with the whole of the Austrian general's conduct; and it
is no small proof of the dexterity with which he served the enemy, that in such circumstances
he could so act with Genoa as to contrive to put himself in the wrong. Nelson was at this time,
according to his own expression, placed in a cleft stick. Mr. Drake, the Austrian minister,
and the Austrian general, all joined in requiring him not to leave Genoa; if he left that port
unguarded, they said, not only the imperial troops at St. Pier d'Arena and Voltri would be
lost, but the French plan for taking post between Voltri and Savona would certainly succeed;
if the Austrians should be worsted in the advanced posts, the retreat of the Bocchetta would
be cut off; and if this happened, the loss of the army would be imputed to him, for having
left Genoa. On the other hand, he knew that if he were not at Pietra, the enemy's gun-boats
would harass the left flank of the Austrians, who, if they were defeated, as was to be expected,
from the spirit of all their operations, would, very probably, lay their defeat to the want
of assistance from the AGAMEMNON. Had the force for which Nelson applied been given him, he
could have attended to both objects; and had he been permitted to attack the convoy in Alassio,
he would have disconcerted the plans of the French, in spite of the Austrian general. He had
foreseen the danger, and pointed out how it might be prevented; but the means of preventing
it were withheld. The attack was made as he foresaw; and the gun-boats brought their fire to
bear upon the Austrians. It so happened, however, that the left flank, which was exposed to
them, was the only part of the army that behaved well: this division stood its ground till
the centre and the right wing fled, and then retreated in a soldier-like manner. General de
Vins gave up the command in the middle of the battle, pleading ill health. "From that moment,"
says Nelson, "not a soldier stayed at his post: it was the devil take the hindmost. Many thousands
ran away who had never seen the enemy; some of them thirty miles from the advanced posts. Had
I not, though I own, against my inclination, been kept at Genoa, from 8000 to 10,000 men would
have been taken prisoners, and, amongst the number, General de Vins himself; but by this means
the pass of the Bocchetta was kept open. The purser of the ship, who was at Vado, ran with
the Austrians eighteen miles without stopping; the men without arms, officers without soldiers,
women without assistance. The oldest officers say they never heard of so complete a defeat,
and certainly without any reason. Thus has ended my campaign. We have established the French
republic: which but for us, I verily believe, would never have been settled by such a volatile,
changeable people. I hate a Frenchman: they are equally objects of my detestation whether royalists
or republicans: in some points, I believe, the latter are the best." Nelson had a lieutenant
and two midshipmen taken at Vado: they told him, in their letter, that few of the French soldiers
were more than three or four and twenty years old, a great many not more than fourteen, and
all were nearly naked; they were sure, they said, his barge's crew could have beat a hundred
of them; and that, had he himself seen them, he would not have thought, if the world had been
covered with such people, that they could have beaten the Austrian army.

The defeat of General de Vins gave the enemy possession of the Genoese coast from Savona to
Voltri, and it deprived the Austrians of their direct communication with the English fleet.
The AGAMEMNON, therefore, could no longer be useful on this station, and Nelson sailed for
Leghorn to refit. When his ship went into dock, there was not a mast, yard, sail, or any part
of the rigging, but what stood in need of repair, having been cut to pieces with shot. The
hull was so damaged that it had for some time been secured by cables, which were served or
thrapped round it.

CHAPTER IV

1796 - 1797

Sir J. Jervis takes the Command--Genoa joins the French--Bounaparte begins his Career--Evacuation
of Corsica--Nelson hoists his broad Pennant in the MINERVE--Action with the SABINA--Battle
off Cape St. Vincent--Nelson commands the inner Squadron at the Blockade of Cadiz Boat Action
in the Bay of Cadiz--Expedition against Teneriffe--Nelson loses an Arm--His Sufferings in England,
and Recovery.

SIR JOHN JERVIS had now arrived to take the command of the Mediterranean fleet. The AGAMEMNON
having, as her captain said, been made as fit for sea as a rotten ship could be, Nelson sailed
from Leghorn, and joined the admiral in Fiorenzo Bay. "I found him," said he, "anxious to know
many things which I was a good deal surprised to find had not been communicated to him by others
in the fleet; and it would appear that he was so well satisfied with my opinion of what is
likely to happen, and the means of prevention to be taken, that he had no reserve with me respecting
his information and ideas of what is likely to be done." The manner in which Nelson was received
is said to have excited some envy. One captain observed to him: "You did just as you pleased
in Lord Hood's time, the same in Admiral Hotham's, and now again with Sir John Jervis: it makes
no difference to you who is commander-in-chief." A higher compliment could not have been paid
to any commander-in-chief than to say of him that he understood the merits of Nelson, and left
him, as far as possible, to act upon his own judgment.

Sir John Jervis offered him the ST. GEORGE, ninety, or the ZEALOUS, seventy-four, and asked
if he should have any objection to serve under him with his flag. He replied, that if the AGAMEMNON
were ordered home, and his flag were not arrived, he should, on many accounts, wish to return
to England; still, if the war continued, he should be very proud of hoisting his flag under
Sir John's command, "We cannot spare you," said Sir John, "either as captain or admiral." Accordingly,
he resumed his station in the Gulf of Genoa. The French had not followed up their successes
in that quarter with their usual celerity. Scherer, who commanded there, owed his advancement
to any other cause than his merit: he was a favourite of the directory; but for the present,
through the influence of Barras, he was removed from a command for which his incapacity was
afterwards clearly proved, and Buonaparte was appointed to succeed him. Buonaparte had given
indications of his military talents at Toulon, and of his remorseless nature at Paris; but
the extent either of his ability or his wickedness was at this time known to none, and perhaps
not even suspected by himself.

Nelson supposed, from the information which he had obtained, that one column of the French
army would take possession of Port Especia; either penetrating through the Genoese territory,
or proceeding coast-ways in light vessels; our ships of war not being able to approach the
coast, because of the shallowness of the water. To prevent this, he said; two things were necessary:
the possession of Vado Bay, and the taking of Port Especia; if either of these points were
secured, Italy would be safe from any attack of the French by sea. General Beaulieu, who had
now superseded De Vins in the command of the allied Austrian and Sardinian army, sent his nephew
and aide-de-camp to communicate with Nelson, and inquire whether he could anchor in any other
place than Vado Bay. Nelson replied, that Vado was the only place where the British fleet could
lie in safety, but all places would suit his squadron; and wherever the general came to the
sea-coast, there he should find it. The Austrian repeatedly asked, if there was not a risk
of losing the squadron? and was constantly answered, that if these ships should be lost, the
admiral would find others. But all plans of co-operation with the Austrians were soon frustrated
by the battle of Montenotte. Beaulieu ordered an attack to be made upon the post of Voltri.
It was made twelve hours before the time which he had fixed, and before he arrived to direct
it. In consequence, the French were enabled to effect their retreat, and fall back to Montenotte,
thus giving the troops there a decisive superiority in number over the division which attacked
them. This drew on the defeat of the Austrians. Buonaparte, with a celerity which had never
before been witnessed in modern war, pursued his advantages; and, in the course of a fortnight,
dictated to the court of Turin terms of peace, or rather of submission; by which all the strongest
places of Piedmont were put into his bands.

On one occasion, and only on one, Nelson was able to impede the progress of this new conqueror.
Six vessels, laden with cannon and ordnance-stores for the siege of Mantua, sailed from Toulon
for St. Pier d'Arena. Assisted by Captain Cockburn, in the MELEAGER, he drove them under a
battery; pursued them, silenced the batteries, and captured the whole. Military books, plans
and maps of Italy, with the different points marked upon them where former battles had been
fought, sent by the directory for Buonaparte's use, were found in the convoy. The loss of this
artillery was one of the chief causes which compelled the French to raise the siege of Mantua;
but there was too much treachery, and too much imbecility, both in the councils and armies
of the allied powers, for Austria to improve this momentary success. Buonaparte perceived that
the conquest of Italy was within his reach; treaties, and the rights of neutral or of friendly
powers, were as little regarded by him as by the government for which he acted. In open contempt
of both he entered Tuscany, and took possession of Leghorn. In consequence of this movement,
Nelson blockaded that port, and landed a British force in the Isle of Elba, to secure Porto
Ferrajo. Soon afterwards he took the Island of Capraja, which had formerly belonged to Corsica,
being less than forty miles distant from it; a distance, however, short as it was, which enabled
the Genoese to retain it, after their infamous sale of Corsica to France. Genoa had now taken
part with France: its government had long covertly assisted the French, and now willingly yielded
to the first compulsory menace which required them to exclude the English from their ports.
Capraja was seized in consequence; but this act of vigour was not followed up as it ought to
have been. England at that time depended too much upon the feeble governments of the Continent,
and too little upon itself. It was determined by the British cabinet to evacuate Corsica, as
soon as Spain should form an offensive alliance with France. This event, which, from the moment
that Spain had been compelled to make peace, was clearly foreseen, had now taken place; and
orders for the evacuation of the island were immediately sent out. It was impolitic to annex
this island to the British dominions; but having done so, it was disgraceful thus to abandon
it. The disgrace would have been spared, and every advantage which could have been derived
from the possession of the island secured, if the people had at first been left to form a government
for themselves, and protected by us in the enjoyment of their independence.

The viceroy, Sir Gilbert Elliott, deeply felt the impolicy and ignominy of this evacuation.
The fleet also was ordered to leave the Mediterranean. This resolution was so contrary to the
last instructions which had been received, that Nelson exclaimed, "Do his majesty's ministers
know their own minds? They at home," said he, "do not know what this fleet is capable of performing--anything
and everything. Much as I shall rejoice to see England, I lament our present orders in sackcloth
and ashes, so dishonourable to the dignity of England, whose fleets are equal to meet the world
in arms; and of all the fleets I ever saw, I never beheld one, in point of officers and men,
equal to Sir John Jervis's, who is a commander-in-chief able to lead them to glory." Sir Gilbert
Elliott believed that the great body of the Corsicans were perfectly satisfied, as they had
good reason to be, with the British Government, sensible of its advantages, and attached to
it. However this may have been, when they found that the English intended to evacuate the island,
they naturally and necessarily sent to make their peace with the French. The partisans of France
found none to oppose them. A committee of thirty took upon them the government of Bastia, and
sequestrated all the British property; armed Corsicans mounted guard at every place, and a
plan was laid for seizing the viceroy. Nelson, who was appointed to superintend the evacuation,
frustrated these projects. At a time when every one else despaired of saving stores, cannon,
provisions, or property of any kind, and a privateer was moored across the mole-head to prevent
all boats from passing, he sent word to the committee, that if the slightest opposition were
made to the embarkment and removal of British property, he would batter the town down. The
privateer pointed her guns at the officer who carried this message, and muskets were levelled
against his boats from the mole-head. Upon this Captain Sutton, of the EGMONT, pulling out
his watch, gave them a quarter of an hour to deliberate upon their answer. In five minutes
after the expiration of that time, the ships, he said, would open their fire. Upon this the
very sentinels scampered off, and every vessel came out of the mole. A shipowner complained
to the commodore that the municipality refused to let him take his goods out of the custom-house.
Nelson directed him to say, that unless they were instantly delivered, he would open his fire.
The committee turned pale, and, without answering a word, gave him the keys. Their last attempt
was to levy a duty upon the things that were re-embarked. He sent them word, that he would
pay them a disagreeable visit, if there were any more complaints. The committee then finding
that they had to deal with a man who knew his own power, and was determined to make the British
name respected, desisted from the insolent conduct which they had assumed; and it was acknowledged
that Bastia never had been so quiet and orderly since the English were in possession of it.
This was on the 14th of October; during the five following days the work of embarkation was
carried on, the private property was saved, and public stores to the amount of L200,000. The
French, favoured by the Spanish fleet, which was at that time within twelve leagues of Bastia,
pushed over troops from Leghorn, who landed near Cape Corse on the 18th; and on the 20th, at
one in the morning, entered the citadel, an hour only after the British had spiked the guns
and evacuated it. Nelson embarked at daybreak, being the last person who left the shore; having
thus, as he said, seen the first and the last of Corsica. Provoked at the conduct of the municipality,
and the disposition which the populace had shown to profit by the confusion, he turned towards
the shore, as he stepped into his boat, and exclaimed: "Now, John Corse, follow the natural
bent of your detestable character --plunder and revenge." This, however, was not Nelson's deliberate
opinion of the people of Corsica; he knew that their vices were the natural consequences of
internal anarchy and foreign oppression, such as the same causes would produce in any people;
and when he saw, that of all those who took leave of the viceroy there was not one who parted
from him without tears, he acknowledged that they manifestly acted not from dislike of the
English, but from fear of the French. England then might, with more reason, reproach her own
rulers for pusillanimity than the Corsicans for ingratitude.

Having thus ably effected this humiliating service, Nelson was ordered to hoist his broad pendant
on board the MINERVE frigate, Captain George Cockburn, and with the BLANCHE under his command,
proceed to Porto Ferrajo, and superintend the evacuation of that place also. On his way, he
fell in with two Spanish frigates, the SABINA and the CERES. The MINERVE engaged the former,
which was commanded by D. Jacobo Stuart, a descendent of the Duke of Berwick. After an action
of three hours, during which the Spaniards lost 164 men, the SABINA struck. The Spanish captain,
who was the only surviving officer, had hardly been conveyed on board the MINERVE, when another
enemy's frigate came up, compelled her to cast off the prize, and brought her a second time
into action. After half an hour's trial of strength, this new antagonist wore and hauled off;
but a Spanish squadron of two ships of the line and two frigates came in sight. The BLANCHE,
from which the CERES had got off, was far to windward, and the MINERVE escaped only by the
anxiety of the enemy to recover their own ship. As soon as Nelson reached Porto Ferrajo he
sent his prisoner in a flag of truce to Carthagena, having returned him his sword; this he
did in honour of the gallantry which D. Jacobo had displayed, and not without some feeling
of respect for his ancestry. "I felt it," said he, "consonant to the dignity of my country
and I always act as I feel right, without regard to custom; he was reputed the best officer
in Spain, and his men were worthy of such a commander." By the same flag of truce he sent back
all the Spanish prisoners at Porto Ferrajo; in exchange for whom he received his own men who
had been taken in the prize.

General de Burgh, who commanded at the Isle of Elba, did not think himself authorised to abandon
the place till he had received specific instructions from England to that effect; professing
that he was unable to decide between the contradictory orders of government, or to guess at
what their present intentions might be; but he said, his only motive for urging delay in this
measure arose from a desire that his own conduct might be properly sanctioned, not from any
opinion that Porto Ferrajo ought to be retained. But Naples having made peace, Sir John Jervis
considered his business with Italy as concluded; and the protection of Portugal was the point
to which he was now instructed to attend. Nelson, therefore, whose orders were perfectly clear
and explicit, withdrew the whole naval establishment from that station, leaving the transports
victualled, and so arranged that all the troops and stores could be embarked in three days.
He was now about to leave the Mediterranean. Mr. Drake, who had been our minister at Genoa,
expressed to him, on this occasion, the very high opinion which the allies entertained of his
conspicuous merit; adding, that it was impossible for any one, who had the honour of co-operating
with him, not to admire the activity, talents, and zeal which he had so eminently and constantly
displayed. In fact, during this long course of services in the Mediterranean, the whole of
his conduct had exhibited the same zeal, the same indefatigable energy, the same intuitive
judgment, the same prompt and unerring decision which characterised his after-career of glory.
His name was as yet hardly known to the English public; but it was feared and respected throughout
Italy. A letter came to him, directed "Horatio Nelson, Genoa;" and the writer, when he was
asked how he could direct it so vaguely, replied, "Sir, there is but one Horatio Nelson in
the world." At Genoa, in particular, where he had so long been stationed, and where the nature
of his duty first led him to continual disputes with the government, and afterwards compelled
him to stop the trade of the port, he was equally respected by the doge and by the people;
for, while he maintained the rights and interests of Great Britain with becoming firmness,
he tempered the exercise of power with courtesy and humanity wherever duty would permit. "Had
all my actions," said he, writing at this time to his wife, "been gazetted, not one fortnight
would have passed, during the whole war, without a letter from me. One day or other I will
have a long GAZETTE to myself. I feel that such an opportunity will be given me. I cannot,
if I am in the field of glory, be kept out of sight; wherever there is anything to be done,
there Providence is sure to direct my steps."

These hopes and anticipations were soon to be fulfilled. Nelson's mind had long been irritated
and depressed by the fear that a general action would take place before he could join the fleet.
At length he sailed from Porto Ferrajo with a convoy for Gibraltar; and having reached that
place, proceeded to the westward in search of the admiral. Off the mouth of the Straits he
fell in with the Spanish fleet; and on the 13th of February reaching the station off Cape St.
Vincent, communicated this intelligence to Sir John Jervis. He was now directed to shift his
broad pendant on board the CAPTAIN, seventy-four, Captain R.W. Miller; and before sunset the
signal was made to prepare for action, and to keep, during the night, in close order. At daybreak
the enemy were in sight. The British force consisted of two ships of one hundred guns, two
of ninety-eight, two of ninety, eight of seventy-four, and one sixty-four;-fifteen of the line
in all; with four frigates, a sloop, and a cutter. The Spaniards had one four-decker, of one
hundred and thirty-six guns; six three-deckers, of one hundred and twelve; two eighty-four,
eighteen seventy-four--in all, twenty-seven ships of the line, with ten frigates and a brig.
Their admiral, D. Joseph de Cordova, had learnt from an American on the 5th, that the English
had only nine ships, which was indeed the case when his informer had seen them; for a reinforcement
of five ships from England, under Admiral Parker, had not then joined, and the CULLODEN had
parted company. Upon this information the Spanish commander, instead of going into Cadiz, as
was his intention when he sailed from Carthagena, determined to seek an enemy so inferior in
force; and relying, with fatal confidence, upon the American account, he suffered his ships
to remain too far dispersed, and in some disorder. When the morning of the 14th broke, and
discovered the English fleet, a fog for some time concealed their number. That fleet had heard
their signal-guns during the night, the weather being fine though thick and hazy; soon after
daylight they were seen very much scattered, while the British ships were in a compact little
body. The look-out ship of the Spaniards, fancying that her signal was disregarded because
so little notice seemed to be taken of it, made another signal, that the English force consisted
of forty sail of the line. The captain afterwards said he did this to rouse the admiral; it
had the effect of perplexing him and alarming the whole fleet. The absurdity of such an act
shows what was the state of the Spanish navy under that miserable government by which Spain
was so long oppressed and degraded, and finally betrayed. In reality, the general incapacity
of the naval officers was so well known, that in a pasquinade, which about this time appeared
at Madrid, wherein the different orders of the state were advertised for sale, the greater
part of the sea-officers, with all their equipments, were offered as a gift; and it was added,
that any person who would please to take them, should receive a handsome gratuity. When the
probability that Spain would take part in the war, as an ally of France, was first contemplated,
Nelson said that their fleet, if it were no better than when it acted in alliance with us,
would "soon be done for."

Before the enemy could form a regular order of battle, Sir J. Jervis, by carrying a press of
sail, came up with them, passed through their fleet, then tacked, and thus cut off nine of
their ships from the main body. These ships attempted to form on the larboard tack, either
with a design of passing through the British line, or to leeward of it, and thus rejoining
their friends. Only one of them succeeded in this attempt; and that only because she was so
covered with smoke that her intention was not discovered till she had reached the rear: the
others were so warmly received, that they put about, took to flight, and did not appear again
in the action to its close. The admiral was now able to direct his attention to the enemy's
main body, which was still superior in number to his whole fleet, and greatly so in weight
of metal. He made signal to tack in succession. Nelson, whose station was in the rear of the
British line, perceived that the Spaniards were bearing up before the wind, with an intention
of forming their line, going large, and joining their separated ships, or else of getting off
without an engagement. To prevent either of these schemes, he disobeyed the signal without
a moment's hesitation: and ordered his ship to be wore. This at once brought him into action
with the SANTISSIMA TRINIDAD, one hundred and thirty-six; the SAN JOSEPH, one hundred and twelve;
the SALVADOR DEL MUNDO, one hundred and twelve; the SAN NICOLAS, eighty; the SAN ISIDRO, seventy-four,
another seventy-four, and another first-rate. Troubridge, in the CULLODEN, immediately joined,
and most nobly supported him; and for nearly an hour did the CULLODEN and CAPTAIN maintain
what Nelson called "this apparently, but not really unequal contest;"--such was the advantage
of skill and discipline, and the confidence which brave men derive from them. The BLENHEIM
then passing between them and the enemy, gave them a respite, and poured in her fire upon the
Spaniards. The SALVADOR DEL MUNDO and SAN ISIDRO dropped astern, and were fired into in a masterly
style by the EXCELLENT, Captain Collingwood. The SAN ISIDRO struck; and Nelson thought that
the SALVADOR struck also. "But Collingwood," says he, "disdaining the parade of taking possession
of beaten enemies, most gallantly pushed up, with every sail set, to save his old friend and
messmate, who was to appearance in a critical situation;" for the CAPTAIN was at this time
actually fired upon by three first-rates--by the SAN NICOLAS, and by a seventy-four, within
about pistol-shot of that vessel. The BLENHEIM was ahead, the CULLODEN crippled and astern.
Collingwood ranged up, and hauling up his mainsail just astern, passed within ten feet of the
SAN NICOLAS, giving her a most tremendous fire, then passed on for the SANTISSIMA TRINIDAD.
The SAN NICOLAS luffing up, the SAN JOSEPH fell on board her, and Nelson resumed his station
abreast of them, and close alongside. The CAPTAIN was now incapable of further service, either
in the line or in chase: she had lost her foretop-mast; not a sail, shroud, or rope was left,
and her wheel was shot away. Nelson therefore directed Captain Miller to put the helm a-starboard,
and calling for the boarders, ordered them to board.

Captain Berry, who had lately been Nelson's first lieutenant, was the first man who leaped
into the enemy's mizen chains. Miller, when in the very act of going, was ordered by Nelson
to remain. Berry was supported from the spritsail-yard, which locked in the SAN NICOLAS's main
rigging. A soldier of the 69th broke the upper quarter-gallery window, and jumped in, followed
by the commodore himself and by the others as fast as possible. The cabin doors were fastened,
and the Spanish officers fired their pistols at them through the window; the doors were soon
forced, and the Spanish brigadier fell while retreating to the quarter-deck. Nelson pushed
on, and found Berry in possession of the poop, and the Spanish ensign hauling down. He passed
on to the forecastle, where he met two or three Spanish officers, and received their swords.
The English were now in full possession of every part of the ship, when a fire of pistols and
musketry opened upon them from the admiral's stern-gallery of the SAN JOSEPH. Nelson having
placed sentinels at the different ladders, and ordered Captain Miller to send more men into
the prize, gave orders for boarding that ship from the SAN NICOLAS. It was done in an instant,
he himself leading the way, and exclaiming, "Westminster Abbey or victory!" Berry assisted
him into the main chains; and at that moment a Spanish officer looked over the quarter-deck
rail, and said they surrendered. It was not long before he was on the quarter-deck, where the
Spanish captain presented to him his sword, and told him the admiral was below dying of his
wounds. There, on the quarter-deck of an enemy's first-rate, he received the swords of the
officers, giving them, as they were delivered, one by one to William Fearney, one of his old
AGAMEMNONs, who, with the utmost coolness, put them under his arm, "bundling them up," in the
lively expression of Collingwood, "with as much composure as he would have made a faggot, though
twenty-two sail of their line were still within gunshot." One of his sailors came up, and with
an Englishman's feeling took him by the hand, saying he might not soon have such another place
to do it in, and he was heartily glad to see him there. Twenty-four of the CAPTAIN's men were
killed, and fifty-six wounded; a fourth part of the loss sustained by the whole squadron falling
upon this ship. Nelson received only a few bruises.

The Spaniards had still eighteen or nineteen ships which had suffered little or no injury:
that part of the fleet which had been separated from the main body in the morning was now coming
up, and Sir John Jervis made signal to bring to. His ships could not have formed without abandoning
those which they had captured, and running to leeward: the CAPTAIN was lying a perfect wreck
on board her two prizes; and many of the other vessels were so shattered in their masts and
rigging as to be wholly unmanageable. The Spanish admiral meantime, according to his official
account, being altogether undecided in his own opinion respecting the state of the fleet, inquired
of his captains whether it was proper to renew the action; nine of them answered explicitly
that it was not; others replied that it was expedient to delay the business. The PELAYO and
the PRINCE CONQUISTADOR were the only ships that were for fighting.

As soon as the action was discontinued, Nelson went on board the admiral's ship. Sir John Jervis
received him on the quarter-deck, took him in his arms, and said he could not sufficiently
thank him. For this victory the commander-in-chief was rewarded with the title of Earl St.
Vincent. Nelson, who before the action was known in England had been advanced to the rank of
rear-admiral, had the Order of the Bath given him. The sword of the Spanish rear-admiral, which
Sir John Jervis insisted upon his keeping, he presented to the Mayor and Corporation of Norwich,
saying that he knew no place where it could give him or his family more pleasure to have it
kept than in the capital city of the county where he was born. The freedom of that city was
voted him on this occasion. But of all the numerous congratulations which he received, none
could have affected him with deeper delight than that which came from his venerable father.
"I thank my God," said this excellent man, "with all the power of a grateful soul, for the
mercies he has most graciously bestowed on me in preserving you. Not only my few acquaintance
here, but the people in general, met me at every corner with such handsome words, that I was
obliged to retire from the public eye. The height of glory to which your professional judgment,
united with a proper degree of bravery, guarded by Providence, has raised you, few sons, my
dear child, attain to, and fewer fathers live to see. Tears of joy have involuntarily trickled
down my furrowed cheeks: who could stand the force of such general congratulation? The name
and services of Nelson have sounded through this city of Bath--from the common ballad-singer
to the public theatre." The good old man concluded by telling him that the field of glory,
in which he had so long been conspicuous, was still open, and by giving him his blessing.

Sir Horatio, who had now hoisted his flag as rear-admiral of the blue, was sent to bring away
the troops from Porto Ferrajo; having performed this, he shifted his flag to the THESEUS. That
ship, had taken part in the mutiny in England, and being just arrived from home, some danger
was apprehended from the temper of the men. This was one reason why Nelson was removed to her.
He had not been on board many weeks before a paper, signed in the name of all the ship's company,
was dropped on the quarter-deck, containing these words: "Success attend Admiral Nelson! God
bless Captain Miller! We thank them for the officers they have placed over us. We are happy
and comfortable, and will shed every drop of blood in our veins to support them; and the name
of the THESEUS shall be immortalised as high as her captain's." Wherever Nelson commanded,
the men soon became attached to him; in ten days' time he would have restored the most mutinous
ship in the navy to order. Whenever an officer fails to win the affections of those who are
under his command, he may be assured that the fault is chiefly in himself.

While Sir Horatio was in the THESEUS, he was employed in the command of the inner squadron
at the blockade of Cadiz. During this service, the most perilous action occurred in which he
was ever engaged. Making a night attack upon the Spanish gun-boats, his barge was attacked
by an armed launch, under their commander, D. Miguel Tregoyen, carrying 26 men. Nelson had
with him only his ten bargemen, Captain Freemantle, and his coxswain, John Sykes, an old and
faithful follower, who twice saved the life of his admiral by parrying the blows that were
aimed at him, and at last actually interposed his own head to receive the blow of a Spanish
sabre, which he could not by any other means avert; thus dearly was Nelson beloved. This was
a desperate service--hand to hand with swords; and Nelson always considered that his personal
courage was more conspicuous on this occasion than on any other during his whole life. Notwithstanding
the great disproportion of numbers, 18 of the enemy were killed, all the rest wounded, and
their launch taken. Nelson would have asked for a lieutenancy for Sykes, if he had served long
enough; his manner and conduct, he observed, were so entirely above his situation, that Nature
certainly intended him for a gentleman; but though he recovered from the dangerous wound which
he received in this act of heroic attachment, he did not live to profit by the gratitude and
friendship of his commander.

Twelve days after this rencontre, Nelson sailed at the head of an expedition against Teneriffe.
A report had prevailed a few months before, that the viceroy of Mexico, With the treasure ships,
had put into that island. This had led Nelson to meditate the plan of an attack upon it, which
he communicated to Earl St. Vincent. He was perfectly aware of the difficulties of the attempt.
"I do not," said he, "reckon myself equal to Blake; but, if I recollect right, he was more
obliged to the wind coming off the land than to any exertions of his own. The approach by sea
to the anchoring-place is under very high land, passing three valleys; therefore the wind is
either in from the sea, or squally with calms from the mountains:" and he perceived that if
the Spanish ships were won, the object would still be frustrated if the wind did not come off
shore. The land force, he thought, would render success certain; and there were the troops
from Elba, with all necessary stores and artillery, already embarked. "But here," said he,
"soldiers must be consulted; and I know, from experience, they have not the same boldness in
undertaking a political measure that we have: we look to the benefit of our country, and risk
our own fame every day to serve her; a soldier obeys his orders, and no more." Nelson's experience
at Corsica justified him in this harsh opinion: he did not live to see the glorious days of
the British army under Wellington. The army from Elba, consisting of 3700 men, would do the
business, he said, in three days, probably in much less time; and he would undertake, with
a very small squadron, to perform the naval part; for though the shore was not easy of access,
the transports might run in and land the troops in one day.

The report concerning the viceroy was unfounded: but a homeward-bound Manilla ship put into
Santa Cruz at this time, and the expedition was determined upon. It was not fitted out upon
the scale which Nelson had proposed. Four ships of the line, three frigates, and the FOX cutter,
formed the squadron; and he was allowed to choose such ships and officers as he thought proper.
No troops were embarked; the seamen and marines of the squadron being thought sufficient. His
orders were, to make a vigorous attack; but on no account to land in person, unless his presence
should be absolutely necessary. The plan was, that the boats should land in the night, between
the fort on the N.E. side of Santa Cruz bay and the town, make themselves masters of that fort,
and then send a summons to the governor. By midnight, the three frigates, having the force
on board which was intended for this debarkation, approached within three miles of the place;
but owing to a strong gale of wind in the offing, and a strong current against them in-shore,
they were not able to get within a mile of the landing-place before daybreak; and then they
were seen, and their intention discovered. Troubridge and Bowen, with Captain Oldfield, of
the marines, went upon this to consult with the admiral what was to be done; and it was resolved
that they should attempt to get possession of the heights above the fort. The frigates accordingly
landed their men; and Nelson stood in with the line-of-battle ships, meaning to batter the
fort for the purpose of distracting the attention of the garrison. A calm and contrary current
hindered him from getting within a league of the shore; and the heights were by this time so
secured, and manned with such a force, as to be judged impracticable. Thus foiled in his plans
by circumstances of wind and tide, he still considered it a point of honour that some attempt
should be made. This was on the 22nd of July: he re-embarked his men that night, got the ships
on the 24th to anchor about two miles north of the town, and made show as if he intended to
attack the heights. At six in the evening signal was made for the boats to prepare to proceed
on the service as previously ordered.

When this was done, Nelson addressed a letter to the commander-in-chief--the last which was
ever written with his right hand. "I shall not," said he, "enter on the subject, why we are
not in possession of Santa Cruz. Your partiality will give credit, that all has hitherto been
done which was possible, but without effect. This night I, humble as I am, command the whole
destined to land under the batteries of the town; and to-morrow my head will probably be crowned
either with laurel or cypress. I have only to recommend Josiah Nisbet to you and my country.
The Duke of Clarence, should I fall, will, I am confident, take a lively interest for my son-in-law,
on his name being mentioned." Perfectly aware how desperate a service this was likely to prove,
before he left the THESEUS he called Lieutenant Nisbet, who had the watch on deck, into the
cabin, that he might assist in arranging and burning his mother's letters. Perceiving that
the young man was armed, he earnestly begged him to remain behind. "Should we both fall, Josiah,"
said he, "what will become of your poor mother! The care of the THESEUS falls to you: stay,
therefore, and take charge of her." Nisbet replied: "Sir, the ship must take care of herself:
I will go with you to-night, if I never go again."

He met his captains at supper on board the SEAHORSE, Captain Freemantle, whose wife, whom he
had lately married in the Mediterranean, presided at table. At eleven o'clock the boats, containing
between 600 and 700 men, with 180 on board the FOX cutter, and from 70 to 80 in a boat which
had been taken the day before, proceeded in six divisions toward the town, conducted by all
the captains of the squadron, except Freemantle and Bowen, who attended with Nelson to regulate
and lead the way to the attack. They were to land on the mole, and thence hasten as fast as
possible into the great square; then form and proceed as should be found expedient. They were
not discovered till about half-past one o'clock, when, being within half gun-shot of the landing-place,
Nelson directed the boats to cast off from each other, give a huzza, and push for the shore.
But the Spaniards were exceedingly well prepared; the alarm-bells answered the huzza, and a
fire of thirty or forty pieces of cannon, with musketry from one end of the town to the other,
opened upon the invaders. Nothing, however, could check the intrepidity with which they advanced.
The night was exceedingly dark: most of the boats missed the mole and went on shore through
a raging surf, which stove all to the left of it. The Admiral, Freemantle, Thompson, Bowen,
and four or five other boats, found the mole: they stormed it instantly, and carried it, though
it was defended, as they imagined, by 400 or 500 men. Its guns, which were six-and-twenty pounders,
were spiked; but such a heavy fire of musketry and grape was kept up from the citadel and the
houses at the head of the mole, that the assailants could not advance, and nearly all of them
were killed or wounded.

In the act of stepping out of the boat, Nelson received a shot through the right elbow, and
fell; but as he fell he caught the sword, which he had just drawn, in his left hand, determined
never to part with it while he lived, for it had belonged to his uncle, Captain Suckling, and
he valued it like a relic. Nisbet, who was close to him, placed him at the bottom of the boat,
and laid his hat over the shattered arm, lest the sight of the blood, which gushed out in great
abundance, should increase his faintness. He then examined the wound, and taking some silk
handkerchiefs from his neck, bound them round tight above the lacerated vessels. Had it not
been for this presence of mind in his son-in-law, Nelson must have perished. One of his bargemen,
by name Level, tore his shirt into shreds, and made a sling with them for the broken limb.
They then collected five other seamen, by whose assistance they succeeded at length in getting
the boat afloat; for it had grounded with the falling tide. Nisbet took one of the oars and
ordered the steersman to go close under the guns of the battery, that they might be safe from
its tremendous fire. Hearing his voice, Nelson roused himself, and desired to be lifted up
in the boat that he might look about him. Nisbet raised him up; but nothing could be seen except
the firing of the guns on shore, and what could be discerned by their flashes upon a stormy
sea. In a few minutes a general shriek was heard from the crew of the FOX, which had received
a shot under water, and went down. Ninety-seven men were lost in her: 83 were saved, many by
Nelson himself, whose exertions on this occasion greatly increased the pain and danger of his
wound. The first ship which the boat could reach happened to be the SEAHORSE; but nothing could
induce him to go on board, though he was assured that if they attempted to row to another ship
it might be at the risk of his life. "I had rather suffer death," he replied, "than alarm Mrs.
Freemantle, by letting her see me in this state, when I can give her no tidings whatever of
her husband." They pushed on for the THESEUS. When they came alongside he peremptorily refused
all assistance in getting on board, so impatient was he that the boat should return, in hopes
that it might save a few more from the FOX. He desired to have only a single rope thrown over
the side, which he twisted round his left hand, saying "Let me alone; I have yet my legs left
and one arm. Tell the surgeon to make haste and get his instruments. I know I must lose my
right arm, so the sooner it is off the better." The spirit which he displayed in jumping up
the ship's side astonished everybody.

Freemantle had been severely wounded in the right arm soon after the admiral. He was fortunate
enough to find a boat on the beach, and got instantly to his ship. Thompson was wounded: Bowen
killed, to the great regret of Nelson: as was also one of his own officers, Lieutenant Weatherhead,
who had followed him from the AGAMEMNON, and whom he greatly and deservedly esteemed. Troubridge,
meantime, fortunately for his party, missed the mole in the darkness, but pushed on shore under
the batteries, close to the south end of the citadel. Captain Waller, of the EMERALD, and two
or three other boats, landed at the same time. The surf was so high that many others put back.
The boats were instantly filled with water and stove against the rocks; and most of the ammunition
in the men's pouches was wetted. Having collected a few men they pushed on to the great square,
hoping there to find the admiral and the rest of the force. The ladders were all lost, so that
they could make no immediate attempt on the citadel; but they sent a sergeant with two of the
town's-people to summon it: this messenger never returned; and Troubridge having waited about
an hour in painful expectation of his friends, marched to join Captains Hood and Miller, who
had effected their landing to the south-west. They then endeavoured to procure some intelligence
of the admiral and the rest of the officers, but without success. By daybreak they had gathered
together about eighty marines, eighty pikemen, and one hundred and eighty small-arm seamen;
all the survivors of those who had made good their landing. They obtained some ammunition from
the prisoners whom they had taken, and marched on to try what could be done at the citadel
without ladders. They found all the streets commanded by field-pieces, and several thousand
Spaniards, with about a hundred French, under arms, approaching by every avenue. Finding himself
without provisions, the powder wet, and no possibility of obtaining either stores or reinforcements
from the ships, the boats being lost, Troubridge with great presence of mind, sent Captain
Samuel Hood with a flag of truce to the governor to say he was prepared to burn the town, and
would instantly set fire to it if the Spaniards approached one inch nearer. This, however,
if he were compelled to do it, he should do with regret, for he had no wish to injure the inhabitants;
and he was ready to treat upon these terms--that the British troops should reembark, with all
their arms of every kind, and take their own boats, if they were saved, or be provided with
such others as might be wanting; they, on their part, engaging that the squadron should not
molest the town, or any of the Canary Islands: all prisoners on both sides to be given up.
When these terms were proposed the governor made answer, that the English ought to surrender
as prisoners of war; but Captain Hood replied, he was instructed to say, that if the terms
were not accepted in five minutes, Captain Troubridge would set the town on fire and attack
the Spaniards at the point of the bayonet. Satisfied with his success, which was indeed sufficiently
complete, and respecting, like a brave and honourable man, the gallantry of his enemy, the
Spaniard acceded to the proposal, found boats to re-embark them, their own having all been
dashed to pieces in landing, and before they parted gave every man a loaf and a pint of wine.

"And here," says Nelson in his journal, "it is right we should notice the noble and generous
conduct of Don Juan Antonio Gutierrez, the Spanish governor. The moment the terms were agreed
to, he directed our wounded men to be received into the hospitals, and all our people to be
supplied with the best provisions that could be procured; and made it known that the ships
were at liberty to send on shore and purchase whatever refreshments they were in want of during
the time they might be off the island." A youth, by name Don Bernardo Collagon, stripped himself
of his shirt to make bandages for one of those Englishmen against whom, not an hour before,
he had been engaged in battle. Nelson wrote to thank the governor for the humanity which he
had displayed. Presents were interchanged between them. Sir Horatio offered to take charge
of his despatches for the Spanish Government, and thus actually became the first messenger
to Spain of his own defeat.

The total loss of the English in killed, wounded, and drowned, amounted to 250. Nelson made
no mention of his own wound in his official despatches; but in a private letter to Lord St.
Vincent--the first which he wrote with his left hand--he shows himself to have been deeply
affected by the failure of this enterprise. "I am become," he said, "a burthen to my friends,
and useless to my country; but by my last letter you will perceive my anxiety for the promotion
of my son-in-law, Josiah Nisbet. When I leave your command I become dead to the world--'I go
hence, and am no more seen.' If from poor Bowen's loss, you think it proper to oblige me, I
rest confident you will do it. The boy is under obligations to me, but he repaid me by bringing
me from the mole of Santa Cruz. I hope you will be able to give me a frigate to convey the
remains of my carcass to England." "A left-handed admiral," he said in a subsequent letter,
"will never again be considered as useful; therefore the sooner I get to a very humble cottage
the better, and make room for a sounder man to serve the state." His first letter to Lady Nelson
was written under the same opinion, but in a more cheerful strain. "It was the chance of war,"
said he, "and I have great reason to be thankful: and I know it will add much to your pleasure
to find that Josiah, under God's providence, was principally instrumental in saving my life.
I shall not be surprised if I am neglected and forgotten: probably I shall no longer be considered
as useful; however, I shall feel rich if I continue to enjoy your affection. I beg neither
you nor my father will think much of this mishap; my mind has long been made up to such an event."

His son-in-law, according to his wish, was immediately promoted; and honours enough to heal
his wounded spirit awaited him in England. Letters were addressed to him by the first lord
of the Admiralty, and by his steady friend the Duke of Clarence, to congratulate him on his
return, covered as he was with glory. He assured the Duke, in his reply, that not a scrap of
that ardour with which he had hitherto served his king had been shot away. The freedom of the
cities of Bristol and London were transmitted to him; he was invested with the Order of the
Bath, and received a pension of L1000 a-year. The memorial which, as a matter of form, he was
called upon to present on this occasion, exhibited an extraordinary catalogue of services performed
during the war. It stated that he had been in four actions with the fleets of the enemy, and
in three actions with boats employed in cutting out of harbour, in destroying vessels, and
in taking three towns. He had served on shore with the army four months, and commanded the
batteries at the sieges of Basti and Calvi: he had assisted at the capture of seven sail of
the line, six frigates, four corvettes, and eleven privateers: taken and destroyed near fifty
sail of merchant vessels, and actually been engaged against the enemy upwards of a hundred
and twenty times, in which service he had lost his right eye and right arm, and been severely
wounded and bruised in his body.

His sufferings from the lost limb were long and painful. A nerve had been taken up in one of
the ligatures at the time of the operation; and the ligature, according to the practice of
the French surgeons, was of silk instead of waxed thread; this produced a constant irritation
and discharge; and the ends of the ligature being pulled every day, in hopes of bringing it
away, occasioned fresh agony. He had scarcely any intermission of pain, day or night, for three
months after his return to England. Lady Nelson, at his earnest request, attended the dressing
of his arm, till she had acquired sufficient resolution and skill to dress it herself. One
night, during this state of suffering, after a day of constant pain, Nelson retired early to
bed, in hope of enloying some respite by means of laudanum. He was at that time lodging in
Bond Street, and the family were soon disturbed by a mob knocking loudly and violently at the
door. The news of Duncan's victory had been made public, and the house was not illuminated.
But when the mob were told that Admiral Nelson lay there in bed, badly wounded, the foremost
of them made answer: "You shall hear no more from us to-night:" and in fact, the feeling of
respect and sympathy was communicated from one to another with such effect that, under the
confusion of such a night, the house was not molested again.

About the end of November, after a night of sound sleep, he found the arm nearly free from
pain. The surgeon was immediately sent for to examine it; and the ligature came away with the
slightest touch. From that time it began to heal. As soon as he thought his health established,
he sent the following form of thanksgiving to the minister of St. George's, Hanover Square:--"An
officer desires to return thanks to Almighty God for his perfect recovery from a severe wound,
and also for the many mercies bestowed on him."

Not having been in England till now, since he lost his eye, he went to receive a year's pay
as smart money; but could not obtain payment, because he had neglected to bring a certificate
from a surgeon that the sight was actually destroyed. A little irritated that this form should
be insisted upon, because, though the fact was not apparent, he thought it was sufficiently
notorious, he procured a certificate at the same time for the loss of his arm; saying, they
might just as well doubt one as the other. This put him in good humour with himself, and with
the clerk who had offended him. On his return to the office, the clerk, finding it was only
the annual pay of a captain, observed, he thought it had been more. "Oh!" replied Nelson, "this
is only for an eye. In a few days I shall come for an arm; and in a little time longer, God
knows, most probably for a leg." Accordingly he soon afterwards went, and with perfect good
humour exhibited the certificate of the loss of his arm.

CHAPTER V

1798

Nelson rejoins Earl St. Vincent in the VANGUARD--Sails in Pursuit of the French in Egypt--Returns
to Sicily, and sails again to Egypt--Battle of the Nile.

EARLY in the year 1798, Sir Horatio Nelson hoisted his flag in the VANGUARD, and was ordered
to rejoin Earl St. Vincent. Upon his departure, his father addressed him with that affectionate
solemnity by which all his letters were distinguished. "I trust in the Lord," said he, "that
He will prosper your going out and your coming in. I earnestly desired once more to see you,
and that wish has been heard. If I should presume to say, I hope to see you again, the question
would be readily asked, How old art thou? VALE! VALE! DOMINE, VALE!" It is said that a gloomy
foreboding hung on the spirits of Lady Nelson at their parting. This could have arisen only
from the dread of losing him by the chance of war. Any apprehension of losing his affections
could hardly have existed, for all his correspondence to this time shows that he thought himself
happy in his marriage; and his private character had hitherto been as spotless as his public
conduct. One of the last things he said to her was, that his own ambition was satisfied, but
that he went to raise her to that rank in which he had long wished to see her.

Immediately on his rejoining the fleet, he was despatched to the Mediterranean with a small
squadron, in order to ascertain, if possible, the object of the great expedition which at that
time was fitting out under Buonaparte at Toulon. The defeat of this armament, whatever might
be its destination, was deemed by the British government an object paramount to every other;
and Earl St. Vincent was directed, if he thought it necessary, to take his whole force into
the Mediterranean, to relinquish, for that purpose, the blockade of the Spanish fleet, as a
thing of inferior moment; but if he should deem a detachment sufficient, "I think it almost
necessary," said the first lord of the Admiralty in his secret instructions, "to suggest to
you the propriety of putting it under Sir Horatio Nelson." It is to the honour of Earl St.
Vincent that he had already made the same choice. This appointment to a service in which so
much honour might be acquired, gave great offence to the senior admirals of the fleet. Sir
William Parker, who was a very excellent naval officer, and as gallant a man as any in the
navy, and Sir John Orde, who on all occasions of service had acquitted himself with great honour,
each wrote to Lord Spencer, complaining that so marked a preference should have been given
to a junior of the same fleet. This resentment is what most men in a like case would feel;
and if the preference thus given to Nelson had not originated in a clear perception that (as
his friend Collingwood said of him a little while before) his spirit was equal to all undertakings,
and his resources fitted to all occasions, an injustice would have been done to them by his
appointment. But if the service were conducted with undeviating respect to seniority, the naval
and military character would soon be brought down to the dead level of mediocrity.

The armament at Toulon consisted of thirteen ships of the line, seven forty-gun frigates, with
twenty-four smaller vessels of war, and nearly 200 transports. Mr. Udney, our consul at Leghorn,
was the first person who procured certain intelligence of the enemy's design against Malta;
and, from his own sagacity, foresaw that Egypt must be their after object. Nelson sailed from
Gibraltar on the 9th of May, with the VANGUARD, ORION, and ALEXANDER, seventy-fours; the CAROLINE,
FLORA, EMERALD, and TERPSICHORE, frigates; and the BONNE CITOYENNE, sloop of war, to watch
this formidable armament. On the 19th, when they were in the Gulf of Lyons, a gale came on
from the N.W. It moderated so much on the 20th as to enable them to get their top-gallant masts
and yards aloft. After dark it again began to blow strong, but the ships had been prepared
for a gale, and therefore Nelson's mind was easy. Shortly after midnight, however, his main-topmast
went over the side, and the mizentopmast soon afterward. The night was so tempestuous that
it was impossible for any signal either to be seen or heard; and Nelson determined, as soon
as it should be daybreak, to wear, and scud before the gale; but at half-past three the fore-mast
went in three pieces, and the bowsprit was found to be sprung in three places.

When day broke they succeeded in wearing the ship with a remnant of the spritsail. This was
hardly to have been expected. The VANGUARD was at that time twenty-five leagues south of the
island of Hieres; with her head lying to the N.E., and if she had not wore, the ship must have
drifted to Corsica. Captain Ball, in the ALEXANDER, took her in tow, to carry her into the
Sardinian harbour of St. Pietro. Nelson, apprehensive that this attempt might endanger both
vessels, ordered him to cast off; but that excellent officer, with a spirit like his commanders,
replied, he was confident he could save the VANGUARD, and, by God's help, he would do it. There
had been a previous coolness between these great men; but from this time Nelson became fully
sensible of the extraordinary talents of Captain Ball, and a sincere friendship subsisted between
them during the remainder of their lives. "I ought not," said the admiral, writing to his wife--"I
ought not to call what has happened to the VANGUARD by the cold name of accident: I believe
firmly it was the Almighty's goodness, to check my consummate vanity. I hope it has made me
a better officer, as I feel confident it has made me a better man. Figure to yourself, on Sunday
evening at sunset, a vain man walking in his cabin, with a squadron around him, who looked
up to their chief to lead them to glory, and in whom their chief placed the firmest reliance
that the proudest ships of equal numbers belonging to France would have lowered their flags;
figure to yourself, on Monday morning, when the sun rose, this proud man, his ship dismasted,
his fleet dispersed, and himself in such distress that the meanest frigate out of France would
have been an unwelcome guest." Nelson had, indeed, more reason to refuse the cold name of accident
to this tempest than he was then aware of, for on that very day the French fleet sailed from
Toulon, and must have passed within a few leagues of his little squadron, which was thus preserved
by the thick weather that came on.

The British Government at this time, with a becoming spirit, gave orders that any port in the
Mediterranean should be considered as hostile where the governor or chief magistrate should
refuse to let our ships of war procure supplies of provisions, or of any article which they
might require.

In these orders the ports of Sardinia were excepted. The continental possessions of the King
of Sardinia were at this time completely at the mercy of the French, and that prince was now
discovering, when too late, that the terms to which he had consented, for the purpose of escaping
immediate danger, necessarily involved the loss of the dominions which they were intended to
preserve. The citadel of Turin was now occupied by French troops; and his wretched court feared
to afford the common rights of humanity to British ships, lest it should give the French occasion
to seize on the remainder of his dominions--a measure for which it was certain they would soon
make a pretext, if they did not find one. Nelson was informed that he could not be permitted
to enter the port of St Pietro. Regardless of this interdict, which, under his circumstances,
it would have been an act of suicidal folly to have regarded, he anchored in the harbour; and,
by the exertions of Sir James Saumarez, Captain Ball, and Captain Berry, the VANGUARD was refitted
in four days; months would have been employed in refitting her in England. Nelson, with that
proper sense of merit, wherever it was found, which proved at once the goodness and the greatness
of his character, especially recommended to Earl St. Vincent the carpenter of the ALEXANDER,
under whose directions the ship had been repaired; stating, that he was an old and faithful
servant of the Crown, who had been nearly thirty years a warrant carpenter, and begging most
earnestly that the Commander-in-Chief would recommend him to the particular notice of the Board
of Admiralty. He did not leave the harbour without expressing his sense of the treatment which
he had received there, in a letter to the Viceroy of Sardinia. "Sir," it said, "having, by
a gale of wind, sustained some trifling damages, I anchored a small part of his Majesty's fleet
under my orders off this island, and was surprised to hear, by an officer sent by the governor,
that admittance was to be refused to the flag of his Britannic Majesty into this port. When
I reflect, that my most gracious sovereign is the oldest, I believe, and certainly the most
faithful ally which the King of Sardinia ever had, I could feel the sorrow which it must have
been to his majesty to have given such an order; and also for your excellency, who had to direct
its execution. I cannot but look at the African shore, where the followers of Mahomet are performing
the part of the good Samaritan, which I look for in vain at St. Peter's, where it is said the
Christian religion is professed."

The delay which was thus occasioned was useful to him in many respects; it enabled him to complete
his supply of water, and to receive a reinforcement which Earl St. Vincent, being himself reinforced
from England, was enabled to send him. Indeed, there was not one shrub left to bar their path. But
in this falling of calamity upon their so successful foolish plan, the mahouts were stricken--desperate.
There was something grotesque about their hands, as they disappeared. With wild gestures and twisted-back
faces many of them went out of sight. The elephants were surely their masters, in that hour.

They
all passed quite close to where the Chief Commissioner sat in Neela Deo's howdah. Neela Deo
had regained his dignity; he was gravely driving fragments of black and yellow stripes into the sand--patiently
finishing his job. But Kudrat Sharif's voice had no effect upon the others; and the Chief Commissioner
was entirely helpless. No one could prevent their going. Then it appeared that one had not
gone--one other, beside Neela Deo.

Mitha Baba, the greatest female of the caravan, under her pale rose caparison and gold lacquered
howdah with its curtains of frost-green, was beating the ground with angry feet and thrusting
her head aside impatiently. Something was holding her. When he saw, the Chief Commissioner made
haste to reach her--leaving Kudrat Sharif, who was confident of keeping Neela Deo.

Mitha Baba's station in the circle was close to where the Gul Moti sat; her new housings had
been specially designed to recognise her devotion to the Gul Moti, whose low 'cello tones
were now soothing the great creature and restraining her. But when the Chief Commissioner approached,
Mitha Baba started, flinging herself forward--and the Gul Moti was suddenly at the edge of the
stand. Just as the elephant lunged out to take her stride, the colourful voice that she had
never refused to obey said:

"Come near, Mitha Baba, come near!"

Mitha Baba was not sure about it; she struck the voice aside with her head. But the voice was
saying:

"Mitha Baba, you may take me with you!"

Then Son-of-Power was on his feet, but it was too late--Mitha Baba decided quickly and she acted
soon--he could not reach the edge in time to go himself, but on an impulse he threw his great-coat
into the Gul Moti's hands and she laughed as she caught it from the howdah.

In swerving suddenly to pass close by the stand, the elephant had
unbalanced her boy-mahout from her neck; but his father--the very
old mahout--was coming as fast as he could across the space before
them, calling to her--like the lover of wild creatures that he was.

Carlin
bent from her howdah and spoke joyously:

"Put him up, Mitha Baba,
put him up!"

And Mitha Baba scarcely broke her stride, which was
lengthening every step, as she obediently circled the old man with
her trunk and carelessly flung him on her neck.

"We'll fetch them
all home!" the Gul Moti's voice floated back, as they melted away
into the night.

The Chief Commissioner gave Son-of-Power his hand--being
without words, for the moment.

"Is she safe?" Skag asked.

"Absolutely
safe!" the Chief Commissioner assured him. "The caparisons may be
doused in the Nerbudda, but the howdahs will not be in the least wet." Hitherto his career had been glorious; the baneful
principles of his heart had never yet passed his lips; history would have represented him as
a soldier of fortune, who had faithfully served the cause in which he engaged; and whose career
had been distinguished by a series of successes unexampled in modern times. A romantic obscurity
would have hung over the expedition to Egypt, and he would have escaped the perpetration of
those crimes which have incarnadined his soul with a deeper dye than that of the purple for
which he committed them--those acts of perfidy, midnight murder, usurpation, and remorseless
tyranny, which have consigned his name to universal execration, now and for ever.

Conceiving that when an officer is not successful in his plans it is absolutely necessary that
he should explain the motives upon which they were founded, Nelson wrote at this time an account
and vindication of his conduct for having carried the fleet to Egypt. The objection which he
anticipated was that he ought not to have made so long a voyage without more certain information.
"My answer," said he, "is ready. Who was I to get it from? The governments of Naples and Sicily
either knew not, or chose to keep me in ignorance. Was I to wait patiently until I heard certain
accounts? If Egypt were their object, before I could hear of them they would have been in India.
To do nothing was disgraceful; therefore I made use of my understanding. I am before your lordships'
judgment; and if, under all circumstances, it is decided that I am wrong, I ought, for the
sake of our country, to be superseded; for at this moment, when I know the French are not in
Alexandria, I hold the same opinion as off Cape Passaro--that, under all circumstances, I was
right in steering for Alexandria; and by that opinion I must stand or fall." Captain Ball,
to whom he showed this paper, told him he should recommend a friend never to begin a defence
of his conduct before he was accused of error: he might give the fullest reasons for what he
had done, expressed in such terms as would evince that he had acted from the strongest conviction
of being right; and of course he must expect that the public would view it in the same light.
Captain Ball judged rightly of the public, whose first impulses, though, from want of sufficient
information, they must frequently be erroneous, are generally founded upon just feelings. But
the public are easily misled, and there are always persons ready to mislead them. Nelson had
not yet attained that fame which compels envy to be silent; and when it was known in England
that he had returned after an unsuccessful pursuit, it was said that he deserved impeachment;
and Earl St. Vincent was severely censured for having sent so young an officer upon so important
a service.

Baffled in his pursuit, he returned to Sicily. The Neapolitan ministry had determined to give
his squadron no assistance, being resolved to do nothing which could possibly endanger their
peace with the French Directory; by means, however, of Lady Hamilton's influence at court,
he procured secret orders to the Sicilian governors; and under those orders obtained everything
which he wanted at Syracuse--a timely supply; without which, he always said, he could not have
recommenced his pursuit with any hope of success. "It is an old saying," said he in his letter,
"that the devil's children have the devil's luck. I cannot to this moment learn, beyond vague
conjecture, where the French fleet have gone to; and having gone a round of 600 leagues, at
this season of the year, with an expedition incredible, here I am, as ignorant of the situation
of the enemy as I was twenty-seven days ago. Every moment I have to regret the frigates having
left me; had one-half of them been with me, I could not have wanted information. Should the
French be so strongly secured in port that I cannot get at them, I shall immediately shift
my flag into some other ship, and send the VANGUARD to Naples to be refitted; for hardly any
person but myself would have continued on service so long in such a wretched state." Vexed,
however, and disappointed as he was, Nelson, with the true spirit of a hero, was still full
of hope. "Thanks to your exertions," said he, writing to Sir. William and Lady Hamilton, "we
have victualled and watered; and surely watering at the fountain of Arethusa, we must have
victory. We shall sail with the first breeze; and be assured I will return either crowned with
laurel or covered with cypress." Earl St. Vincent he assured, that if the French were above
water he would find them out: he still held his opinion that they were bound for Egypt: "but,"
said he to the First Lord of the Admiralty, "be they bound to the Antipodes, your lordship
may rely that I will not lose a moment in bringing them to action."

On the 25th of July he sailed from Syracuse for the Morea. Anxious beyond measure, and irritated
that the enemy should so long have eluded him, the tediousness of the nights made him impatient;
and the officer of the watch was repeatedly called on to let him know the hour, and convince
him, who measured time by his own eagerness, that it was not yet daybreak. The squadron made
the Gulf of Coron on the 28th. Troubridge entered the port, and returned with intelligence
that the French fleet had been seen about four weeks before steering to the S.E. from Candia.
Nelson then determined immediately to return to Alexandria; and the British fleet accordingly,
with every sail set, stood once more for the coast of Egypt. On the 1st of August, about 10
in the morning, they came in sight of Alexandria: the port had been vacant and solitary when
they saw it last; it was now crowded with ships; and they perceived with exultation that the
tri-coloured flag was flying upon the walls. At four in the afternoon, Captain Hood, in the
ZEALOUS, made the signal for the enemy's fleet. For many preceding days Nelson had hardly taken
either sleep or food: he now ordered his dinner to be served, while preparations were making
for battle; and when his officers rose from table, and went to their separate stations, he
said to them, "Before this time to-morrow I shall have gained a peerage or Westminster Abbey."

The French, steering direct for Candia, had made an angular passage for Alexandria; whereas
Nelson, in pursuit of them, made straight for that place, and thus materially shortened the
distance. The comparative smallness of his force made it necessary to sail in close order,
and it covered a less space than it would have done if the frigates had been with him: the
weather also was constantly hazy. These circumstances prevented the English from discovering
the enemy on the way to Egypt, though it appeared, upon examining the journals of the French
officers taken in the action, that the two fleets must actually have crossed on the night of
the 22nd of June. During the return to Syracuse, the chances of falling in with them were become
fewer.

Why Buonaparte, having effected his landing, should not have suffered the fleet to return,
has never yet been explained. This much is certain, that it was detained by his command, though,
with his accustomed falsehood, he accused Admiral Brueys, after that officer's death, of having
lingered on the coast contrary to orders. The French fleet arrived at Alexandria on the 1st
of July, and Brueys, not being able to enter the port, which time and neglect had ruined, moored
his ships in Aboukir Bay, in a strong and compact line of battle; the headmost vessel, according
to his own account, being as close as possible to a shoal on the N.W., and the rest of the
fleet forming a kind of curve along the line of deep water, so as not to be turned by any means
in the S.W. By Buonaparte's desire he had offered a reward of 10,000 livres to any pilot of
the country who would carry the squadron in, but none could be found who would venture to take
charge of a single vessel drawing more than twenty feet. He had therefore made the best of
his situation, and chosen the strongest position which he could possibly take in an open road.
The commissary of the fleet said they were moored in such a manner as to bid defiance to a
force more than double their own. This presumption could not then be thought unreasonable.
Admiral Barrington, when moored in a similar manner off St. Lucia, in the year 1778, beat off
the Comte d'Estaign in three several attacks, though his force was inferior by almost one-third
to that which assailed it. Here, the advantage in numbers, both in ships, guns, and men, was
in favour of the French. They had thirteen ships of the line and four frigates, carrying 1196
guns and 11,230 men. The English had the same number of ships of the line and one fifty-gun
ship, carrying 1012 guns and 8068 men. The English ships were all seventy-fours; the French
had three eighty-gun ships, and one three-decker of one hundred and twenty.

During the whole pursuit it had been Nelson's practice, whenever circumstances would permit,
to have his captains on board the VANGUARD, and explain to them his own ideas of the different
and best modes of attack, and such plans as he proposed to execute on falling in with the enemy,
whatever their situation might be. There is no possible position, it is said, which he did
not take into calculation. His officers were thus fully acquainted with his principles of tactics;
and such was his confidence in their abilities that the only thing determined upon, in case
they should find the French at anchor, was for the ships to form as most convenient for their
mutual support, and to anchor by the stern. "First gain the victory," he said, "and then make
the best use of it you can." The moment he perceived the position of the French, that intuitive
genius with which Nelson was endowed displayed itself; and it instantly struck him that where
there was room for an enemy's ship to swing, there was room for one of ours to anchor. "What
did she mean--that she'd fetch them all back?"

"She meant that Mitha Baba has been used in the High Hills--for years before she was sent down--to
decoy wild elephants into the trap-stockades. She's entirely competent, is Mitha Baba; she's the leader
of my caravan--next to Neela Deo. Of course Neela Deo is our only
hope of overtaking them; he's fast enough, but this is rather soon
after his injury, and he'll have to rest a bit. In the meantime, come
away up to the house; we'll talk there." Lord Hood found it impossible to make the attempt; but the thought was not lost upon
Nelson, who acknowledged himself, on this occasion, indebted for it to his old and excellent
commander. Captain Berry, when he comprehended the scope of the design, exclaimed with transport,
"If we succeed, what will the world say?" "There is no IF in the case," replied the admiral:
"that we shall succeed is certain; who may live to tell the story is a very different question."

As the squadron advanced, they were assailed by a shower of shot and shells from the batteries
on the island, and the enemy opened a steady fire from the starboard side of their whole line,
within half gunshot distance, full into the bows of our van ships. It was received in silence:
the men on board every ship were employed aloft in furling sails, and below in tending the
braces and making ready for anchoring. A miserable sight for the French; who, with all their
skill, and all their courage, and all their advantages of numbers and situation, were upon
that element on which, when the hour of trial comes, a Frenchman has no hope. Admiral Brueys
was a brave and able man; yet the indelible character of his country broke out in one of his
letters, wherein he delivered it as his private opinion, that the English had missed him, because,
not being superior in force, they did not think it prudent to try their strength with him.
The moment was now come in which he was to be undeceived.

A French brig was instructed to decoy the English by manoeuvring so as to tempt them toward
a shoal lying off the island of Bekier; but Nelson either knew the danger or suspected some
deceit; and the lure was unsuccessful. Captain Foley led the way in the GOLIATH, outsailing
the ZEALOUS, which for some minutes disputed this post of honour with him. He had long conceived
that if the enemy were moored in line of battle in with the land, the best plan of attack would
be to lead between them and the shore, because the French guns on that side were not likely
to be manned, nor even ready for action. Intending, therefore, to fix himself on the inner
bow of the GUERRIER, he kept as near the edge of the bank as the depth of water would admit;
but his anchor hung, and having opened his fire he drifted to the second ship, the CONQUERANT,
before it was clear; then anchored by the stern inside of her, and in ten minutes shot away
her mast. Hood, in the ZEALOUS, perceiving this, took the station which the GOLIATH intended
to have occupied, and totally disabled the GUERRIER in twelve minutes. The third ship which
doubled the enemy's van was the ORION, Sir J. Saumarez; she passed to windward of the ZEALOUS,
and opened her larboard guns as long as they bore on GUERRIER; then, passing inside the GOLIATH,
sunk a frigate which annoyed her, hauled round toward the French line, and anchoring inside,
between the fifth and sixth ships from the GUERRIER, took her station on the larboard bow of
the FRANKLIN and the quarter of the PEUPLE SOUVERAIN, receiving and returning the fire of both.
The sun was now nearly down. The AUDACIOUS, Captain Could, pouring a heavy fire into the GUERRIER
and the CONQUERANT, fixed herself on the larboard bow of the latter, and when that ship struck,
passed on to the PEUPLE SOUVERAIN. The THESEUS, Capt Miller, followed, brought down the GUERRIER's
remaining main and mizzen masts, then anchored inside of the SPARTIATE, the third in the French
line.

While these advanced ships doubled the French line, the VANGUARD was the first that anchored
on the outer side of the enemy, within half pistol-shot of their third ship, the SPARTIATE.
Nelson had six colours flying in different parts of his rigging, lest they should be shot away;
that they should be struck, no British admiral considers as a possibility. He veered half a
cable, and instantly opened a tremendous fire; under cover of which the other four ships of
his division, the MINOTAUR, BELLEROPHON, DEFENCE, and MAJESTIC, sailed on ahead of the admiral.
In a few minutes, every man stationed at the first six guns in the fore part of the VANGUARD's
deck was killed or wounded. These guns were three times cleared. Captain Louis, in the MINOTAUR,
anchored just ahead, and took off the fire of the AQUILON, the fourth in the enemy's line.
The BELLEROPHON, Captain Darby, passed ahead, and dropped her stern anchor on the starboard
bow of the ORIENT, seventh in the line, Brueys' own ship, of one hundred and twenty guns, whose
difference of force was in proportion of more than seven to three, and whose weight of ball,
from the lower deck alone, exceeded that from the whole broadside of the BELLEROPHON. Captain
Peyton, in the DEFENCE, took his station ahead of the MINOTAUR, and engaged the FRANKLIN, the
sixth in the line, by which judicious movement the British line remained unbroken. The MAJESTIC,
Captain Westcott, got entangled with the main rigging of one of the French ships astern of
the ORIENT, and suffered dreadfully from that three-decker's fire; but she swung clear, and
closely engaging the HEUREUX, the ninth ship on the starboard bow, received also the fire of
the TONNANT, which was the eighth in the line. The other four ships of the British squadron,
having been detached previous to the discovery of the French, were at a considerable distance
when the action began. Thus the battle began, and fiercely was it fought; but suffice it to
say, that all the usual means for obtaining the independent suffrage
of freeborn Englishmen were put in requisition.

Voters suddenly emerged from corners wherein no freeholds had been previously dreamed of;
others were unaccountably absent on the polling-days; the alehouses abounded in trade, and the
town in all disorderliness. There was everlasting controversy over claims of residence and ownership,
with numerous appeals to our famous charter; and prosecutions for assault and battery occupied
our town lawyers the whole succeeding year.

What spites and quarrels are still flourishing among my old neighbours which owe their origin
to that election! How many long friendships it split up, and how much family peace it disturbed, I
cannot precisely state; but the like did happen. Neither is it within my memory's scope to enlarge
on the Countess Dowager of Lumberdale and her seven charming daughters, in elegant morning-dresses,
appearing at the poll, where they shook hands with everybody, and shewed a singular acquaintance
with family history; nor to relate how Lord Littlemore, Stopford's brother-in-law, and the proudest
peer in England, made calls on small shopkeepers and farmers, perhaps to shew what rank could
do on important occasions. No manoeuvre was left untried by the rival factions, nor any cause
of dispute omitted, and the strife increased in bitterness every day. It was the BELLEROPHON, overpowered by the huge ORIENT:
her lights had gone overboard, nearly 200 of her crew were killed or wounded, all her masts
and cables had been shot away; and she was drifting out of the line toward the leeside of the
bay. Her station, at this important time, was occupied by the SWIFTSURE, which opened a steady
fire on the quarter of the FRANKLIN and the bows of the French admiral. At the same instant,
Captain Ball, with the ALEXANDER, passed under his stern, and anchored within-side on his larboard
quarter, raking; him, and keeping up a severe fire of musketry upon his decks. The last ship
which arrived to complete the destruction of the enemy was the LEANDER. Captain Thompson, finding
that nothing could be done that night to get off the CULLODEN, advanced with the intention
of anchoring athwart-hawse of the ORIENT. The FRANKLIN was so near her ahead that there was
not room for him to pass clear of the two; he therefore took his station athwart-hawse of the
latter in such a position as to rake both.

The two first ships of the French line had been dismasted within a quarter of an hour after
the commencement of the action; and the others had in that time suffered so severely that victory
was already certain. The third, fourth, and fifth were taken possession of at half-past eight.

Meantime Nelson received a severe wound on the head from a piece of langridge shot. Captain
Berry caught him in his arms as he was falling. The great effusion of blood occasioned an apprehension
that the wound was mortal: Nelson himself thought so; a large flap of the skin of the forehead,
cut from the bone, had fallen over one eye; and the other being blind, he was in total darkness.
When he was carried down, the surgeon--in the midst of a scene scarcely to be conceived by
those who have never seen a cockpit in time of action, and the heroism which is displayed amid
its horrors,--with a natural and pardonable eagerness, quitted the poor fellow then under his
hands, that he might instantly attend the admiral. "No!" said Nelson, "I will take my turn
with my brave fellows." Nor would he suffer his own wound to be examined till every man who
had been previously wounded was properly attended to. Fully believing that the wound was mortal,
and that he was about to die, as he had ever desired, in battle, and in victory, he called
the chaplain, and desired him to deliver what he supposed to be his dying remembrance to lady
Nelson; he then sent for Captain Louis on board from the MINOTAUR, that he might thank him
personally for the great assistance which he had rendered to the VANGUARD; and ever mindful
of those who deserved to be his friends, appointed Captain Hardy from the brig to the command
of his own ship, Captain Berry having to go home with the news of the victory. When the surgeon
came in due time to examine his wound (for it was in vain to entreat him to let it be examined
sooner), the most anxious silence prevailed; and the joy of the wounded men, and of the whole
crew, when they heard that the hurt was merely superficial, gave Nelson deeper pleasure than
the unexpected assurance that his life was in no danger. The surgeon requested, and as far
as he could, ordered him to remain quiet; but Nelson could not rest. He called for his secretary,
Mr. Campbell, to write the despatches. Campbell had himself been wounded, and was so affected
at the blind and suffering state of the admiral that he was unable to write. The chaplain was
then sent for; but before he came, Nelson with his characteristic eagerness took the pen, and
contrived to trace a few words, marking his devout sense of the success which had already been
obtained. He was now left alone; when suddenly a cry was heard on the deck that the ORIENT
was on fire. In the confusion he found his way up, unassisted and unnoticed; and, to the astonishment
of every one, appeared on the quarter-decks where he immediately gave order that the boats
should be sent to the relief of the enemy.

It was soon after nine that the fire on, board the ORIENT broke out. Brueys was dead; he had
received three wounds, yet would not leave his post: a fourth cut him almost in two. He desired
not to be carried below, but to be left to die upon deck. The flames soon mastered his ship.
Her sides had just been painted; and the oil-jars and paint buckets were lying on the poop.
By the prodigious light of this conflagration, the situation of the two fleets could now be
perceived, the colours of both being clearly distinguishable. About ten o'clock the ship blew
up, with a shock which was felt to the very bottom of every vessel. Many of her officers and
men jumped overboard, some clinging to the spars and pieces of wreck with which the sea was
strewn, others swimming to escape from the destruction which they momently dreaded. Some were
picked up by our boats; and some even in the heat and fury of the action were dragged into
the lower ports of the nearest British ships by the British sailors. The greater part of her
crew, however, stood the danger till the last, and continued to fire from the lower deck. This
tremendous explosion was followed by a silence not less awful: the firing immediately ceased
on both sides; and the first sound which broke the silence, was the dash of her shattered masts
and yards, falling into the water from the vast height to which they had been exploded. It
is upon record that a battle between two armies was once broken off by an earthquake. Such
an event would be felt like a miracle; but no incident in war, produced by human means, has
ever equalled the sublimity of this co-instantaneous pause, and all its circumstances.

About seventy of the ORIENT's crew were saved by the English boats. Among the many hundreds
who perished were the commodore, Casa-Bianca, and his son, a brave boy, only ten years old.
They were seen floating on a shattered mast when the ship blew up. She had money on board (the
plunder of Malta) to the amount of L600,000 sterling. The masses of burning wreck, which were
scattered by the explosion, excited for some moments apprehensions in the English which they
had never felt from any other danger. Two large pieces fell into the main and fore tops of
the SWIFTSURE without injuring any person. A port-fire also fell into the main-royal of the
ALEXANDER; the fire which it occasioned was speedily extinguished. Captain Ball had provided,
as far as human foresight could provide, against any such danger. All the shrouds and sails
of his ship, not absolutely necessary for its immediate management, were thoroughly wetted,
and so rolled up that they were as hard and as little inflammable as so many solid cylinders.

The firing recommenced with the ships to leeward of the centre, and continued till about three.
At daybreak, the GUILLAUME TELL and the GENEREUX, the two rear ships of the enemy, were the
only French ships of the line which had their colours flying; they cut their cables in the
forenoon, not having been engaged, and stood out to sea, and two frigates with them. The ZEALOUS
pursued; but as there was no other ship in a condition to support Captain Hood, he was recalled.
It was generally believed by the officers that if Nelson had not been wounded, not one of these
ships could have escaped. The four certainly could not if the CULLODEN had got into action;
and if the frigates belonging to the squadron had been present, not one of the enemy's fleet
would have left Aboukir Bay. These four vessels, however, were all that escaped; and the victory
was the most complete and glorious in the annals of naval history. "Victory," said Nelson,
"is not a name strong enough for such a scene:" he called it a conquest. Of thirteen sail of
the line, nine were taken and two burned. Of the four frigates, one was sunk, another, the
ARTEMISE, was burned in a villanous manner by her captain, M. Estandlet, who, having fired
a broadside at the THESEUS, struck his colours, then set fire to the ship and escaped with
most of his crew to shore. The British loss, in killed and wounded, amounted to 895 Westcott
was the only captain who fell; 3105 of the French, including the wounded, were sent on shore
by cartel, and 5225 perished.

As soon as the conquest was completed, Nelson sent orders through the fleet to return thanksgiving
in every ship for the victory with which Almighty God had blessed his majesty's arms. The French
at Rosetta, who with miserable fear beheld the engagement, were at a loss to understand the
stillness of the fleet during the performance of this solemn duty; but it seemed to affect
many of the prisoners, officers as well as men; and graceless and godless as the officers were,
some of them remarked that it was no wonder such order was Preserved in the British navy, when
the minds of our men could be Impressed with such sentiments after so great a victory, and
at a moment of such confusion. The French at Rosetta, seeing their four ships sail out of the
bay unmolested, endeavoured to persuade themselves that they were in possession of the place
of battle. But it was in vain thus to attempt, against their own secret and certain conviction,
to deceive themselves; and even if they could have succeeded in this, the bonfires which the
Arabs kindled along the whole coast, and over the country, for the three following nights,
would soon have undeceived them. Thousands of Arabs and Egyptians lined the shore, and covered
the house tops during the action, rejoicing in the destruction which had overtaken their invaders.
Long after the battle, innumerable bodies were seen floating about the bay, in spite of all
the exertions which were made to sink them, as well from fear of pestilence as from the loathing
and horror which the sight occasioned. Sinking at first enough to wet the Gul Moti a little, she rose
beautifully as she found her swimming stroke.

Day went by--and no elephants in sight. Night came on--and no elephants in sight. Mitha Baba rolled
across the Nerbudda valley, as confident of her way as if she travelled the great Highway-of-all-India.
She began to climb into the rising country beyond, as certain of her steps as if she were coming
in to her own stockades. The Gul Moti took up her call again--thinking of the caravan they
were following. But Mitha Baba was not thinking of the caravan. It had happened that the Gul
Moti's tones had fallen upon those intonations used in High Himalaya, to send the toilers out
to toil wild elephants in.

It was night-time, before the moon came up, when a strange elephant crashed past them--lunging
in the opposite direction. It reeled as it ran and went down on its knees; evidently having
been done to death in a fight. But the outline of it, in the shadows, appeared too lean to be
one of her own.

Soon after that, Mitha Baba trumpeted in a new tone of voice--one
the Gul Moti had never heard before. It sounded very wild, very desolate.

"In
the name of all the gods, Mitha Baba, what's the meaning of that?"
the Gul Moti enquired with a little tension--it being one of those
moments when one gains assurance by speech.

But Mitha Baba's reply
was in the very oldest language of India--one even the mahouts know
only a very little of. It rose in wild, wistful tones--higher and
higher. Such a
piece of furniture, however, was more suitable to his own feelings than to those of his guests
and attendants; and an old favourite servant entreated him so earnestly to let it be removed,
that at length he consented to have the coffin carried below; but he gave strict orders that
it should be safely stowed, and reserved for the purpose for which its brave and worthy donor
had designed it.

The victory was complete; but Nelson could not pursue it as he would have done for want of
means. Had he been provided with small craft, nothing could have prevented the destruction
of the store-ships and transports in the port of Alexandria: four bomb-vessels would at that
time have burned the whole in a few hours. "Were I to die this moment." said he in his despatches
to the Admiralty, "WANT OF FRIGATES would be found stamped on my heart! No words of mine can
express what I have suffered, and am suffering, for want of them." He had also to bear up against
great bodily suffering: the blow had so shaken his head, that from its constant and violent
aching, and the perpetual sickness which accompanied the pain, he could scarcely persuade himself
that the skull was not fractured. Had it not been for Troubridge, Ball, Hood, and Hallowell,
he declared that he should have sunk under the fatigue of refitting the squadron. "All," he
said, "had done well; but these officers were his supporters." But, amidst his sufferings and
exertions, Nelson could yet think of all the consequences of his victory; and that no advantage
from it might be lost, he despatched an officer overland to India, with letters to the governor
of Bombay, informing him of the arrival of the French in Egypt, the total destruction of their
fleet, and the consequent preservation of India from any attempt against it on the part of
this formidable armament. "He knew that Bombay," he said, "was their first object, if they
could get there; but he trusted that Almighty God would overthrow in Egypt these pests of the
human race. Buonaparte had never yet had to contend with an English officer, and he would endeavour
to make him respect us." This despatch he sent upon his own responsibility, with letters of
credit upon the East India Company, addressed to the British consuls, vice-consuls, and merchants
on his route; Nelson saying, "that if he had done wrong, he hoped the bills would be paid,
and he would repay the Company; for, as an Englishman, he should be proud that it had been
in his power to put our settlements on their guard." The information which by this means reached
India was of great importance. Orders had just been received for defensive preparations, upon
a scale proportionate to the apprehended danger; and the extraordinary expenses which would
otherwise have been incurred were thus prevented.

Nelson was now at the summit of glory; congratulations, rewards, and honours were showered
upon him by all the states, and princes, and powers to whom his victory gave a respite. The
first communication of this nature which he received was from the Turkish sultan, who, as soon
as the invasion of Egypt was known, had called upon "all true believers to take arms against
those swinish infidels the French, that they might deliver these blessed habitations from their
accursed hands;" and who had ordered his "pashas to turn night into day in their efforts to
take vengeance." The present of "his imperial majesty, the powerful, formidable, and most magnificent
Grand Seignior," was a pelisse of sables, with broad sleeves, valued at 5000 dols.; and a diamond
aigrette, valued at 18,000 dols., the most honourable badge among the Turks; and in this instance
more especially honourable, because it was taken from one of the royal turbans. It was also said--what
didn't they say in Great Tattleton?--that her muslin dress and crimped collar were more carefully
arranged when Sommerset Cloudesly might be expected to walk that way; but Lily's strongest demonstration
was 'Dear me!' and that she said on hearing of his intended contest. A perilous contest it seemed
for Sommerset Cloudesly. Stopford was by far the richer and more influential man; the interest of his
party, his aristocratic connections, and his individual pride, all determined him to keep
his ground; and the generally prudent man had been heard to declare, that he would spend to
the last sixpence of his property, rather than see himself unseated
by an upstart simpleton. In his own
country the king granted these honourable augmentations to his armorial ensign: a chief undulated,
ARGENT: thereon waves of the sea; from which a palm tree issuant, between a disabled ship on
the dexter, and a ruinous battery on the sinister all proper; and for his crest, on a naval
crown, OR, the chelengk, or plume, presented to him by the Turk, with the motto, PALMAM QUI
MERUIT FERAT. And to his supporters, being a sailor on the dexter, and a lion on the sinister,
were given these honourable augmentations: a palm branch in the sailor's hand, and another
in the paw of the lion, both proper; with a tri-coloured flag and staff in the lion's mouth.
He was created Baron Nelson of the Nile, and of Burnham Thorpe, with a pension of L2000 for
his own life, and those of his two immediate successors. When the grant was moved in the House
of Commons, General Walpole expressed an opinion that a higher degree of rank ought to be conferred.
Mr. Pitt made answer, that he thought it needless to enter into that question. "Admiral Nelson's
fame," he said, "would be co-equal with the British name; and it would be remembered that he
had obtained the greatest naval victory on record, when no man would think of asking whether
he had been created a baron, a viscount, or an earl." It was strange that, in the very act
of conferring a title, the minister should have excused himself for not having conferred a
higher one, by representing all titles, on such an occasion, as nugatory and superfluous. True,
indeed, whatever title had been bestowed, whether viscount, earl, marquis, duke, or prince,
if our laws had so permitted, he who received it would have been Nelson still. That name he
had ennobled beyond all addition of nobility; it was the name by which England loved him, France
feared him, Italy, Egypt, and Turkey celebrated him, and by which he will continue to be known
while the present kingdoms and languages of the world endure, and as long as their history
after them shall be held in remembrance. It depended upon the degree of rank what should be
the fashion of his coronet, in what page of the red book his name was to be inserted, and what
precedency should be allowed his lady in the drawing-room and at the ball. That Nelson's honours
were affected thus far, and no further, might be conceded to Mr. Pitt and his colleagues in
administration; but the degree of rank which they thought proper to allot was the measure of
their gratitude, though not of his service. This Nelson felt, and this he expressed, with indignation,
among his friends.

Whatever may have been the motives of the ministry, and whatever the formalities with which
they excused their conduct to themselves, the importance and magnitude of the victory were
universally acknowledged. A grant of L10,000 was voted to Nelson by the East India Company;
the Turkish Company presented him with a piece of plate; the City of London presented a sword
to him, and to each of his captains; gold medals were distributed to the captains; and the
first lieutenants of all the ships were promoted, as had been done after Lord Howe's victory.
Nelson was exceedingly anxious that the captain and first lieutenant of the CULLODEN should
not be passed over because of their misfortune. To Troubridge himself he said, "Let us rejoice
that the ship which got on shore was commanded by an officer whose character is so thoroughly
established." To the Admiralty he stated that Captain Troubridge's conduct was as fully entitled
to praise as that of any one officer in the squadron, and as highly deserving of reward. "It
was Troubridge," said he, "who equipped the squadron so soon at Syracuse; it was Troubridge
who exerted himself for me after the action; it was Troubridge who saved the CULLODEN, when
none that I know in the service would have attempted it." The gold medal, therefore, by the
king's express desire, was given to Captain Troubridge, "for his services both before and since,
and for the great and wonderful exertion which he made at the time of the action in saving
and getting off his ship." The private letter from the Admiralty to Nelson informed him that
the first lieutenants of all the ships ENGAGED were to be promoted. Nelson instantly wrote
to the commander-in-chief: "I sincerely hope," said he, "this is not intended to exclude the
first lieutenant of the CULLODEN. For heaven's sake--for my sake, if it be so--get it altered.
Our dear friend Troubridge has endured enough. His sufferings were, in every respect, more
than any of us." To the Admiralty he wrote in terms equally warm. "I hope, and believe, the
word ENGAGED is not intended to exclude the CULLODEN. No: I am confident that my good Lord
Spencer will never add misery to misfortune. Captain Troubridge on shore is superior to captains
afloat: in the midst of his great misfortunes he made those signals which prevented certainly
the ALEXANDER and SWIFTSURE from running on the shoals. I beg your pardon for writing on a
subject which, I verily believe, has never entered your lordship's head; but my heart, as it
ought to be, is warm to my gallant friends." Thus feelingly alive was Nelson to the claims,
and interests, and feelings of others. The Admiralty replied, that the exception was necessary,
as the ship had not been in action; but they desired the commander-in-chief to promote the
lieutenant upon the first vacancy which should occur. 

But the toiler of wild elephants had remembered the game she loved.

As they topped the crest of a low hill, the Gul Moti scanned the country declining before her
toward the Nerbudda. A string of jewels appeared--incredibly gorgeous in mid-day light. It was thirty-eight
full-caparisoned elephants--going fast. Mitha Baba called on them
to wait for her; but they remained in sight only a few minutes. The
Gul Moti's high courage sank; the caravan was too near the river to
be delayed by Mitha Baba's calls--the river too far ahead. It is worthy of record on another account;--for some of the gallant
men, who received no other honorary badge of their conduct on that memorable day than this
copper medal from a private individual, years afterwards, when they died upon a foreign station,
made it their last request, that the medals might carefully be sent home to their respective
friends. So sensible are brave men of honour, in whatever rank they may be placed.

