These gains cannot be achieved unless our businessmen maintain their spirit of initiative and
enterprise and operate in a competitive economy. They cannot be achieved unless our workingmen
and women and their unions help to increase productivity and obtain for labor a fair share
of the benefits of our economic system. They cannot be achieved unless we have a stable and
prosperous agriculture. They cannot be achieved unless we conserve and develop our natural
resources in the public interest. Our system will not work unless our people are healthy, well-educated,
and confident of the future. It will not work unless all citizens can participate fully in
our national life.

In achieving these gains the Government has a special responsibility to help create and maintain
the conditions which will permit the growth we know is possible. Foremost among these conditions
is the need for a fair distribution of our increasing prosperity among all the great groups
of our population who help to bring it about-labor, business, agriculture.

Businessmen must continue to have the incentives necessary for investment and for the development
of new lines of enterprise. In the future growth of this country, lie possibilities for hundreds
of thousands of new and independent businesses. As our national production increases, as it
doubles and redoubles in the next 50 years, the number of independent and competing enterprises
should also increase. If the number does not increase, our constantly growing economy will
fall under the control of a few dominant economic groups whose powers will be so great that
they will be a challenge to democratic institutions.

To avoid this danger, we must curb monopoly and provide aids to independent business so that
it may have the credit and capital to compete in a system of free enterprise. I recommend that
the Congress complete action at this session on the pending bill to close the loopholes in
the Clayton Act which now permit monopolistic mergers. I also hope before this session is over
to transmit to the Congress a series of proposals to strengthen the antimonopoly laws, to assist
small business, and to encourage the growth of new enterprises.

In the case of labor, free collective bargaining must be protected and encouraged. Collective
bargaining is not only a fundamental economic freedom for labor. It is also a strengthening
and stabilizing influence for our whole economy.

The Federal statute now governing labor relations is punitive in purpose and one-sided in operation.
This statute is, and always has been, inconsistent with the practice of true and effective
collective bargaining. It should be repealed and replaced by a law that is fair to all and
in harmony with our democratic ideals.

A full understanding of the problems of modern labor relations is of such importance that I
recommend the establishment of a labor extension service to encourage educational activities
in this field.

Another essential for our continued growth is a stable and prosperous agriculture. For many
years we have been building a program to give the farmer a reasonable measure of protection
against the special hazards to which he is exposed. That program was improved at the last session
of the Congress. However, our farm legislation is still not adequate.

Although the Congress has properly declared as a matter of national policy that safeguards
must be maintained against slumps in farm prices, there are serious shortcomings in the methods
now available for carrying out this policy. Mandatory price supports should be provided for
the commodities not now covered which are major sources of farm income.

Moreover, we should provide a method of supporting farm income at fair levels which will, at
the same time, avoid piling up unmanageable surpluses and allow consumers to obtain the full
benefit of our abundant agricultural production. A system of production payments gives the
greatest promise of accomplishing this purpose. I recommend that the use of such a system be
authorized.

One of the most important factors in our continued growth is the construction of more good,
up-to-date housing. In a country such as ours there is no reason why decent homes should not
be within the reach of all. With the help of various Government programs we have made great
progress in the last few years in increasing the number of homes.

Despite this increase, there is still an acute shortage of housing for the lower and middle-income
groups, especially in large metropolitan areas. We have laid the groundwork for relieving the
plight of lower-income families in the Housing Act of 1949. To aid the middle-income families,
I recommend that the Congress enact new legislation authorizing a vigorous program to help
cooperatives and other nonprofit groups build housing which these families can afford.

Rent control has done a great deal to prevent the housing shortage from having had worse effects
during this postwar period of adjustment. Rent control is still necessary to prevent widespread
hardship and sharp curtailment of the buying power of millions of consumers in metropolitan
areas. I recommend, therefore, that rent control be continued for another year.

If we are to achieve a better life for all, the natural resources of the country must be regarded
as a public trust. We must use our precious assets of soil, water, and forest, and grassland
in such a way that they become constantly more productive and more valuable. Government investment
in the conservation and development of our resources is necessary to the future economic expansion
of the country.

We need to enlarge the production and transmission of public power. That is true not only in
those regions which have already received great benefits from Federal power projects, but also
in regions such as New England where the benefits of large-scale public power development have
not yet been experienced.

In our hydroelectric and irrigation undertakings, as well as in our other resource programs,
we must continue policies to assure that their benefits will be spread among the many and not
restricted to the favored few.

Important resource legislation which should be passed at this session includes the authorization
of the St. Lawrence seaway and power project and the establishment of the Columbia Valley Administration--the
establishment of the Columbia Valley Administration, I don't want you to miss that.

Through wise Government policies and Government expenditures for the conservation and development
of our natural resources, we can be sure of transmitting to our children and our children's
children a country far richer and more productive than the one we know today.

The value of our natural resources is constantly being increased by the progress of science.
Research is finding new ways of using such natural assets as minerals, sea water, and plant
life. In the peaceful development of atomic energy, particularly, we stand on the threshold
of new wonders. The first experimental machines for producing useful power from atomic energy
are now under construction. We have made only the first beginnings in this field, but in the
perspective of history they may loom larger than the first airplane, or even the first tools
that started man on the road to civilization.

To take full advantage of the increasing possibilities of nature we must equip ourselves with
increasing knowledge. Government has a responsibility to see that our country maintains its
position in the advance of science. As a step toward this end, the Congress should complete
action on the measure to create a National Science Foundation.

Another duty of the Government is to promote the economic security, the health, and the education
of its citizens. By so doing, we strengthen both our economy and the structure of our society.
In a nation as rich as ours, all citizens should be able to live in decency and health.

Our Social Security System should be developed into the main reliance of our people for basic
protection against the economic hazards of old-age, unemployment, and illness. I earnestly
hope that the Congress will complete action at this session on legislation to increase the
benefits and extend the coverage of old-age and survivors' insurance. The widespread movement
to provide pensions in private industry dramatizes the need for improvements in the public
insurance system.

I also urge that the Congress strengthen our unemployment compensation law to meet present-day
needs more adequately. The economic downturn of the past year was the first real test that
our system of unemployment insurance has had to meet. That test has proved the wisdom of the
system, but it has also made strikingly apparent the need for improving its operation and increasing
its coverage and its benefits.

In the field of health there are immense opportunities to extend to more of our people the
benefits of the amazing advances in medical science. We have made a good beginning in expanding
our hospitals, but we must also go on to remedy the shortages of doctors, nurses, and public
health services, and to establish a system of medical insurance which will enable all Americans
to afford good medical care.

We must take immediate steps to strengthen our educational system. In many parts of our country,
young people are being handicapped for life because of a poor education. The rapidly increasing
number of children of school age, coupled with the shortage of qualified teachers, makes this
problem more critical each year. I believe that the Congress should no longer delay in providing
Federal assistance to the States so that they can maintain adequate schools.

As we go forward in achieving greater economic security and greater opportunity for all our
people, we should make every effort to extend the benefits of our democratic institutions to
every citizen. The religious ideals which we profess, and the heritage of freedom which we
have received from the past, clearly place that duty upon us. I again urge the Congress to
enact the civil rights proposals I made in February 1948. These proposals are for the enactment
of Federal statutes which will protect all our people in the exercise of their democratic rights
and their search for economic opportunity, grant statehood to Alaska and Hawaii, provide a
greater measure of self-government for our island possessions, and accord home rule to the
District of Columbia. Some of those proposals have been before the Congress for a long time.
Those who oppose them, as well as those who favor them, should recognize that it is the duty
of the elected representatives of the people to let these proposals come to a vote.

Our democratic ideals, as well as our best interests, require that we do our fair share in
providing homes for the unfortunate victims of war and tyranny. In so doing, we shall add strength
to our democracy through the abilities and skills which these men and women will bring here.
I urge the prompt enactment by the Congress of the legislation now before it to extend and
broaden the existing displaced persons law and remove its discriminatory features.

The measures I am recommending to the Congress concerning both our foreign and our domestic
policies represent a carefully considered program to meet our national needs. It is a program
which necessarily requires large expenditures of funds. More than 70 percent of the Government's
expenditures are required to meet the costs of past wars and to work for world peace. This
is the dominant factor in our fiscal policy. At the same time, the Government must make substantial
expenditures which are necessary to the growth and expansion of the domestic economy.

At present, largely because of the ill-considered tax reduction of the Both Congress, the Government
is not receiving enough revenue to meet its necessary expenditures.

To meet this situation, I am proposing that Federal expenditures be held to the lowest levels
consistent with our international requirements and the essential needs of economic growth,
and the well-being of our people. I think I had better read that over; you interrupted me in
the middle. Don't forget that last phrase. At the same time, we must guard against the folly
of attempting budget slashes which would impair our prospects for peace or cripple the programs
essential to our national strength.

The budget recommendations I shall shortly transmit to the Congress show that we can expect
a substantial improvement in our fiscal position over the next few years, as the cost of some
of our extraordinary postwar programs declines, and as the Government revenue rises as a result
of growth in employment and national income. To further improve our fiscal outlook, we should
make some changes in our tax system which will reduce present inequities, stimulate business
activity, and yield a moderate amount of additional revenue. I expect to transmit specific
recommendations to the Congress on this subject at a very early date.

The fiscal policy I am recommending is the quickest and safest way of achieving a balanced budget.

As we move forward into the second half of the 20th century, we must always bear in mind the
central purpose of our national life. We do not seek material prosperity for ourselves because
we love luxury; we do not aid other nations because we wish to increase our power. We have
not devised programs for the security and well-being of our people because we are afraid or
unwilling to take risks. This is not the meaning of our past history or our present course.

We work for a better life for all, so that all men may put to good use the great gifts with
which they have been endowed by their Creator. We seek to establish those material conditions
of life in which, without exception, men may live in dignity, perform useful work, serve their
communities, and worship God as they see fit.

These may seem simple goals, but they are not little ones. They are worth a great deal more
than all the empires and conquests of history. They are not to be achieved by military aggression
or political fanaticism. They are to be achieved by humbler means-by hard work, by a spirit
of self-restraint in our dealings with one another, and by a deep devotion to the principles
of justice and equality.

It should make us truly thankful, as we look back to the beginnings of this country, that we
have come so far along the road to a better life for all. It should make us humble to think,
as we look ahead, how much farther we have to go to accomplish, at home and abroad, the objectives
that were set out for us at the founding of this great Nation.

As we approach the halfway mark of the 20th century, we should ask for continued strength and
guidance from that Almighty Power who has placed before us such great opportunities for the
good of mankind in the years to come.

***

State of the Union Address Harry S. Truman January 8, 1951

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Congress:

This 82d Congress faces as grave a task as any Congress in the history of our Republic. The
actions you take will be watched by the whole world. These actions will measure the ability
of a free people, acting through their chosen representatives and their free institutions,
to meet a deadly challenge to their way of life.

We can meet this challenge foolishly or wisely. We can meet it timidly or bravely, shamefully
or honorably.

I know that the 82d Congress will meet this challenge in a way worthy of our great heritage.
I know that your debates will be earnest, responsible, constructive, and to the point. I know
that from these debates there will come the great decisions needed to carry us forward.

At this critical time, I am glad to say that our country is in a healthy condition. Our democratic
institutions are sound and strong. We have more men and women at work than ever before. We
are able to produce more than ever before--in fact, far more than any country ever produced
in the history of the world.

I am confident that we can succeed in the great task that lies before us.

We will succeed, but we must all do our part. We must all act together as citizens of this
great Republic.

As we meet here today, American soldiers are fighting a bitter campaign in Korea. We pay tribute
to their courage, devotion, and gallantry.

Our men are fighting, alongside their United Nations allies, because they know, as we do, that
the aggression in Korea is part of the attempt of the Russian Communist dictatorship to take
over the world, step by step.

Our men are fighting a long way from home, but they are fighting for our lives and our liberties.
They are fighting to protect our right to meet here today--our right to govern ourselves as
a free nation.

The threat of world conquest by Soviet Russia endangers our liberty and endangers the kind
of world in which the free spirit of man can survive. This threat is aimed at all peoples who
strive to win or defend their own freedom and national independence.

Indeed, the state of our Nation is in great part the state of our friends and allies throughout
the world. The gun that points at them points at us, also. The threat is a total threat and
the danger is a common danger.

All free nations are exposed and all are in peril. Their only security lies in banding together.
No one nation can find protection in a selfish search for a safe haven from the storm.

The free nations do not have any aggressive purpose. We want only peace in the world--peace
for all countries. No threat to the security of any nation is concealed in our plans and programs.

We had hoped that the Soviet Union, with its security assured by the Charter of the United
Nations, would be willing to live and let live. But I am sorry to say that has not been the case.

The imperialism of the czars has been replaced by the even more ambitious, more crafty, and
more menacing imperialism of the rulers of the Soviet Union.

This new imperialism has powerful military forces. It is keeping millions of men under arms.
It has a large air force and a strong submarine force. It has complete control of the men and
equipment of its satellites. It has kept its subject peoples and its economy in a state of
perpetual mobilization.

The present rulers of the Soviet Union have shown that they are willing to use this power to
destroy the free nations and win domination over the whole world.

The Soviet imperialists have two ways of going about their destructive work. They use the method
of subversion and internal revolution, and they use the method of external aggression. In preparation
for either of these methods of attack, they stir up class strife and disorder. They encourage
sabotage. They put out poisonous propaganda. They deliberately try to prevent economic improvement.

If their efforts are successful, they foment a revolution, as they did in Czechoslovakia and
China, and as they tried, unsuccessfully, to do in Greece. If their methods of subversion are
blocked, and if they think they can get away with outright warfare, they resort to external
aggression. This is what they did when they loosed the armies of their puppet states against
the Republic of Korea, in an evil war by proxy.

We of the free world must be ready to meet both of these methods of Soviet action. We must
not neglect one or the other.

The free world has power and resources to meet these two forms of aggression--resources that
are far greater than those of the Soviet dictatorship. We have skilled and vigorous peoples,
great industrial strength, and abundant sources of raw materials. And above all, we cherish
liberty. Our common ideals are a great part of our strength. These ideals are the driving force
of human progress.

The free nations believe in the dignity and the worth of man.

We believe in independence for all nations.

We believe that free and independent nations can band together into a world order based on
law. We have laid the cornerstone of such a peaceful world in the United Nations.

We believe that such a world order can and should spread the benefits of modern science and
industry, better health and education, more food and rising standards of living--throughout
the world.

These ideals give our cause a power and vitality that Russian communism can never command.

The free nations, however, are bound together by more than ideals. They are a real community
bound together also by the ties of self-interest and self-preservation. If they should fall
apart, the results would be fatal to human freedom.

Our own national security is deeply involved with that of the other free nations. While they
need our support, we equally need theirs. Our national safety would be gravely prejudiced if
the Soviet Union were to succeed in harnessing to its war machine the resources and the manpower
of the free nations on the borders of its empire.

If Western Europe were to fall to Soviet Russia, it would double the Soviet supply of coal
and triple the Soviet supply of steel. If the free countries of Asia and Africa should fall
to Soviet Russia, we would lose the sources of many of our most vital raw materials, including
uranium, which is the basis of our atomic power. And Soviet command of the manpower of the
free nations of Europe and Asia would confront us with military forces which we could never
hope to equal.

In such a situation, the Soviet Union could impose its demands on the world, without resort
to conflict, simply through the preponderance of its economic and military power. The Soviet
Union does not have to attack the United States to secure domination of the world. It can achieve
its ends by isolating us and swallowing up all our allies. Therefore, even if we were craven
enough I do not believe we could be--but, I say, even if we were craven enough to abandon our
ideals, it would be disastrous for us to withdraw from the community of free nations.

We are the most powerful single member of this community, and we have a special responsibility.
We must take the leadership in meeting the challenge to freedom and in helping to protect the
rights of independent nations.

This country has a practical, realistic program of action for meeting this challenge.

First, we shall have to extend economic assistance, where it can be effective. The best way
to stop subversion by the Kremlin is to strike at the roots of social injustice and economic
disorder. People who have jobs, homes, and hopes for the future will defend themselves against
the underground agents of the Kremlin. Our programs of economic aid have done much to turn
back Communism,

In Europe the Marshall plan has had an electrifying result. As European recovery progressed,
the strikes led by the Kremlin's agents in Italy and France failed. All over Western Europe
the Communist Party took worse and worse beatings at the polls.

The countries which have received Marshall plan aid have been able, through hard work, to expand
their productive strength-in many cases, to levels higher than ever before in their history.
Without this strength they would be completely incapable of defending themselves today. They
are now ready to use this strength in helping to build a strong combined defense against aggression.

We shall need to continue some economic aid to European countries. This aid should now be specifically
related to the building of their defenses.

In other parts of the world our economic assistance will need to be more broadly directed toward
economic development. In the Near East, in Africa, in Asia, we must do what we can to help
people who are striving to advance from misery, poverty, and hunger. We must also continue
to help the economic growth of our good neighbors in this hemisphere. These actions will bring
greater strength for the free world. They will give many people a real stake in the future
and reason to defend their freedom. They will mean increased production of goods they need
and materials we need.

Second, we shall need to continue our military assistance to countries which want to defend
themselves.

The heart of our common defense effort is the North Atlantic community. The defense of Europe
is the basis for the defense of the whole free world--ourselves included. Next to the United
States, Europe is the largest workshop in the world. It is also a homeland of the great religious
beliefs shared by many of our citizens beliefs which are now threatened by the tide of atheistic
communism.

Strategically, economically, and morally, the defense of Europe is a part of our own defense.
That is why we have joined with the countries of Europe in the North Atlantic Treaty, pledging
ourselves to work with them.

There has been much discussion recently over whether the European countries are willing to
defend themselves. Their actions are answering this question.

Our North Atlantic Treaty partners have strict systems of universal military training. Several
have recently increased the term of service. All have taken measures to improve the quality
of training. Forces are being trained and expanded as rapidly as the necessary arms and equipment
can be supplied from their factories and ours. Our North Atlantic Treaty partners, together,
are building armies bigger than our own.

None of the North Atlantic Treaty countries, including our own country, has done enough yet.
But real progress is being made. Together, we have worked out defense plans. The military leaders
of our own country took part in working out these plans, and are agreed that they are sound
and within our capabilities.

To put these plans into action, we sent to Europe last week one of our greatest military commanders,
General Dwight D. Eisenhower.

General Eisenhower went to Europe to assume command of the united forces of the North Atlantic
Treaty countries, including our own forces in Germany.

The people of Europe have confidence in General Eisenhower. They know his ability to put together
a fighting force of allies. His mission is vital to our security. We should all stand behind
him, and give him every bit of help we can.

Part of our job will be to reinforce the military strength of our European partners by sending
them weapons and equipment as our military production expands.

Our program of military assistance extends to the nations in the Near East and the Far East
which are trying to defend their freedom. Soviet communism is trying to make these nations
into colonies, and to use their people as cannon fodder in new wars of conquest. We want their
people to be free men and to enjoy peace.

Our country has always stood for freedom for the peoples of Asia. Long, long ago it stood for
the freedom of the peoples of Asia. Our history shows this. We have demonstrated it in the
Philippines. We have demonstrated it in our relations with Indonesia, India, and with China.
We hope to join in restoring the people of Japan to membership in the community of free nations.

It is in the Far East that we have taken up arms, under the United Nations, to preserve the
principle of independence for free nations. We are fighting to keep the forces of Communist
aggression from making a slave state out of Korea.

Korea has tremendous significance for the world. It means that free nations, acting through
the United Nations, are fighting together against aggression.

We will understand the importance of this best if we look back into history. If the democracies
had stood up against the invasion of Manchuria in 1931, or the attack on Ethiopia in 1935,
or the seizure of Austria in 1938, if they had stood together against aggression on those occasions
as the United Nations has done in Korea, the whole history of our time would have been different.

The principles for which we are fighting in Korea are right and just. They are the foundations
of collective security and of the future of free nations. Korea is not only a country undergoing
the torment of aggression; it is also a symbol. It stands for right and justice in the world
against oppression and slavery. The free world must always stand for these principles--and
we will stand with the free world.

As the third part of our program, we will continue to work for peaceful settlements in international
disputes. We will support the United Nations and remain loyal to the great principles of international
cooperation laid down in its charter.

We are willing, as we have always been, to negotiate honorable settlements with the Soviet
Union. But we will not engage in appeasement.

The Soviet rulers have made it clear that we must have strength as well as right on our side.
If we build our strength--and we are building it--the Soviet rulers may face the facts and
lay aside their plans to take over the world.

That is what we hope will happen, and that is what we are trying to bring about. That is the
only realistic road to peace.

These are the main elements of the course our Nation must follow as a member of the community
of free nations. These are the things we must do to preserve our security and help create a
peaceful world. But they will be successful only if we increase the strength of our own country.

Here at home we have some very big jobs to do. We are building much stronger military forces--and
we are building them fast. We are preparing for full wartime mobilization, if that should be
necessary. And we are continuing to build a strong and growing economy, able to maintain whatever
effort may be required for as long as necessary.

We are building our own Army, Navy, and Air Force to an active strength of nearly 3 1/2 million
men and women. We are stepping up the training of the reserve forces, and establishing more
training facilities, so that we can rapidly increase our active forces far more on short notice.

We are going to produce all the weapons and equipment that such an armed force will need. Furthermore,
we will make weapons for our allies, and weapons for our own reserve supplies. On top of this,
we will build the capacity to turn out on short notice arms and supplies that may be needed
for a full-scale war.

Fortunately, we have a good start on this because of our enormous plant capacity and because
of the equipment on hand from the last war. For example, many combat ships are being returned
to active duty from the "mothball fleet" and many others can be put into service on very short
notice. We have large reserves of arms and ammunition and thousands of workers skilled in arms
production.

In many cases, however, our stocks of weapons are low. In other cases, those on hand are not
the most modern. We have made remarkable technical advances. We have developed new types of
jet planes and powerful new tanks. We are concentrating on producing the newest types of weapons
and producing them as fast as we can.

This production drive is more selective than the one we had during World War II, but it is
just as urgent and intense. It is a big program and it is a costly one.

Let me give you two concrete examples. Our present program calls for expanding the aircraft
industry so that it will have the capacity to produce 50,000 modern military planes a year.
We are preparing the capacity to produce 35,000 tanks a year. We are not now ordering that
many planes or that many tanks, and we hope that we never have to, but we mean to be able to
turn them out if we need them.

The planes we are producing now are much bigger, much better, and much more expensive than
the planes we had during the last war.

We used to think that the B-17 was a huge plane, and the blockbuster it carried a huge load.
But the B-36 can carry five of these blockbusters in its belly, and it can carry them five
times as far. Of course, the B-36 is much more complicated to build than the B-17, and far
more expensive. One B-17 costs $275,000, while now one B-36 costs $3 1/2 million.

I ask you to remember that what we are doing is to provide the best and most modern military
equipment in the world for our fighting forces.

This kind of defense production program has two parts.

The first part is to get our defense production going as fast as possible. We have to convert
plants and channel materials to defense production. This means heavy cuts in civilian uses
of copper, aluminum, rubber, and other essential materials. It means shortages in various consumer
goods.

The second part is to increase our capacity to produce and to keep our economy strong for the
long pull. We do not know how long Communist aggression will threaten the world.

Only by increasing our output can we carry the burden of preparedness for an indefinite period
in the future. This means that we will have to build more power plants and more steel mills,
grow more cotton, mine more copper, and expand our capacity in many other ways.

The Congress will need to consider legislation, at this session, affecting all the aspects
of our mobilization job. The main subjects on which legislation will be needed are:

First, appropriations for our military buildup.

Second, extension and revision of the Selective Service Act.

Third, military and economic aid to help build up the strength of the free world.

Fourth, revision and extension of the authority to expand production and to stabilize prices,
wages, and rents.

Fifth, improvement of our agricultural laws to help obtain the kinds of farm products we need
for the defense effort.

Sixth, improvement of our labor laws to help provide stable labor-management relations and
to make sure that we have steady production in this emergency.

Seventh, housing and training of defense workers and the full use of all our manpower resources.

Eighth, means for increasing the supply of doctors, nurses, and other trained medical personnel
critically needed for the defense effort.

Ninth, aid to the States to meet the most urgent needs of our elementary and secondary schools.
Some of our plans will have to be deferred for the time being. But we should do all we can
to make sure our children are being trained as good and useful citizens in the critical times
ahead.

Tenth, a major increase in taxes to meet the cost of the defense effort.

The Economic Report and the Budget Message will discuss these subjects further. In addition,
I shall send to the Congress special messages containing detailed recommendations on legislation
needed at this Session.

In the months ahead the Government must give priority to activities that are urgent--like military
procurement and atomic energy and power development. It must practice rigid economy in its
nondefense activities. Many of the things we would normally do must be curtailed or postponed.

But in a long-term defense effort like this one, we cannot neglect the measures needed to maintain
a strong economy and a healthy democratic society.

The Congress, therefore, should give continued attention to the measures which our country
will need for the long pull. And it should act upon such legislation as promptly as circumstances
permit.

To take just one example--we need to continue and complete the work of rounding out our system
of social insurance. We still need to improve our protection against unemployment and old age.
We still need to provide insurance against the loss of earnings through sickness, and against
the high costs of modern medical care.

And above all, we must remember that the fundamentals of our strength rest upon the freedoms
of our people. We must continue our efforts to achieve the full realization of our democratic
ideals. We must uphold the freedom of speech and the freedom of conscience in our land. We
must assure equal rights and equal opportunities to all our citizens.

As we go forward this year in the defense of freedom, let us keep dearly before us the nature
of our present effort.

We are building up our strength, in concert with other free nations, to meet the danger of
aggression that has been turned loose on the world. The strength of the free nations is the
world's best hope of peace.

I ask the Congress for unity in these crucial days.

Make no mistake about my meaning. I do not ask, or expect, unanimity. I do not ask for an end
to debate. Only by debate can we arrive at decisions which are wise, and which reflect the
desires of the American people. We do not have a dictatorship in this country, and we never
will have one in this country.

When I request unity, what I am really asking for is a sense of responsibility on the part
of every Member of this Congress. Let us debate the issues, but let every man among us weigh
his words and his deeds. There is a sharp difference between harmful criticism and constructive
criticism. If we are truly responsible as individuals, I am sure that we will be unified as
a government.

Let us keep our eyes on the issues and work for the things we all believe in.

Let each of us put our country ahead of our party, and ahead of our own personal interests.

I had the honor to be a Member of the Senate during World War II, and I know from experience
that unity of purpose and of effort is possible in the Congress without any lessening of the
vitality of our two-party system.

Let us all stand together as Americans. Let us stand together with all men everywhere who believe
in human liberty.

Peace is precious to us. It is the way of life we strive for with all the strength and wisdom
we possess. But more precious than peace are freedom and justice. We will fight, if fight we
must, to keep our freedom and to prevent justice from being destroyed.

These are the things that give meaning to our lives, and which we acknowledge to be greater
than ourselves.

This is our cause--peace, freedom, justice. We will pursue this cause with determination and
humility, asking divine guidance that in all we do we may follow the will of God.

***

State of the Union Address Harry S. Truman January 9, 1952

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Congress:

I have the honor to report to the Congress on the state of the Union.

At the outset, I should like to speak of the necessity for putting first things first as we
work together this year for the good of our country.

The United States and the whole free world are passing through a period of grave danger. Every
action you take here in Congress, and every action that I take as President, must be measured
against the test of whether it helps to meet that danger.

This will be a presidential election year-the year in which politics plays a large part in
our lives--a larger part than usual. That is perfectly proper. But we have a greater responsibility
to conduct our political fights in a manner that does not harm the national interest.

We can find plenty of things to differ about without destroying our free institutions and without
abandoning our bipartisan foreign policy for peace.

When everything is said and done, all of us--Republicans and Democrats alike--all of us are
Americans; and we are all going to sink or swim together.

We are moving through a perilous time. Faced with a terrible threat of aggression, our Nation
has embarked upon a great effort to help establish the kind of world in which peace shall be
secure. Peace is our goal-not peace at any price, but a peace based on freedom and justice.
We are now in the midst of our effort to reach that goal. On the whole, we have been doing
very well.

Last year, 1951, was a year in which we threw back aggression, added greatly to our military
strength, and improved the chances for peace and freedom in many parts of the world.

This year, 1952, is a critical year in the defense effort of the whole free world. If we falter
we can lose all the gains we have made. If we drive ahead, with courage and vigor and determination,
we can by the end of 1952 be in a position of much greater security. The way will be dangerous
for the years ahead, but if we put forth our best efforts this year--and next year--we can
be "over the hump" in our effort to build strong defenses.

When we look at the record of the past year, 1951, we find important things on both the credit
and the debit side of the ledger. We have made great advances. At the same time we have run
into new problems which must be overcome.

Now let us look at the credit side first.

Peace depends upon the free nations sticking together, and making a combined effort to check
aggression and prevent war. In this respect, 1951 was a year of great achievement.

In Korea the forces of the United Nations turned hack the Chinese Communist invasion-and did
it without widening the area of conflict. The action of the United Nations in Korea has been
a powerful deterrent to a third world war. However, the situation in Korea remains very hazardous.
The outcome of the armistice negotiation still remains uncertain.

In Indochina and Malaya, our aid has helped our allies to hold back the Communist advance,
although there are signs of further trouble in that area.

In 1951 we strengthened the chances of peace in the Pacific region by the treaties with Japan
and the defense arrangements with Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines.

In Europe combined defense has become a reality. The free nations have created a real fighting
force. This force is not yet as strong as it needs to be; but it is already a real obstacle
to any attempt by hostile forces to sweep across Europe to the Atlantic.

In 1951 we also moved to strengthen the security of Europe by the agreement to bring Greece
and Turkey into the North Atlantic Treaty.

The United Nations, the world's greatest hope for peace, has come through a year of trial stronger
and more useful than ever. The free nations have stood together in blocking Communist attempts
to tear up the charter.

At the present session of the United Nations in Paris, we, together with the British and the
French, offered a plan to reduce and control all armaments under a foolproof inspection system.
This is a concrete, practical proposal for disarmament.

But what happened? Vishinsky laughed at it. Listen to what he said: "I could hardly sleep at
all last night .... I could not sleep because I kept laughing." The world will be a long time
forgetting the spectacle of that fellow laughing at disarmament.

Disarmament is not a joke. Vishinsky's laughter met with shock and anger from the people all
over the world. And, as a result, Mr. Stalin's representative received orders to stop laughing
and start talking.

If the Soviet leaders were to accept this proposal, it would lighten the burden of armaments,
and permit the resources of the earth to be devoted to the good of mankind. But until the Soviet
Union accepts a sound disarmament proposal, and joins in peaceful settlements, we have no choice
except to build up our defenses.

During this past year we added more than a million men and women to our Armed Forces. The total
is now nearly 3 1/2 million. We have made rapid progress in the field of atomic weapons. We
have turned out billion worth of military supplies and equipment, three times as much as the
year before.

Economic conditions in the country are good. There are 61 million people on the job; wages,
farm incomes, and business profits are at high levels. Total production of goods and services
in our country has increased 8 percent over last year--about twice the normal rate of growth.

Perhaps the most amazing thing about our economic progress is the way we are increasing our
basic capacity to produce. For example, we are now in the second year of a 3-year program which
will double our output of aluminum, increase our electric power supply by 40 percent, and increase
our steelmaking capacity by 15 percent. We can then produce 120 million tons of steel a year,
as much as all the rest of the world put together.

This expansion will mean more jobs and higher standards of living for all of us in the years
ahead. At the present time it means greater strength for us and for the rest of the free world
in the fight for peace.

Now, I must turn to the debit side of the ledger for the past year.

The outstanding fact to note on the debit side of the ledger is that the Soviet Union, in 1951,
continued to expand its military production and increase its already excessive military power.

It is true that the Soviets have run into increasing difficulties. Their hostile policies have
awakened stern resistance among free men throughout the world. And behind the Iron Curtain
the Soviet rule of force has created growing political and economic stresses in the satellite
nations.

Nevertheless, the grim fact remains that the Soviet Union is increasing its armed might. It
is still producing more war planes than the free nations. It has set off two more atomic explosions.
The world still walks in the shadow of another world war.

And here at home, our defense preparations are far from complete.

During 1951 we did not make adequate progress in building up civil defense against atomic attack.
This is a major weakness in our plans for peace, since inadequate civilian defense is an open
invitation to a surprise attack. Failure to provide adequate civilian defense has the same
effect as adding to the enemy's supply of atomic bombs.

In the field of defense production we have run into difficulties and delays in designing and
producing the latest types of airplanes and tanks. Some machine tools and metals are still
in extremely short supply.

In other free countries the defense buildup has created severe economic problems. It has increased
inflation in Europe and has endangered the continued recovery of our allies.

In the Middle East political tensions and the oil controversy in Iran are keeping the region
in a turmoil. In the Far East the dark threat of Communist imperialism still hangs over many
nations.

This, very briefly, is the good side and the bad side of the picture.

Taking the good and bad together, we have made real progress this last year along the road
to peace. We have increased the power and unity of the free world. And while we were doing
this, we have avoided world war on the one hand, and appeasement on the other. This is a hard
road to follow, but the events of the last year show that it is the right road to peace.

We cannot expect to complete the job overnight. The free nations may have to maintain for years
the larger military forces needed to deter aggression. We must build steadily, over a period
of years, toward political solidarity and economic progress among the free nations in all parts
of the world.

Our task will not be easy; but if we go at it with a will, we can look forward to steady progress.
On our side are all the great resources of freedom--the ideals of religion and democracy, the
aspiration of people for a better life, and the industrial and technical power of a free civilization.

These advantages outweigh anything the slave world can produce. The only thing that can defeat
us is our own state of mind. We can lose if we falter.

The middle period of a great national effort like this is a very difficult time. The way seems
long and hard. The goal seems far distant. Some people get discouraged. That is only natural.

But if there are any among us who think we ought to ease up in the fight for peace, I want
to remind them of three things--just three things.

First: The threat of world war is still very real. We had one Pearl Harbor--let's not get caught
off guard again. If you don't think the threat of Communist armies is real, talk to some of
our men back from Korea.

Second: If the United States had to try to stand alone against a Soviet-dominated world, it
would destroy the life we know and the ideals we hold dear. Our allies are essential to us,
just as we are essential to them. The more shoulders there are to bear the burden the lighter
that burden will be.

Third: The things we believe in most deeply are under relentless attack. We have the great
responsibility of saving the basic moral and spiritual values of our civilization. We have
started out well--with a program for peace that is unparalleled in history. If we believe in
ourselves and the faith we profess, we will stick to that job until it is victoriously finished.

This is a time for courage, not for grumbling and mumbling.

Now, let us take a look at the things we have to do.

The thing that is uppermost in the minds of all of us is the situation in Korea. We must, and
we will, keep up the fight there until we get the kind of armistice that will put an end to
the aggression and protect the safety of our forces and the security of the Republic of Korea.
Beyond that we shall continue to work for a settlement in Korea that upholds the principles
of the United Nations.

We went into Korea because we knew that Communist aggression had to be met firmly if freedom
was to be preserved in the world. We went into the fight to save the Republic of Korea, a free
country, established under the United Nations. These are our aims. We will not give up until
we attain them.

Meanwhile, we must continue to strengthen the forces of freedom throughout the world.

I hope the Senate will take early and favorable action on the Japanese peace treaty, on our
security pacts with the Pacific countries, and on the agreement to bring Greece and Turkey
into the North Atlantic Treaty.

We are also negotiating an agreement with the German Federal Republic under which it can play
an honorable and equal part among nations and take its place in the defense of Western Europe.

But treaties and plans are only the skeleton of our defense structure. The sinew and muscle
of defense are the forces and equipment which must be provided.

In Europe we must go on helping our friends and allies to build up their military forces. This
means we must send weapons in large volume to our European allies. I have directed that weapons
for Europe be given a very high priority. Economic aid is necessary, too, to supply the margin
of difference between success and failure in making Europe a strong partner in our joint defense.

In the long run we want to see Europe freed from any dependence on our aid. Our European allies
want that just as bad as we do. The steps that are now being taken to build European unity
should help bring that about. Six European countries are pooling their coal and steel production
under the Schuman plan. Work is going forward on the merger of European national forces on
the Continent into a single army. These great projects should become realities in 1952.

We should do all we can to help and encourage the move toward a strong and united Europe.

In Asia the new Communist empire is a daily threat to millions of people. The peoples of Asia
want to be free to follow their own way of life. They want to preserve their culture and their
traditions against communism, just as much as we want to preserve ours. They are laboring under
terrific handicaps--poverty, ill health, feudal systems of land ownership, and the threat of
internal subversion or external attack. We can and we must increase our help to them.

This means military aid, especially to those places like Indochina which might be hardest hit
by some new Communist attack.

It also means economic aid, both technical know-how and capital investment.

This last year we made available millions of bushels of wheat to relieve famine in India. But
far more important, in the long run, is the work Americans are doing in India to help the Indian
farmers themselves raise more grain. With the help of our technicians, Indian farmers, using
simple, inexpensive means, have been able since 1948 to double the crops in one area in India.
One farmer there raised 63 bushels of wheat to the acre, where 13 bushels had been the average
before.

This is point 4--our point 4 program at work. It is working--not only in India but in Iran,
Paraguay, Liberia--in 33 countries around the globe. Our technical missionaries are out there.
We need more of them. We need more funds to speed their efforts, because there is nothing of
greater importance in all our foreign policy. There is nothing that shows more clearly what
we stand for, and what we want to achieve.

My friends of the Congress, less than one-third of the expenditure for the cost of World War
II would have created the developments necessary to feed the whole world so we wouldn't have
to stomach communism. That is what we have got to fight, and unless we fight that battle and
win it, we can't win the cold war or a hot one either.

We have recently lost a great public servant who was leading this effort to bring opportunity
and hope to the people of half the world. Dr. Henry Bennett and his associates died in line
of duty on a point 4 mission. It is up to us to carry on the great work for which they gave
their lives.

During the coming year we must not forget the suffering of the people who live behind the Iron
Curtain. In those areas minorities are being oppressed, human rights violated, religions persecuted.
We should continue to expose those wrongs. We should continue and expand the activities of
the Voice of America, which brings our message of hope and truth to those peoples and other
peoples throughout the world.

I have just had an opportunity to discuss many of these world problems with Prime Minister
Churchill. We have had a most satisfactory series of meetings. We thoroughly reviewed the situation
in Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East. We both look forward to steady progress toward
peace through the cooperative action and teamwork of the free nations.

Turning from our foreign policies, let us consider the jobs we have here at home as a part
of our program for peace.

The first of these jobs is to move ahead full steam on the defense program.

Our objective is to have a well-equipped active defense force large enough--in concert with
the forces of our allies--to deter aggression and to inflict punishing losses on the enemy
immediately if we should be attacked. This active force must be backed by adequate reserves,
and by the plants and tools to turn out the tremendous quantities of new weapons that would
be needed if war came. We are not building an active force adequate to carry on full scale
war, but we are putting ourselves in a position to mobilize very rapidly if we have to.

This year I shall recommend some increases in the size of the active force we are building,
with particular emphasis on air power. This means we shall have to continue large-scale production
of planes and other equipment for a longer period of time than we had originally planned.

Planes and tanks and other weapons-what the military call "hard goods"--are now beginning to
come off the production lines in volume. Deliveries of hard goods now amount to about a billion
and a half dollars worth a month. A year from now, we expect that rate to be doubled.

We shall have to hold to a high rate of military output for about a year after that. In 1954
we hope to have enough equipment so that we can reduce the production of most military items
substantially. The next 2 years should therefore be the peak period of defense production.

Defense needs will take a lot of steel, aluminum, copper, nickel, and other scarce materials.
This means smaller production of some civilian goods. The cutbacks will be nothing like those
during World War II, when most civilian production was completely stopped. But there will be
considerably less of some goods than we have been used to these past 2 or 3 years.

The very critical part of our defense job this year is to keep down inflation.

We can control inflation if we make up our minds to do it.

On the executive side of the Government, we intend to hold the line on prices just as tightly
as the law allows. We will permit only those wage increases which are clearly justified under
sound stabilization policies; and we will see to it that industries absorb cost increases out
of earnings wherever feasible, before they are authorized to raise prices. We will do that,
at any rate, except where the recent amendments to the law specifically require us to give
further price increases.

Congress has a tremendous responsibility in this matter. Our stabilization law was shot full
of holes at the last session. This year, it will be one of the main tasks before the Congress
to repair the damage and enact a strong anti-inflation law.

As a part of our program to keep our country strong, we are determined to preserve the financial
strength of the Government. This means high taxes over the next few years. We must see to it
that these taxes are shared among the people as fairly as possible. I expect to discuss these
matters in the Economic Report and the Budget Message which will soon be presented to the Congress.

Our tax laws must be fair. And we must make absolutely certain they are administered fairly,
without fear or favor of any kind for anybody. To this end, steps have already been taken to
remedy weaknesses which have been disclosed in the administration of the tax laws. In addition,
I hope the Congress will approve my reorganization plan for the Bureau of Internal Revenue.
We must do everything necessary in order to make just as certain as is humanly possible that
every taxpayer receives equal treatment under the law.

To carry the burden of defense we must have a strong, productive, and expanding economy here
at home. We cannot neglect those things that have made us the great and powerful nation we
are today.

Our strength depends upon the health, the morale, the freedom of our people. We can take on
the burden of leadership in the fight for world peace because, for nearly 20 years, the Government
and the people have been working together for the general welfare. We have given more and more
of out citizens a fair chance at decent, useful, productive lives. That is the reason we are
as strong as we are today.

This Government of ours--the Congress and the executive both--must keep on working to bring
about a fair deal for all the American people. Some people will say that we haven't the time
or the money this year for measures for the welfare of the people. But if we want to win the
fight for peace, this is a part of the job we cannot ignore.

We will have to give up some things, we will have to go forward on others at a slower pace.
But, so far as I am concerned, I do not think we can give up the things that are vital to our
national strength.

I believe most people in this country will agree with me on that.

I think most farmers understand that soil conservation and rural electrification and agricultural
research are not frills or luxuries, but real necessities in order to boost our farm production.

I think most workers understand that decent housing and good working conditions are not luxuries,
but necessities if the working men and women of this country are to continue to out-produce
the rest of the world.

I think our businessmen know that scientific research and transportation services and more
steel mills and power projects are not luxuries, but necessities to keep our business and our
industry in the forefront of industrial progress.

I think everybody knows that social insurance and better schools and health services are not
frills, but necessities in helping all Americans to be useful and productive citizens, who
can contribute their full share in the national effort to protect and advance our way of life.

We cannot do all we want to in times like these--we have to choose the things that will contribute
most to defense--but we must continue to make progress if we are to be a strong nation in the
years ahead.

Let me give you some examples.

We are going right ahead with the urgently needed work to develop our natural resources, to
conserve our soil, and to prevent floods. We are going to produce essential power and build
the lines that are necessary and that we have to have to transmit it to our farms and factories.
We are going to encourage exploration for new mineral deposits.

We are going to keep on building essential highways and taking any other steps that will assure
the Nation an adequate transportation system--on land, on the sea, and in the air.

We must move right ahead this year to see that defense workers and soldiers' families get decent
housing at rents they can afford to pay.

We must begin our long deferred program of Federal aid to education--to help the States meet
the present crisis in the operation of our schools. And we must help with the construction
of schools in areas where they are critically needed because of the defense effort.

We urgently need to train more doctors and other health personnel, through aid to medical education.
We also urgently need to expand the basic public health services in our home communities--especially
in defense areas. The Congress should go ahead with these two measures immediately.

I have set up an impartial commission to make a thorough study of the Nation's health needs. In
the rare intervals of private life which he enjoyed on shore, Blake also compels our sincere
regard. When released for awhile from political and professional duties, he loved to run down to
Bridgewater for a few days or weeks, and, as his biographer says, with his chosen books, and one
or two devout and abstemious friends, to indulge in all the luxuries of seclusion. 'He was
by nature self-absorbed and taciturn.

His morning was usually occupied with a long walk, during which he appeared to his simple
neighbours to be lost in profound thought, as if working out in his own mind the details of one
of his great battles, or busy with some abstruse point of Puritan theology. If accompanied
by one of his brothers, or by some other intimate friend, he was still for the most part silent.
Always good-humoured, and enjoying sarcasm when of a grave, high
class, he yet never talked from the loquacious instinct, or encouraged
others so to employ their time and talents in his presence.

Even his lively and rattling brother Humphrey, his almost constant companion when on shore, caught,
from long habit, the great man's contemplative and self-communing gait and manner; and when
his friends rallied him on the subject in after-years, he used to say, that he had caught the
trick of silence while walking by the admiral's side in his long
morning musings on Knoll Hill.

A plain dinner satisfied his wants. Religious conversation, reading, and the details of business,
generally filled up the evening until supper-time; after family prayers--always pronounced
by the general himself--he would invariably call for his cup of sack and a dry crust of bread,
and while he drank two or three horns of Canary, would smile and chat in his own dry manner with
his friends and domestics, asking minute questions about their neighbours
and acquaintance; or when scholars or clergymen shared his simple
repast, affecting a droll anxiety--rich and pleasant in the conqueror
of Tromp--to prove, by the aptness and abundance of his quotations,
that, in becoming an admiral, he had not forfeited his claim to be
considered a good classic.'

The care and interest with which he looked
to the well-being of his humblest followers, made him eminently popular
in the fleet.

He was always ready to hear complaints and to rectify grievances. When wounded at the battle
of Portland, and exhorted to go on shore for repose and proper medical treatment, he refused
to seek for himself the relief which he had put in the way of his meanest comrade. Even at the
early period of his cruise against the Cavalier corsairs of Kinsale, such was Blake's popularity,
that numbers of men were continually joining him from the enemy's
fleet, although he offered them less pay, and none of that licence
which they had enjoyed under Prince Rupert's flag.

They gloried in following a leader sans peur et sans reproche--one with whose renown the whole country
speedily rang--the renown of a man who had revived the traditional glories of the English navy, and
proved that its meteor flag could 'yet terrific burn.'

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Robert Blake: Admiral and General at Sea.

By Hepworth Dixon. London: Chapman and Hall. 1852.

[2] Biographical and Critical Miscellanies.

[3] History of Great Britain, c. lxi.

[4] He had been lamed for life, by a wound in the thigh, at the battle
of Portland, 1653.

SUMMER LODGINGS.

In the dominions of the Czar, the backs of the serfs suffer a weekly titillation as insufferable,
although not so deadly, as the less frequent knout. When it comes to Wednesday, they begin to imagine
that they are not exactly comfortable; on Thursday, the natural moisture of their skin seems
fast drying up, and they are in an incipient fit of the fidgets; on Friday, the epidermis cracks all
over, or makes-believe to do so; and on Saturday, the whole population,
with a shout of impatient joy, rush to the bath-house of the village,
like a herd of bullocks in the dog-days to the river, and boil themselves
in steam.

When thoroughly done, they come out, beautifully plumped, as the cooks say, and feeling fresh
and vigorous, and as fit as ever they were in their lives to encounter a new week of serfdom.

An annual process analogous to this takes place in our own country. In spring, we begin to look
wistfully at the garden, to watch the opening of the lettuces, and count the colours of the
pansies. As the season advances, we wander into the fields, examine curiously the thin grass,
and turn an admiring eye towards the green hills in the distance.



When you come right down to it, it is the courage and the character of our Nation--and of each
one of us as individuals-that will really decide how well we meet this challenge.

We are engaged in a great undertaking at home and abroad--the greatest, in fact, that any nation
has ever been privileged to embark upon. We are working night and day to bring peace to the
world and to spread the democratic ideals of justice and self-government to all people. Our
accomplishments are already remarkable. We ought to be full of pride in what we are doing,
and full of confidence and hope in the outcome. No nation ever had greater resources, or greater
energy, or nobler traditions to inspire it.

And yet, day in and day out, we see a long procession of timid and fearful men who wring their
hands and cry out that we have lost the way, that we don't know what we are doing, that we
are bound to fail. Some say we should give up the struggle for peace, and others say we should
have a war and get it over with. That's a terrible statement. I had heard it made, but they
want us to forget the great objective of preventing another world war--the objective for which
our soldiers have been fighting in the hills of Korea.

If we are to be worthy of all that has been done for us by our soldiers in the field, we must
be true to the ideals for which they are fighting. We must reject the counsels of defeat and
despair. We must have the determination to complete the great work for which our men have laid
down their lives.

In all we do, we should remember who we are and what we stand for. We are Americans. Our forefathers
had far greater obstacles than we have, and much poorer chances of success. They did not lose
heart, or turn aside from their goals. In the darkest of all winters in American history, at
Valley Forge, George Washington said: "We must not, in so great a contest, expect to meet with
nothing but sunshine." With that spirit they won their fight for freedom.

We must have that same faith and vision. In the great contest in which we are engaged today,
we cannot expect to have fair weather all the way. But it is a contest just as important for
this country and for all men, as the desperate struggle that George Washington fought through
to victory.

Let us prove, again, that we are not merely sunshine patriots and summer soldiers. Let us go
forward, trusting in the God of Peace, to win the goals we seek.

***

State of the Union Address Harry S. Truman January 7, 1953

To the Congress of the United States:

I have the honor to report to the Congress on the state of the Union.

This is the eighth such report that, as President, I have been privileged to present to you
and to the country. On previous occasions, it has been my custom to set forth proposals for
legislative action in the coming year. But that is not my purpose today. The presentation of
a legislative program falls properly to my successor, not to me, and I would not infringe upon
his responsibility to chart the forward course. Instead, I wish to speak of the course we have
been following the past eight years and the position at which we have arrived.

In just two weeks, General Eisenhower will be inaugurated as President of the United States
and I will resume--most gladly--my place as a private citizen of this Republic. The Presidency
last changed hands eight years ago this coming April. That was a tragic time: a time of grieving
for President Roosevelt--the great and gallant human being who had been taken from us; a time
of unrelieved anxiety to his successor, thrust so suddenly into the complexities and burdens
of the Presidential office.

Not so this time. This time we see the normal transition under our democratic system. One President,
at the conclusion of his term, steps back to private life; his successor, chosen by the people,
begins his tenure of the office. And the Presidency of the United States continues to function
without a moment's break.

Since the election, I have done my best to assure that the transfer from one Administration
to another shall be smooth and orderly. From General Eisenhower and his associates, I have
had friendly and understanding collaboration in this endeavor. I have not sought to thrust
upon him--nor has he sought to take--the responsibility which must be mine until twelve o'clock
noon on January twentieth. But together, I hope and believe we have found means whereby the
incoming President can obtain the full and detailed information he will need to assume the
responsibility the moment he takes the oath of office.

The President-elect is about to take up the greatest burdens, the most compelling responsibilities,
given to any man. And I, with you and all Americans, wish for him all possible success in undertaking
the tasks that will so soon be his.

What are these tasks? The President is Chief of State, elected representative of all the people,
national spokesman for them and to them. He is Commander-in-Chief of our armed forces. He is
charged with the conduct of our foreign relations. He is Chief Executive of the Nation's largest
civilian organization. He must select and nominate all top officials of the Executive Branch
and all Federal judges. And on the legislative side, he has the obligation and the opportunity
to recommend, and to approve or veto legislation. Besides all this, it is to him that a great
political party turns naturally for leadership, and that, too, he must provide as President.

This bundle of burdens is unique; there is nothing else like it on the face of the earth. Each
task could be a full-time job. Together, they would be a tremendous undertaking in the easiest
of times.

But our times are not easy; they are hard-as hard and complex, perhaps as any in our history.
Now, the President not only has to carry on these tasks in such a way that our democracy may
grow and flourish and our people prosper, but he also has to lead the whole free world in overcoming
the communist menace--and all this under the shadow of the atomic bomb.

This is a huge challenge to the human being who occupies the Presidential office. But it is
not a challenge to him alone, for in reality he cannot meet it alone. The challenge runs not
just to him but to his whole Administration, to the Congress, to the country.

Ultimately, no President can master his responsibilities, save as his fellow citizens-indeed,
the whole people--comprehend the challenge of our times and move, with him, to meet it.

It has been my privilege to hold the Presidential office for nearly eight years now, and much
has been done in which I take great pride. But this is not personal pride. It is pride in the
people, in the Nation. It is pride in our political system and our form of government--balky
sometimes, mechanically deficient perhaps, in many ways--but enormously alive and vigorous;
able through these years to keep the Republic on the right course, rising to the great occasions,
accomplishing the essentials, meeting the basic challenge of our times.

There have been misunderstandings and controversies these past eight years, but through it
all the President of the United States has had that measure of support and understanding without
which no man could sustain the burdens of the Presidential office, or hope to discharge its
responsibilities.

For this I am profoundly grateful--grateful to my associates in the Executive Branch--most
of them non-partisan civil servants; grateful--despite our disagreements-to the Members of
the Congress on both sides of the aisle; grateful especially to the American people, the citizens
of this Republic, governors of us all.

We are still so close to recent controversies that some of us may find it hard to understand
the accomplishments of these past eight years. But the accomplishments are real and very great,
not as the President's, not as the Congress', but as the achievements of our country and all
the people in it.

Let me remind you of some of the things we have done since I first assumed my duties as President
of the United States.

I took the oath of office on April 12, 1945. In May of that same year, the Nazis surrendered.
Then, in July, that great white flash of light, man-made at Alamogordo, heralded swift and
final victory in World War II--and opened the doorway to the atomic age.

Consider some of the great questions that were posed for us by sudden, total victory in World
War II. Consider also, how well we as a Nation have responded.

Would the American economy collapse, after the war? That was one question. Would there be another
depression here--a repetition of 1921 or 1929? The free world feared and dreaded it. The communists
hoped for it and built their policies upon that hope.

We answered that question--answered it with a resounding "no."

Our economy has grown tremendously. Free enterprise has flourished as never fore. Sixty-two
million people are now gainfully employed, compared with 51 million seven years ago. Private
businessmen and farmers have invested more than 200 billion dollars in new plant and equipment
since the end of World War II. Prices have risen further than they should have done--but incomes,
by and large, have risen even more, so that real living standards are now considerably higher
than seven years ago. Aided by sound government policies, our expanding economy has shown the
strength and flexibility for swift and almost painless reconversion from war to peace, in 1945
and 1946; for quick reaction and recovery--well before Korea--from the beginnings of recession
in 1949. Above all, this live and vital economy of ours has now shown the remarkable capacity
to sustain a great mobilization program for defense, a vast outpouring of aid to friends and
allies all around the world--and still to produce more goods and services for peaceful use
at home than we have ever known before.

This has been our answer, up to now, to those who feared or hoped for a depression in this country.

How have we handled our national finances? That was another question arising at war's end.
In the administration of the Government, no problem takes more of the President's time, year
in and year out, than fashioning the Budget, and the related problem of managing the public debt.

Financing World War II left us with a tremendous public debt, which reached 279 billion dollars
at its peak in February, 1946.

Beginning in July, 1946, when war and reconversion financing had ended, we have held quite
closely to the sound standard that in times of high employment and high national income, the
Federal Budget should be balanced and the debt reduced.

For the four fiscal years from July 1, 1946, to June 30, 1950, we had a net surplus of 4.3
billion dollars. Using this surplus, and the Treasury's excess cash reserves, the debt was
reduced substantially, reaching a low point of 251 billion dollars in June, 1949, and ending
up at 257 billion dollars on June 30, 1950.

In July of 1950, we began our rapid rearmament, and for two years held very close to a pay-as-we-go
policy. But in the current fiscal year and the next, rising expenditures for defense will substantially
outrun receipts. This will pose an immediate and serious problem for the new Congress.

Now let me turn to another question we faced at the war's end. Would we take up again, and
carry forward, the great projects of social welfare--so badly needed, so long overdue--that
the New Deal had introduced into our national life? Would our Government continue to have a
heart for the people, or was the progress of the New Deal to be halted in the aftermath of
war as decisively as the progress of Woodrow Wilson's New Freedom had been halted after the
first world war?

This question, too, we have answered. We have answered it by doubling old age insurance benefits
and extending coverage to ten million more people. We have answered it by increasing our minimum
wage. We have answered by the three million privately constructed homes that the Federal Government
has helped finance since the war--and the 155 thousand units of low rent public housing placed
under construction since 1949.

We have answered with the 42 thousand new hospital beds provided since 1946 through the joint
efforts of the Federal Government and local communities.

We have answered by helping eight million veterans of World War II to obtain advanced education,
196 thousand to start in business, and 64 thousand to buy farms.

We have answered by continuing to help farmers obtain electric power, until today nearly 90
per cent of our farms have power line electric service.

In these and other ways, we have demonstrated, up to now, that our democracy has not forgotten
how to use the powers of the Government to promote the people's welfare and security.

Another of the big post-war questions was this: What we would do with the Nation's natural
resources--its soils and water, forests and grasslands. Would we continue the strong conservation
movement of the 1930's, or would we, as we did after the First World War, slip back into the
practices of monopoly, exploitation, and waste?

The answer is plain. All across our country, the soil conservation movement has spread, aided
by Government programs, enriching private and public lands, preserving them from destruction,
improving them for future use. In our river basins, we have invested nearly 5 billion dollars
of public funds in the last eight years--invested them in projects to control floods, irrigate
farmlands, produce low-cost power and get it to the housewives and farmers and businessmen
who need it. We have been vigilant in protecting the people's property--lands and forests and
oil and minerals.

We have had to fight hard against those who would use our resources for private greed; we have
met setbacks; we have had to delay work because of defense priorities, but on the whole we
can be proud of our record in protecting our natural heritage, and in using our resources for
the public good.

Here is another question we had to face at the war's close: Would we continue, in peace as
well as war, to promote equality of opportunity for all our citizens, seeking ways and means
to guarantee for all of them the full enjoyment of their civil rights?

During the war we achieved great economic and social gains for millions of our fellow citizens
who had been held back by prejudice. Were we prepared, in peacetime, to keep on moving toward
full realization of the democratic promise? Or would we let it be submerged, wiped out, in
post-war riots and reaction, as after World War I?

We answered these questions in a series of forward steps at every level of government and in
many spheres of private life. In our armed forces, our civil service, our universities, our
railway trains, the residential districts of our cities--in stores and factories all across
the Nation--in the polling booths as well--the barriers are coming down. This is happening,
in part, at the mandate of the courts; in part, at the insistence of Federal, State and local
governments; in part, through the enlightened action of private groups and persons in every
region and every walk of life.

There has been a great awakening of the American conscience on the issues of civil rights.
And all this progress--still far from complete but still continuing--has been our answer, up
to now, to those who questioned our intention to live up to the promises of equal freedom for
us all.

There was another question posed for us at the war's end, which equally concerned the future
course of our democracy: Could the machinery of government and politics in this Republic be
changed, improved, adapted rapidly enough to carry through, responsibly and well, the vast,
new complicated undertakings called for in our time?

We have answered this question, too, answered it by tackling the most urgent, most specific,
problems which the war experience itself had brought into sharp focus. The reorganization of
the Congress in 1946; the unification of our armed services, beginning in 1947; the closer
integration of foreign and military policy through the National Security Council created that
same year; and the Executive reorganizations, before and after the Hoover-Acheson Commission
Report in 1949--these are landmarks in our continuing endeavor to make government an effective
instrument of service to the people.

I come now to the most vital question of all, the greatest of our concerns: Could there be
built in the world a durable structure of security, a lasting peace for all the nations, or
would we drift, as after World War I, toward another terrible disaster--a disaster which this
time might be the holocaust of atomic war?

That is still the overriding question of our time. We cannot know the answer yet; perhaps we
will not know it finally for a long time to come. But day and night, these past eight years,
we have been building for peace, searching out the way that leads most surely to security and
freedom and justice in the world for us and all mankind.

This, above all else, has been the task of our Republic since the end of World War II, and
our accomplishment so far should give real pride to all Americans. At the very least, a total
war has been averted, each day up to this hour. And at the most, we may already have succeeded
in establishing conditions which can keep that kind of war from happening, for as far ahead
as man can see.

The Second World War radically changed the power relationships of the world. Nations once great
were left shattered and weak, channels of communication, routes of trade, political and economic
ties of many kinds were ripped apart.

And in this changed, disrupted, chaotic situation, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged
as the two strongest powers of the world. Each had tremendous human and natural resources,
actual or potential, on a scale unmatched by any other nation.

Nothing could make plainer why the world is in its present state--and how that came to pass--than
an understanding of the diametrically opposite principles and policies of these two great powers
in a war-ruined world.

For our part, we in this Republic were-and are--free men, heirs of the American Revolution,
dedicated to the truths of our Declaration of Independence:

"... That all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights... That to secure these rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their
just powers from the consent of the governed."

Our post-war objective has been in keeping with this great idea. The United States has sought
to use its pre-eminent position of power to help other nations recover from the damage and
dislocation of the war. We held out a helping hand to enable them to restore their national
lives and to regain their positions as independent, self-supporting members of the great family
of nations. This help was given without any attempt on our part to dominate or control any
nation. We did not want satellites but partners.

The Soviet Union, however, took exactly the opposite course.

Its rulers saw in the weakened condition of the world not an obligation to assist in the great
work of reconstruction, but an opportunity to exploit misery and suffering for the extension
of their power. Instead of help, they brought subjugation. They extinguished, blotted out,
the national independence of the countries that the military operations of World War II had
left within their grasp.

The difference stares at us from the map of Europe today. To the west of the line that tragically
divides Europe we see nations continuing to act and live in the light of their own traditions
and principles. On the other side, we see the dead uniformity of a tyrannical system imposed
by the rulers of the Soviet Union. Nothing could point up more clearly what the global struggle
between the free world and the communists is all about.

It is a struggle as old as recorded history; it is freedom versus tyranny.

For the dominant idea of the Soviet regime is the terrible conception that men do not have
rights but live at the mercy of the state.

Inevitably this idea of theirs--and all the consequences flowing from it--collided with the
efforts of free nations to build a just and peaceful world. The "cold war" between the communists
and the free world is nothing more or less than the Soviet attempt to checkmate and defeat
our peaceful purposes, in furtherance of their own dread objective.

We did not seek this struggle, God forbid. We did our utmost to avoid it. In World War II,
we and the Russians had fought side by side, each in our turn attacked and forced to combat
by the aggressors. After the war, we hoped that our wartime collaboration could be maintained,
that the frightful experience of Nazi invasion, of devastation in the heart of Russia, had
turned the Soviet rulers away from their old proclaimed allegiance to world revolution and
communist dominion. But instead, they violated, one by one, the solemn agreements they had
made with us in wartime. They sought to use the rights and privileges they had obtained in
the United Nations, to frustrate its purposes and cut down its powers as an effective agent
of world progress and the keeper of the world's peace.

Despite this outcome, the efforts we made toward peaceful collaboration are a source of our
present strength. They demonstrated that we believed what we proclaimed, that we actually sought
honest agreements as the way to peace. Our whole moral position, our leadership in the free
world today, is fortified by that fact.

The world is divided, not through our fault or failure, but by Soviet design. They, not we,
began the cold war. And because the free world saw this happen because men know we made the
effort and the Soviet rulers spurned it--the free nations have accepted leadership from our
Republic, in meeting and mastering the Soviet offensive.

It seems to me especially important that all of us be clear, in our own thinking, about the
nature of the threat we have faced-and will face for a long time to come. The measures we have
devised to meet it take shape and pattern only as we understand what we were--and are--up against.

The Soviet Union occupies a territory of 8 million square miles. Beyond its borders, East and
West, are the nearly five million square miles of the satellite states--virtually incorporated
into the Soviet Union--and of China, now its close partner. This vast land mass contains an
enormous store of natural resources sufficient to support an economic development comparable
to our own.

That is the Stalinist world. It is a world of great natural diversity in geography and climate,
in distribution of resources, in population, language, and living standards, in economic and
cultural development. It is a world whose people are not all convinced communists by any means.
It is a world where history and national traditions, particularly in its borderlands, tend
more toward separation than unification, and run counter to the enforced combination that has
been made of these areas today.

But it is also a world of great man-made uniformities, a world that bleeds its population white
to build huge military forces; a world in which the police are everywhere and their authority
unlimited; a world where terror and slavery are deliberately administered both as instruments
of government and as means of production; a world where all effective social power is the state's
monopoly--yet the state itself is the creature of the communist tyrants.

The Soviet Union, with its satellites, and China are held in the tight grip of communist party
chieftains. The party dominates all social and political institutions. The party regulates
and centrally directs the whole economy. In Moscow's sphere, and in Peiping's, all history,
philosophy, morality and law are centrally established by rigid dogmas, incessantly drummed
into the whole population and subject to interpretation--or to change by none except the party's
own inner circle.

And lest their people learn too much of other ways of life, the communists have walled off
their world, deliberately and uniformly, from the rest of human society.

That is the communist base of operation in-their cold war. In addition, they have at their
command hundreds and thousands of dedicated foreign communists, people in nearly every free
country who will serve Moscow's ends. Thus the masters of the Kremlin are provided with deluded
followers all through the free world whom they can manipulate, cynically and quite ruthlessly,
to serve the purposes of the Soviet state.

Given their vast internal base of operations, and their agents in foreign lands, what are the
communist rulers trying to do?

Inside their homeland, the communists are trying to maintain and modernize huge military forces.
And simultaneously, they are endeavoring to weld their whole vast area and population into
a completely self-contained, advanced industrial society. They aim, some day, to equal or better
the production levels of Western Europe and North America combined--thus shifting the balance
of world economic power, and war potential, to their side.

They have a long way to go and they know it. But they are prepared to levy upon living generations
any sacrifice that helps strengthen their armed power, or speed industrial development.

Externally, the communist rulers are trying to expand the boundaries of their world, whenever
and wherever they can. This expansion they have pursued steadfastly since the close of World
War II, using any means available to them.

Where the Soviet army was present, as in the countries of Eastern Europe, they have gradually
squeezed free institutions to death.

Where post-war chaos existed in industrialized nations, as in Western Europe, the local Stalinists
tried to gain power through political processes, politically-inspired strikes, and every available
means for subverting free institutions to their evil ends.

Where conditions permitted, the Soviet rulers have stimulated and aided armed insurrection
by communist-led revolutionary forces, as in Greece, Indo-China, the Philippines, and China,
or outright aggression by one of their satellites, as in Korea.

Where the forces of nationalism, independence, and economic change were at work throughout
the great sweep of Asia and Africa, the communists tried to identify themselves with the cause
of progress, tried to picture themselves as the friends of freedom and advancement--surely
one of the most cynical efforts of which history offers record.

Thus, everywhere in the free world, the communists seek to fish in troubled waters, to seize
more countries, to enslave more millions of human souls. They were, and are, ready to ally
themselves with any group, from the extreme left to the extreme right, that offers them an
opportunity to advance their ends.

Geography gives them a central position. They are both a European and an Asian power, with
borders touching many of the most sensitive and vital areas in the free world around them.
So situated, they can use their armies and their economic power to set up simultaneously a
whole series of threats--or inducements--to such widely dispersed places as Western Germany,
Iran, and Japan. These pressures and attractions can be sustained at will, or quickly shifted
from place to place.

Thus the communist rulers are moving, with implacable will, to create greater strength in their
vast empire, and to create weakness and division in the free world, preparing for the time
their false creed teaches them must come: the time when the whole world outside their sway
will be so torn by strife and contradictions that it will be ripe for the communist plucking.

This is the heart of the distorted Marxist interpretation of history. This is the glass through
which Moscow and Peiping look out upon the world, the glass through which they see the rest
of us. They seem really to believe that history is on their side. And they are trying to boost
"history" along, at every opportunity, in every way they can.

I have set forth here the nature of the communist menace confronting our Republic and the whole
free world. This is the measure of the challenge we have faced since World War II--a challenge
partly military and partly economic, partly moral and partly intellectual, confronting us at
every level of human endeavor and all around the world.

It has been and must be the free world's purpose not only to organize defenses against aggression
and subversion, not only to build a structure of resistance and salvation for the community
of nations outside the iron curtain, but in addition to give expression and opportunity to
the forces of growth and progress in the free world, to so organize and unify the cooperative
community of free men that we will not crumble but grow stronger over the years, and the Soviet
empire, not the free world, will eventually have to change its ways or fall.

Our whole program of action to carry out this purpose has been directed to meet two requirements.

The first of these had to do with security. Like the pioneers who settled this great continent
of ours, we have had to carry a musket while we went about our peaceful business. We realized
that if we and our allies did not have military strength to meet the growing Soviet military
threat, we would never have the opportunity to carry forward our efforts to build a peaceful
world of law and order--the only environment in which our free institutions could survive and
flourish.

Did this mean we had to drop everything else and concentrate on armies and weapons? Of course
it did not: side-by-side with this urgent military requirement, we had to continue to help
create conditions of economic and social progress in the world. This work had to be carried
forward alongside the first, not only in order to meet the non-military aspects of the communist
drive for power, but also because this creative effort toward human progress is essential to
bring about the kind of world we as free men want to live in.

These two requirements--military security and human progress--are more closely related in action
than we sometimes recognize. Military security depends upon a strong economic underpinning
and a stable and hopeful political order; conversely, the confidence that makes for economic
and political progress does not thrive in areas that are vulnerable to military conquest.

These requirements are related in another way. Both of them depend upon unity of action among
the free nations of the world. This, indeed, has been the foundation of our whole effort, for
the drawing together of the free people of the world has become a condition essential not only
to their progress, but to their survival as free people.

This is the conviction that underlies all the steps we have been taking to strengthen and unify
the free nations during the past seven years.

What have these steps been? First of all, how have we gone about meeting the requirement of
providing for our security against this world-wide challenge?

Our starting point, as I have said on many occasions, has been and remains the United Nations.

We were prepared, and so were the other nations of the free world, to place our reliance on
the machinery of the United Nations to safeguard peace. But before the United Nations could
give full expression to the concept of international security embodied in the Charter, it was
essential that the five permanent members of the Security Council honor their solemn pledge
to cooperate to that end. This the Soviet Union has not done.

I do not need to outline here the dreary record of Soviet obstruction and veto and the unceasing
efforts of the Soviet representatives to sabotage the United Nations. It is important, however,
to distinguish clearly between the principle of collective security embodied in the Charter
and the mechanisms of the United Nations to give that principle effect. We must frankly recognize
that the Soviet Union has been able, in certain instances, to stall the machinery of collective
security. Yet it has not been able to impair the principle of collective security. The free
nations of the world have retained their allegiance to that idea. They have found the means
to act despite the Soviet veto, both through the United Nations itself and through the application
of this principle in regional and other security arrangements that are fully in harmony with
the Charter and give expression to its purposes.

The free world refused to resign itself to collective suicide merely because of the technicality
of a Soviet veto.

The principle of collective measures to forestall aggression has found expression in the Treaty
of Rio de Janeiro, the North Atlantic Treaty, now extended to include Greece and Turkey, and
the several treaties we have concluded to reinforce security in the Pacific area.

But the free nations have not this time fallen prey to the dangerous illusion that treaties
alone will stop an aggressor. By a series of vigorous actions, as varied as the nature of the
threat, the free nations have successfully thwarted aggression or the threat of aggression
in many different parts of the world.

Our country has led or supported these collective measures. The aid we have given to people
determined to act in defense of their freedom has often spelled the difference between success
and failure.

We all know what we have done, and I shall not review in detail the steps we have taken. Each
major step was a milepost in the developing unity, strength and resolute will of the free nations.

The first was the determined and successful effort made through the United Nations to safeguard
the integrity and independence of Iran in 1945 and 1946.

Next was our aid and support to embattled Greece, which enabled her to defeat the forces threatening
her national independence.

In Turkey, cooperative action resulted in building up a bulwark of military strength for an
area vital to the defenses of the entire free world.

In 1949, we began furnishing military aid to our partners in the North Atlantic Community and
to a number of other free countries.

The Soviet Union's threats against Germany and Japan, its neighbors to the West and to the
East, have been successfully withstood. Free Germany is on its way to becoming a member of
the peaceful community of nations, and a partner in the common defense. The Soviet effort to
capture Berlin by blockade was thwarted by the courageous Allied airlift. An independent and
democratic Japan has been brought back into the community of free nations.

In the Far East, the tactics of communist imperialism have reached heights of violence unmatched
elsewhere--and the problem of concerted action by the free nations has been at once more acute
and more difficult.

Here, in spite of outside aid and support, the free government of China succumbed to the communist
assault. Our aid has enabled the free Chinese to rebuild and strengthen their forces on the
island of Formosa. In other areas of the Far East-in Indo-China, Malaya, and the Philippines--our
assistance has helped sustain a staunch resistance against communist insurrectionary attacks.

The supreme test, up to this point, of the will and determination of the free nations came
in Korea, when communist forces invaded the Republic of Korea, a state that was in a special
sense under the protection of the United Nations. The response was immediate and resolute.
Under our military leadership, the free nations for the first time took up arms, collectively,
to repel aggression.

Aggression was repelled, driven back, punished. Since that time, communist strategy has seen
fit to prolong the conflict, in spite of honest efforts by the United Nations to reach an honorable
truce. The months of deadlock have demonstrated that the communists cannot achieve by persistence,
or by diplomatic trickery, what they failed to achieve by sneak attack. Korea has demonstrated
that the free world has the will and the endurance to match the communist effort to overthrow
international order through local aggression.

It has been a bitter struggle and it has cost us much in brave lives and human suffering, but
it has made it plain that the free nations will fight side by side, that they will not succumb
to aggression or intimidation, one by one. This, in the final analysis, is the only way to
halt the communist drive to world power.

At the heart of the free world's defense is the military strength of the United States.

From 1945 to 1949, the United States was sole possessor of the atomic bomb. That was a great
deterrent and protection in itself.

But when the Soviets produced an atomic explosion--as they were bound to do in time--we had
to broaden the whole basis of our strength. We had to endeavor to keep our lead in atomic weapons.
We had to strengthen our armed forces generally and to enlarge our productive capacity-our
mobilization base. Historically, it was the Soviet atomic explosion in the fall of 1949, nine
months before the aggression in Korea, which stimulated the planning for our program of defense
mobilization.

What we needed was not just a central force that could strike back against aggression. We also
needed strength along the outer edges of the free world, defenses for our allies as well as
for ourselves, strength to hold the line against attack as well as to retaliate.

We have made great progress on this task of building strong defenses. In the last two and one
half years, we have more than doubled our own defenses, and we have helped to increase the
protection of nearly all the other free nations.

All the measures of collective security, resistance to aggression, and the building of defenses,
constitute the first requirement for the survival and progress of the free world. But, as I
have pointed out, they are interwoven with the necessity of taking steps to create and maintain
economic and social progress in the free nations. There can be no military strength except
where there is economic capacity to back it. There can be no freedom where there is economic
chaos or social collapse. For these reasons, our national policy has included a wide range
of economic measures.

In Europe, the grand design of the Marshall Plan permitted the people of Britain and France
and Italy and a half dozen other countries, with help from the United States, to lift themselves
from stagnation and find again the path of rising production, rising incomes, rising standards
of living. The situation was changed almost overnight by the Marshall Plan; the people of Europe
have a renewed hope and vitality, and they are able to carry a share of the military defense
of the free world that would have been impossible a few years ago.

Now the countries of Europe are moving rapidly towards political and economic unity, changing
the map of Europe in more hopeful ways than it has been changed for 500 years. Customs unions,
European economic institutions like the Schuman Plan, the movement toward European political
integration, the European Defense Community-all are signs of practical and effective growth
toward greater common strength and unity. The countries of Western Europe, including the free
Republic of Germany are working together, and the whole free world is the gainer.

It sometimes happens, in the course of history, that steps taken to meet an immediate necessity
serve an ultimate purpose greater than may be apparent at the time. This, I believe, is the
meaning of what has been going on in Europe under the threat of aggression. The free nations
there, with our help, have been drawing together in defense of their free institutions. In
so doing, they have laid the foundations of a unity that will endure as a major creative force
beyond the exigencies of this period of history. We may, at this close range, be but dimly
aware of the creative surge this movement represents, but I believe it to be of historic importance.
I believe its benefits will survive long after communist tyranny is nothing but an unhappy memory.

In Asia and Africa, the economic and social problems are different but no less urgent. There
hundreds of millions of people are in ferment, exploding into the twentieth century, thrusting
toward equality and independence and improvement in the hard conditions of their lives.

Politically, economically, socially, things cannot and will not stay in their pre-war mold
in Africa and Asia. Change must come--is coming--fast. Just in the years I have been President,
12 free nations, with more than 600 million people, have become independent: Burma, Indonesia,
the Philippines, Korea, Israel, Libya, India, Pakistan and Ceylon, and the three Associated
States of Indo-China, now members of the French Union. These names alone are testimony to the
sweep of the great force which is changing the face of half the world.

Working out new relationships among the peoples of the free world would not be easy in the
best of times. Even if there were no Communist drive for expansion, there would be hard and
complex problems of transition from old social forms, old political arrangements, old economic
institutions to the new ones our century demands--problems of guiding change into constructive
channels, of helping new nations grow strong and stable. But now, with the Soviet rulers striving
to exploit this ferment for their own purposes, the task has become harder and more urgent--terribly
urgent.

In this situation, we see the meaning and the importance of the Point IV program, through which
we can share our store of know-how and of capital to help these people develop their economies
and reshape their societies. As we help Iranians to raise more grain, Indians to reduce the
incidence of malaria, Liberians to educate their children better, we are at once helping to
answer the desires of the people for advancement, and demonstrating the superiority of freedom
over communism. There will be no quick solution for any of the difficulties of the new nations
of Asia and Africa--but there may be no solution at all if we do not press forward with full
energy to help these countries grow and flourish in freedom and in cooperation with the rest
of the free world.

Our measures of economic policy have already had a tremendous effect on the course of events.
Eight years ago, the Kremlin thought post-war collapse in Western Europe and Japan--with economic
dislocation in America--might give them the signal to advance. We demonstrated they were wrong.
Now they wait with hope that the economic recovery of the free world has set the stage for
violent and disastrous rivalry among the economically developed nations, struggling for each
other's markets and a greater share of trade. Here is another test that we shall have to meet
and master in the years immediately ahead. And it will take great ingenuity and effort--and
much time--before we prove the Kremlin wrong again. But we can do it. It is true that economic
recovery presents its problems, as does economic decline, but they are problems of another
order. They are the problems of distributing abundance fairly, and they can be solved by the
process of international cooperation that has already brought us so far.

These are the measures we must continue. This is the path we must follow. We must go on, working
with our free associates, building an international structure for military defense, and for
economic, social, and political progress. We must be prepared for war, because war may be thrust
upon us. But the stakes in our search for peace are immensely higher than they have ever been
before.

For now we have entered the atomic age, and war has undergone a technological change which
makes it a very different thing from what it used to be. War today between the Soviet empire
and the free nations might dig the grave not only of our Stalinist opponents, but of our own
society, our world as well as theirs.

This transformation has been brought to pass in the seven years from Alamogordo to Eniwetok.
It is only seven years, but the new force of atomic energy has turned the world into a very
different kind of place.

Science and technology have worked so fast that war's new meaning may not yet be grasped by
all the .peoples who would be its victims; nor, perhaps, by the rulers in the Kremlin. But
I have been President of the United States, these seven years, responsible for the decisions
which have brought our science and our engineering to their present place. I know what this
development means now. I know something of what it will come to mean in the future.

We in this Government realized, even before the first successful atomic explosion, that this
new force spelled terrible danger for all mankind unless it were brought under international
control. We promptly advanced proposals in the United Nations to take this new source of energy
out of the arena of national rivalries, to make it impossible to use it as a weapon of war.
These proposals, so pregnant with benefit for all humanity, were rebuffed by the rulers of
the Soviet Union.

The language of science is universal, the movement of science is always forward into the unknown.
We could not assume that the Soviet Union would not develop the same weapon, regardless of
all our precautions, nor that there were not other and even more terrible means of destruction
lying in the unexplored field of atomic energy.

We had no alternative, then, but to press on, to probe the secrets of atomic power to the uttermost
of our capacity, to maintain, if we could, our initial superiority in the atomic field. At
the same time, we sought persistently for some avenue, some formula, for reaching an agreement
with the Soviet rulers that would place this new form of power under effective restraints--that
would guarantee no nation would use it in war. I do not have to recount here the proposals
we made, the steps taken in the United Nations, striving at least to open a way to ultimate
agreement. I hope and believe that we will continue to make these efforts so long as there
is the slightest possibility of progress. All civilized nations are agreed on the urgency of
the problem, and have shown their willingness to agree on effective measures of control--all
save the Soviet Union and its satellites. But they have rejected every reasonable proposal.

Meanwhile, the progress of scientific experiment has outrun our expectations. Atomic science
is in the full tide of development; the unfolding of the innermost secrets of matter is uninterrupted
and irresistible. Since Alamogordo we have developed atomic weapons with many times the explosive
force of the early models, and we have produced them in substantial quantities. And recently,
in the thermonuclear tests at Eniwetok, we have entered another stage in the world-shaking
development of atomic energy. From now on, man moves into a new era of destructive power, capable
of creating explosions of a new order of magnitude, dwarfing the mushroom clouds of Hiroshima
and Nagasaki.

We have no reason to think that the stage we have now reached in the release of atomic energy
will be the last. Indeed, the speed of our scientific and technical progress over the last
seven years shows no signs of abating. We are being hurried forward, in our mastery of the
atom, from one discovery to another, toward yet unforeseeable peaks of destructive power.

Inevitably, until we can reach international agreement, this is the path we must follow. And
we must realize that no advance we make is unattainable by others, that no advantage in this
race can be more than temporary.

The war of the future would be one in which man could extinguish millions of lives at one blow,
demolish the great cities of the world, wipe out the cultural achievements of the past--and
destroy the very structure of a civilization that has been slowly and painfully built up through
hundreds of generations.

Such a war is not a possible policy for rational men. We know this, but we dare not assume
that others would not yield to the temptation science is now placing in their hands.

With that in mind, there is something I would say, to Stalin: You claim belief in Lenin's prophecy
that one stage in the development of communist society would be war between your world and
ours. But Lenin was a pre-atomic man, who viewed society and history with pre-atomic eyes.
Something profound has happened since he wrote. War has changed its shape and its dimension.
It cannot now be a "stage" in the development of anything save ruin for your regime and your
homeland.

I do not know how much time may elapse before the communist rulers bring themselves to recognize
this truth. But when they do, they will find us eager to reach understandings that will protect
the world from the danger it faces today.

It is no wonder that some people wish that we had never succeeded in splitting the atom. But
atomic power, like any other force of nature, is not evil in itself. Properly used, it is an
instrumentality for human betterment. As a source of power, as a tool of scientific inquiry,
it has untold possibilities. We are already making good progress in the constructive use of
atomic power. We could do much more if we were free to concentrate on its peaceful uses exclusively.

Atomic power will be with us all the days of our lives. We cannot legislate it out of existence.
We cannot ignore the dangers or the benefits it offers.

I believe that man can harness the forces of the atom to work for the improvement of the lot
of human beings everywhere. That is our goal. As a nation, as a people, we must understand
this problem, we must handle this new force wisely through our democratic processes. Above
all, we must strive, in all earnestness and good faith, to bring it under effective international
control. To do this will require much wisdom and patience and firmness. The awe-inspiring responsibility
in this field now falls on a new Administration and a new Congress. I will give them my support,
as I am sure all our citizens will, in whatever constructive steps they may take to make this
newest of man's discoveries a source of good and not of ultimate destruction. 

Here the Marquis of Douglas has determined, with much good taste, that his property shall not
be vulgarised by the new style of country lodgings, and so far from feuing the ground, he
will not permit even a pier to be built for the accommodation of
visitors. We cannot measure how deep-rooted
are the Kremlin's illusions about us. We can be sure, however, that the rulers of the communist
world will not change their basic objectives lightly or soon.

The communist rulers have a sense of time about these things wholly unlike our own. We tend
to divide our future into short spans, like the two-year life of this Congress, or the four
years of the next Presidential term. They seem to think and plan in terms of generations. And
there is, therefore, no easy, short-run way to make them see that their plans cannot prevail.

This means there is ahead of us a long hard test of strength and stamina, between the free
world and the communist domain-our politics and our economy, our science and technology against
the best they can do--our liberty against their slavery--our voluntary concert Of free nations
against their forced amalgam of "people's republics"--our strategy against their strategy-our
nerve against their nerve.

Above all, this is a test of the will and the steadiness of the people of the United States.

There has been no challenge like this in the history of our Republic. We are called upon to
rise to the occasion, as no people before us.

What is required of us is not easy. The way we must learn to live, the world we have to live
in, cannot be so pleasant, safe or simple as most of us have known before, or confidently hoped
to know.

Already we have had to sacrifice a number of accustomed ways of working and of living, much
nervous energy, material resources, even human life. Yet if one thing is certain in our future,
it is that more sacrifice still lies ahead.

Were we to grow discouraged now, were we to weaken and slack off, the whole structure we have
built, these past eight years, would come apart and fall away. Never then, no matter by what
stringent means, could our free world regain the ground, the time, the sheer momentum, lost
by such a move. There can and should be changes and improvements in our programs, to meet new
situations, serve new needs. But to desert the spirit of our basic policies, to step back from
them now, would surely start the free world's slide toward the darkness that the communists
have prophesied-toward the moment for which they watch and wait.

If we value our freedom and our way of life and want to see them safe, we must meet the challenge
and accept its implications, stick to our guns and carry out our policies.

I have set out the basic conditions, as I see them, under which we have been working in the
world, and the nature of our basic policies. What, then, of the future? The answer, I believe,
is this: As we continue to confound Soviet expectations, as our world grows stronger, more
united, more attractive to men on both sides of the iron curtain, then inevitably there will
come a time of change within the communist world. We do not know how that change will come
about, whether by deliberate decision in the Kremlin, by coup d'etat, by revolution, by defection
of satellites, or perhaps by some unforeseen combination of factors such as these.

But if the communist rulers understand they cannot win by war, and if we frustrate their attempts
to win by subversion, it is not too much to expect their world to change its character, moderate
its aims, become more realistic and less implacable, and recede from the cold war they began.

Do not be deceived by the strong face, the look of monolithic power that the communist dictators
wear before the outside world. Remember their power has no basis in consent. Remember they
are so afraid of the free world's ideas and ways of life, they do not dare to let their people
know about them. Think of the massive effort they put forth to try to stop our Campaign of
Truth from reaching their people with its message of freedom.

The masters of the Kremlin live in fear their power and position would collapse were their
own people to acquire knowledge, information, comprehension about our free society. Their world
has many elements of strength, but this one fatal flaw: the weakness represented by their iron
curtain and their police state. Surely, a social order at once so insecure and so fearful,
must ultimately lose its competition with our free society.

Provided just one thing--and this I urge you to consider carefully--provided that the free
world retains the confidence and the determination to outmatch the best our adversary can accomplish
and to demonstrate for uncertain millions on both sides of the iron curtain the superiority
of the free way of life.

That is the test upon all the free nations; upon none more than our own Republic.

Our resources are equal to the task. We have the industry, the skills, the basic economic strength.
Above all, we have the vigor of free men in a free society. We have our liberties. And while
we keep them, while we retain our democratic faith, the ultimate advantage in this hard competition
lies with us, not with the communists.

But there are some things that could shift the advantage to their side. One of the things that
could defeat us is fear--fear of the task we face, fear of adjusting to it, fear that breeds
more fear, sapping our faith, corroding our liberties, turning citizen against citizen, ally
against ally. Fear could snatch away the very values we are striving to defend.

Already the danger signals have gone up. Already the corrosive process has begun. And every
diminution of our tolerance, each new act of enforced conformity, each idle accusation, each
demonstration of hysteria-each new restrictive law--is one more sign that we can lose the battle
against fear.

The communists cannot deprive us of our liberties--fear can. The communists cannot stamp out
our faith in human dignity-fear can. Fear is an enemy within ourselves, and if we do not root
it out, it may destroy the very way of life we are so anxious to protect.

To beat back fear, we must hold fast to our heritage as free men. We must renew our confidence
in one another, our tolerance, our sense of being neighbors, fellow citizens. We must take
our stand on the Bill of Rights. The inquisition, the star chamber, have no place in a free
society.

Our ultimate strength lies, not alone in arms, but in the sense of moral values and moral truths
that give meaning and vitality to the purposes of free people. These values are our faith,
our inspiration, the source of our strength and our indomitable determination.

We face hard tasks, great dangers. But we are Americans and we have faced hardships and uncertainty
before, we have adjusted before to changing circumstances. Our whole history has been a steady
training for the work it is now ours to do.

No one can lose heart for the task, none can lose faith in our free ways, who stops to remember
where we began, what we have sought, and what accomplished, all together as Americans.

I have lived a long time and seen much happen in our country. And I know out of my own experience,
that we can do what must be done.

When I think back to the country I grew up in--and then look at what our country has become--I
am quite certain that having done so much, we can do more.

After all, it has been scarcely fifteen years since most Americans rejected out-of-hand the
wise counsel that aggressors must be "quarantined". The very concept of collective security,
the foundation-stone of all our actions now, was then strange doctrine, shunned and set aside.
Talk about adapting; talk about adjusting; talk about responding as a people to the challenge
of changed times and circumstances--there has never been a more spectacular example than this
great change in America's outlook on the world.

Let all of us pause now, think back, consider carefully the meaning of our national experience.
Let us draw comfort from it and faith, and confidence in our future as Americans.

The Nation's business is never finished. The basic questions we have been dealing with, these
eight years past, present themselves anew. That is the way of our society. Circumstances change
and current questions take on different forms, new complications, year by year. Notwithstanding this
disaster, not a whisper was heard against the admiral either in the Council of State or in the
city; his offer to resign was flatteringly rejected; and he soon
found, that the 'misfortune which might have ruined another man, had
given him strength and influence in the country.' This disaster, in
fact, gave him power to effect reforms in the service, and to root
out abuses which had defied all his efforts in the day of his success.

He followed it up by the great battle of Portland, and other triumphant engagements.


May God bless our country and our cause.

***

State of the Union Address Dwight D. Eisenhower February 2, 1953

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Eighty-third Congress:

I welcome the honor of appearing before you to deliver my first message to the Congress.

It is manifestly the joint purpose of the congressional leadership and of this administration
to justify the summons to governmental responsibility issued last November by the American
people. The grand labors of this leadership will involve:

Application of America's influence in world affairs with such fortitude and such foresight
that it will deter aggression and eventually secure peace;

Establishment of a national administration of such integrity and such efficiency that its honor
at home will ensure respect abroad;

Encouragement of those incentives that inspire creative initiative in our economy, so that
its productivity may fortify freedom everywhere; and

Dedication to the well-being of all our citizens and to the attainment of equality of opportunity
for all, so that our Nation will ever act with the strength of unity in every task to which
it is called.

The purpose of this message is to suggest certain lines along which our joint efforts may immediately
be directed toward realization of these four ruling purposes.

The time that this administration has been in office has been too brief to permit preparation
of a detailed and comprehensive program of recommended action to cover all phases of the responsibilities
that devolve upon our country's new leaders. Such a program will be filled out in the weeks
ahead as, after appropriate study, I shall submit additional recommendations for your consideration.
Today can provide only a sure and substantial beginning.

II.

Our country has come through a painful period of trial and disillusionment since the victory
of 1945. We anticipated a world of peace and cooperation. The calculated pressures of aggressive
communism have forced us, instead, to live in a world of turmoil.

From this costly experience we have learned one clear lesson. We have learned that the free
world cannot indefinitely remain in a posture of paralyzed tension, leaving forever to the
aggressor the choice of time and place and means to cause greatest hurt to us at least cost
to himself.

This administration has, therefore, begun the definition of a new, positive foreign policy.
This policy will be governed by certain fixed ideas. They are these:

(1) Our foreign policy must be clear, consistent, and confident. This means that it must be
the product of genuine, continuous cooperation between the executive and the legislative branches
of this Government. It must be developed and directed in the spirit of true bipartisanship.

(2) The policy we embrace must be a coherent global policy. The freedom we cherish and defend
in Europe and in the Americas is no different from the freedom that is imperiled in Asia.

(3) Our policy, dedicated to making the free world secure, will envision all peaceful methods
and devices--except breaking faith with our friends. We shall never acquiesce in the enslavement
of any people in order to purchase fancied gain for ourselves. I shall ask the Congress at
a later date to join in an appropriate resolution making clear that this Government recognizes
no kind of commitment contained in secret understandings of the past with foreign governments
which permit this kind of enslavement.

(4) The policy we pursue will recognize the truth that no single country, even one so powerful
as ours, can alone defend the liberty of all nations threatened by Communist aggression from
without or subversion within. Mutual security means effective mutual cooperation. For the United
States, this means that, as a matter of common sense and national interest, we shall give help
to other nations in the measure that they strive earnestly to do their full share of the common
task. No wealth of aid could compensate for poverty of spirit. The heart of every free nation
must be honestly dedicated to the preserving of its own independence and security.

(5) Our policy will be designed to foster the advent of practical unity in Western Europe.
The nations of that region have contributed notably to the effort of sustaining the security
of the free world. From the jungles of Indochina and Malaya to the northern shores of Europe,
they have vastly improved their defensive strength. Where called upon to do so, they have made
costly and bitter sacrifices to hold the line of freedom.

But the problem of security demands closer cooperation among the nations of Europe than has
been known to date. Only a more closely integrated economic and political system can provide
the greatly increased economic strength needed to maintain both necessary military readiness
and respectable living standards.

Europe's enlightened leaders have long been aware of these facts. All the devoted work that
has gone into the Schuman plan, the European Army, and the Strasbourg Conference has testified
to their vision and determination. These achievements are the more remarkable when we realize
that each of them has marked a victory--for France and for Germany alike over the divisions
that in the past have brought such tragedy to these two great nations and to the world.

The needed unity of Western Europe manifestly cannot be manufactured from without; it can only
be created from within. But it is right and necessary that we encourage Europe's leaders by
informing them of the high value we place upon the earnestness of their efforts toward this
goal. Real progress will be conclusive evidence to the American people that our material sacrifices
in the cause of collective security are matched by essential political, economic, and military
accomplishments in Western Europe.

(6) Our foreign policy will recognize the importance of profitable and equitable world trade.

A substantial beginning can and should be made by our friends themselves. Europe, for example,
is now marked by checkered areas of labor surplus and labor shortage, of agricultural areas
needing machines and industrial areas needing food. Here and elsewhere we can hope that our
friends will take the initiative in creating broader markets and more dependable currencies,
to allow greater exchange of goods and services among themselves.

Action along these lines can create an economic environment that will invite vital help from us.

This help includes:

First: Revising our customs regulations to remove procedural obstacles to profitable trade.
I further recommend that the Congress take the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act under immediate
study and extend it by appropriate legislation. This objective must not ignore legitimate safeguarding
of domestic industries, agriculture, and labor standards. In all executive study and recommendations
on this problem labor and management and farmers alike will be earnestly consulted.

Second: Doing whatever Government properly can to encourage the flow of private American investment
abroad. This involves, as a serious and explicit purpose of our foreign policy, the encouragement
of a hospitable climate for such investment in foreign nations.

Third: Availing ourselves of facilities overseas for the economical production of manufactured
articles which are needed for mutual defense and which are not seriously competitive with our
own normal peacetime production.

Fourth: Receiving from the rest of the world, in equitable exchange for what we supply, greater
amounts of important raw materials which we do not ourselves possess in adequate quantities.

III.

In this general discussion of our foreign policy, I must make special mention of the war in Korea.

This war is, for Americans, the most painful phase of Communist aggression throughout the world.
It is clearly a part of the same calculated assault that the aggressor is simultaneously pressing
in Indochina and in Malaya, and of the strategic situation that manifestly embraces the island
of Formosa and the Chinese Nationalist forces there. The working out of any military solution
to the Korean war will inevitably affect all these areas.

The administration is giving immediate increased attention to the development of additional
Republic of Korea forces. The citizens of that country have proved their capacity as fighting
men and their eagerness to take a greater share in the defense of their homeland. Organization,
equipment, and training will allow them to do so. Increased assistance to Korea for this purpose
conforms fully to our global policies.

In June 1950, following the aggressive attack on the Republic of Korea, the United States Seventh
Fleet was instructed both to prevent attack upon Formosa and also to insure that Formosa should
not be used as a base of operations against the Chinese Communist mainland.

This has meant, in effect, that the United States Navy was required to serve as a defensive
arm of Communist China. Regardless of the situation in 1950, since the date of that order the
Chinese Communists have invaded Korea to attack the United Nations forces there. They have
consistently rejected the proposals of the United Nations Command for an armistice. They recently
joined with Soviet Russia in rejecting the armistice proposal sponsored in the United Nations
by the Government of India. This proposal had been accepted by the United States and 53 other
nations.

Consequently there is no longer any logic or sense in a condition that required the United
States Navy to assume defensive responsibilities on behalf of the Chinese Communists, thus
permitting those Communists, with greater impunity, to kill our soldiers and those of our United
Nations allies in Korea.

I am, therefore, issuing instructions that the Seventh Fleet no longer be employed to shield
Communist China. This order implies no aggressive intent on our part. But we certainly have
no obligation to protect a nation fighting us in Korea.

IV.

Our labor for peace in Korea and in the world imperatively demands the maintenance by the United
States of a strong fighting service ready for any contingency.

Our problem is to achieve adequate military strength within the limits of endurable strain
upon our economy. To amass military power without regard to our economic capacity would be
to defend ourselves against one kind of disaster by inviting another.

Both military and economic objectives demand a single national military policy, proper coordination
of our armed services, and effective consolidation of certain logistics activities.

We must eliminate waste and duplication of effort in the armed services.

We must realize clearly that size alone is not sufficient. The biggest force is not necessarily
the best--and we want the best. 

A prince, of whom the epigram declares that, if he never said a foolish thing, he never did a
wise one--saw fit to disturb the hero's grave, drag out the embalmed body, and cast it into a
pit in the abbey-yard. One of Charles Stuart's most witless performances!


We must effectively integrate our armament programs and plan them in such careful relation
to our industrial facilities that we assure the best use of our manpower and our materials.

Because of the complex technical nature of our military organization and because of the security
reasons involved, the Secretary of Defense must take the initiative and assume the responsibility
for developing plans to give our Nation maximum safety at minimum cost. Accordingly, the new
Secretary of Defense and his civilian and military associates will, in the future, recommend
such changes in present laws affecting our defense activities as may be necessary to clarify
responsibilities and improve the total effectiveness of our defense effort.

This effort must always conform to policies laid down in the National Security Council.

The statutory function of the National Security Council is to assist the President in the formulation
and coordination of significant domestic, foreign, and military policies required for the security
of the Nation. In these days of tension it is essential that this central body have the vitality
to perform effectively its statutory role. I propose to see that it does so.

Careful formulation of policies must be followed by clear understanding of them by all peoples.
A related need, therefore, is to make more effective all activities of the Government related
to international information.

I have recently appointed a committee of representative and informed citizens to survey this
subject and to make recommendations in the near future for legislative, administrative, or
other action.

A unified and dynamic effort in this whole field is essential to the security of the United
States and of the other peoples in the community of free nations. There is but one sure way
to avoid total war--and that is to win the cold war.

While retaliatory power is one strong deterrent to a would-be aggressor, another powerful deterrent
is defensive power. No enemy is likely to attempt an attack foredoomed to failure.

Because the building of a completely impenetrable defense against attack is still not possible,
total defensive strength must include civil defense preparedness. Because we have incontrovertible
evidence that Soviet Russia possesses atomic weapons, this kind of protection becomes sheer
necessity.

Civil defense responsibilities primarily belong to the State and local governments--recruiting,
training, and organizing volunteers to meet any emergency. The immediate job of the Federal
Government is to provide leadership, to supply technical guidance, and to continue to strengthen
its civil defense stockpile of medical, engineering, and related supplies and equipment. This
work must go forward without lag.

V.

I have referred to the inescapable need for economic health and strength if we are to maintain
adequate military power and exert influential leadership for peace in the world.

Our immediate task is to chart a fiscal and economic policy that can:

(1) Reduce the planned deficits and then balance the budget, which means, among other things,
reducing Federal expenditures to the safe minimum;

(2) Meet the huge costs of our defense;

(3) Properly handle the burden of our inheritance of debt and obligations;

(4) Check the menace of inflation;

(5) Work toward the earliest possible reduction of the tax burden;

(6) Make constructive plans to encourage the initiative of our citizens.

It is important that all of us understand that this administration does not and cannot begin
its task with a clean slate. Much already has been written on the record, beyond our power
quickly to erase or to amend. This record includes our inherited burden of indebtedness and
obligations and deficits.

The current year's budget, as you know, carries a 5.9 billion dollar deficit; and the budget,
which was presented to you before this administration took office, indicates a budgetary deficit
of 9.9 billion for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1954. The national debt is now more than
265 billion dollars. In addition, the accumulated obligational authority of the Federal Government
for future payment totals over 80 billion dollars. Even this amount is exclusive of large contingent
liabilities, so numerous and extensive as to be almost beyond description.

The bills for the payment of nearly all of the 80 billion dollars of obligations will be presented
during the next 4 years. These bills, added to the current costs of government we must meet,
make a formidable burden.

The present authorized Government-debt limit is 275 billion dollars. The forecast presented
by the outgoing administration with the fiscal year 1954 budget indicates that--before the
end of the fiscal year and at the peak of demand for payments during the year--the total Government
debt may approach and even exceed that limit. Unless budgeted deficits are checked, the momentum
of past programs will force an increase of the statutory debt limit.

Permit me this one understatement: to meet and to correct this situation will not be easy.

Permit me this one assurance: every department head and I are determined to do everything we
can to resolve it.

The first order of business is the elimination of the annual deficit. This cannot be achieved
merely by exhortation. It demands the concerted action of all those in responsible positions
in the Government and the earnest cooperation of the Congress.

Already, we have begun an examination of the appropriations and expenditures of all departments
in an effort to find significant items that may be decreased or canceled without damage to
our essential requirements.

Getting control of the budget requires also that State and local governments and interested
groups of citizens restrain themselves in their demands upon the Congress that the Federal
Treasury spend more and more money for all types of projects.

A balanced budget is an essential first measure in checking further depreciation in the buying
power of the dollar. This is one of the critical steps to be taken to bring an end to planned
inflation. Our purpose is to manage the Government's finances so as to help and not hinder
each family in balancing its own budget.

Reduction of taxes will be justified only as we show we can succeed in bringing the budget
under control. As the budget is balanced and inflation checked, the tax burden that today stifles
initiative can and must be eased.

Until we can determine the extent to which expenditures can be reduced, it would not be wise
to reduce our revenues.

Meanwhile, the tax structure as a whole demands review. The Secretary of the Treasury is undertaking
this study immediately. We must develop a system of taxation which will impose the least possible
obstacle to the dynamic growth of the country. This includes particularly real opportunity
for the growth of small businesses. Many readjustments in existing taxes will be necessary
to serve these objectives and also to remove existing inequities. Clarification and simplification
in the tax laws as well as the regulations will be undertaken.

In the entire area of fiscal policy--which must, in its various aspects, be treated in recommendations
to the Congress in coming weeks--there can now be stated certain basic facts and principles.

First. It is axiomatic that our economy is a highly complex and sensitive mechanism. Hasty
and ill-considered action of any kind could seriously upset the subtle equation that encompasses
debts, obligations, expenditures, defense demands, deficits, taxes, and the general economic
health of the Nation. Our goals can be clear, our start toward them can be immediate--but action
must be gradual.

Second. It is clear that too great a part of the national debt comes due in too short a time.
The Department of the Treasury will undertake at suitable times a program of extending part
of the debt over longer periods and gradually placing greater amounts in the hands of longer-term
investors.

Third. Past differences in policy between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board have helped
to encourage inflation. Henceforth, I expect that their single purpose shall be to serve the
whole Nation by policies designed to stabilize the economy and encourage the free play of our
people's genius for individual initiative.

In encouraging this initiative, no single item in our current problems has received more thoughtful
consideration by my associates, and by the many individuals called into our counsels, than
the matter of price and wage control by law.

The great economic strength of our democracy has developed in an atmosphere of freedom. The
character of our people resists artificial and arbitrary controls of any kind. Direct controls,
except those on credit, deal not with the real causes of inflation but only with its symptoms.
In times of national emergency, this kind of control has a role to play. Our whole system,
however, is based upon the assumption that, normally, we should combat wide fluctuations in
our price structure by relying largely on the effective use of sound fiscal and monetary policy,
and upon the natural workings of economic law.

Moreover, American labor and American business can best resolve their wage problems across
the bargaining table. Government should refrain from sitting in with them unless, in extreme
cases, the public welfare requires protection.

We are, of course, living in an international situation that is neither an emergency demanding
full mobilization, nor is it peace. No one can know how long this condition will persist. Consequently,
we are forced to learn many new things as we go along-clinging to what works, discarding what
does not.

In all our current discussions on these and related facts, the weight of evidence is clearly
against the use of controls in their present forms. They have proved largely unsatisfactory
or unworkable. They have not prevented inflation; they have not kept down the cost of living.
Dissatisfaction with them is wholly justified. I am convinced that now--as well as in the long
run--free and competitive prices will best serve the interests of all the people, and best
meet the changing, growing needs of our economy.

Accordingly, I do not intend to ask for a renewal of the present wage and price controls on
April 30, 1953, when present legislation expires. In the meantime, steps will be taken to eliminate
controls in an orderly manner, and to terminate special agencies no longer needed for this
purpose. It is obviously to be expected that the removal of these controls will result in individual
price changes--some up, some down. But a maximum of freedom in market prices as well as in
collective bargaining is characteristic of a truly free people.

I believe also that material and product controls should be ended, except with respect to defense
priorities and scarce and critical items essential for our defense. I shall recommend to the
Congress that legislation be enacted to continue authority for such remaining controls of this
type as will be necessary after the expiration of the existing statute on June 30, 1953.

I recommend the continuance of the authority for Federal control over rents in those communities
in which serious housing shortages exist. These are chiefly the so-called defense areas. In
these and all areas the Federal Government should withdraw from the control of rents as soon
as practicable. But before they are removed entirely, each legislature should have full opportunity
to take over, within its own State, responsibility for this function.

It would be idle to pretend that all our problems in this whole field of prices will solve
themselves by mere Federal withdrawal from direct controls.

We shall have to watch trends closely. If the freer functioning of our economic system, as
well as the indirect controls which can be appropriately employed, prove insufficient during
this period of strain and tension, I shall promptly ask the Congress to enact such legislation
as may be required.

In facing all these problems--wages, prices, production, tax rates, fiscal policy, deficits--everywhere
we remain constantly mindful that the time for sacrifice has not ended. But we are concerned
with the encouragement of competitive enterprise and individual initiative precisely because
we know them to be our Nation's abiding sources of strength.

VI.

Our vast world responsibility accents with urgency our people's elemental right to a government
whose clear qualities are loyalty, security, efficiency, economy, and integrity.

The safety of America and the trust of the people alike demand that the personnel of the Federal
Government be loyal in their motives and reliable in the discharge of their duties. Only a
combination of both loyalty and reliability promises genuine security.

To state this principle is easy; to apply it can be difficult. But this security we must and
shall have. By way of example, all principal new appointees to departments and agencies have
been investigated at their own request by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Confident of your understanding and cooperation, I know that the primary responsibility for
keeping out the disloyal and the dangerous rests squarely upon the executive branch. When this
branch so conducts itself as to require policing by another branch of the Government, it invites
its own disorder and confusion.

I am determined to meet this responsibility of the Executive. The very grumbling they gave rise to was
a wholesome exercise. The short allowance was worth a whole pharmacopoeia. The ravenous appetite
that fastened upon things common and unclean was a glorious symptom. We came back strengthened
in mind as well as body. Our country sojourn had the effect of foreign travel in opening the
heart and expanding the intellect; it smoothed away prejudices and
upset conventionalities; and the ruddy glow of our sunburnt cheeks
was the external token of the healthy natural tone of the feelings
within.

 If they should prove inadequate, the necessary legislation will be requested.

These programs will be both fair to the rights of the individual and effective for the safety
of the Nation. They will, with care and justice, apply the basic principle that public employment
is not a right but a privilege.

All these measures have two clear purposes: Their first purpose is to make certain that this
Nation's security is not jeopardized by false servants. Their second purpose is to clear the
atmosphere of that unreasoned suspicion that accepts rumor and gossip as substitutes for evidence.

Our people, of course, deserve and demand of their Federal Government more than security of
personnel. They demand, also, efficient and logical organization, true to constitutional principles.

I have already established a Committee on Government Organization. The Committee is using as
its point of departure the reports of the Hoover Commission and subsequent studies by several
independent agencies. To achieve the greater efficiency and economy which the Committee analyses
show to be possible, I ask the Congress to extend the present Government Reorganization Act
for a period of 18 months or 2 years beyond its expiration date of April 1, 1953.

