A Lecture on WILLIAM LAW was delivered at the opening of a former Session as an Introduction
to the whole subject of Mysticism.

A. W.

ST. GEORGE'S FREE CHURCH, 5th November 1894.

Jacob Behmen

Jacob Behmen, the greatest of the mystics, and the father of German philosophy, was all his
life nothing better than a working shoemaker.  He was born at Old Seidenberg, a village near
Goerlitz in Silesia, in the year 1575, and he died at Goerlitz in the year 1624.  Jacob Behmen
has no biography.  Jacob Behmen's books are his best biography.  While working with his hands,
Jacob Behmen's whole life was spent in the deepest and the most original thought; in piercing
visions of GOD and of nature; in prayer, in praise, and in love to GOD and man.  Of Jacob Behmen
it may be said with the utmost truth and soberness that he lived and moved and had his being
in GOD.  Jacob Behmen has no biography because his whole life was hid with CHRIST in GOD.

* * * * *

While we have nothing that can properly be called a biography of Jacob Behmen, we have ample
amends made to us in those priceless morsels of autobiography that lie scattered so plentifully
up and down all his books.  And nothing could be more charming than just those incidental and
unstudied utterances of Behmen about himself.  Into the very depths of a passage of the profoundest
speculation Behmen will all of a sudden throw a few verses of the most childlike and heart-winning
confidences about his own mental history and his own spiritual experience.  And thus it is
that, without at all intending it, Behmen has left behind him a complete history of his great
mind and his holy heart in those outbursts of diffidence, deprecation, explanation, and self-defence,
of which his philosophical and theological, as well as his apologetic and experimental, books
are all so full.  It were an immense service done to our best literature if some of Behmen's
students would go through all Behmen's books, so as to make a complete collection and composition
of the best of those autobiographic passages.  Such a book, if it were well done, would at
once take rank with The Confessions of ST. AUGUSTINE, The Divine Comedy of DANTE, and the Grace
Abounding of JOHN BUNYAN. It would then be seen by all, what few, till then, will believe,
that Jacob Behmen's mind and heart and spiritual experience all combine to give him a foremost
place among the most classical masters in that great field.

In the nineteenth chapter of the Aurora there occurs a very important passage of this autobiographic
nature.  In that famous passage Behmen tells his readers that when his eyes first began to
be opened, the sight of this world completely overwhelmed him.  ASAPH'S experiences, so powerfully
set before us in the seventy-third Psalm, will best convey, to those who do not know Behmen,
what Behmen also passed through before he drew near to GOD.  Like that so thoughtful Psalmist,
Behmen's steps had well-nigh slipped when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, and when he
saw how waters of a full cup were so often wrung out to the people of GOD.  The mystery of
life, the sin and misery of life, cast Behmen into a deep and inconsolable melancholy.  No
Scripture could comfort him.  His thoughts of GOD were such that he will not allow himself,
even after they are long past, to put them down on paper.  In this terrible trouble he lifted
up his heart to GOD, little knowing, as yet, what GOD was, or what his own heart was.  Only,
he wrapped up his whole heart, and mind, and will, and desire in the love and the mercy of
GOD: determined not to give over till GOD had heard him and had helped him.  'And then, when
I had wholly hazarded my life upon what I was doing, my whole spirit seemed to me suddenly
to break through the gates of hell, and to be taken up into the arms and the heart of GOD.
I can compare it to nothing else but the resurrection at the last day.  For then, with all
reverence I say it, with the eyes of my spirit I saw GOD.  I saw both what GOD is, and I saw
how GOD is what He is.  And with that there came a mighty and an incontrollable impulse to
set it down, so as to preserve what I had seen. Some men will mock me, and will tell me to
stick to my proper trade, and not trouble my mind with philosophy and theology.  Let these
high matters alone.  Leave them to those who have both the time and the talent for them, they
will say.  So I have often said to myself, but the truth of GOD did burn in my bones till I
took pen and ink and began to set down what I had seen.  All this time do not mistake me for
a saint or an angel.  My heart also is full of all evil.  In malice, and in hatred, and in
lack of brotherly love, after all I have seen and experienced, I am like all other men.  I
am surely the fullest of all men of all manner of infirmity and malignity.'  Behmen protests
in every book of his that what he has written he has received immediately from GOD.  'Let it
never be imagined that I am any greater or any better than other men.  When the Spirit of GOD
is taken away from me I cannot even read so as to understand what I have myself written.  I
have every day to wrestle with the devil and with my own heart, no man in all the world more.
Oh no! thou must not for one moment think of me as if I had by my own power or holiness climbed
up into heaven or descended into the abyss.  Oh no! hear me.  I am as thou art.  I have no
more light than thou hast.  Let no man think of me what I am not.  But what I am all men may
be who will truly believe, and will truly wrestle for truth and goodness under JESUS CHRIST.
I marvel every day that GOD should reveal both the Divine Nature and Temporal and Eternal Nature
for the first time to such a simple and unlearned man as I am.  But what am I to resist what
GOD will do?  What am I to say but, Behold the son of thine handmaiden!  I have often besought
Him to take these too high and too deep matters away from off me, and to commit them to men
of more learning and of a better style of speech.  But He always put my prayer away from Him
and continued to kindle His fire in my bones.  And with all my striving to quench GOD'S spirit
of revelation, I found that I had only by that gathered the more stones for the house that
He had ordained me to build for Him and for His children in this world.'

Jacob Behmen's first book, his Aurora, was not a book at all, but a bundle of loose leaves.
Nothing was further from Behmen's mind, when he took up his pen of an evening, than to make
a book.  He took up his pen after his day's work was over in order to preserve for his own
memory and use in after days the revelations that had been made to him, and the experiences
and exercises through which GOD had passed him.  And, besides, Jacob Behmen could not have
written a book even if he had tried it.  He was a total stranger to the world of books; and
then, over and above that, he had been taken up into a world of things into which no book ever
written as yet had dared to enter.  Again, and again, and again, till it came to fill his whole
life, Behmen would be sitting over his work, or walking abroad under the stars, or worshipping
in his pew in the parish church, when, like the captive prophet by the river of Chebar, he
would be caught up by the hair of the head and carried away into the visions of GOD to behold
the glory of GOD.  And then, when he came to himself, there would arise within him a 'fiery
instigation' to set down for a 'memorial' what he had again seen and heard.  'The gate of the
Divine Mystery was sometimes so opened to me that in one quarter of an hour I saw and knew
more than if I had been many years together at a university.  At which I did exceedingly admire,
and, though it passed my understanding how it happened, I thereupon turned my heart to GOD
to praise Him for it.  For I saw and knew the Being of all Beings; the Byss and the Abyss;
as, also, the Generation of the Son and the Procession of the Spirit.  I saw the descent and
original of this world also, and of all its creatures.  I saw in their order and outcome the
Divine world, the angelical world, paradise, and then this fallen and dark world of our own.
I saw the beginning of the good and the evil, and the true origin and existence of each of
them.  All of which did not only cause me great wonder but also a great joy and a great fear.
And then it came with commanding power into my mind that I must set down the same in pen and
ink for a memorial to myself; albeit, I could hardly contain or express what I had seen.  For
twelve years this went on in me.  Sometimes the truth would hit me like a sudden smiting storm
of rain; and then there would be the clear sunshine after the rain.  All which was to teach
me that GOD will manifest Himself in the soul of man after what manner and what measure it
pleases Him and as it seems good in His sight.'

No human being knew all this time what Jacob Behmen was passing through, and he never intended
that any human being should know.  But, with all his humility, and all his love of obscurity,
he could not remain hidden. Just how it came about we are not fully told; but, long before
his book was finished, a nobleman in the neighbourhood, who was deeply interested in the philosophy
and the theology of that day, somehow got hold of Behmen's papers and had them copied out and
spread abroad, to Behmen's great surprise and great distress.  Copy after copy was stealthily
made of Behmen's manuscript, till, most unfortunately for both of them, a copy came into the
hands of Behmen's parish minister.  But for that accident, so to call it, we would never have
heard the name of GREGORY RICHTER, First Minister of Goerlitz, nor could we have believed that
any minister of JESUS CHRIST could have gone so absolutely mad with ignorance and envy and
anger and ill-will.  The libel is still preserved that Behmen's minister drew out against the
author of Aurora, and the only thing it proves to us is this, that its author must have been
a dull-headed, coarse-hearted, foul-mouthed man.  Richter's persecution of poor Behmen caused
Behmen lifelong trouble; but, at the same time, it served to advertise his genius to his generation,
and to manifest to all men the meekness, the humility, the docility, and the love of peace
of the persecuted man.  'Pastor-Primarius Richter,' says a bishop of his own communion, 'was
a man full of hierarchical arrogance and pride.  He had only the most outward apprehension
of the dogmatics of his day, and he was totally incapable of understanding Jacob Behmen.' 
But it is not for the limitations of his understanding that Pastor Richter stands before us
so laden with blame.  The school is a small one still that, after two centuries of study and
prayer and a holy life, can pretend to understand the whole of the Aurora.  WILLIAM LAW, a
man of the best understanding, and of the humblest heart, tells us that his first reading of
Behmen put him into a 'perfect sweat' of astonishment and awe.  No wonder, then, that a man
of Gregory Richter's narrow mind and hard heart was thrown into such a sweat of prejudice and
anger and ill-will.

