50 cents.

 II. DIGGERS IN THE EARTH. 50 cents.

III. MAKERS OF MANY THINGS. 50 cents.

 IV. TRAVELERS AND TRAVELING. 50 cents. DOWN IN THE QUARRIES                            11

 III. HOUSES OF SAND                                  21

  IV. BRICKS, THEIR FAULTS AND THEIR VIRTUES          31

   V. AT THE GOLD DIGGINGS                            39

  VI. THE STORY OF A SILVER MINE                      48

 VII. IRON, THE EVERYDAY METAL                        57

VIII. OUR GOOD FRIEND COPPER                          65

  IX. THE NEW METAL, ALUMINUM                         76

   X. THE OIL IN OUR LAMPS                            84

  XI. As Zuléikha, the embodiment of all virtue and beauty, had loved him,
he believed himself to be an object of adoration to all feminine hearts,
and grimly resolved that all womankind must suffer in expiation of
his own sufferings.

During the winter there arrived another student from Germany, who,
becoming acquainted with Bodenstedt, arranged to share with him the
lessons in Tartar and Persian, which Mirza-Schaffy was pleased to
call "hours of wisdom."

In course of time other friends joined the circle, so that finally
arose a formal divan, where the wise man of Gjändsha discoursed less
on personalities, dwelling chiefly on general effusions of wisdom,
interspersed with many a song.

 OF AN ALUMINUM FUNNEL                       79

A CALIFORNIA OIL FIELD                                87

THE INDUSTRIAL READERS

BOOK II

DIGGERS IN THE EARTH

I

IN A COAL MINE

Did you ever wonder how beds of coal happened to be in the earth? This is their story.

Centuries ago, so many thousand centuries that even the most learned men can only guess at
their number, strange things were coming to pass. The air was so moist and cloudy that the
sun's rays had hard work to get through. It was warm, nevertheless, for the crust of the earth
was not nearly so thick as it is now, and much heat came from the earth itself. Many plants
and trees grow best in warm, moist air; and such plants flourished in those days. Some of their
descendants are living now, but they are dwarfs, while their ancestors were giants. There is
a little "horse-tail" growing in our meadows, and there are ferns and club mosses almost everywhere.
These are some of the descendants; but many of their ancestors were forty or fifty feet high.
They grew very fast, especially in swamps; and when they died, there was no lack of others
to take their places. Dead leaves fell and heaped up around them. Stumps stood and decayed,
just as they do in our forests to-day. Every year the soft, black, decaying mass grew deeper.
As the crust of the earth was so thin, it bent and wrinkled easily. It often sank in one place
and rose in another. When these low, swampy places sank, water rushed over them, pressing down
upon them with a great weight and sweeping in sand and clay. I wish you could have been with us
last Sunday, we had such an interesting person here--Max Müller, the great linguist and Orientalist.
But we can't have pleasant meets here: we have only one spare room."

"How
old is Max Müller?" I asked. If you cover the wood before
you light it, so that only a little oxygen reaches it, much of the carbon is left, in the form
of charcoal.

When wood decays, its carbon unites with the oxygen of the air; and so decay is really a sort
of burning. In the forests of to-day the leaves, and at length the trees themselves, fall and
decay in the open air; but at the time when our coal was forming, the water kept the air away,
and much carbon was left. This is the way coal was made. Some of the layers, or strata, are
fifty or sixty feet thick, and some are hardly thicker than paper. On top of each one is a
stratum of sandstone or dark-gray shale. This was made by the sand and mud which were brought
in by the water. These shaly rocks split easily into sheets and show beautiful fossil impressions
of ferns. "Ah, here it comes," she said.

There was the bier borne on men's shoulders and a little company of mourners, the peasantry of
the neighborhood, the men wearing smock-frocks. They were awaiting
the clergyman at the lichgate.

Since the crust of the earth was so thin and yielding, it wrinkled up as the earth cooled,
much as the skin of an apple wrinkles when the apple dries. This brought some of the strata
of coal to the surface, and after a while people discovered that it would burn. If a vein of
coal cropped out on a man's farm, he broke some of it up with his pickaxe, shoveled it into
his wheelbarrow, and wheeled it home. After a while hundreds of thousands of people wanted
coal; and now it had to be mined. In some places the coal stratum was horizontal and cropped
out on the side of a hill, so that a level road could be dug straight into it. In other places
the coal was so near the surface that it could be quarried under the open sky, just as granite
is quarried. Generally, however, if you wish to visit a coal mine, you go to a shaft, a square,
black well sometimes deeper than the height of three or four ordinary church steeples. You
get into the "cage," a great steel box, and are lowered down, down, down. At last the cage
stops and you are at the bottom of the mine. The miners' faces, hands, overalls, are all black
with coal dust. They wear tiny lamps on their caps, and as they come near the walls of coal,
it sparkles as it catches the light. Here and there hangs an electric lamp. It is doing its
best to give out light, but its glass is thick with coal dust. The low roof is held up by stout
wooden timbers and pillars of coal. A long passageway stretches off into a blacker darkness
than you ever dreamed of. From this moment new life dawned on our Mirza, and for six weeks he basked
in the sunshine of felicity ere threatening clouds loomed up in his horizon. Then Ibrahim
Chan returned from the war, and with him came his daughter's suitor. A troop of horsemen had
been despatched to Avaria for the bridal gift, and on their return
they were to conduct Achmed Chan and his chosen lady home.

Prize combats and festivities were planned to celebrate the return of the heroes, and at Zuléikha's
request a singing festival was likewise to take place. All the singers of the land were invited and
bidden to prepare their choicest lays extolling the sovereign lady of the fête: to the victorious
competitor would be accorded the right to break the instruments of
his opponents.

 The miner then had to lie down on his side near the wall of coal in his "room" and cut
into it, close to the floor, as far as his pickaxe would reach. Then he bored a hole into the
top of the coal, pushed in a cartridge, thrust in a slender squib, lighted it, and ran for
his life. The cartridge exploded, and perhaps a ton or two of coal fell. The miner's helper
shoveled this into a car and pushed it out of the room to join the long string of cars.

That is the way mining used to be done. In these days a man with a small machine for cutting
coal comes first. He puts his cutter on the floor against the wall of coal and turns on the
electricity. Chip, chip, grinds the machine, eating its way swiftly into the coal, and soon
there is a deep cut all along the side of the room. The man and his machine go elsewhere, and
the first room is left for its next visitors. They come in the evening and bore holes for the
blasting. Once these holes were bored by hand, but now they are made with powerful drills that
work by compressed air. A little later other men come and set off cartridges. In the morning
when the dust has settled and the smoke has blown away, the loaders appear with their shovels
and load the coal into the cars. Then it is raised to the surface and made ready for market.

Did you ever notice that some pieces of coal are dull and smutty, while others are hard and
bright? The dull coal is called bituminous, because it contains more bitumen or mineral pitch.
This is often sold as "run-of-mine" coal,--that is, just as it comes from the mine, whether
in big pieces or in little ones; but sometimes it is passed over screens, and in this process
the dust and smaller bits drop out.

The second kind of coal, the sort that is hard and bright, is anthracite. Its name is connected
with a Greek word meaning ruby. It burns with a glow, but does not blaze. Most of the anthracite
coal is used in houses, and householders will not buy it unless the pieces are of nearly the
same size and free from dirt, coal dust, and slate. He talked of his wife with the strongest affection--wished
I could remain longer with them, if only to know her better. Nothing could be more tender than
his manner toward her. He went for her when we were in the study, and the last half hour of
my stay she sat with us. It goes between rollers, which
crush it; then over screens, through which the smaller pieces fall. Sometimes the screens are
so made that the coal will pass over them, while the thin, flat pieces of slate will fall through.
In spite of all this, bits of coal mixed with slate sometimes slide down with the coal, and
these are picked out by boys. A better way of getting rid of them is now coming into use. This
is to put the coal and slate into moving water. The slate is heavier than the coal, and sinks;
and so the coal can easily be separated from it. Dealers have names for the various sizes of
coal. "Egg" must be between two and two and five eighths inches in diameter; "nut" between
three fourths and one and one eighth inches; "pea" between one half and three fourths of an inch.

Mining coal is dangerous work. Any blow of the pickaxe may break into a vein of water which
will burst out and flood the mine. The wooden props which support the roof may break, or the
pillars of coal may not be large enough; and the roof may fall in and crush the workers. He told
me, however, of teaching of quite another character, addressed to people of cultivation mainly, and
to him peculiarly acceptable. His reference was to Robertson's Sermons: he showed me the volume--the
first series--just then published. One
kind of gas is called "choke-damp," because it chokes or suffocates any one who breathes it.
There is also "white-damp," the gas which you see burning with a pretty blue flame over a hot
coal fire. Worst of all is the "fire-damp." If you stir up the water in a marsh, you will see
bubbles of it rise to the surface. It is harmless in a marsh, but quite the opposite in a mine.
When it unites with a certain amount of air, it becomes explosive, and the least bit of flame
will cause a terrible explosion. Even coal dust may explode if the air is full of it, and it
is suddenly set in motion by too heavy a blast of powder.

