This was surprising, but Prince Eugene suggested, as the most probable event, that, in the
rain and darkness, the boat had been carried down the river, and it might yet be some hours
before it was heard of. It was arranged that at the first information on either side, we should
communicate with each other.

I returned to our own side of the river, a little puzzled, but in no way alarmed at the disappearance
of the party, for so fate blinds us when she is about to deliver her heaviest strokes. But
search was made in good earnest. Within twenty-four hours every man of the party was accounted
for, except Gaston Cheverny. As Prince Eugene had surmised, the boat had drifted a long distance
down the river in the darkness, with the wind and tide both urging it on. At daylight an attempt
was made to land on the Austrian side where there was an outpost, and before the character
of the expedition was found out, several shots were fired on the boat and a bullet made a slight
wound in Gaston Cheverny's head. Their greatest danger came after they were recognized, for
in attempting to land, the boat had been upset, and every man in it narrowly escaped drowning.
All had been saved, however, and three of the Austrians declared that they had seen Gaston
Cheverny after they reached the shore. But beyond that, no one could tell anything. They had
found out he was not Count Saxe, and in the confusion of the boat's upsetting, and the struggle
for their own lives, they had lost sight of their prisoner. This was perfectly satisfactory
to us for a time. We supposed that Gaston, seeing his chance, had quietly walked away from
his captors. We expected him every day for a week, and to facilitate his return, Count Saxe
released Brohl, the lieutenant, with the understanding that Gaston Cheverny was to be set at
liberty as soon as found. But he was not found, nor was there any sign of him.

A man can not vanish like a ghost, said Count Saxe; so he set to work with a good heart, to
have Gaston Cheverny sought for. His wound in the head might partly account for his disappearance.
He had perhaps wandered beyond the Austrian lines, and being wounded, might have sought refuge
in some farmhouse or peasant's hut, where he would be found. Nothing seemed more likely. Every
farmhouse and peasant's hut, every village, every schloss even, was searched for the wounded
French officer, the Austrians assisting; but if Gaston Cheverny had vanished from the earth,
he could not have disappeared more completely. I acknowledged that for the first week--nay
for two weeks--I was not seriously alarmed. A wounded man on foot can not get out of a certain
zone, and that zone was searched as one searches for a gold piece dropped on the floor. But
we found not Gaston Cheverny. At the end of two weeks we were fairly puzzled, but by no means
in despair. Marvelous things happen in war, and a story of the strange disappearances and stranger
returns of men lost in siege, battle, or reconnaissance, would read like the fables of the
ancient mythology.

At the end of a fortnight, I began to see signs of anxiety for Gaston Cheverny in Count Saxe.
Perhaps this was because Gaston's disappearance came from his prompt ruse to save Count Saxe,
and there was little doubt that the bigger game would have been bagged but for this ruse. Count
Saxe thought constantly of Gaston Cheverny. He not only instituted the most thorough search,
but he offered a large reward in money, out of his own purse. Trust Count Saxe to remember
the services of a friend! The one thought in my mind was Francezka.

CHAPTER XXII

HER BEST BELOVED

I considered within myself whether it were not my duty to confide to Count Saxe the fact that
Francezka was Gaston's wife, and I quickly concluded that it was my duty. And so one night,
sitting at the writing table, I told him the story of Francezka's and Gaston's love.

Count Saxe listened to me attentively.

"So, my lady Francezka takes the bit between her teeth and marries the man of her choice. Well,
any one might safely have predicted as much. It is a good thing, though, that her fancy turned
to Gaston instead of Regnard Cheverny, for Gaston is much the better man. But it is impossible--I
say, Babache, it is impossible--that Gaston Cheverny should not shortly reappear."

When Count Saxe used the word impossible, I knew for the first time he felt a poignant doubt
and anxiety.

"And how shall Madame Cheverny be informed?" I asked.

"As Gaston Cheverny's coolness saved me from the consequences of my own rashness--for look
you, Babache, I was rash, and showed all the qualities of a bad general in remaining here practically
unguarded--it is as little as I can do to have the news of his disappearance gently conveyed
to his wife. So, be prepared to ride for Brabant by the day after to-morrow if nothing be heard
of Gaston Cheverny by that time."

My heart leaped and then sank into an abyss. I should see Francezka, but what news should I
carry to her!

"It would be well," added Count Saxe, "that Regnard Cheverny be formally notified of his brother's
disappearance, that he may assist in the search."

Which was done, a special messenger taking the letter to Prince Eugene's headquarters, from
whence it would be forwarded to Regnard Cheverny.

I made my preparations next day to leave the following morning, for I felt an inward painful
conviction that nothing would be heard that day of Gaston Cheverny. Count Saxe gave me leave
to remain as many days in Brabant as necessary, and if Francezka wished to return with me,
I was to escort her. Such was the generous nature of the man. I took with me that last letter
Gaston had written, but his other papers and belongings I left under my master's care, hoping--but
alas! not believing--that before I returned Gaston Cheverny would have been found. I rode hard
on that journey, and on the fifth evening after leaving Hüningen, about ten o'clock, I reached
the château of Capello. It had been less than a month since I had left Francezka full of hope
and joy, and I had come now to rob her of all except hope.

Although it was the fragrant time of the year, the evening was chill, with a fine, cold rain
falling. The lights were still burning in the little yellow room where Francezka usually sat.

My knock at the great door of the château sounded to me like the crack of doom. Old Peter opened
the door, and by some magic of thought, he saw at a glance that I was a messenger of evil.
Without a word, he led me to the yellow saloon, and announced in a trembling voice, which was
a warning in itself:

"Here, Madame, is Captain Babache."

Francezka was alone, but not without companionship. The dog Bold lay at her feet. Her harpsichord
was open, a book lay by her on the table, and her fingers were busily employed on some fine
needlework, for she was an expert needlewoman. I had schooled my countenance, but I verily
believe, without levity, that there is something sinister in extreme ugliness, and it was that
which gave old Peter the warning of evil, and also Francezka. As she heard my name, she sprang
up, her vivid face breaking into a smile like sunlight, and she cried, in her sweet and penetrating
voice:

"Oh, Babache, how glad I am to see you! And how is my lord? And where is the letter, for surely
he has written me."

I handed her silently the letter I had found on Gaston's table. She snatched it from my hand,
kissed the signature, and read it and re-read it, smiling joyfully all the while; then, for
the first time, looking closely at me, her smile faded, her eyes grew anxious, and stepping
forward, she laid her hand on my arm. She said not one word, but her eyes commanded me to speak.
She told me afterward that the look in my face frightened her so that she could hardly stand.
But I, obeying the command in her eyes, told her every word concerning Gaston that I knew.
She heard me to the end, and I could see that like all really courageous persons, she grew
calmer as the danger got closer. When I had finished, she said to me in a steady voice:

"And you say, Babache, there is not the smallest evidence that my husband is dead?"

"Not the least, Madame. Not a handkerchief belonging to him has been found. There is a boom
at the narrowest part of the river, below Hüningen, which would stop the body of a ferret,
much less a man's, and nothing has been found there."

She drew a long breath of relief, and sat down, leaning her head on her hand--a favorite attitude
of hers. The dog Bold, knowing as well as I that Francezka was troubled, lay down at her feet,
and licked the half-open hand that hung at her side. I then told her that Count Saxe had directed
me to place myself at her service.

"How good that was of him!" she said. "And you, of all persons, would be the most helpful to
me, for, of course, I intend myself to go in search of my husband. Has Regnard been notified
of Gaston's disappearance?"

I replied that he had, but so far no word had come from him. Francezka reflected a little while.
Then she said:

"Babache, you are the best and truest of souls, and are my chief dependence. But I think it
would be an abuse of Count Saxe's indulgence to keep you here. I can not, as Mademoiselle Capello,
go in search of Gaston Cheverny. I shall have to assemble my friends and neighbors and announce
to them my marriage. Then I shall provide myself with a stout traveling chaise and travel to
Hüningen, and search and search until I find my best beloved."

I had often remarked upon the natural good sense which was the basis of Francezka's character,
and saw at once the justness of her course.

"So," she said, bravely recovering her cheerfulness, "you will remain here to rest, and you
shall leave when you like and I will follow you within the week."

I explained, however, that if I were at liberty to return at once I should go back to Brussels
that very night and start for the Rhine country next morning. To this she agreed, when she
saw I had reason on my side, but before I went she made me sup, and had brought out for me
a bottle of the true lachrymæ christi, of which her father had laid in a small store at a great
price. By midnight I had said farewell to Francezka and was again in the saddle.

As I rode through the blackness and solitariness of the night I could but reflect upon the
extraordinary courage and constancy of women when really put to the test. Francezka was the
last woman in the world to be weak in the face of calamity. She had in her the making of ten
good soldiers, including a general.

My master was at Philipsburg with his command when I again saw him. He was assisting the Duke
of Berwick in the siege of that important place. I did not need to ask him if there was any
news of Gaston Cheverny; I saw at the first glance there was none.

The siege went on steadily. We had in our army too many "red heels" and tourlourous. The red
heels were those luxurious and worthless young gentlemen sent us in chaises from the court,
who had not one single idea of a soldier in their empty heads, and who were fit for nothing
but to lead the forlorn hope, waving their swords frantically, and bawling "Follow me!" The
tourlourous were the raw levies, of whom we had more than was quite comfortable. To balance
this, Prince Eugene had in his army eighty royal princes, which in itself was enough to account
for the strange paralysis of this active old general.

But a dreadful misfortune lay in store for us. On the twelfth of June, at nine o'clock in the
morning, Marshal, Duke of Berwick, while standing upon the banquette, and directing the captain
of the siege, was struck by a cannon ball--whether French or Austrian, was never known--and
was blown to pieces. In an instant of time he had made the whole journey from this country
into the other one, and suffered not one pang. He had made twenty-nine campaigns, and had commanded
in fifteen, and had never had his skin broken. Glory holds an invisible shield before her children.
Cæsar was never wounded, nor Pompey, nor Charlemagne, nor Henry IV, nor any of the great generals
of Louis XIV. But sometimes, the days of a warrior being accomplished, he is accorded death
upon the Bed of Honor, as it was anciently called. The great Constable de Bourbon never received
but one wound, and that his death wound, while leading the assault. Old Marshal Villars, lying
at the age of eighty on his deathbed, said, when he heard how the Duke of Berwick had been
called higher: "That man was ever lucky."

The sorrow and confusion brought about by this terrible loss is not to be described. But the
soldiers, infuriated by the death of the great marshal, demanded Philipsburg as a sacrifice
to his ashes, and the siege was conducted with the greatest fury.

Within three weeks from the time I had parted from Francezka in Brabant I received a message
from her. She was at a little village, three miles from Philipsburg, and desired to see me.

I had no difficulty in getting away, and I reached the village where Francezka was, in the
late afternoon. It was a small, peaceful place, lying in the lap of the hills, and the inn
on the outskirts of it was plain, but comfortable. When I rode up, Francezka was awaiting me
on the balcony of her room. Her traveling chaise was in the tavern yard, and I caught sight
of Peter, with two men servants, and Elizabeth, Francezka's maid.

As always, Francezka seemed glad to see me. She knew I had no news of Gaston, and only asked
me if search was still kept up for him. I told her yes, and that Count Saxe had increased the
already large reward offered for news of Gaston. Also I told her that we were well convinced
Gaston must be on the farther side of the Rhine; I did not say "if alive." I could not, with
Francezka's lovely, miserable eyes upon me. But she was perfectly calm and collected. I never
saw her more entirely mistress of herself.

I then asked her of her own affairs since we had parted. She told me that she had thought best
to make the announcement of her marriage as public and as ceremonious as possible, and for
that reason had invited all of the most considerable people of the neighborhood to the château
of Capello on a certain day. She told me--poor, unhappy Francezka--that in anticipation of
a gala when Gaston should return, she had prepared handsome new liveries for all her servants,
and had refurnished the red saloon, and had hung the Diana gallery with mirrors. These things
she determined to display on the day she made the announcement.

"For, in spite of my heavy misfortune in not knowing where my husband is, it must ever be a
day of congratulation and of honor with me when I tell the world that I am Gaston Cheverny's
wife," she said proudly.

She had written to the Bishop of Louvain with her own hand, but by some accident he had heard
before receiving the letter that Francezka was privately married--only that Count Bellegarde,
his relative, was the happy man, instead of Gaston Cheverny. The bishop, pleased at his nephew's
good fortune, wrote Francezka a letter of congratulation, warmly approving her marriage, and
most indulgent toward the secrecy of it. But on receiving Francezka's letter, saying she was
Gaston Cheverny's wife, the bishop changed his tune and sent Francezka a fulmination, in which
he denounced the secrecy of the marriage excessively. To this Francezka replied, saying as
the bishop was so incensed with her, she would reconsider a considerable gift she had intended
making toward building the new wing of the palace, to which Madame Riano was so much opposed.
This brought the bishop down on his marrow bones. Francezka, in spite of her trouble, was still
Francezka, and a gleam of her old humor shone in her eyes when she told of the bishop's discomfiture,
and especially that the threatened withdrawal of the gift was the suggestion of Father Benart,
the bishop's brother. I always knew the little priest was not devoid of either sense or humor.

When the day came Francezka said she was so torn with emotions she could scarcely go through
with it, but pride and devotion to Gaston Cheverny held her up. And a great piece of good fortune
befell her at the crucial moment--Madame Riano arrived unexpectedly from Scotland. Another
gleam of humor shot from Francezka's eyes when she told me that Madame Riano claimed to have
had supernatural information in Scotland that a Kirkpatrick was in trouble, which brought her
home; but Francezka thought that Madame Riano had by that time grown a little tired of her
sojourn in the land of Goshen, as she represented Scotland to be. At all events, her coming
was of extraordinary good fortune to Francezka; for having countenanced the marriage, and advised
secrecy, Madame Riano could do no less than sustain Francezka.

"I made the announcement myself," said Francezka, "standing at the top of the Diana gallery,
with the Bishop of Louvain on one side of me, my aunt on the other, and Father Benart, with
Madame Chambellan, behind me, and before fifty persons of the highest quality I could gather
together. I dressed myself splendidly for the occasion and wore all my jewels, and I don't
think, Babache, that there was any note of apology in my voice for having married Gaston Cheverny.
I told of his gallant ruse to save Count Saxe, of his being carried off, and being lost sight
of, and of my determination to go in search of him. I felt, rather than saw, in the beginning,
that many of those present were hostile to me, and did not cordially approve my course, but
before I finished speaking there was a subtile change, a warming toward me. When I had concluded,
the Sieur de Montigny, eighty years old, arose and expressed for the company heartfelt wishes
that I might find my husband, and that we might live long in joy and peace together."

Yes, it was easily understood how courage and devotion in the person of Francezka, with her
eloquent voice and eyes to plead for her, had won her the victory over these people.

"The ordeal had begun for me most painfully, but it ended most hopefully. Surely if all those
people believed that Gaston would be found, it was not for me, his wife, to give way to despair.
Just as at the hour of our marriage, a storm had come up, followed by a clear and beautiful
evening, so, on the morning of the day of which I have been telling you, rain fell, and a cold
northeast wind made the June day as dreary as November. But while I was speaking I caught the
gleam of the sun upon the canal, under the windows, and suddenly the day became inexpressibly
beautiful; so I think, Babache, that my day and Gaston's will yet be sunshiny."

With this Francezka's face grew almost gay, but it was a lightning flash; it was not the steady
and cheerful hope I had seen in her eyes when she told me first of her marriage.

She further told me that she was accompanied on her travels by Madame Chambellan for the sake
of propriety; but beyond securing Madame Chambellan's comfort, I do not fancy that Francezka
concerned herself further. This good, insipid, incapable lady was not a person to uphold any
one, and answered Francezka's requirement for a lay figure perfectly.

I asked after my old friend Bold. Him, she said, she had left behind, not being minded to take
the chances of traveling with him.

"And if Gaston should reach Capello while I am away he will have at least one faithful heart
to greet him," she said.

Madame Riano remained at the château, and Francezka spoke with gratitude of her courage and
sympathy, which were never wanting in a good cause. I returned to camp by nightfall and reported
to Count Saxe. Next day he went with me to pay his respects to Francezka and to concert with
her any plan she might desire for the prosecution of the search. Francezka received us with
her old grace and dignity, and blushed with pleasure at Count Saxe's tribute to Gaston Cheverny.

"And apart from my affection for Monsieur Cheverny," he said, "I feel myself peculiarly obliged
to use every means to find him. We can not afford to lose such a man as your husband, Madame
Cheverny."

Francezka thanked Count Saxe, and then sitting down at a table, we discussed pros and cons.
The extent of the search which had already been made for Gaston seemed to frighten Francezka
a little, but she bravely rallied. She said to Count Saxe that her whole fortune should be
spent, if necessary, in this quest for her husband. Then Francezka told him of a new plan she
had--to search all the Austrian prisons. It was by no means improbable that Gaston Cheverny,
wandering about in his French uniform, and dazed with his wound, might have fallen in with
Austrians, who would send him away with other chance prisoners. This was so plausible a theory
that Count Saxe was much struck with it, and said to Francezka:

"Madame, you would be a much better general than I, if once you would put your keen wit to
the business."

Francezka smiled with pleasure. No sorrow nor anxiety that ate into her soul could keep her
from relishing a compliment from so great a man as Count Saxe. My master, however, gently put
before her the discomforts and dangers that might lie before her. Francezka only looked at
him calmly and replied:

"Discomfort and danger are nothing to a woman in comparison with her best beloved."

Count Saxe said not one word further to discourage her, but, on the contrary, set himself seriously
to work to help her. He offered to get letters from many royal and noble persons and officers
of rank in both armies. Francezka, in thanking him, said, with tears in her eyes:

"I realize at this moment that I am, for the present, strangely alone in the world. I know
not whom to advise with, except you, Count Saxe, and my good Babache. I know, however, one
thing which is necessary to me, and that is, Babache. When you are not actually fighting, will
you not lend me Babache, to help me search until I find my husband?"

"Madame," replied Count Saxe, "I do not lend him to you--I give him to you as long as you need
him. He is the most valuable possession I have on earth; therefore you may measure my regard
for you."

They both rose--so did I--and Francezka turned her cheek to Count Saxe, who kissed her reverently.
Let those sneer at Count Saxe who will, about his Mademoiselle Verières, his Duchesse de Bouillon
and the rest. I say no one respected a woman of honor more than Count Saxe. He was bewitched
by Francezka's beauty, tears and devotion, and he began to tell her of so many officers, supposed
to be lost in war, who had returned, sometimes after long years, to their friends, that he
fixed the idea in Francezka's head, Gaston must return. I said to him afterward, privately,
that Francezka's determined belief that Gaston would be found would be unalterable after this
conversation. Count Saxe looked a little disturbed, but striking his forehead, cried out:

"Babache, I swear I knew not half I was saying; I saw only distressed beauty, faithful and
devoted, and I would have perjured my soul to comfort her!"

It was concluded, at this conference, that as soon as Philipsburg fell, I was to accompany
Francezka and Madame Chambellan to Prince Eugene's headquarters, and if necessary to Vienna,
that the plan of looking for Gaston Cheverny in the Austrian prisons might be carried out.

We returned to our stations before Philipsburg, but I had several opportunities of seeing Francezka
in the next few weeks. She posted large rewards for news of Gaston Cheverny, but not one single
person appeared to claim them.

Philipsburg fell on the eighteenth of July. As soon as this was accomplished the campaign became
perfunctory. In August, everything had simmered down, and actually the Crown Prince of Prussia,
with some of the other too numerous princes in Prince Eugene's army, were given passports to
visit the French camp. This young Crown Prince of Prussia, afterward known as Frederick the
Great, was the same one who had so much admired Francezka at the camp of Radewitz, four years
before. Count Saxe suggested that Francezka should see him, and ask, through him, the help
of the Prussians in her search.

On the day of this visit, therefore, a beautiful August forenoon, after a whole mob of princes
had been entertained by the Duc de Noailles and other officers of high rank, Count Saxe invited
to his tent the Crown Prince of Prussia. This tent was of purple and white silk, and was very
luxurious; but luxury did not prevent Count Saxe from being a soldier as hardy as those old
Greeks, who furiously chased and fought their enemies over the windy plains of Troy.

I had seen the crown prince many times at Radewitz. He always bore on his countenance some
indications of greatness: the clear, steel blue eye of him, the forehead of a man born a captain.
But at Radewitz his old brute of a father had treated him worse than a dog. Like his friend,
Voltaire, he had been caned more than once. Now, times were better with him; but no man ever
submitted to have a cane laid on his back without bearing marks upon his character long after
the marks on his skin had disappeared. When I was a private soldier I always carried around
my neck a little bag which contained my few treasures, and one of these treasures was a bullet
for the sergeant who should order a lash laid on me. He was dressed in a faultlessly fitting serge suit enlivened by a
nankeen waistcoat supporting a gold watch-chain.

The fingers of one hand clutched a palm-leaf fan; the fingers of the other were extended toward
Jack. He had known Jack's governor for years, and so a too formal introduction was unnecessary.

"Show
me what you've got," he began, "the latest, understand. Wife wants something to hang over the sideboard.
You've been doing some new things, I hear from Ruggles."

The tone of the request grated on Jack, who had risen to his feet the moment "His Finance" (as
he insisted on calling him afterward to Sam) had opened the door. He felt instantly that the
atmosphere of his sanctum had, to a certain extent, been polluted. But that Sam's eyes were upon him
he would have denied point-blank that he had a single canvas of any kind for sale, and so closed
the incident.

Sam saw the wavering look in his friend's face and started in to overhaul a rack of unframed pictures
with their faces turned to the wall. These he placed one after the other on the ledge of the
easel and immediately above the Monet, which still kept its place
on the floor, its sunny face gazing up at the shopkeeper, his clerk,
and bin customer.

"This the newest one you've got?" asked the millionnaire, in the same
tone he would have used to his tailor, as he pointed to a picture
of a strip of land between sea and sky--one of those uncertain landscapes
that a man is righteously excused for hanging upside down.

"Yes," said Jack, with a grave face, "right off the ice."

Sam winced, but "His Finance" either did not hear it or supposed it was some art-slang common to
such a place.

"This another?" he inquired, fixing his glasses in place and hending down closer to the Monet.

"No--that's
out of another refrigerator," remarked Jack, carelessly--not a smile on his face.

"Rather a neat thing," continued the Moneybags. "Looks just like a place up in Somesbury where
I was born--same old pasture. What's the price?"

"It isn't for sale," answered Jack, in a decided tone.

"Not for sale?"

"No."

"Well, I rather like it," and he bent down closer, "and, if you can fix a figure, I might----"

"I
can't fix a figure, for it isn't for sale.

I didn't paint it--it's one of Monet's."

"Belongs to you--don't it?"

"Yes--belongs to me."

"Well, how about a thousand dollars for it?"

Sam's heart leaped to his throat, but Jack's face never showed a wrinkle.

"Thanks; much obliged, but I'll hold on to it for a while. I'm not through with it yet."

"If you decide to sell it will you let me know?"

"Yes," said Jack,
grimly, and picking up the canvas and carrying it across the room,
he turned its face to the wall.

While Sam was bowing the millionnaire
out (there was nothing but the Monet, of course, which he wanted now
that he couldn't buy it), Jack occupied the minutes in making a caricature
of His Finance on a fresh canvas.

Sam's opening sentences on his
return, out of breath with his run back up the three flights of stairs,
were not complimentary. They began by impeaching Jack's intelligence
in terms more profane than polite, and ended in the fervent hope that
he make an instantaneous visit to His Satanic Majesty.

In the midst
of this discussion--in which one side roared his displeasure and the
other answered in pantomime between shouts of his own laughter--there
came another knock at the door, and the owner of the Monet walked
in. He, too, was in a disturbed state of mind. He had heard some things
during the day bearing directly on Jack's credit, and had brought
a bill with him for the value of the picture.

He would like the money
then and there.

Jack's manner with the dealer was even more lordly
and condescending than with the would-be buyer.

"Want a check--when--now?
My dear sir! when I bought that Monet was there anything said about
my paying for it in twenty-four hours? To-morrow, when my argosies
arrive laden with the spoils of the far East, but not now. I never
pay for anything immediately--it would injure my credit. Sit down
and let me offer you a cigar--my governor imports 'em and so you can
be assured they are good. By the way--what's become of that Ziem I
saw in your window last week? The Metropolitan ought to have that
picture." Francezka was known to many of these people. The story of her romantic
marriage and her loving quest for her husband had got abroad, and at every stopping place she
received sympathy and wishes for success in her search. I saw that Francezka took all these
polite expressions for gospel truths, and thought everybody who spoke a word of encouragement
to her was profoundly versed in wisdom.

I had neither the power nor the wish to rob her of this beautiful illusion. She had by nature
a great and glowing imagination, and she pictured to herself and to me the charm of her return
journey with Gaston. She admitted the possibility that he might be ill and worn, but then her
tenderness would nurse him back to health. It would be necessary for him to ride in a chaise,
perhaps, so she would give up her horse and ride with him. How exquisite it would be, as they
passed along the swift flowing Rhine, through the purple vineyards, the radiant mornings, the
glorious sunsets, the dreamy purple twilights--all would be beautiful. But these glowing visions
did not impair Francezka's watchfulness nor lead her to relax one single effort in her vigilant
hunt.

This rosy hope lasted her until we reached Prince Eugene's headquarters in the Taunus hills.
There, one interview with Prince Eugene himself brought home to Francezka the gray and gloomy
outlook before her. It left her with but one rational basis of hope, that of finding Gaston
in some Austrian prison.

On the night of this interview with Prince Eugene, at which I was present, Francezka sent for
me to come to her room at the little inn where we were staying. I saw by the gravity of her
look that the old hunchback prince's clear, but not unkind, statement of the case had produced
its effect upon her. And she also proved to me, in our conversation, what I had long known,
that although self-willed and impetuous, Francezka was neither selfish nor inconsiderate.

"Babache," she said to me on entering, "I think you know that you are the most comforting and
helpful person in the world to me now, and that if I consent to part with you it is not because
you are of no more use or good to me. But I see plainly that my search in the Austrian prisons
for my husband is likely to last the whole year if, oh God! I find him even then! And I see
that I can contrive all that is necessary myself. Therefore, much as you are to me now, I can
not think it right to deprive Count Saxe of your services, and so I give you leave to return
at once. When I want you, be sure I will send for you."

In reply, I told her that I belonged to her and to Count Saxe, and either could make any disposition
of me that was desired.

We then deliberated on the singular silence of Regnard Cheverny. Although he was not with Prince
Eugene's own contingent, yet it was scarcely possible that he had not received one of the several
letters which had been written him by Francezka as well as other persons, concerning his brother's
disappearance; nor could he fail to know of the catastrophe from other sources; but not one
line or word had come from him. Francezka was very deeply incensed at him. She had never really
liked nor trusted Regnard, and was not disposed to excuse him in anything.

Her next move would be to Vienna, in order to complete her plan of searching the Austrian prisons.
With her usual promptness, she decided to start on the morrow.

The next morning I saw her depart. She went in the chaise with Madame Chambellan, discarding
her riding horse. When she bade me farewell at the chaise door she tried to express her thanks
to me, but instead, she burst into a passion of tears. I closed the door hastily and turned
away. I could not bear to see her weep, and I could not, myself, utter one word.

I returned to Count Saxe. On the first of January, 1735, peace was proclaimed; and as Count
Saxe said, the rain having ceased, the cloaks were laid away.

For the two years that followed I was often with Francezka, and never out of her reach, and
worked for her diligently; yet I speak of some things that I did not actually see, but heard.

Francezka proceeded to Vienna, where she was received with distinction by the Emperor Charles
and his empress. They became much interested in her story, and gave her every facility possible.
The young Princess Maria Theresa, who was destined to reign with the energy of a king and the
sweetness of a queen, was then in her eighteenth year. She became deeply interested in Francezka,
and showed her many kind attentions. Armed with letters from the emperor, Francezka proceeded
to examine the Austrian prisons, from which the prisoners were being released on their exchange
at the prospect of peace, and all of the records were laid before her. But she found not the
smallest trace of her husband.

This consumed the entire autumn, winter and spring. At the beginning of summer, this source
of hope being exhausted, Francezka reluctantly turned toward Brabant. But on passing through
the Taunus country she made a discovery at the very center of the region that had been combed
over a dozen times for Gaston Cheverny by the French, the Austrians and Francezka herself.
This was the indubitable proof that Gaston Cheverny had been alive and at that place three
months after his disappearance, and in the very midst of the hunt for him!

Francezka unearthed this fact by the acuteness of her understanding, which reckoned nothing
too small or too great for her to attempt in this undertaking. On her way to Brabant, after
nearly a year of fruitless effort, she stopped over night in a village not far from the Rhine
and on the way to Frankfort. She did not fail to ask of the authorities if any person answering
to Gaston Cheverny's description had been seen at any time in the place, and to cause a large
reward to be posted; but no one could tell her anything.

At the inn she noticed a pointer that somewhat resembled Bold. The dog took a fancy to Francezka,
which she returned, being touched by the dog's resemblance to her old friend. The innkeeper's
little daughter, not ten years old, seeing this, said in Francezka's hearing, that the dog
was as fond of "the great lady" as it had been of "the French prisoner with his head bound
up." Francezka, calling to the child, questioned her closely, and received the startling information
from the little girl that the prisoner, who was a gentleman, had fondled the dog, because he
said it was like a dog at home which he loved. It was brought out at once that this prisoner
was one of a number on their way to Bohemia. His description tallied perfectly with Gaston
Cheverny, and the absolute certainty was reached by the innkeeper's wife producing a fine handkerchief
which had been left behind, with Gaston Cheverny's initials embroidered on it by Francezka's
own hand!

When Francezka heard this she was like one ready to die with joy. It proved at once that nothing
concerning Gaston's disappearance could be taken as final. Francezka, by her own wit, had found
out what all the machinery of two great commanders had failed to discover. Was it strange that
after this she should trust to no one's efforts but her own? All this I gathered in hurried
but ecstatic letters written me in the first flush of her delight. At once all her hopes bloomed
afresh--nor could any one, in reason, discourage her.

But this joy was the joy of Tantalus--for in spite of months of time and great sums of money
spent on the spot by Francezka, not one scintilla of light more was thrown upon this tragic
mystery of her life.

At last, having spent a whole year in her pursuit, Francezka was forced to turn her steps homeward.
This did not mean that she gave up either hope or work, that was impossible to her; but that
she would rest and wait a while. She told over to herself, so she wrote me, all the stories
she had ever heard, including those of Count Saxe, of persons who, having been sought diligently,
at last returned when all hope was abandoned. Francezka apparently forgot that although strange
disappearances and equally strange reappearances take place often in troublous times, but few
persons in the world had been searched for as thoroughly, as patiently, and with such lavish
expenditure of time and money as had Gaston Cheverny. To his honor be it said that at no time
was there the smallest suspicion in any mind that he had made way with himself, or had voluntarily
abandoned Francezka.

It was in September of 1735 that Francezka again saw the château of Capello. She entered her
own house with sadness and disappointment, but not in despair. Hope could not die within her.
As she wrote me, "My heart can not--will not--break."

It is not to be wondered at, however, that the rest of Francezka's world reckoned Gaston Cheverny
a dead man. Father Benart, the little priest, who was a courageous man, even hinted to Francezka
that she should wear mourning. This went to her heart like a knife. To put on the garments
of widowhood would be the last abandonment of hope, and to this she would not consent. She
adopted, however, the Spanish costume, which is black, but not mourning, and no one could accuse
her of unseemliness in her attire.

She found her house swept and garnished, for Francezka's administrative qualities were of that
order which make affairs apparently go on of themselves. The dog Bold was overjoyed to see
her and became, as formerly, her inseparable companion. The harvests had been good, her flocks
and herds had prospered; all belonging to Francezka seemed to bask in the sunlight of good
fortune, except Francezka herself.

As soon as her return was known she was overrun with visitors, mostly impelled by curiosity,
who pestered her with questions. Francezka met these with the spirit and courage which were
a part of her. Being naturally and incurably humorous, she often smiled, and even laughed,
though her heart was near to breaking, at the air of surprise and even chagrin with which her
calm announcement was received that she did not yet admit her husband to be dead, and should
ever hope for his return. But these idle persons inflicted upon her pride a burning smart;
she continually felt that she was reckoned foolish and visionary--she, the most practical,
the most resourceful, the most entirely sensible of women.

She had greater courage, a more powerful imagination than most people, and so the commonplace
of the earth had ever been eager to deny her common sense. She had proved herself possessed
of the most sublime common sense in the management of her life and her affairs. Beautiful and
alone, she had escaped slander; with a great fortune and perfect liberty, she had avoided the
ever present snare of being married for her fortune, and had chosen a man who loved her for
herself alone, and would have married her in her smock. She had proved herself capable in every
emergency, and had commanded love and admiration, a thing not easily forgiven. Now, the small-minded,
the carpers and the critics, had their opportunity, and they fell upon her in full cry like
a pack of wolves.

She could sustain herself against them. They might whisper and backbite--they might point with
unctuous hypocrisy at the terrible results of a marriage made solely to please herself, but
none of them dared to speak before her face. It was, however, mortifying for her self-love
to know that they dared speak behind her back. Francezka was, in some respects, a spoiled child
of fortune. She did not for one moment relax her efforts to find Gaston Cheverny, although
she no longer attempted it personally. A number of trained men were employed by her to keep
the matter alive, the rewards before the public, and to follow up every possible clue.

And then she went upon her way, unchanged and unchanging in some respects. She again took up
her reading and studying; the Brabant ladies were much scandalized at the amount of money which
Madame Cheverny spent on books. She again had her music and singing masters to attend her.
She did all these things diligently, though she had lost much of the enjoyment they once gave
her. Such hope as she had left was enough to make her unmurmuring in her present life, but
not enough to make her happy. And so the year of 1735 passed.

CHAPTER XXIV

CONFIDENT TO-MORROWS

It does not matter how that time went with me, Babache. I was with my master, Count Saxe, whose
glory increased with time. Every day and hour Francezka was in my mind, and so far as I could
I kept up the search for Gaston Cheverny. I never met a man from the Rhine country, nor one
who had taken part in any of the campaigns of 1733-34, of whom I did not make inquiry concerning
Gaston Cheverny.

One thing was strange and tantalizing: while it was impossible to prove that he was alive,
it was equally impossible to prove that he was dead. Nor was this an unknown man who had vanished,
but an officer of distinction, for whom the search had begun within six hours of his disappearance,
which was taken part in by Count Saxe and the armies of France and Austria, and carried on
steadily by a woman of the wit, the wealth and the resource of Francezka Capello. I have known
of strange vanishings in war, but never have I known one in the least like Gaston Cheverny's.
Regnard Cheverny seemed to have vanished, too, but his disappearance was entirely voluntary.

The only communication which was received from him was to his agent. As soon as peace was assured
this agent received orders from Regnard Cheverny to sell Castle Haret, which he presently did,
for a good round sum. It was known soon after that Regnard had resigned from the Austrian army
and had accepted a high command in the East India Company's army in British India. I concluded
that the chagrin Regnard had felt at losing Francezka was very deep and had much increased
his distaste for his native country, but on the whole, his conduct appeared both unfeeling
and ungenerous. Madame Riano oscillated between Paris and Brabant. I think the attitude of
her mind had something to do with Francezka's obstinate clinging to the belief that Gaston
Cheverny was alive and would be found. Madame Riano's belief was superstitious, pure and simple.
She actually believed that nobody married to a Kirkpatrick could be called out of this world
without ceremony. There must be all the ghostly accessories by which the exits of the Kirkpatricks
were made as imposing as the Deity could contrive--so thought she; but to Francezka it always
seemed the height of wisdom to believe Gaston Cheverny to be alive.

Much of the year 1736 we spent at Paris, and Count Saxe again occupied himself with his amusettes,
and in the invention of a wheel by which boats could be propelled through the water. The women,
I admit, still chased him vigorously; one brazen princess would not let him get the length
of a cow's tail away from her. But was this to be wondered at? Maurice of Saxe seemed to be
sent into this world to conquer all women as well as all men.

We were always lodged magnificently in Paris, at the Luxembourg, and at Versailles and Fontainebleau,
and Marly-le-Roi, when we went to court. The king could not do enough for Count Saxe, and had
already begun to consider giving him the Castle of Chambord, as he afterward did. Count Saxe
could, if he had wished, put the king's shirt on him every morning, but Count Saxe was not
a perfect courtier, after the sort described by the Regent of Orleans, who defined a perfect
courtier as a man without pride or temper. Count Saxe had both, and did not like the business
of valeting, even for kings.

He spent much time on his book, Mes Rêves, he dictating and I writing it. He also studied the
seven books on war by that Florentine secretary, Niccolo Machiavelli, who knew more about war
than any man who ever wore a black cloak. He was the first who invented the battalion formation.
Count Saxe used to say, laughing, that according to Machiavelli, I lacked an essential of a
good soldier--gaiety of heart. I always replied that the Tatars, my royal ancestors, like other
princes, had not much cause for gaiety, and that my somberness was due to the exalted rank
with which I had been invested. When I was a barefooted boy, trotting about the Marais, I was
as happy as a bird in spring.

I think Mademoiselle Lecouvreur's death had a lasting effect on Count Saxe. I ever believed
that he grieved more for her than did Voltaire, who wrote verses on her. Voltaire, at that
time, was hanging to the petticoats of that lean, brown Madame du Châtelet, who spent her time
working out Newton's Principia and henpecking Voltaire. No woman ever henpecked my master.
But I must admit Voltaire was a sorcerer, and could spur a dead horse into life. He confused
me very much about that time by asking me if the writing I was engaged upon was a life of Count
Saxe, and when I said not, the rogue remarked that he supposed I was like Amyot, who said that
he did not write the life of his various masters because he was too much attached to them.
Now, what answer is a man to make to such things?

In spite of all the distractions of Paris, Count Saxe by no means lost interest in Francezka,
and kept in constant communication with her. Madame Riano had urged Francezka to join her in
Paris, but Francezka declined to leave Brabant for two reasons why she must not stir from home;
that Gaston, if living, might find her there; and if he were dead, she preferred the seclusion
of her own home to the gaiety of Paris.

In the spring of 1737 Madame Riano was seized with the notion of going to England again. I
judge she had had enough of Scotland, that land of milk and honey, as she represented it to
be. This time she went straight to London, where she took a great house, proclaimed herself
a Jacobite, put white cockades on every one of her servants, down to the very scullions in
the kitchen, and defied Sir Robert Walpole's government to arrest her. To her cruel disappointment,
the ministry took not the least notice of her. In vain she gave balls on Prince Charles Stuart's
birthday, whom she called James III, made everybody curtsy to his portrait, which was placed
in the main lobby of her house, and never failed to revile and ridicule the Elector of Hanover,
as she called King George, and all his family. The straw that broke the camel's back was when
her coach locked wheels with that of the Duke of Newcastle, then secretary of state under Sir
Robert Walpole, and known as the greatest fool in England. It was on the way to a levee at
St. James's Palace. Madame Riano upbraided the duke for his treachery to his lawful sovereign,
King James the Third, called King George a Hanoverian rat, and then triumphantly demanded in
the face of a great crowd which collected around the combatants:

"And now, will your Grace have me arrested?"

The poor foolish duke, who stuttered and stammered fearfully, replied to this:

"M-m-m-madame, the king's orders are n-n-not to arrest anybody except p-persons of the f-f-first
consequence, M-madame!"

Fancy Madame Riano's rage! And the crowd actually cheered the duke, so we heard in Paris. This,
however, drove Scotch Peg out of London. She returned to Paris, reopened the Hôtel Kirkpatrick,
and announced that she only lived for the purpose of hurling the Hanoverian rats from the throne
of England and Scotland. My master went to call on her and took me with him. Madame Riano received
us in her usual state, which was lofty, for one of the merits which Madame Riano possessed
in common with Francezka was a perfect capacity for affairs. Madame Riano might furnish food
for laughter in Paris and London and Brabant, but her debts were always promptly paid; she
lived splendidly, but without waste, and she always had more money in her pocket than those
who laughed at her.

She was kind, if patronizing, to Count Saxe, and acted as if I were rather the more important
of the two. She delivered a long account of the outrages heaped upon her by the Elector of
Hanover, as she called George of England, which outrages, as nearly as I could make out, consisted
wholly in not having her sent to the Tower of London and tried for high treason as she ardently
desired. After the recital of Madame Riano's wrongs at the hands of the Kings of England, Spain
and France--for she had something against the last two as well as the first, and complained
that they had all treated her as if she were of no more account than the drummer's cat--the
conversation turned on Francezka. Madame Riano heard from her regularly. She was well, endeavored
to be cheerful, and held an undying hope.

Madame Riano freely declared she believed Gaston Cheverny to be still alive, but could give
no better reason for it than the belief that Omnipotence would not trifle with the life of
one connected with the Kirkpatrick family by marriage. She told us that she was going to Brabant
for the summer and later to pay a round of visits in Luxembourg. Shortly after our visit she
took her proposed departure.

That year of 1737 was an active one for Count Saxe. I could make a very pretty history of our
travels and adventures in Paris, Dresden, Leipsic, Brussels and other gay towns, but I will
not. For myself all places were alike to me, provided I was with Count Saxe or with Francezka.
I hoped eagerly that Francezka would send for me, knowing that would mean some clue to Gaston
Cheverny, but she did not. I had from her three letters, however, in which her soul shone forth.
In the spring of 1738 we were at Paris again. The women were very troublesome that year after
Count Saxe, and a gay set of rival duchesses came near driving him to drink. One night in May
he came into my chamber at midnight, and throwing himself on a chair, said:

"Babache, I am weary of this town of Paris, and there is a duchess or two that I would as lief
were somewhere else. But as they will not go, I have bethought me of our errand to Brussels.
We can travel slowly through the pleasant French country in this month of May; we can stop
at the château of Capello and see that matchless Francezka, and for a little while we can live
like men, instead of courtiers. What do you think of this?"

I thought it well; my heart leaped at the mention of the château of Capello. It was arranged
that we should not give the least hint where we were going. In fact, I was instructed to say
that we were going to the Pyrenees, and the story took so well that both the duchesses sent
their private spies to Spain to find out what my master was doing there. Meanwhile we were
on the high road to Brabant.

No one was with Count Saxe except myself and Beauvais. We left Paris on a spring morning, very
like the one so many years before when I had been led out to be shot. We traveled briskly,
and at every step that we left the duchesses behind my master's spirits rose. As we had given
out that this journey was to the Pyrenees, the ladies sent their couriers with their love-letters
in the wrong direction, and Count Saxe did not get a single love-letter between Paris and Brussels,
and his health and spirits visibly improved. Trust a woman of rank for hounding a man to death.

We sent word ahead to the château of Capello of our coming, and planned to arrive about sunset.
The country of Brabant is everywhere beautiful, rich and well tilled, but the estate of Capello
was the most beautiful, the richest and the best tilled of any we saw. Francezka had not increased
the park land, rightly thinking she had no right to reduce the arable land of the peasants,
but she had made them keep their cottages like the cottages of a theater scene, and she had
planted most charming hedges of roses and of lilacs, and other beautiful plants and trees.
I think I never saw anything lovelier than the rich meadow, where cows were grazing, almost
encircled by a lilac hedge, with occasional rose trees; and the cows had sense enough to prefer
the rich grass to the thorny roses or tough lilac foliage. This was characteristic of Francezka.
She loved beauty, as a Spaniard does, but this love was tempered by that stern Scotch sense
which does not lose sight of what is useful.

Count Saxe had not seen the château since 1732, and he, too, was lost in admiration at the
beauty, order and fruitfulness of it all. The windows of the château blazed in the sinking
sun when we crossed the stone bridge, dismounted, and walked up the steps of the terrace. Francezka
met us on the highest terrace. She wore, as when I had last seen her, a rich Spanish costume
of black, but not of mourning. She was then in her twenty-seventh year, and was in the full
perfection of her charms. She received us joyfully, gave Count Saxe her cheek to kiss and me
her hand, and thanked us for coming to see her. Bold was still her inseparable companion, and
barked a joyful welcome to me.

As I had noted in her, after she had married Gaston Cheverny, a new and sweet humility, so
I now saw a new development of gentle patience and quiet courage. She had taken up at last
the burden of anxiety which is a part of every creature's burden on this earth, and she bore
it more sweetly than would have been thought possible by one who knew how dazzlingly happy
and brilliant her path had been heretofore. Unlike most persons whose lives and fortunes are
dedicated to a single pursuit, Francezka had not become ill balanced or fanciful. I thought
I had never seen her more dignified or sensible than when she presided at supper that night.

She was perfectly informed on public affairs in Europe, being naturally a great reader, and
the retired life she led inclining her the more to reading. She blushed with pleasure at Count
Saxe's compliments upon her acquirements. But Francezka, in spite of all changes, was still
Francezka. She knew perfectly well how to entertain a great man like Count Saxe. While we supped
she had musicians in the gallery, who sang a song recounting Count Saxe's triumphs in war.
My master listened with pleasure, the greater when Francezka admitted that she was the author
of both the words and the music. In her voluntary retirement she had cultivated gifts that
would have lain fallow had she kept her place in the world.

Old Peter waited on us, as usual, at supper. There was something in his response to my inquiry
after his health which was more cheerful than I had seen in him for years. I was not surprised,
therefore, when Francezka whispered to me, during Peter's absence from the room, that poor
little Lisa had returned.

Madame Chambellan was still of Francezka's household, but being, as I think, incurably lazy,
she kept her room and asked to be excused to us, which we cheerfully granted.

When supper was over it was still warm enough to go out of doors, so Francezka led the way
to that well-remembered spot, the Italian garden, and there, under the solemn yew trees, and
looking down upon the somber lake, dark, although the twilight was still mellow, we sat and
talked with the joy and peace of friends after a long separation. Bold, of course, was of the
party, and continued to honor me with his friendship.

The first thing Count Saxe asked Francezka was, if she had any news of Gaston. Francezka shook
her head.

"But I have not given up hope; if I did I should throw myself into the lake. And, after all,
what does any search amount to, after my discovery that my lord was alive and present in a
place which had been searched a dozen times in three months? Could any wife give up hope after
that? No! All I can do is to wait and watch and hope and pray and work, for work I do, that
when my husband returns he may find a wife to his taste. I read somewhere lately that Hesiod,
an old Greek, said that the gods have placed labor as a sentinel over virtue. As long as I
work and stay quietly at home no one can slander me, no one can accuse me, and I can live my
own life of work, study and prayer."

Count Saxe looked at her in silent admiration. There was something heroic in the steady fight
this woman was making for her love. She told us that she still spent a great part of her income
in promoting the search for Gaston Cheverny. She acknowledged that much of this money went
to deceitful and designing persons, who professed to have information to sell which was no
information at all, but as Francezka said coolly, she would rather spend her fortune in that
way than in any other. Then she told us about Lisa's return.

"Jacques Haret, it seems, had deserted her after six months," said Francezka, "and poor, doglike
Lisa followed him for almost a year from place to place, not to force herself on him, but only
to get a glimpse of his face. Think of such love being wasted on Jacques Haret! Think of such
devotion to him as old Peter's! Well, Lisa, at last, came face to face with Jacques Haret.
He spoke to her, gave her a silver snuff-box in default of money, and when she threw it away
before his face, the only act of spirit I ever knew in her, Jacques Haret laughed at her. That
stung even her patient soul.

"She fled from him, and in her despair thought to drown herself. She was stricken with remorse
at her thought, however, and little by little the desire to kill herself departed. Then the
longing to see poor old Peter and her home overcame everything, and she turned her face toward
Brabant. It took her long, of course, to reach here; she was quite on the other side of Paris;
she had to live and to work, but with steady purpose she came toward Brabant. One evening,
in the late winter, when Peter went home, he found Lisa sitting in rags by the fire. She fell
on her knees before him and was forgiven in a breath.

"Next morning Peter came to me, and, with tears, implored me not to send Lisa too far away.
He was overwhelmed when I told him she might stay in the cottage. Poor Lisa! If all sinners
were as penitent! Father Benart is kind to her, and the poor soul works and prays. Some of
the people in the parish are indignant with Father Benart, and with me, too, for countenancing
Lisa, but they have not so far ventured to speak to me on the subject. If they did--" Francezka
turned her head with an air that showed that neither sorrow nor disappointment had impaired
the lofty martial spirit she had inherited from the Kirkpatricks.

She also told us that Madame Riano was absent upon her tour of visits, but would return within
a fortnight. That night, before we slept, Count Saxe told me he did not propose to remain long
enough to encounter Peggy Kirkpatrick.

CHAPTER XXV

A DISCOMFITED BISHOP

Next morning, as usual, I was up early, and walked down to the village. There I found Father
Benart, the good little man, just coming out of the church. He told me he had got word that
his brother, the bishop, was coming to visit him and Madame Cheverny that day, and he knew
a sharp disappointment was in store for the bishop when he should find Madame Riano absent.
Then Father Benart asked me some very intelligent questions about Count Saxe's exploits in
the Rhine campaigns. As we talked we walked along a narrow road by a field, in which some women
were at work, digging and planting. Among the workers I recognized at once the unfortunate
Lisa. She was poorly but cleanly clad, and although it was plain she labored hard, she was
inexpert, and did not accomplish a great deal.

All of the women, except Lisa, were coarse peasant women, with stout arms and legs, broad backs,
and but little inferior in physical strength to men. Lisa, on the contrary, was more delicate,
more thin and pale than she had ever been before. She worked steadily, neither turning to the
right nor to the left, not even when one of the women pointed to her and uttered a jeer, which
was greeted with coarse laughter. Her pale face colored faintly, but she made no response,
going on with her work. Father Benart opened his mouth to call out a reproof to the women,
who joined in taunting the unfortunate girl, but changed his mind.

"No," he said aloud, "it is just that she should bear her punishment, and this public shame
may save some other girl from the same downward path, but God is more merciful than man."

While we were standing in the road beside the field we saw a great, lumbering coach approaching,
which the little priest at once recognized as that of his brother, the bishop. His Grace had
not been expected until the afternoon, but here he was at eight o'clock in the morning. I suspected
the bishop had not enjoyed a very good lodging the night before. When the coach drew near we
saw the bishop sitting in it alone. As soon as it was close enough it was stopped, and the
bishop called to his brother, invited him to step within, and recognizing me as the Tatar prince
with whom he was acquainted, extended the same civility to me. We both accepted and mounted
into the coach, which proceeded toward the château of Capello, where his Grace said he was
going on a particular errand. I fancied the bishop preferred the cookery of the château to
that of Father Benart's housekeeper.

His Grace had sharp eyes, and had observed the scene going on in the fields, about which he
inquired. Father Benart told him it was Lisa, with whose story the bishop was perfectly acquainted.

"That is one of the things that I wish especially to speak to you about," said the bishop to
Father Benart, in the tone of a schoolmaster and without regarding my presence in the least.
"My brother, it is with grief that I learn of what has been going on in your parish of late,
of the sin and evil behavior."

"Alas, my brother," responded Father Benart gravely, "there is always sin and evil behavior
of some sort in this parish, and I greatly fear, until mankind is totally changed from what
it has ever been, that a certain portion of sin and evil behavior must abide with us."

The bishop scowled.

"I fear you do not precisely understand me, brother. I refer particularly to the case of Peter
Embden's niece, who, I hear, has returned here, and has not only had all her sins forgiven,
but forgotten, as it were. And I recognize the girl yonder flaunting her shame in the face
of honest women."

Father Benart silently pointed out of the coach window to Lisa in the distance, her thin form
outlined against the bright sky of a May morning. She was a picture of patience and penitence.
The bishop, however, although he was not a cruel man, loved to scold, and proceeded to harangue
Father Benart, who listened patiently and replied:

"The unfortunate girl is a shining example of God's grace. She tells me--and I have ever found
her truthful, having known her from her infancy--that finding herself deserted by that villain
of villains, Jacques Haret, she had but one thought--to drown herself--and, as she walked along
the brink of a river with this thought in her heart, God's light came to her; she saw it would
be but to heap sin on sin, and a voice within her bade her return to her uncle, who had suffered
so much for her sin. And so, struggling against the Spirit of Evil, which made her dread this
place worse than any in the world, she came back; came back half starved, half clothed, and
arriving at nightfall, went to Peter Embden's door, and offered to go or to stay, as he should
wish. And he, a gentle and forgiving man, bade her, as did our Lord and Saviour, to sin no
more, and took her again under his roof. Then, coming early next morning to ask of me what
he should do, being greatly troubled in his mind, I said to him to treat this poor sinner as
he himself would wish to be treated at the Last Day. So he has given her bread and shelter since."

"Very reprehensible," cried the bishop. "Such lapses should be punished, punished with severity,
and Madame Cheverny, wilful and impractical woman that she is, disdaining advice from all,
abetted you in this, for the girl could not have remained in Peter's house without Madame Cheverny's
consent."

"True," said Father Benart. "Of course Peter was obliged to ask Madame Cheverny's consent.
I did not even think it necessary to remind him of that. And as to Madame Cheverny's asking
advice, I know of no one who has managed affairs so successfully as Madame Cheverny. We might
all of us ask advice of her in many things."

The air of humility with which the little priest said this convinced me that he was a wit disguised
in his rusty cassock. The bishop did not relish the implication in his brother's speech, and
resumed with some choler.

"I presume that headstrong woman, Peggy Kirkpatrick, who wishes to be thought Jove in petticoats,
went about the parish counseling all the young women to follow Lisa Embden's example."

"I can not inform you on that point, brother," replied Father Benart, "I have not cognizance
of all Madame Riano says and does."

"She is a great trial of my patience," said the bishop. "She is the thorn in my flesh like
unto the one that St. Paul prayed seven times that he might be delivered from. I should come
oftener to the château of Capello, but for the unpleasant chance of meeting Peggy Kirkpatrick."

"You will not meet her this time, brother. She is in Luxembourg."

At once the bishop's countenance fell, but he recovered himself sufficiently to express satisfaction
that Madame Riano was in Luxembourg. He then went on to say, taking me as well as his brother
into his confidence, that one object of his visit was to induce Francezka to give up all hope
of her husband's return, and, putting on mourning, to comport herself as a widow should. I
could not help compassionating the bishop when he said this, knowing what he was likely to
receive. He consulted with Father Benart whether he should admonish Francezka in public or
in private. Father Benart reflected a moment before he answered. We were then driving along
the splendid avenue of lindens toward the château, which sat in fairy beauty on its terraces,
the morning sun gilding its white façade, the canal sparkling in the light, the grass freshly
green--all, all, lovely to excess. After a pause, Father Benart spoke:

"It is a painful and delicate subject, brother, and but little can be safely said upon it.
I think it best, perhaps, if you are determined to speak, to do so in the presence of a third
person."

The little priest told me afterward, that he was afraid, if the bishop undertook to harangue
Francezka in private, he would get such a reception that his ears would burn for a week; and
he looked to the third person to restrain Francezka's tongue, which was somewhat free on all
occasions.

By that time we had dismounted from the coach. Francezka was not awaiting the bishop at the
top of the terrace, which seemed to annoy him. He forgot that he had arrived some hours in
advance of the time.

Count Saxe, however, was strolling about enjoying the fragrance of the morning. The bishop
had not seen him since our return from Courland, and, by some accident, had never been enlightened
as to his real name and rank. It was not without secret amusement that I introduced him to
the bishop, who instantly recognized his old acquaintance. His Grace was a moving sight at
the moment. His face fell, his eye wandered aimlessly around as he muttered to himself:

"Count Saxe--Count Saxe--and is it possible I did not know that he was Count Saxe?"

"I think not, Monseigneur," replied Count Saxe, "else your Grace would not have criticized
my expedition into Courland so freely before my face."

The bishop's chagrin was a little mitigated by Francezka's appearance at that moment. She greeted
him courteously, apologized for her delay in appearing, and had old Peter to show the bishop
to his apartment, where he might repose himself until dinner time. Count Saxe made some excuse
to be absent from dinner, and when the hour came, only Francezka, the bishop, Father Benart,
Madame Chambellan and myself sat down together.

As soon as it was over, and we had retired to the red saloon, the bishop intimated he had something
of a particular nature to say to Francezka.

"Then, will your Grace say it here?" said Francezka, who knew the bishop's propensity for haranguing,
and reckoned, as Father Benart had done in her own case, upon Father Benart to restrain the
bishop. She continued: "All of the friends present are close to me, and conversant with my
affairs--hence, no harm can come of your Grace's speaking openly."

I saw the calmness of her manner, and her air of gentle expectancy somewhat disconcerted the
bishop, who perhaps found women disconcerting creatures.

"Madame, my friend," began the bishop, following the advice of Horatius Flaccus, and plunging
into the middle of things, "I have come upon a painful errand. Reproof is always painful to me."

"Yes, your Grace."

As Francezka said this, there was a gleam in her eyes like laughter. And Père Benart took out
his handkerchief and coughed violently.

"Reproof, I say, is painful to me," repeated the bishop blandly, "but I should be a renegade
to my duty, if I spared you, my child, in order to spare myself. First, I must complain of
the actual encouragement you give to vice by permitting that niece of Peter Embden's to remain
in his house, which is your property."

"I do it, your Grace," replied Francezka, sweetly, and with a glance at Father Benart, "by
the express advice of my director."

And then, with folded hands, she sat demurely looking down, and leaving Father Benart to shoulder
the burden alone. The good bishop saw that he had two recalcitrants to deal with instead of
one; so, like other weak, well-meaning men, he resorted to bluster when reason did not suggest
itself to him.

"It is my opinion," he said, raising his voice, "that Lisa Embden should be sent out of this
parish--sent to some city, where her past is not known, and where she can give no scandal."

Francezka turned sweetly to her accomplice, and said:

"You hear that, Father Benart? The bishop looks to you to enforce this."

Father Benart said not a word, but raising his eyes to the ceiling, seemed to be absorbed either
in prayer or in uncomplimentary speculation about his brother. The bishop, who was not quite
a fool, saw that he had not gained his point. He then charged again, but this time against
another position.

"We will speak later of this affair of Lisa. To come now to something more nearly concerning
yourself. While your loyal devotion to your husband, and your constant expectation of his return,
do your heart infinite honor, Madame, it is not equally flattering to your head. As Swift,
an English writer says, reason goes to cuffs with imagination, and fancy gets astride of judgment.
For, distressing as it is to me to say it, I must tell you that Monsieur Gaston Cheverny will
never return."

Francezka grew a little pale at these words, but rallied after a moment, speaking courteously.

"Such is your Grace's opinion. But you can not expect Gaston Cheverny's wife to be the first
to give up hoping for him."

"By no means. But--Madame Cheverny--you are a widow--and you should conduct yourself as such.
You should put on mourning, and place the affairs of your husband before the courts, that they
may be settled. In short--pardon the form in which I put it--but you are a widow and should
conduct yourself as such."

"In that case, I should be at liberty to marry again," coolly remarked Francezka. "Would your
Grace recommend me to that?"

The bishop fairly jumped from his chair.

"Great God! No, Madame! It would give frightful scandal!"

"But, Monseigneur, you say that I am a widow--that I should wear mourning. At least be consistent."

The bishop, swelling with wrath, rose and walked twice, thrice up and down the room. I fancied
he was saying in his mind--Was there ever so vexatious a creature as this Francezka? She never
had any proper respect for authority! And there sat that easy young brother of his, smiling
at his discomfiture--the discomfiture of a bishop!

Francezka remained silent for a little while, and when she spoke it was with seriousness.

"Your Grace asks me to give up the hope on which I live. I can not do it. My husband may be
dead, but I have not been able to secure the smallest proof of it. It has been four years since
he disappeared. But we know of strange disappearances lasting much longer. And can you ask
me--his wife, who adores him--to believe him dead unless I have proof of it? No! a thousand
times no!"

She rose and her face and eyes were flooded with color and light, as she stood facing the bishop.

"Do not again speak to me of putting on mourning. When I do that, then indeed is life over
for me--all hope, all joy, forever dead. And do you suppose I care that idle people wonder
at me? I am too busy to care for anything but my husband's return; I have my estates to manage--a
heavy task for a woman. And I am determined that if my husband returns, he shall find not only
a great estate to his hand, but an accomplished wife to his mind. Look at this proof of my
study and endeavor!"

She threw open the door which communicated with the little yellow room, where she spent most
of her time. The walls were lined with books, and there were several musical instruments in
the room.

"There do I read and study daily. Gaston Cheverny was ever fond of books--fonder than I, carried
away as I was with the pleasures of life. He must often have felt the want of knowledge on
my part. He shall not feel it so, when he returns. And does your Grace see yonder harpsichord?
When my husband last saw me, I played but fairly well on it. Now, I spend a part of every day
before it, and I am a skilled performer. And I dress every day in silk--for Gaston's sake.
For he may come to me at any moment, and I do not wish him to find me a frowsy creature, but
a wife worthy of him. To be that, I must be ever well dressed, well read, well behaved--such,
I hope I am."

The flood of her vehemence arrested the bishop's impatient walk. Father Benart sighed a little,
as any one might, at this poor, human heart of Francezka's, laid bare, and beating desperately
against the fate that seemed closing around her. Neither one of them spoke immediately, nor
did I. No one of us present knew how to answer Francezka. After a considerable pause, the bishop
said, not unkindly:

"I perceive my counsel has been in vain. I must depart."

Francezka, then, mindful of her duties as chatelaine, pressed him to remain, or at least to
take some refreshment before leaving. To the last he agreed.

Peter, in response to a ring of the bell, brought a tray, with wine and glasses. At the first
sip of wine, the bishop's countenance cleared. He was a judge of wines and that in his glass
was worthy even of the Bishop of Louvain.

"This is admirable--the best of the Mosel vineyards," he said.

"Yes," sweetly replied Francezka. "I stocked the cellar last year with good wine at a reasonable
price--" which she named.

The bishop blinked his eyes at her. How came it, that she, a woman, should have so good a head?
And being practical in the purchase of wine and the management of affairs should be so impractical
concerning her missing husband? However, the bishop would depart, so he said adieu to us all,
and accompanied by Father Benart, went away, to spend the night at the priest's house.

I made no remark about the bishop's visit, but I saw that it was not without its effect on
Francezka, in spite of her spirited protest to his Grace. She was more silent all of that day
than I had yet seen her, and there was a heart-breaking look in her eyes that went to my heart,
and also to the heart of the dog, Bold; for, seeing her pensive, he rose from his place at
her feet, and laid his head, with a little whine of sympathy, upon her lap. For once, Francezka
forgot to notice him. Her eyes were fixed on something afar which yet she saw not, and I heard
her murmur:

"Oh, my tired heart!"

Father Benart told me afterward, the conclusion of the bishop's concern about Lisa. The little
priest did not tell it me exactly as I repeat it; but what I had seen of his Grace supplied
all details. His defeat at Francezka's hands determined him on punishing somebody, and Father
Benart and Lisa being convenient, they became the natural objects of the bishop's righteous
indignation. In the evening, after his arrival at his brother's house, the bishop told Father
Benart that he felt it his duty to speak to Lisa Embden--he was fearful that the girl's soul
would be lost for want of counsel and reproof. Father Benart, without protesting, said that
he would send for Lisa in the morning. Next morning, when the bishop was having his breakfast
in the garden, Lisa appeared. This brazen creature, as the bishop chose to esteem her, looked
anything but brazen. With every indication of privations undergone, and with her poor clothes,
Lisa was a very good exemplification that the wages of sin is death.

The bishop calling up his sternest accents said:

"I know what your sin has been--are you truly penitent for it?"

Lisa made a faint sound, indicating her penitence.

"And are you willing to do penance for it?"

Lisa inclined her head, and trembled.

"Your sin has been very great. Your behavior no doubt was light, such as to encourage Jacques
Haret or any other evil man."

Lisa raised her eyes to the bishop's face, and said gently:

"Sir, I can not say that. However wicked I was, at least I was not wicked in that way."

"But you must have been," replied the bishop, with the calm confidence of ignorance. "And the
misery you endured while persisting in your sinful courses, was God's punishment."

"But, sir," said Lisa, still calmly, "I was not miserable then. I was the happiest of God's
creatures."

"Impossible!" cried the bishop, starting from his chair, as he had done the day before, in
the interview with that other obstinate woman, Francezka Cheverny.

Lisa did not contradict the bishop, but the bishop saw that his denial of the fact had not
really affected that fact.

"Do you mean to tell me," thundered the bishop, "that you were happy in the society of your
partner in guilt?"

"Yes, sir."

The bishop dropped back in his chair. What problems were these parish affairs anyway! Here
was a girl, persisting in saying she had been happy in guilt, when the bishop knew--or thought
he knew--that all sinners were miserable!

"But at least you are not happy now?"

"No, sir."

"And why?"

"Because," replied poor Lisa, with the utmost simplicity, "I can never see Monsieur Jacques
Haret again."

"You may go."

Lisa turned and walked rapidly away.

Soon after that I passed through the village, and noticed the bishop's coach in front of the
priest's modest house. The two brothers were coming out of the door. Father Benart was saying:

"There are many inexplicable things in a country parish, my brother. It is not in my power
to make Lisa Embden, or any other creature, feel happiness in the pursuit of good. If I can
keep them a little out of the path of evil, it is all I can hope for."

"I am of the belief," cried the bishop, "that one self-willed and unruly woman like Peggy Kirkpatrick
can put insubordination into the head of a young woman, like Francezka Cheverny--Francezka,
in her turn, can implant it in her dependents. There seems to be a general lack of discipline
among the women in your parish, brother."

"True," replied Father Benart, "and I take it that Madame Riano is to blame for Lisa Embden's
lapse from virtue."

The bishop glared at his brother--Father Benart standing, smiling and blinking in the sun.
The bishop then noticed me, but I was no restraint upon him, for he plunged into a long and
severe discourse upon the evils Father Benart was bringing upon his parish by allowing the
women in it to do pretty much as they pleased. Father Benart meekly excused himself by saying
that he could not help it. The bishop, however, showed that he had not a bad heart, by leaving
a dozen gold louis, which he directed should be spent on the poor of the parish--at the same
time sternly commanding that not one penny should be spent on the chief of sinners, Lisa Embden.
Father Benart accepted this dole with a twinkle in his eye and solemnly promised that Lisa
should not have a penny of it.

But a few days more remained of our stay. It passed quietly, in sweet and gentle converse,
and with books and music. The change continued in Francezka after the bishop's visit. He was
a man of little weight, and she had frankly treated him as such, but his belief that Gaston
Cheverny was no more, which she had treated with scorn, had yet left its impress on her; perhaps
because people of more sense than the bishop had been more guarded and tender with her. But
when we bade her good by, she said to us:

"Remember, Count Saxe and Babache, if you are my friends, you will never forget to make inquiry
of each and every person you meet, from whom it would be possible to hear of my husband. For
myself, once, every day, shall I go to the spot in the Italian garden which overlooks the highroad,
to watch for my heart's desire--and if he never returns--"

Her eyes, as she said this, grew dark with melancholy, but there was still an undying courage
shining in them. Poor, poor Francezka!

CHAPTER XXVI

COME AND REJOICE

We went on to Brussels; but though my body was in Brussels, my soul was still at the château
of Capello. I had not the slightest doubt in my own mind that Gaston Cheverny was dead, and
the spectacle of this poor Francezka, with her passionate faithfulness, unable to part with
that lingering ghost of hope, was enough to touch any heart. It deeply touched Count Saxe's.
He was the last man on earth to forget that through devotion to him Gaston Cheverny had been
lost, and I believe he would have given his right arm could Gaston Cheverny have been found.

By the time we got to Brussels, the women in Paris had found out where Count Saxe was, and
a bushel of love letters awaited him--which spoiled that place for us. We went as far as Dresden,
and going to Strasburg, returned to Paris by that road, without passing near Brabant. In fact,
two whole years passed without my seeing Francezka; and when I saw her--but no more--

Many things happened to Count Saxe in those years, the most important being the gift of the
Castle of Chambord with an income to support it, and the promise of being made Marshal of France
if he were successful in the war which was bound to break out soon, and actually did break
out in 1741. This gift of Chambord was made in January of 1740. The king always had a fear
that he might lose Count Saxe's services, for the Courland business haunted my master--that
dream of a throne and a crown never quite left him. For that reason Louis XV determined to
attach Count Saxe permanently to France; and this royal gift of Chambord, with its vast estates,
its forests, fields and parks, made Count Saxe at once the ruler of a principality.

There had been some hints of this, and Count Saxe had told me privately that he would not accept
any gift from the king, unless coupled with the promise of the marshalship in the event of
a successful campaign. I can say of my own knowledge that Count Saxe would rather be Marshal
of France than to own Chambord, with Versailles and the Louvre thrown in as makeweights.

On that January day, when Count Saxe was sent for to Fontainebleau to receive this kingly present,
I was with him. He was summoned to the king's closet by Marshal, the Duc de Noailles--the one
who always called my master "My Saxe." As soon as Count Saxe disappeared, I was left in the
anteroom with the mob of ladies and gentlemen; they flocked about me. They knew that a great
honor for Count Saxe was impending, and by some strange logic, they persuaded themselves that
they were entitled to share in it, and they looked upon me as a shoeing horn. I was "good Babache"
to people I had never seen before. My health, all at once, seemed to become of consequence
to everybody at Fontainebleau; and the proverb that a beggar, on falling into a fortune, has
neither relations nor friends, was speedily disproved. I found I had hosts of friends, and
no doubt could have found some relations if I had tried. Courtiers are very childlike creatures
after all. The continual frank pursuit of their own interests brings them back to the starting
point of a savage, who does not see or know anything beyond to-day and its wants.

Among the waiting crowd was Monsieur Voltaire. I had seen him several times in the preceding
two years. He always greeted me civilly--a tribute I think to the poor lost Adrienne, whom
none who knew her could forget. On this day, however, Voltaire eyed me somewhat superciliously,
and I protest I relished it by contrast with the smirks and bows and smiles and honeyed words
lavished upon me by others in hopes of an invitation to Chambord.

My master remained with the king a full half hour. When he came out, he was accompanied, as
when he went in, by the old marshal, Duc de Noailles. As soon as I saw Count Saxe's face, I
knew that something more and better had befallen him than a life interest in a great estate.
His eyes, the brightest and clearest in the world, sought me out, and by a look, he brought
me to his side, the people making way readily enough--real princes cheerfully taking the wall
for this Tatar prince born in the Marais! When I got quite close to my master, he whispered
in my ear:

"Marshal of France, if successful!"

I felt myself grow hot with joy. Marshal of France! How much greater was that than a huge pile
of stone like Chambord!

The Duc de Noailles was then giving out the news, and, turning to my master, the white-haired
marshal embraced him as a brother in arms. But I had been the first one told by my master.

The ladies and gentlemen all showed great joy and complaisance. They knew that Count Saxe was
not the man to do things by halves, and that at Chambord the gay days of Francis the First
and the escadrons volants would be gloriously renewed. I watched Monsieur Voltaire, as with
his wonderful and unforgettable eyes he gazed upon Count Saxe and probably reflected on the
difference of the reward given a successful general and a great wit--for I am not denying that
Monsieur Voltaire possessed a very considerable share of wit. He was among the last to congratulate
my master, but he did it finally, winding up a fine compliment with this:

"And now, Monsieur, I presume you will be elected to the seat in the Academy. You shall have
my vote. You can always spell victory--and what matters the rest?"

This was the meanest allusion possible to my master's never having time or inclination to devote
to such common things as spelling. But Count Saxe came back at him thus:

"Oh, no, Monsieur Voltaire. I am not a candidate for a seat in the Academy. I am pledged to
support a friend of mine for the vacancy."

All the people pricked up their ears and Monsieur Voltaire was the most eager of them all.

"My candidate," said Count Saxe very impressively, "is Captain Babache"--here he whacked me
on the shoulder--"a prince of the royal blood of Tatary, who can spell like any clerk, and
write a better hand than any academician, living or dead, ever did."

Monsieur Voltaire was a picture. The people present shouted with laughter--Monsieur Voltaire
never was very popular at court--and my master grinned, and I felt myself grow weak in the
knees with all those laughing eyes fixed on me. It was said afterward, that some of the Academicians
were sore over this joke of Count Saxe's. I had my turn at Monsieur Voltaire shortly after,
for having occasion to write him a note in my master's name, I directed it in full to "Monsieur
François Marie Voltaire, Member of the French Academy"--which he was not until some time afterward--"at
the house of Madame du Châtelet, on the Isle of St. Louis, Paris." "Voltaire, Paris," would
have taken any letter straight to him, but I chose to assume that very explicit directions
were necessary to reach him, as if he were quite unknown, and difficult to find. It made him
very angry, so I heard, and that was what I meant it for.

The whole of that winter and spring, I spent running to and fro between Paris and Chambord,
for it is no easy thing to get in order such an establishment as Count Saxe set up, in that
vast palace. There were four hundred rooms, and thirteen grand staircases, to say nothing of
the smaller ones, and there was stabling for twelve hundred horses. The king had given Count
Saxe permission to increase his body-guard of Uhlans, in view of the war known to be coming,
and all these men and horses had to be assigned to their proper quarters, and provided for
otherwise. The hunting establishment alone required the services of more than a hundred men;
for there were wolves and wild boars to be hunted besides smaller game, in the forests of Chambord,
and the plains of Salon. It is in this region that Thibaut of Champagne, so the peasants believe,
follows his ghostly hunt. Often, at midnight, the winding of his horn echoes through the darkness
of the forest, and the cry of his dogs from the nether world rings to the night sky--so say
the peasants. I never saw or heard this supernatural hunt.

With the internal management of the castle I had nothing to do. Beauvais was promoted to be
maître d'hôtel, and a hard enough time he had, losing, in one year, a very good head of hair
over it. The only authority I was made to assume was over the pages of honor. There were ten
of these brats, all dressed in yellow silk breeches and waistcoats, and black velvet coats,
and they gave me more trouble, grief and perplexity than my whole battalion of Uhlans. Will
it be believed that these little rascals in yellow silk, of whom the eldest was barely fourteen,
kept me perpetually in anxiety about fighting duels among themselves?

They would beg, borrow or steal rapiers, and sneaking away by night or in the early morning,
would fight on the edge of the moat on a little embankment, from which they were extremely
likely to tumble into the water, if they missed each other's swordpoints. I could not cure
them of it, but whenever I caught them I cuffed them soundly. They made great outcry over this,
being of the best blood of France. But when they ran with their tales to my master--particularly
one little Boufflers, who was about to run me through--my master always told them that I was
of the royal blood of Tatary; so it was rather an honor, than a disgrace, for me to lay hands
on them.

Let it not be supposed that all these labors and perplexities put Francezka out of my mind
for one hour. Nor had Count Saxe forgotten her. He caused me to write to her more than once,
and delicately intimated a desire that she would honor Chambord at some time with her presence.
I little thought when I wrote that letter that Francezka would be likely to see Chambord. But
events were moving silently but swiftly, and when I least expected it--when Francezka's sad
fate seemed fixed; when her life had apparently adjusted itself finally, a great, a stupendous
change was at hand. It came suddenly but quietly, and the news of it met us at the last place
and from the last person one might possibly expect. It was May, when being overtaken by sunset
on the way to Paris, and the horses being tired, Count Saxe and myself stopped at a little
roadside inn, just one stage from Paris. Count Saxe had not even a servant with him, thinking
to spend only a few hours in Paris and then to return at once to Chambord.

The inn was a plain, but comfortable place, with good wine, and excellent plain fare. After
supper, Count Saxe, being weary, went to bed, the innkeeper valeting him, while I remained
out of doors. The evening was softly beautiful. The sun was slowly disappearing; it was not
far from eight o'clock, and the sky was all red and gold and amber. The rich and quiet landscape
was not unlike that of Capello, though far from being so rich and so lovely. It was the sweet
hour at which I always thought of Francezka, the hour she always kept her vigil in the Italian
garden--a vigil that had seemed to me to be taking the form of remembrance of the dead, rather
than expectation of the living. And knowing exactly what she was doing at that hour often produced
in me a sense of nearness to Francezka.

On this evening she seemed to hover near me, and it was not the Francezka I had last seen,
the bravely patient, the undyingly courageous; but the Francezka of her first wild, sweet youth,
high-hearted, all fire and dew, laughter and tears, haughty and merry--the Francezka who claimed
happiness as her right. And with this presence near me, and her voice ringing in my ears, I
was suddenly brought back to this earth by seeing before me the unwelcome face of Jacques Haret.

I had not seen the scoundrel for four years, and never wished to see him again. He was sitting
at a table in the garden of the inn--for I had unconsciously wandered from the orchard into
the garden. He looked more prosperous than I had ever seen him, being well dressed all over,
and for the first time evidently in clothes made for him. I was for passing on with a brief
word, when he stopped me.

"Have you heard the great news?" he asked. "No, of course you have not. Gaston Cheverny has
been found. I compute that he reached the château of Capello this afternoon--probably at this
very hour."

The earth began to rock under my feet, the heavens broke into long waves of light, as if the
oceans and a million voices were shouting in my ear at once. In the midst of all this, Jacques
Haret's cool, musical voice continued:

"Yes. He should reach there about this time. And a tragedy may have preceded him--Madame Cheverny
may have driven a nail into the eye of Count Bellegarde, as Jael did to Sisera, or cut off
his head and put it in a bag, as Judith did that of Holofernes. For Bellegarde--the greatest
fool alive--told me that on this date he meant to go to Capello and make a formal offer of
his hand to the supposed widow, and by the blessing of God he hoped to own Capello. I have
just come from Brabant, you see. I advised Bellegarde to make his will and to repent of his
sins before going on such an errand, for Madame Cheverny has the spirit of all the Kirkpatricks
in her beautiful body, and is dangerous when roused."

While Jacques Haret was speaking, I recovered my composure, although my soul was in storm and
tumult, but I could not ask one of the thousand questions burning upon my lips. Then I saw
a figure approaching, hatless and unpowdered, and wrapped in a bed coverlet. It was Count Saxe.
He had not gone to sleep, and hearing through his open window Jacques Haret's tale, had sprung
from his bed and rushed into the garden. Next to Francezka, Count Saxe, of all the world, wished
Gaston Cheverny to be found for reasons easily understood. He called out as he stalked forward
in his bed coverlet:

"Do you know anything else about it?"

"Nothing," replied Jacques, thrusting his hands in his pockets; "but it has ruined Bellegarde's
chances of living at Capello, the palace of delights."

"And some one else has come back to Capello," I added. "Lisa, Peter Embden's niece."

Not by the flicker of an eyelash did Jacques Haret show any shame at the mention of the unfortunate
girl's name, or of poor old Peter's. Count Saxe, however, standing a little way off, and gesticulating
in his coverlet, cried loudly:

"Jacques Haret, you are the blackest villain, cheat, scoundrel, rogue and rapscallion yet unhung.
The jail yawns for you, the gallows yearns for you. May they both get you!"

"Thanks, Monsieur," replied Jacques Haret; "I am as God made me--and He makes men different.
As Monsieur Voltaire said of your Excellency, 'God has not seen fit to give wings to the donkey.'
God has not seen fit to make me like the founder of La Trappe. That is all."

Count Saxe turned to me:

"Get post-horses, Babache. We must go to Paris this night; no doubt there are letters for us.
This news, if it be true, is worth a hundred thousand crowns to me."

The innkeeper got horses for us, and we started for Paris in a ramshackle chaise. Jacques Haret
watched our departure with the greatest interest and entirely at his ease.

When I was stepping into the chaise, I called out to him, as he stood on the grass, in the
shadowy light:

"I have not time now to give you a good beating, Jacques Haret. But when next we meet, I promise
it to you, and will let nothing interfere with my engagement."

"Thanks," replied Jacques, "I have been promised not less than a million of beatings and have
not yet got the first one. Adieu."

As we jolted along through the May night, all sorts of agitating thoughts poured into my mind
about Francezka. She was at that moment, probably, in a heaven of her own making; for, be it
observed, I doubted not in the least that Jacques Haret knew what he was talking about. I was
somewhat surprised that he knew in advance of Gaston's arrival, but that was easily accounted
for. Gaston would not travel incognito, and the news must have flown in advance of him.

Count Saxe, lying back in his corner of the chaise, talked of Gaston, of his manliness, his
courage, his charm; and of Francezka, whom he could not praise enough. I saw that a cloud had
passed from his life with Gaston's return. He told me that Francezka's face haunted him, and
the absence of any reproach on her part for the imprudence which led to Gaston's capture went
like a poniard to his heart. We reached the Luxembourg before midnight, and were abroad by
daylight. I, myself, went to the café of the Green Basket, where news was to be gathered, and
found that wild rumors were afloat concerning Gaston Cheverny's return. Within the next two
days we got positive confirmation of it, and, also, a letter from Francezka. It was written
in a trembling hand, unlike her usual firm, clear writing. It ran thus:

  Count Saxe and dear, faithful Babache:

  My best beloved has returned to me. Come and rejoice with me.

  Francezka Cheverny.

That was all; none of her other names and titles, scarce one superfluous word--but a letter
written in the very ecstasy and palpitation of joy.

It took Count Saxe not an hour to fix a day for our departure for Capello, and I wrote a letter
telling Francezka when we should arrive; and trying to tell her how deep was my joy in her joy.

Within a week we rode for Brabant--only myself and Beauvais with Count Saxe--and traveled leisurely
in the pleasant spring weather.

What Jacques Haret had told concerning the poor Count Bellegarde was true. He, the most absurd
creature alive, who had believed for years that this glorious creature was his for the asking,
had come to the château of Capello that May afternoon, and had made Francezka a formal offer
of marriage. It had been easy enough to dispose of the poor gentleman. Francezka's temper was
naturally warm. In this case, her heart eating itself with despair, her nerves racked with
hope deferred, she had turned like a lioness upon the unfortunate Bellegarde. He had fled from
her indignant presence, and from the wrath which shone in her eyes and blazed in her cheeks;
and Francezka, trembling and tempest-tossed, had, in her turn, fled to the Italian garden,
where she could be alone. For she needed to be alone to face the specter which now took shape
before her. It was no less than her dead hopes, clad in their grave clothes, which told her
that Gaston Cheverny was no more. And while she walked slowly up and down the path, with this
horror walking beside her, she looked up, and, behold! There stood Gaston Cheverny in the flesh.

Of what she said or did, Francezka had no memory. When she first became conscious of thought,
she was lying in Gaston's arms, in an agony of sobbing and crying, and he was soothing her,
and lavishing upon her every tenderness that love could devise. And after a time, when the
first great shock of joy was over, Francezka rallied and became herself again--brave, resolute
and loving. And then they looked into each other's eyes with rapture, and Gaston cried:

"We can never again be apart beyond the touch of each other's hand."

And after an hour spent in paradise, Francezka and Gaston walked hand in hand to the château,
the servants and dependents were summoned, and Francezka, kneeling among them, with her hand
on Gaston's shoulder, humbly gave thanks to God for having restored her best beloved to her.
The news spread like wildfire, and roused the entire country. The next day, when Francezka
and Gaston publicly gave thanks in the church, half the province was present.

Gaston was, of course, besieged with inquiries concerning the vicissitudes which had befallen
him. They turned out to be quite as strange as might have been expected. The wound on his head
had been severe, and had caused him great suffering, and, what was worse, had brought upon
him long periods of forgetfulness. He had no recollection of anything that had happened to
him after being struck by the Austrian bullet, and could not recall even the incident of the
little village in the Taunus, where he had been seen three months after his capture. His first
connected impressions were, on finding himself in Holland, and next, he knew not how, on a
Dutch ship bound for Batavia. After nearly a year he had reached Batavia, and then began the
struggle to return to Europe. He had written repeatedly to Francezka, and to his friends; that
is, scrawled as well as he could, with his left hand, for his right hand, although it had no
outward mark of weakness, was quite unfit for writing. He could not explain the cause of this;
it was one of those blanks in his memory, in which some of the most painful as well as some
of the dearest of his recollections were erased.

Being bred to the trade of a soldier, he knew no other means of livelihood and he found it
hard, in his wanderings, to keep body and soul together. He was alone in a far country, unacquainted
with the languages, and further borne down by those physical and mental ailments which only
mended in the course of long years. Only two things remained ever clear and unclouded with
him: one was, the remembrance of Francezka; the other was, a fixed determination to return
to Europe. By degrees, his mind recovered its poise and his body its health; but seven years
were consumed from the time he was snatched away from his country, from his love, his health,
his understanding, until he was again restored to them.

Some of this we heard before we left Paris. Of course, the women would not let Count Saxe depart
in peace. The Countess Vielinski followed us with post-horses as far as Mézieres, and Count
Saxe only saved himself by decamping in the night, galloping out of one gate of the town, as
Madame Vielinski's berlin rolled into the other. And yet this man is called a gay Lothario!

Everywhere on the road people were talking of Gaston Cheverny's wonderful return. The number
of persons who knew that he must eventually come back was very large--I believe I did not see
one single person who was not convinced all along that Gaston would be found. And the country
rang with praises of Madame Cheverny's constancy and devotion. Especially did this come from
the people who had declared Francezka to be wildly visionary and had severely condemned her
course from the beginning.

CHAPTER XXVII

A ROYAL RECOMPENSE

It was night when we reached the château of Capello. Afar off, we could see the windows blazing
with lights and hear the heavenly thrilling of music. The villagers were dancing by moonlight
on the village green, to the music of pipes; we heard that every night since Gaston Cheverny's
return, there had been dancing and music everywhere on the estates of Capello, as well as at
the château.

When we dismounted before the great entrance, we could see that the château was full of company,
and a ball was going on in the Diana gallery. Old Peter received us, and fairly burst into
tears of joy when we greeted him. An army of servants were in splendid new liveries; there
seemed to be no limit to waxlights, and everything was in gala.

We were shown to our rooms to change our traveling clothes, and soon descended to the red saloon,
where Francezka and Gaston received their guests. I was so eager to see how Francezka bore
her happiness, that I saw only her, standing at the top of the splendidly lighted room with
Gaston by her side. She wore a trailing gown of white shimmering satin, and pearls and diamonds
were on her matchless white throat and in her rich hair. She had lost long since the air of
graceful pride and innocent triumph which marked her first bright youth, and now, with all
her joy, there was a soft deprecation, that in one by nature so proud as Francezka was the
sweetest thing in the world. I saw all this while my master was making his compliments to Francezka,
and embracing Gaston. Francezka, by that time, was looking into my face, with tears on her
cheeks, and grasping my hand with both of hers, she only said:

"My dear, dear Babache--my faithful friend--"

Then she turned to Gaston, who embraced me warmly.

"Francezka has told me all, Babache," he cried. "How can I thank you enough!"

In that brief moment I noticed that Gaston had changed much, as one might expect in those seven
years of exile and misery, but not for the worse. On the contrary, I thought him a comelier
man than he had ever been before. And strange, for a man who had spent seven years of hardship
and labor among a half-civilized people, he bore no trace whatever of awkwardness or boorishness
amid his splendid surroundings. He might just have stepped from the oeil-de-boeuf at the king's
levee at Versailles, he was so graceful and so much at ease, but he had ever been remarkable
for that.

The great apartment was full of people. I recognized Madame Riano, who called me to her and
spoke to me most graciously. Also, Father Benart, who had on a new cassock for the occasion.
He, too, spoke to me most kindly, but he was rather subdued and silent. I judged that like
the pagan Greeks of old, this Christian man felt a fear for those who stood upon the shining
peaks of perfect joy.

Bellegarde was not there. Francezka, somewhat unreasonably, I think, haughtily refused to see
or to speak with him, and sent him a message to the effect that his life would be spared, for
which he should be thankful. She was very bitter against him, but the rest of the world, including
Gaston Cheverny, took a more lenient view of poor Bellegarde's offense, and he was laughed
at rather than condemned. Nor was the Bishop of Louvain present. I fancy he was afraid to face
Madame Riano, after having persistently declared his conviction that Gaston Cheverny would
never be again heard of, and having pooh-poohed Madame Riano's signs, dreams and presentiments
that Gaston would return.

I have said before, that although declared a prince, a Tatar prince, I have a most unprince-like
habit of retiring to the wall when in fine company, and this I did in the red saloon. I could
not take my eyes from Francezka. It seemed to me as if no change could come over her that did
not increase her hold upon hearts. Certainly I had never at any time seen her look so beautiful
or so winning as in this, her day of triumph. She disarmed envy by a silent appeal for forgiveness
that she was so much happier than most of the children of men.

No woman ever lived who knew better how to be splendid than Francezka Cheverny, and she and
all about her were very splendid on this night. Supper was served in state, the handsomest
youths of the best families in Brabant serving at table, according to the old Brabant custom.
There was no want of attention to any one present--not even to me, Babache. When the company
was being marshaled for supper, Gaston sought me out and secured me a partner in the person
of a very old and very ugly lady of rank who, I take it, had been misled by my title, and evidently
thought me a person of consideration and treated me accordingly. Francezka, of course, was
escorted by Count Saxe.

The supper was very grand; the old Marquis Capello's wine flowed like water; there was a servant
in livery behind every other chair; the table was loaded with delicacies; and musicians played
soft music from the gallery, the guests joining in the singing. Many old songs were sung, like
the ancient Carillon du Verre, and some new ones--especially one, a song of hope, beginning,
Espère! Espère, il reviendra! which particularly applied to Francezka and Gaston. I saw the
eyes of Francezka and Gaston meet when this strain was sweetly played; they sat, after the
French custom, opposite each other in the middle of the long table. Francezka's eyes were those
of an angel, and Gaston's were so full of pride, of love, of triumph, that they shone like stars.

During the singing I noticed, for the first time, the slight defect of memory from which I
had heard Gaston still suffered. He had formerly an agreeable voice, of no great compass or
quality, but he sang with taste enough to make up for both. Many heavy hours during our days
in Courland had we been soothed with Gaston's singing to his viol; many moonlit nights on the
island in Lake Uzmaiz had his voice told its story in songs. In those journeyings through France
and Germany and in those long and quiet evenings in Paris Gaston's singing had been one of
our great resources, but he seemed to have lost all power over both words and music, and sat
quite silent while all the rest trolled forth. I do not know whether any one else observed
this except myself. When the singing was at its height my master called out to me, as I sat,
near the foot of the long table:

"Babache, my prince, what is the name of the song Monsieur Cheverny used to sing to us on the
terrace of the island in the lake?"

"It was Blondel's song, Monsieur," I answered.

Francezka, with a glowing face and dewy eyes, looked at Gaston, but he looked puzzled and a
little embarrassed.

"I can not recall it," he said; "it has gone from me with the memory of other things I would
remember."

Francezka, to assist his struggling memory, softly repeated the first two lines:

                        O Richard! O mon roi,
                        L'univers t'abandonne!

It would seem as if he could not but remember how they had often sung and played it together
in their golden youth, and the secret, tender meaning they had affixed to it, known only to
themselves. And Francezka, in her unhappy time, had often played that air upon the harpsichord
as recalling her lost love. But Gaston only shook his head.

"It is gone from me with other things--the sweetest recollections--the sacredest memories--never
to return."

"When you begin to play the guitar once more, as you used," said Francezka gently, and smiling,
to encourage him, "all these songs will come back to you again."

Gaston raised his right hand, brown and sinewy.

"This hand looks to be the same it was when I gave it you," he said, smiling back sadly at
Francezka, "but, like my memory, it is not what it once was. I can neither play the guitar
nor write, nor do anything with it as I once did."

It was sad to see so young a man in the full vigor of manhood with these cruel marks of mental
and physical suffering left upon him, but on the whole, few men living could at that moment
reckon themselves happier than Gaston Cheverny. If he had suffered he had certainly come into
a royal recompense.

We sat late, and afterward there was dancing in the Diana gallery. Francezka walked the minuet
with Count Saxe, and afterward danced in a very merry branle. She had danced since Gaston's
return, for the first time in eight years, she told me, having no heart to dance in that first
year, when she was secretly Gaston Cheverny's wife, because he was away at the wars, and having
never seen dancing in those seven years of sorrow when she waited and longed for him. But she
had not lost either her grace or her gaiety, and danced as she had done in her first girlhood.
Madame Riano did some strange Scotch dances with great agility in spite of her sixty years,
and rated everybody soundly who could not do the Scotch dances and did not know the Scotch airs.

It was midnight before the company dispersed. I did not go to my chamber, but driven by some
impulse stronger than myself, slipped out of the château and took my way toward a spot sure
to be silent and deserted at this hour--the Italian garden.

A great bright moon rode in the heavens, making the landscape all black and silver. The yews
and box trees were as dark as the darkest night, and the lake lay in its ever-present gloom
shadowed by its sad cypresses and cedars, with but a shimmering of light in its center. In
the deep silence its faintly mournful sound was softly heard. Francezka was happy, that was
plain. All else mattered little--even a strange and hateful feeling within my own breast--I
no longer loved Gaston Cheverny.

At the moment my eyes fell upon him there came upon me a sudden fading of the strong affection
I had felt for him every moment of the fourteen years which had passed since that night in
the garden of the Temple, when I had come near to killing him. Never had I felt so singular
and mysterious an aversion toward a man I had ever loved as toward Gaston Cheverny on my first
seeing him that night, and when he clasped me in his arms, with all of the old affection, this
aversion became an actual repulsion. I had disguised it perfectly. I had returned his embrace
warmly. All of his kind words, his friendly glances, I had met in kind; but a coldness not
to be expressed in speech had come over me toward Gaston Cheverny in this, our hour of reunion.
Nothing availed to warm it, not the recollection of long and close companionship, of keen adventure,
of tedious months and years, lightened by each other's companionship, of community of tastes,
of a high mutual esteem--nothing, nothing availed. The Gaston Cheverny of other days I still
loved tenderly. This Gaston Cheverny I regarded with entire indifference. I did not fail to
remind myself that seven years' separation, as complete as if we had inhabited different worlds,
might make this change, but I could not deny that the change seemed wholly on my side; for,
unless he were as good an actor as I, he felt for me all the warmth of affectionate friendship
which had once been ours in common. Tormented with this singular revulsion of feeling, I remained
long in the garden, until my eye happening to fall on the sun dial, I was reminded there was
such a thing as time, and I heard a distant bell chiming two o'clock in the morning, when I
returned to the château and went to bed.

Next morning the château was awake early, and then began, in the sweet May weather, a round
of festivities which lasted every day of our stay at Capello. Fêtes in the fields, in the May
days; masquerades by night, with water parties on the canal, where hidden music played; and
always winding up with a ball in the Diana gallery,--these were our regular occupations. In
all of these pastimes Francezka shone as queen. In beauty, gaiety, grace and wit, she was unmatched.
Her enjoyment and zest of pleasure were contagious. It was natural that it should be so. Francezka's
life had been so clouded and so stormy, for seven years she had borne so heavy a burden of
anguish, that when at last this burden was removed and the sun shone again it was to be expected
that she should have a thirst for pleasure.

And to Gaston, cut off for so many years from any communion with those of his own race, tongue
and caste, it was necessary, in order to bring himself once more in touch with his own world,
that he should see something of it.

Despite that coldness of the heart I felt toward him, I could not deny that Gaston Cheverny
had preserved--nay, greatly developed--his gifts and graces. I had heard that the Chevernys
as a family were famed for eloquence, and certainly both Gaston and Regnard Cheverny had always
known how to speak well. Gaston now displayed in perfection this excellent gift. His strange
adventures in the isles of the East; his description of his seven years' battle against alien
climes, peoples and conditions; his wanderings by land and sea, the steadiness with which he
kept his face turned to the west, the struggles by which he finally reached Europe again--were
worth hearing and lost nothing in the telling.

Many nights, after a hard day's pleasuring, a great supper party and a ball afterward, did
Gaston Cheverny keep us up until almost daylight telling us these things. Nor was he over ready
to do it, but being courteously pressed by Count Saxe, or other gentlemen, he would tell us
what we wished to hear. Sometimes Francezka listened to these recitals, listened with a glorified
face. Her happiness was so great, so keen, that it made me fear for her. Like the little priest,
Father Benart, I thought the gods would demand their tribute, and only hoped it had been paid
by her seven years of anguish.

Madame Riano was staying at the château, and had not changed a whit. She had ever liked Gaston
Cheverny, and they seemed to be the best of friends still. But she intended shortly to return
to Paris, and so invited herself to travel with Count Saxe when he should be ready to leave.
Old Peter was the same faithful, devoted, sad-eyed creature as ever, but I think not unhappy
after all. Lisa's return had given the old man's heart its natural resting place. I asked him
about her, and he told me, with tears upon his withered leathery face, of her devotion to him,
her uncomplaining fortitude, her humility--he did not say penitence, for Francezka told me
that neither old Peter nor she herself had ever been able to get one word of regret for the
past out of Lisa. I told Francezka about my chance meeting with Jacques Haret. She asked me
if I had given him a good beating; Francezka was, in some respects, a vengeful woman. I told
her it had not occurred to me to do this, but I would remember it if I ever met him under favorable
circumstances again. He had honestly earned a beating--the only thing he ever honestly earned
in his life.

Besides Peter, my other old friend at the château, Bold, seemed also changed, but for the worse.
Age had fastened upon him, and he was now decrepit. That was perhaps the reason why he was
not so much with his mistress as formerly, but, in truth, the whirl of the days and nights
was such that a sober and discreet dog could not keep up the pace.

Now that Gaston Cheverny had been miraculously restored to his wife, people began to ask about
Regnard. Count Saxe inquired of Gaston if anything was known of Regnard, but Gaston shook his
head. He had not yet had time to have inquiries made about his brother, but would do so. Judging,
however, from such information as he had found awaiting him, it seemed likely that Regnard
was dead. This Count Saxe combatted, saying it seemed to him most unlikely that an officer
of rank in the East India Company's army should die without his family or friends receiving
any notification.

And if it were indeed true that Regnard was dead, his estate was worth inquiring after. The
sum he had received for Castle Haret was in itself a considerable one. To this Gaston replied
obstinately that he was convinced Regnard's long silence meant that he was dead, and as soon
as it was possible, inquiries should be set on foot in England to find out all the facts connected
with Regnard's fate. In spite of this, however, I saw that Gaston was really indifferent to
his brother's fate, and remembering their unclouded intimacy and affection, in spite of their
rivalry for Francezka, I found this surprising. It was the first genuine cause I had for loving
Gaston Cheverny less, because his warmth and kindness to me suffered no variation.

I had not, of course, much chance for private talk with Francezka during that week of dancing
and feasting, but I felt she was too loyal a soul to forget me in her hour of triumph, and
would not let me depart without some evidence of her unchanged regard. On the morning of our
departure I rose early, according to custom, and went forth. It was but little past sunrise,
and a delicate fine rain, as thin as a muslin veil, was falling. The earth and the blooming
plants were drinking it up eagerly; it was so gentle that it would not roughly strike the most
delicate flower. I walked about the gardens and terraces, and then went toward the Italian
garden, which always seemed to be consecrated to Francezka. I was scarcely surprised, early
as it was, to see her walking up and down the box walk, with Bold by her side. She had the
hood of her crimson mantle drawn over her head, and was walking slowly up and down, a branch
of roses in her hand. Her face was not joyful, but rather meditative, and it made my heart
leap to see how it lighted up when she saw me within a yard of her.

"I did not mean to let you slip away, Babache, without one private word with you," she cried,
as I joined her. "I thought if I came out here I should probably find you. See how strong is
habit. Here I am, walking and watching with my dog and my friend, just as I have done for seven
years past, and he for whom I watched and waited--my best beloved--is safe at home; and yet
I come always once a day to this spot, and give thanks. And I thank God for you and Bold. You
know, it is high praise to be classed with Bold."

"I know it, Madame," said I, "and Bold is a happy dog now that his master is come home."

Francezka's brow clouded a little, and she looked about her to be sure that no gardeners or
possible eavesdroppers were near.

"No," she said gravely, even with a little quiver of her lip. "Bold is not a happy dog. He
did not know his master, and does not know him now, and to think of how Bold and I loved and
watched and waited for seven years--how many conversations we had about Gaston--and how Bold
always assured me that his master would return. I think he was not less comforting than you,
and much more encouraging. And now he cares nothing--he even snarls at Gaston--"

She looked reproachfully at the old dog, trotting by her side. He was aged, but he had not
lost his sight, or his teeth, or his native good sense, for at the charge brought against him
he looked his mistress steadily in the eye, and then coolly turned off, as much as to say:

"If you choose to complain of me to Captain Babache, at least I scorn to defend myself."

"It must have been very hard on Gaston," I said, "for he ever loved the dog so much."

"No," replied Francezka, as if she were communicating some great sorrow to me. "Gaston cares
no more for Bold than Bold cares for Gaston. What do you think--now, will you promise me to
keep this a secret?"

"Yes."

She came closer to me, and fixing her eyes on me with tragic intensity, said in the voice of
the broken-hearted:

"Gaston had forgotten his dog!"

It was like Francezka to make a huge mountain of a thing like this. Therefore, I replied gravely:

"That is very sad and very bad, but at least, Gaston remembered you. And after all, Madame,
you did attach a ridiculous consequence to the dog."

"Did I?" cried Francezka, with the first flash of her old resentful imperious spirit that I
had yet seen breaking out. "A ridiculous consequence to the creature my husband left me to
be my friend and companion during his absence? And told me whenever I looked into Bold's faithful
eyes I was to see his--Gaston's--faith reflected there, for dogs never forget! And was not
Bold the only living thing, except yourself, who gave me any comfort in these last seven years?
Really, Babache, I can not love you any longer, if you say such things."

It was a trifle, but I saw that the indifference between Bold and his master troubled her.

"Do you know, Madame," said I, "that when one reaches the very heights of happiness--near the
blue heavens--the least little speck of unhappiness is visible?"

"True," replied Francezka, her somber eyes brightening. "To think, after what I have suffered
for seven years that I let this trifle--yes, Babache, your word was the right one--give me
one clouded moment. But--" her eyes were darkened again; "no one walks those heights of happiness
long. It is only for a short time that one can live in that too pure air. The old Greeks knew
this."

"Madame," said I, "give me leave to say that you have lived too much with your own thoughts
and emotions for your own good. No human being, least of all a sensitive woman, could have
endured what you have for so long without retaining some marks of it. So, although I am only
Babache, a savage Tatar prince, the son of a poor notary in the Marais, yet, take my advice:
be happy when you have achieved your heart's desire and trouble not yourself with old dogs
or old Greeks, either."

Francezka's face suddenly dimpled into smiles. The sun came out radiantly at that moment, and
the grass and trees, diamond hung, glittered in the golden sheen of the morning. The earth
seemed new-born; life and joy seemed new created. Francezka looked toward the château and waved
her hands to Gaston, on his way to the stables. He turned and came toward her. I could not
but remark how comely a man he was. He had never been a beautiful creature, like poor silly
Bellegarde, but a good figure of a man, with regular and well-marked features, full of grace
and intelligence. In a minute or two he had joined us. I had not before noticed the behavior
of Gaston and the dog to each other, but now I observed that when Gaston approached, Bold exhibited
an active dislike toward his former master.

His bristles rose, he showed his teeth, and in spite of Francezka's command, and even entreaty,
he trotted off and would not return. I have always been sensitive to the dislike of dogs, believing
them to be better judges of character than men are. But Gaston Cheverny did not seem to mind
Bold's disaffection; he was satisfied with Francezka's constancy.

We remained a pleasant hour in the Italian garden. Gaston was, as he had been from the first,
kind and courteous to me; pressed me to return in the autumn for the wolf hunting, which is
one of the great sports of the region, and thanked me again for what I had been enabled to
do for Francezka in his absence. When we returned to the château the sun was high, but Count
Saxe had not yet left his room. He had then acquired the habit of lying late abed, except when
he was in the field. Then he never slept at all, so his enemies said.

Madame Riano had threatened to accompany us back to Paris, but we were not sure whether she
would go or not. Paris dragged her one way, the hope of meeting the Bishop of Louvain and triumphing
over him, dragged her the other. But we saw her great traveling chaise hauled out of the coach
house and her people busy, so we were not surprised when she met us and announced that she,
with her maids and her maître d'hôtel, was ready to start with us. I allowed Beauvais to communicate
this intelligence to Count Saxe, not liking to be the bearer of bad news, and I heard my master
swearing furiously in his bedroom. But when he appeared in traveling dress, at ten o'clock,
he was smiling and polite as usual, and expressed great joy at being allowed to journey in
Madame Riano's suite. Count Saxe was a prudent as well as a courageous man, and he never belittled
his antagonists, least of all Madame Riano. He often said he reckoned Madame Riano to be the
first warrior of the age with Prince Eugene and Marshal the Duke of Berwick a considerable
distance behind.

At ten o'clock the start was made, Madame Riano in her traveling chaise leading. She bade an
affectionate farewell to Francezka and a kindly one to Gaston, placed her hôtel in Paris at
their disposal whenever they wished to come to Paris, said adieu to old Peter, sent poor Lisa
a gold piece and a terrible denunciation, mounted into her chaise and started.

I had said farewell to Francezka several times in the last few years from the terrace, when
she stood alone and lonely, but with undaunted courage and undying hope. Now that hope and
courage were rewarded; she stood with Gaston by her side, the two happiest creatures on earth.
That last vision of Francezka in her beauty and happiness haunted me like a ravishing strain
of music in a lovely dream.

When we had traveled a couple of stages Madame Riano invited Count Saxe to ride in her chaise,
an honor which he dared not decline. Next day it was my turn. I loathe riding in a stuffy chaise,
full of packages and waiting maids, but, like my master, needs must when Madame Riano drives.
The first question she asked of me amazed me.

"What think you," said she, "of my nephew Gaston Cheverny?"

"What I always thought," I replied. "An admirable man."

"Nevertheless," replied Madame Riano, "you loved him once. You love him no longer."

That was the worst of this terrible old lady. She always found out the awkward truths and proclaimed
them at inconvenient seasons. I made no reply to this, and she continued:

"Men grow hard with time. It is vain to expect of a man separated from you for seven years,
and but three and thirty years of age, the same sensibility he had when he was six and twenty
and had spent many preceding years in your company."

This was true, and I had often said so to myself, so I told Madame Riano.

"As for yourself, Babache," continued this indomitable woman, "you are like old Peter, only
fit to love and forgive and lay your heart down to be trampled on."

"Madame, I have laid my heart at the feet of two persons only," replied I, with spirit; "one
is my master, Count Saxe. Surely he never trampled on it. The other is Madame Cheverny, whom
I have reverenced ever since I first knew her, and with whom, by the strange turns of fate,
I have been much cast for some years."

"Count Saxe and my niece do not tread on you because they both have noble natures. If they
were otherwise now--"

"I should not have had for them the reverent love I cherish, had they been otherwise," I answered,
and just then, Madame Riano taking snuff, she gave a stupendous sneeze that nearly shook the
chaise to pieces and actually jarred the door open; so I slipped out, mounted my horse and
was glad to lay my legs across his back once more.

I had never mentioned to Count Saxe any change I saw in Gaston Cheverny, for indeed, I saw
none--I only felt it. On that Paris journey, however, we talked together much concerning Francezka
and her strange fate; and I found that Count Saxe, like myself, saw a subtile and unpleasing
change in Gaston. But Francezka was happy--that was enough. Nothing could matter very much
so long as Francezka smiled.

CHAPTER XXVIII

A CAMPAIGN OF PLEASURE

We returned from the château of Capello in the spring of 1740, and from then until the autumn
there was hard work to be done at the Castle of Chambord. My master proposed to entertain a
great and noble company of guests, including the king himself, during the time of the boar
hunting, a very royal sport which prevails in Touraine. The king was to come the first week
in December and to remain three days. Among those invited to be of this royal party were Gaston
and Francezka Cheverny. They were to stay a fortnight at Chambord and to spend the rest of
the winter in Paris.

There was, however, a visitor who arrived before we were prepared for any one. This was Madame
Riano. One night, quite early in the autumn, when there was an army of six hundred workmen
at Chambord, and Count Saxe himself was but indifferently lodged, a traveling chaise drove
up, and out got Madame Riano, come to pay Count Saxe a visit before she departed for England
on one of her expeditions to recover the crown for Prince Charles Edward Stuart.

My master swore up and down and crosswise when he recognized Madame Riano's equipage crossing
the Bridge of the Lions, but went down to the courtyard to receive her. He expressed great
joy at seeing her, and also regrets that he could not lodge her, having but two bedrooms in
order, his own and a small one next him, where I, as always, was lodged. Madame Riano coolly
informed him that she should stay the week, and would occupy his bedroom; he could take mine,
and I could sleep in her traveling chaise.

"But, Madame," said my master, "think of my reputation; a woman, still young, still handsome
like yourself--"

"Great God!" cried Madame Riano, "you have no reputation to lose, and as for myself, mine is
far too robust to be hurt by a little thing like this. Not that I ever wanted for lovers when
I was young, from the time I was thirteen years old, when that foolish Bishop of Louvain wanted
to marry me; I had a plenty as long as I wanted them."

"It is singular," said Count Saxe, "that a bishop should want to marry a thirteen-year-old girl."

"He was not in orders then, but was a soft-headed great oaf of a young man of nineteen, and
that you should have understood. Maurice of Saxe, I think you have never been so sensible a
man since you made that ridiculous fiasco in Courland. It seems to have addled your brain somewhat!"

And Count Saxe had to entertain that woman a whole week! She took possession of his only bedchamber,
and he, putting it on the score of propriety, slept on the hay in the stable lofts!

It may be imagined how we worked to be ready to receive the king and his suite and all the
guests asked for that memorable visit. Count Saxe utilized all of that stupendous genius he
had heretofore shown in his campaigns in preparing a campaign of pleasure for those royal festivities
at Chambord. Besides the king, there were two princes of the blood, the Duc d'Orleans and the
Duc de Bourbon, seven dukes and peers of France, two marshals of France, and a horde of other
great people.

Three days in the week there were to be stag hunts and boar hunts in the forest. Two nights
in the week there were to be balls, three nights there were to be cards, and the two other
nights plays in the theater of the castle, otherwise the great yellow saloon. The playwright
was to be no less a person than Monsieur Voltaire, who did not require much coaxing to follow
the king. The ostensible bait held out to him was that Francezka, with whose beauty, faith
and tenderness all Paris was ringing, would be at Chambord and would take part in Monsieur
Voltaire's plays. He remembered her early triumphs in the garden of the Hôtel Kirkpatrick,
and was not averse to a beautiful and brilliant woman assisting in the making of his fame.

My master was to be in one of these plays, and went to Paris several times to attend the rehearsals,
which were under the direction of Monsieur Voltaire. Francezka and Gaston had then arrived
in Paris. Count Saxe came back with famous accounts of these rehearsals. Monsieur Voltaire
was very difficult, and everything about the performance had to be changed a dozen times, except
one--Madame Gaston Cheverny was to play opposite the great Voltaire. He had never seen her
act since that afternoon in the garden so long ago, but he declared the memory of it remained
with him. Other great ladies were chosen, tried and flung aside. Gentlemen of the best blood
of France were put through their paces before the son of Arouet, the notary.

Count Saxe noted this impudence of Monsieur Voltaire's, and had said in his hearing that if
he, Count Saxe, were hauled and pulled about unseemly, he would, by the blessing of God, run
Monsieur Voltaire through the body. This insured Count Saxe the most respectful treatment imaginable
from Monsieur Voltaire. My master had told me, on his return from these Paris rehearsals, that
Monsieur Voltaire maintained the most conciliatory attitude throughout toward Francezka, who,
he declared, was the only actress among all the ladies to be at Chambord. Francezka's spirit
was well known; she was not the niece of Peggy Kirkpatrick for nothing, and once or twice,
so Count Saxe said, a word on her part and a flash of her eyes showed Monsieur Voltaire that
she would throw up her part at the least hint of impertinence from him, so he behaved himself
perfectly to her, as to Count Saxe.

Madame du Châtelet regarded Monsieur Voltaire as much her own as her warming pan, or Newton's
Principia, so she, of course, had to be asked to the festivities at Chambord. Then, Madame
Villars must be of the party. She was the daughter-in-law of Marshal Villars, and daughter
of my master's old friend, Marshal, the Duc de Noailles, of whom the latter would be among
the guests. It was that very autumn that Madame Villars had kissed Voltaire publicly, in her
box at the theater, at the first performance of Mérope, and to the delight of the audience.
Perhaps Monsieur Voltaire's head was not a little turned by this; perhaps Madame du Châtelet
could have told a tale of the airs he gave himself with all the women after that, but no matter.

Of course, there were numbers of other young and beautiful women besides Francezka Cheverny
and Madame Villars. Were any of Count Saxe's loves among them? Perhaps. I, at least, knew not,
except that all women who looked on him fell in love with him, but he can not be found fault
with for that; the fault must be found with the God who made him so all-conquering, beautiful
and bewitching. This is not a chronicle of Count Saxe's love affairs. He chose his own loves,
wrote his own love letters, and I knew no more about them than I did of the royal princes of
Tatar, from which I was supposed to be descended. As far as I know he was a veritable St. Anthony.
I have heard Chambord called the castle built for intrigues, and for the "flying squadrons,"
as the gay ladies of the court were named. But whether this be true or not must be asked of
some one better informed about Chambord than Captain Babache.

By the first day of December all was ready, and on the evening of that day the king was to
arrive, and also Francezka and Gaston Cheverny. These, with other guests, were to precede the
king's arrival by two hours. It was a cold, bright December evening, the wintry sun just setting,
when the procession of coaches began to roll across the Bridge of the Lions and into the great
courtyard. My Uhlans formed a guard of honor at the bridge and in the courtyard itself. A subaltern
commanded, but I was present as the ranking officer of Count Saxe's household.

At least forty ladies and gentlemen had arrived before the coach drove up from which Francezka
and Gaston Cheverny alighted. Count Saxe awaited them at the foot of the grand staircase, but
I was on the ground to welcome Francezka. It was near dusk of a winter's evening, but the torches'
glare, and the row of crystal lanterns hung above the entrance gate showed me her face plainly,
even inside the coach. She was a little pale, probably from traveling, but smiled her own sweet
smile at me as soon as she recognized me opening the coach door for her. Gaston, descending,
embraced me cordially. He looked to be in the highest health and spirits. Francezka, her slender
figure wrapped in a great furred mantle, and her fair face looking out from a black hat with
feathers, stepped down with her usual airy grace.

"The finest thing in this great castle is the face of a friend like you, my Babache," she said.

There was no time to say more, for she saw Count Saxe and advanced quickly toward him. If she
had been Queen Marie Lecszynska he could not have greeted her with greater devotion.

I showed them at once to their rooms, which were agreeable but rather high up, overlooking
that wonderful spiral staircase which is the glory of Chambord. I explained that I had placed
them so high that they might not be disturbed by the noise and commotion which was pretty sure
to be going on night and day in the lower part of the castle.

"Trouble not yourself about that, Babache," cried Francezka, merrily; "Gaston and I are not
in search of quiet, but gaiety. Life was so dark for us for seven years that we want it to
be as merry as we can make it now," to which Gaston laughingly agreed.

I had caused a harpsichord to be placed in Francezka's room. To this she ran, opening it and
dashing into a rattling air upon it. Her eyes were sparkling, the color had come back into
her cheeks--her whole air was one of feverish gaiety. She was then eight and twenty years of
age, but I think I never saw a more girlish looking creature. The years that most young women
spend in going to balls and routs and suppers, and spoiling their complexions with rouge, Francezka
had spent in the solitude and pure air of the country. She had all the verve, the freshness,
of one to whom the world is still new, and youth looked out of her shining eyes. It was as
if the other Francezka were laid away with her black Spanish costumes, and this Francezka were
the Francezka who had stormed all hearts on the lake of Uzmaiz and at the fêtes of Radewitz.

I could only remain with them a few minutes, as the coming of King Louis was imminent. Francezka,
too, had to rehearse for the play to be given that night, so both of us were hurried, but Francezka
took time to say to me:

"We must have one of our old friendly interviews soon, Babache. That must you arrange for,
if you have to neglect not only the king, but Count Saxe himself."

Two hours later the king, followed by a large suite, arrived. I was in command of the body-guard,
and as such was presented to the king in the grand saloon, where all the great people were
ranged to receive him. Louis XV was as handsome as ever and, I thought, less wearied, for he
loved to be with Count Saxe.

I reckoned Francezka to be easily the star of the ladies present, and there were some of the
most beautiful women in France in that saloon of Chambord, their jewels blazing under the waxlights.
Nor was Gaston Cheverny inconspicuous among the gentlemen. He had the grand air as much as
Francezka, and his adventures made him an object of respectful curiosity. The king conversed
with him some time during the evening, and afterward sent for Francezka. She acquitted herself
so well that she made all the women hate her. Monsieur Voltaire, who was not much noticed by
the king, said if virtue could be made the fashion Madame Cheverny would have accomplished it.

On that evening began a veritable tempest of pleasure at Chambord, for I can call it by no
other name. I can not say I enjoyed it. First, we had extra pages of honor, thirty of them,
and I had as soon have had thirty extra devils on my hands. They gave me twice the trouble
that my whole battalion of Uhlans did. Then I had to arrange the entire business of the hunting--everything,
in short, outside of the castle, and Beauvais had charge of everything inside of it. I seldom
got to my camp bed, next Count Saxe's room, before two o'clock in the morning, and I was at
the stables every morning by daylight.

The first day's diversion was a grand battue. The battue was a magnificent spectacle in the
forest, and was not over until late in the afternoon. Then, on the return to the castle, was
organized one of those wild romps which were the amusement of the court. The gentlemen, in
hunting dress, and winding their silver horns, chased the ladies through the vast spaces, the
winding corridors, the crooked stairs of the castle, and when caught, the ladies forfeited
a kiss, or a dozen kisses. The little devils of pages were the hounds. These, being acquainted
with the multitude of turns and windings in the castle, ably assisted the cavaliers, and generally
got a box on the ear for catching a lady, to which the pages responded by kisses on their own
account. It was a very amusing sport, and would have been harmless if the ladies and gentlemen
concerned in it had been angels. Francezka, to my surprise, took part in it, as in everything
else, but being full of art and finesse, was never caught except by one person, the aged Marshal
Duc de Noailles, who was brave and gallant at the age of eighty. Gaston Cheverny excelled at
this wild and gallant sport, and the ladies vowed there was no escaping him.

On the first evening of the king's arrival Francezka had a splendid triumph. Monsieur Voltaire
gave Nanine in the theater of the castle, and Francezka was Nanine, somewhat to Madame du Châtelet's
disgust, I fancy. And for the after piece was The Tattler, with the greatest cast the world
ever saw: Francezka as Hortensia, Monsieur Voltaire as Pasquin, and Count Saxe himself as Clitander.

There were oceans of trouble about this play, and poor Beauvais was near wild, for Monsieur
Voltaire was a troublesome manager, a troublesome actor, a troublesome guest, a troublesome
person altogether. When Sam returned from this second bowing-out his language was more temperate.
"You're a Cracker-Jack," was all he said, and closed the door behind him.

During the ten days that followed, Jack gloated over the Monet and staved off his various creditors
until his father's semi-monthly remittance arrived. Whenever the owner of the Monet mounted the
stairs by appointment and pounded at Jack's door, Jack let him pound, tiptoeing about his
room until he heard the anxious dealer's footsteps echoing down the stairs in retreat.

On the day that the "governor's" remittance arrived--it came on the fifteenth and the first of
every month--Sam found a furniture van backed up opposite Jack's studio street entrance. The
gravity of the situation instantly became apparent. The dealer had lost patience and had sent for
the picture; the van told the story. Had he not been sure of getting it he would not have sent the
van.

Sam went up three steps at a time and burst into Jack's studio.

He found its owner directing two men where to place an inlaid cabinet. It was a large cabinet
of ebony, elaborately carved and decorated, and the two furniture men--judging from the way
they were breathing--had had their hands full in getting it up the three flights of stairs.
Jack was pushing back the easels and pictures to make room for it
when Sam entered.

His first thought was for the unpaid-for picture.

"Monet gone, Jack?" he asked, glancing around the room hurriedly in his anxiety to find it.

"Yea--last
night. He came and took it away. Here," (this to the two men) "shove it close to the wall," pointing
to the cabinet. "There--now go down and get the top, and look out you don't break those little
drawers. What's the matter with you, Samuel?

You look as if somebody had walked over your grave."

"And you had no trouble?"

"Trouble! What are you dilating about, Samuel? We never have any trouble up here."

"Then it's because I've kept him quiet.

I've been three times this week and held him up--much as I could do to keep him from getting
out a warrant."

"Who?"

"Your one-eyed dealer, as you call him."
"My one-eyed dealer isn't worrying, Samuel. Look at this," and he
pulled out a receipted bill. "His name, isn't it? 'Received in full
payment-- Six hundred dollars.' Seems odd, Samuel, doesn't it?"

"Did
your governor send the money?"

"Did my governor send the money! My
governor isn't so obliging. Here--don't stand there with your eyes
hanging out on your cheeks; look on this--found it yesterday at Sighfor's.
Isn't it a stunner? bottom modern except the feet, but the top is
Sixteenth Century. See the way the tortoise-shell is worked in--lots
of secret drawers, too, all through it--going to keep my bills in
one of 'em and lose the key. What are you staring at, anyhow, Sam?"

"Well--but
Jack--I don't see----"

"Of course you don't see! You think I robbed
a bank or waylaid your Moneybags. I did--took twelve hundred dollars
out of his clothes in a check on the spot--wrote it right there at
that desk--for the Monet, and sent it home to his Palazzo da Avenue.
Then I took his dirty check, indorsed it over to that one-eyed skinflint,
got the balance in bills, bought the cabinet for five hundred and
eighty-two dollars cash--forgive me, Samuel, but there was no other
way--and here is just eighteen dollars to the good"--and he pulled
out some bank-notes--"or was before I gave those two poor devils a
dollar apiece for carrying up this cabinet. To-night, Samuel--to-night--we
will dine at the Waldorf."

She had a tiny foot, and always wore the most beautiful shoes imaginable--and in some way,
although she seemed careful not to show her feet, they were always seen. I glanced toward Gaston
Cheverny. I was far back, leaning against the wall, that being my usual station, and he was
one of a number of gentlemen for whom seats were provided, but who preferred to stand back
of the ladies. I saw in his face his pride and love of Francezka. He seemed to me then more
like the Gaston of former days than I had yet seen him. My heart warmed a little to him.

When the plays were over Monsieur Voltaire made a short speech. At that stage of his career
he was very anxious to curry favor with the great, especially as he knew the king did not like
him, but no matter how hard he struggled to be universally flattering, some tinge of his native
sardonic humor would crop out in spite of him. For example, he complimented Francezka so highly
that there was nothing left to be said of the other ladies, and of course the perfunctory praise
he gave them did not make them love him any the better. Then he made a slight though obvious
allusion to Francezka's long waiting for her husband's return, comparing it to Penelope, which
would have been mightily effective if he had not said something further about her bringing
conjugal faith into fashion, which was an allusion some of the ladies could not stand at all,
and caused Count Saxe to laugh in spite of himself. But on the whole, the affair passed off
with the greatest brilliance.

The next thing was the great supper in the hall. Although this was Beauvais's affair, I was
not without responsibility. I had devised a new and splendid form of candlestick for these
royal suppers. These candlesticks consisted of a hundred Uhlans, the handsomest men in the
battalion, in uniforms of silk and velvet, holding their lances upright, and from the lance-head
blazed a flame of perfumed wax. Then there were those damnable little pages. It was their duty
to hand the wine at supper and to attend the more distinguished guests; but they were certain
to play some pranks if I were not on hand to stop them. So I always remained through the supper.

The king's table was set as always, on a dais raised a couple of inches from the floor, under
a royal canopy of crimson velvet with golden fleur-de-lis. To this table he invited Francezka,
besides Madame Villars, Count Saxe, the Duc de Richelieu and one or two others, but he did
not ask Monsieur Voltaire. I heard a subdued murmur of speculation as to whether he would be
asked or not, and I never yet saw Monsieur Voltaire discomfited that it did not give the assemblage
a wicked delight. Madame du Châtelet was already beginning to fume and scowl. It was said that
sometimes she and Monsieur Voltaire quarreled to the point of throwing dishes at each other
across the table, but they were always ready enough to quarrel with the world on each other's
account.

Francezka, escorted by the Duc de Richelieu, walked the length of the great hall, herself a
picture of grace and dignity. On her way she passed Monsieur Voltaire. He stood on one leg,
like a stork, his eyes blazing with rage, chagrin, hope and expectancy. He had not yet been
invited to the king's table, although Francezka had, and this man, who was capable of writing
Nanine, and The Tattler, was in acute misery because he had not been asked to take a seat at
a certain table! I saw compassion for him in Francezka's face, and thought she might contrive
to help Monsieur Voltaire. She curtsied low to the king, ascended the dais at his invitation,
and then I heard her say, as if to herself:

"I must leave room for Monsieur Voltaire," and at the same time flashed from under her long
lashes a look so full of meaning, so droll, and saying at the same time, "I pray your Majesty
will excuse my awkward country ways."

The king burst out laughing and told Count Saxe to fetch Monsieur Voltaire, which he did. I
never saw a creature so pleased as Monsieur Voltaire was at this. I am sure Molière did not
show the same childish delight when Louis le Grand divided with him the celebrated wing of chicken.

Supper over, the king led the way to the ballroom, where, from a great orchestra of twenty-four
violins, an ocean of music rose and fell like the waves of the sea. Count Saxe walked the minuet
de la cour with Francezka. It seemed as if this night was to be her apotheosis, for everything
seemed designed to show her off and to give her the first place. Monsieur Voltaire did not
dance, but overwhelmingly grateful for the ruse by which Francezka had got him to the king's
table, could not be too assiduous to her or praise her wit too highly. From that hour she was
queen at Chambord. It was after midnight that the ball began. I remained only an hour or two,
and then went to my rest, but not in my chamber next Count Saxe's for once. I had not had much
sleep for several nights, so I betook myself to the stables, where, upon a pile of oats designed
for the morning's feed, I wrapped myself in my cloak and fell into a deep slumber.

CHAPTER XXIX

AS HAVING NO PAST

I awakened, as always, at five o'clock, and on inquiring of the grooms and stablemen, found
that the music at the castle had just ceased. The ball was barely over in time for the stag
hunt, which was to take place at sunrise. It was as yet pitchy dark, but the scene of commotion
almost equaled the ball, for there were one thousand horses to be fed. However, I rather liked
that sort of commotion; the cheerful stamping and champing, as the horses, a hundred at the
time, were led out of their stalls into the sharp December air, with the stars still shining
in the blue-black vault of heaven; the tussle at the great watering troughs, into which fifty
men and boys pumped continually; the fresh smell of the hay, at which the horses sniffed joyfully;
the steady combing and dressing of the creatures--all going on with a kind of orderly confusion.

The hunters were attended to first--something over a hundred of them--and when the chief huntsman
winded his silver horn, at the first paling of the stars and flushing of the sky, and the fierce,
sharp yelping of the dogs in leash was heard, troops of ladies and gentlemen in hunting dress
came down the great staircase into the courtyard. Among them was Francezka. I myself swung
her into her saddle. She looked as radiant as if she had not been traveling, rehearsing, acting
and dancing for many hours before. As she gathered up the reins, she cried:

"Ah, Babache, this is to live! I have just changed my ball costume for my hunting dress. It
is almost as good as those days before and after Uzmaiz!"

Action and adventure were in her blood, and she was a strong woman, capable of much exertion,
but I had never seen in her before this thirst for pleasure.

And to the music of silver hunting horns and the bell-like baying of the dogs, I saw the hunt,
with the king, Count Saxe and Francezka, sweep across the Bridge of the Lions and along the
broad, bare, leafless avenue, into the forest, in the cold, bright December sunrise.

I had not time to join the hunt, and, busy with many duties, scarcely noted how the day slipped
away. Toward three o'clock I saw a solitary figure--a woman--ride across the bridge. No one
else had returned, nor was the hunting party expected until sunset. I recognized Francezka's
form and surmised that, fatigued with all she had undergone, she had slipped away from the
hunting party and had returned to the castle to rest.

About five o'clock, when the short winter afternoon was closing and the sun was red, I received
a message from Francezka. She desired to see me in her apartment. I climbed the stairs to her
rooms at once. Her door was opened for me by old Elizabeth, Peter Embden's sister, who, I remembered,
had been Francezka's waiting maid long ago on that journey from Königsberg. Elizabeth was harder
featured than ever, and rheumatic, so she told me; but Francezka had a way of keeping those
about her, who had once loved her, even if they became a little infirm.

Elizabeth went to tell her mistress. I looked about the room, which had a sweet aroma of Francezka
about it, something which made the place appear as if meant for her and her only. The harpsichord
was by the fireplace--Francezka was always devoted to the harpsichord and played more skilfully
upon it every year. There was her book of music, copied with her own hands, her embroidery
frame, and the book she had been reading lay on the table, by which sat a chair with her scarf
thrown over it, and a delicate perfumed handkerchief was where she had dropped it.

A fire burned upon the great hearth, and already, the room was shadowy with the coming dusk.
There were two windows, one looking out upon the marvelous spiral staircase, the other facing
the sunset. In a moment or two, Francezka came out of the inner room. She wore a white robe
and her hair was neither dressed nor powdered, but braided down her back, as the Brabant peasant
women wear theirs. Perhaps it was weariness on her part, but never was there a creature more
changed than she, from the radiant being of the night before. She looked sad and dispirited,
and the welcome in her eyes when she greeted me reminded me painfully of how she had met me
in the sorrowful years of the past. But I chose not to see too much of this.

"It is the greatest good in the world to me, Madame," I said, "seeing you so happy and so admired.
Any woman on earth might have envied you last night."

Francezka smiled a little--she was then seated and looking into the fire.

"Yes, I ever loved to act, and I felt no more tremor last night, although I was to play opposite
the great Monsieur Voltaire himself, than in those days, so long ago, when I played opposite
the baker's boy in the garden of the Hôtel Kirkpatrick. It would have been better for me, perhaps,
if I had been born to earn my living as Mademoiselle Lecouvreur did, on the stage, than to
have been the heiress of the Capellos."

I was thunderstruck when she said this. I had never known her to express a wish for any other
station in life than the one to which she had been born; and, indeed, she had no reason to
do so. And while I was wondering at this speech, she astounded me still more, by saying calmly:

"It is, however, God's mercy that I can act; for I am acting a part every hour and moment of
my life--the part of a happy woman--when I am of all of God's creatures, the most miserable."

She spoke quite softly and composedly, but I guessed readily that she had sent for me that
she might have a friend to whom to pour out her overcharged heart.

"Gaston Cheverny," was all I could say, meaning that he must be the source of her misery.

"There is no fault at all to be found with my husband. He is kindness and devotion itself.
He likes the world--so do I. He is gallant, is complimentary to the ladies; I would not have
him otherwise. I have only to express a wish, and, if possible, it is fulfilled. Yet, I am
the wretchedest of women. For, Babache, I believe--now, do not laugh at me, Babache, and say
it is my Scotch blood that makes me superstitious--but--but--" she paused a moment, and then
said in a whisper, "I believe Regnard Cheverny's soul has got into Gaston Cheverny's body."

Francezka was always more superstitious than she was willing to allow, but this wildness of
delusion staggered me, especially in a woman of her otherwise strong sense.

I hesitated a little before answering her. I saw in her bright and restless eyes, and in the
varying color upon her cheek, that she was speaking under the influence of powerful emotion.

"Madame," said I, "I must speak plainly. It amazes me that a woman of your excellent understanding
should stoop to the folly of what you have just said."

Francezka showed no anger. She only replied:

"It is not so idle as it sounds. I mean, that although Gaston himself has returned to me, he
seems to have Regnard's nature. Remember, I knew them both well. Do you recollect how the old
dog, Bold, saw the change in Gaston? Well, one day about a month after you left Capello, the
dog, which had shown a steady dislike to Gaston, flew at him--flew at his master whom he had
loved so well. Some hours after, I went to my husband--he was standing on the terrace--and said:

"'You must have worried the dog, I never knew him to attack any one before.' 'He will not attack
any one again,' replied Gaston. 'I thought it best that he should be put out of the way, and
to spare you the knowledge I had the dog drowned an hour ago.' I can not express to you, Babache,
my feelings at this. I do not know what I did, or what I said, but that, without hat or mantle,
I rushed to the lake, below the Italian garden--I seemed to know by instinct that it was there
they would drown him. Some stablemen were then dragging the poor drowned creature--my dog--my
Bold--out of the water. They were frightened at what they had done, when they saw me. I retained
my senses enough to say nothing before those men,--I, Francezka Capello, unable to reprove
mere stablemen for the destruction of a creature dear to me for years!

"I fled to the Italian garden; I was in an agony of terror, as well as grief. I repeated to
myself, over and over again, 'It was but a worn-out old dog--Gaston did it in mercy to me--'
I tried, amid all my distress, to reason with myself--to present Gaston's cause. 'It is a trifle,'
I said, but some inward voice told me it was no trifle, but a matter of the greatest moment
to me. Suppose he should turn against me in the same way? I know not how long I sat there;
it seemed to me not a quarter of an hour, but it was a long, long time.

"Presently, I saw Gaston approach. He seated himself by me; he took my hand; he begged my pardon
a thousand times over; he swore to me it was solely for love of me he had it done--that the
dog might have turned against me as against him, and that apprehension had made him have the
poor creature drowned; and knowing I would object, he had it done secretly--and much more of
the same kind. He was so affectionate to me that my heart was melted. He told me he would have
the dog buried anywhere I wished and see it decently done himself. I said I would have my poor
friend buried under the statue of Petrarch--and it was done that very afternoon. We left the
garden, hand in hand, like lovers. I never felt more in love with my husband than at that moment--and
yet--and yet--there was a concealed fear of something--I know not what--in the very depths
of my soul. To think that he should cherish such a design and that I should not know it; that
he should be so utterly indifferent as he had been, ever since his return, to a creature once
so dear to him as his dog! This is one of the mysterious and unexplored places in Gaston's
nature since his return, that gives me the strangest, the most terrifying sense of unfamiliarity
with him--and he, the tenderest, the most devoted husband--a man I should admire even if I
did not love him."

This story, told with Francezka's dramatic fire, impressed me more than I would have admitted
to her; and however wildly fanciful her idea was that Regnard's soul had got into Gaston's
body, yet, had not I, myself, felt that strangeness she described toward the man I had lived
with as a brother for more than seven years? But I was not guilty of the folly of encouraging
her in the unfortunate notions of which she was already possessed.

"It is a pity, Madame," I said, coolly, "that you seem to attach more consequence to a dead
dog than to a living husband, whom you admit you would admire even if you did not love. There
is a troublesome old dog who shows malice. You are inordinately fond of this old dog. Your
husband, tenderly anxious for you, has the brute drowned without your knowledge. For that you
call yourself the most miserable creature on earth."

Francezka's face turned scarlet with wrath. She half arose from her chair, looking at me in
surprise and anger. I bore her scrutiny calmly, my heart reproaching me somewhat for speaking
as I had done of my old friend Bold.

Francezka seated herself in her old pensive attitude, her cheek upon her hand, and there was
a long silence, broken only by the dropping of the embers, and occasionally a faint cry from
afar. The hunting party had returned, and the chase was proceeding merrily in the great corridors
below.

"Babache," she said presently. "One of the chief joys of love is the living over of past delights.
But Gaston and I live together as having no past. One of the cruelest things about the wound
in his head is that he had long periods of forgetfulness, and certain parts of his life are
absolutely blotted from his mind. And one of those great gaps is everything that pertained
to our courtship and marriage. He remembers the summer in which we were married, but could
not recall the date until I told him. He also remembers that we were secretly married and why.
By some strange misfortune--perhaps because his mind was always groping after me in those sad
days of wandering, both in mind and body--all else--those days when we were boy and girl traveling
through Courland; those evenings on the island in the lake--all, all that pertains to our love
is lost to him. He does not even remember why O Richard, O mon roi was so dear to us. It was
not strange that he should lose his voice for singing, but it is so sad that he can not remember
any of those songs which interpreted our hearts to each other.

"I tried at first to bring it all back to his mind, telling him the whole sweet story so deeply
written on my heart, but it only distressed him with the sense of his lapse of memory. He told
me it was his chief agony when he was recovering, in those intolerable days in the isles of
the East, when he knew not how or why he came there, trying to recall this lost happiness;
he never forgot me, but he could not remember, for a long time, whether we were married or not."

"Those cases are common enough," I said. "I once knew a soldier--a common man--who was shot
as he was in the act of demanding the countersign. He lingered months between life and death,
but lived, with just such an impaired memory as you describe. At last a surgeon, experimenting
on him, raised a piece of broken bone from his skull--straightway he recovered memory and understanding,
remembered the countersign--remembered everything, except what had occurred from the time he
was shot until he was finally cured. Of that time, he was confused and inaccurate, just as
Gaston Cheverny is. And, Madame, those risks are taken by all soldiers alike, and if you can
not accept this you should have married one of the gentlemen of the long robe, who stay at
home and never risk their carcasses in battle."

I thought Francezka would truly have scratched my eyes out at that, so did her own dark and
eloquent eyes blaze. But she said nothing, for, at bottom, there was in her, as in Madame Riano,
as I have often said, a strong good sense that always had the last word. Nothing--nothing could
make her disbelieve in the true and hearty devotion I bore her--so much was plain. Presently
she spoke again.

"It is hard--is it not--that I should see so much of Regnard, whom I ever hated, in Gaston
whom I ever loved? I see, as I tell you, Regnard's soul shining out of Gaston's eyes; I see
Regnard's nature speaking in Gaston's words and acts. Brothers often grow the more alike as
time goes on, but why could not Regnard have grown like Gaston, instead of Gaston like Regnard?"

"Has anything been heard of Monsieur Regnard lately?" I asked.

Francezka shook her head.

"I have asked Gaston repeatedly why he did not contrive to communicate with his brother; an
officer in the army of the East India Company can not be lost, as my Aunt Peggy says, like
a needle in a haystack. But Gaston shows a strange indifference that is unlike his nature.
He was ever the most affectionate of brothers, nor was Regnard wanting in love for him--yet,
Gaston does not like me to mention Regnard to him--except--"

I saw she wished to tell me all--all these painful things that preyed upon her heart in secret,
and that might be dispersed by letting daylight in upon them.

"Except what, Madame?"

"You remember, Babache, that Regnard paid me great court the year of my marriage, when he knew
nothing of it. I think the most painful interview of my whole life was when I was forced to
tell Regnard that I was his brother's wife; and most painful it must forever be to Regnard.
Well, I thought it my duty to tell Gaston about it--and--and--"

She hesitated and then went on, her face coloring warmly.

"He laughed at it--he made me tell it him twice running. It was mortifying to me and cruel
to his absent brother; but he roared with laughter, and referred to it more than once, until
I asked him not to speak of it again."

"And he has not again spoken of it?"

"Oh, no. He always respects my wishes, when he knows them. But he does not seem to have any
instinctive knowledge of them. He often troubles me by not knowing what I wish."

"In short, Madame, Gaston Cheverny has not second sight, as the Kirkpatricks have."

Francezka smiled a little at this, but I saw that her uneasiness was deeply rooted, and I had
not succeeded in tearing it away.

Just then there was a shout of laughter, the winding of a hunting horn, echoing afar, a sound
of scurrying feet up the great stairway. Involuntarily we both turned toward the window looking
out upon it, which the reddening sun made bright. Madame Fontange, one of the beauties of the
court, rushed up the stairway laughing and disheveled, her hoop awry, and her satin robe half
torn off her back by a rascal of a little page, who had seized her and who was calling loudly
for Monsieur Cheverny. Gaston Cheverny, wearing his hunting dress, his horn in his hand, was
close behind, covering the great steps two at a time. As he dashed past the window and his
laughing face flashed by in the blaze of the setting sun, I saw, as I am a living man, Regnard
Cheverny's soul shining out of Gaston Cheverny's eyes. Francezka so expressed it, and I can
not express it any better or any differently. I drew back from the window into the room, and
avoided Francezka's searching glance.

"You have seen it, I see," she said calmly. "Do you wonder that I am a wretched woman?"

I gathered my wits about me, dismissed the strange impression I had got, and said, rising:

"Madame, you have, after long waiting, had the husband of your first youth restored to you.
He is not precisely what he was when you lost him. All men change, and most women. You, perhaps,
are the same, but Gaston Cheverny is not. He is, however, devoted to you, high-minded, honorable,
of the same strong intelligence, but with seven years of hardship and adventure behind him.
All that you have told me is fanciful. Dismiss it, I beg of you, from your mind. Let not a
dead dog and a look of your husband's eye, and an inconsiderate fit of laughter wreck your
happiness."

"Do you believe all you say, Babache?" she asked, coming up to me with a world of entreaty
in her eyes.

I am not a gallant, but I am enough of a gentleman to tell a lie, if necessary, to a lady,
and to swear to it until I am black in the face; so I said:

"I swear it to you, Madame, on my sacred honor." And all the time I saw and knew that Francezka
had reason to be wretched with Gaston Cheverny as he now was.

I left the room, and did not again see Francezka until that evening when there was a masked
ball for the king.

CHAPTER XXX

THE BOAR HUNT

It was bruited about the castle that Madame Cheverny was ill and could not appear, which did
not in the least surprise me, after our interview that afternoon. In the midst of the ball,
however, Francezka appeared, perfectly radiant, and repeated her triumphs of the night before.
I hoped from this that our conversation had dissipated all those strange ideas concerning Gaston
which had lodged in her mind.

If Francezka was admired by the men, Gaston certainly succeeded in captivating the ladies.
Many of them declared that any woman could have been faithful to a man as charming, as witty,
as gallant, as Gaston Cheverny. The king retired from the ball at midnight; he had grown lazy
by that time, but the gentlemen and the "flying squadrons" kept going for two hours more, although
they had to rise at daylight, to go upon a great boar hunt, and this was the second day and
night they had been pleasure-driven. Francezka was among the last to leave the ball room, and
if a sparkling face and smiles and laughter are any indication of a heart at ease, Francezka
was a happy woman. But she was, also, a consummate actress.

Next morning, daybreak saw us assembled in the courtyard. The hunting of the wild boar is serious
business. There is a song about the

                   --firm seat and eagle eye
                   He must acquire who would aspire
                   To see the wild boar die.

For my part, I dread to see many men and any woman take part in this dangerous sport. I especially
wished that Gaston Cheverny, with his infirm right arm, and Francezka, with her adventurous
spirit, should not be of the hunting party; but I had no doubt they would be, and my apprehension
was verified; for both of them were in the great courtyard when the company was mustered.

The king, being lazy and brave--for most lazy men are brave--frankly declared he meant only
to be a spectator of it. So did the old Marshal de Noailles. There are some men who have attained
the highest form of courage in being able to refuse danger. There are others who fear to refuse
it; others again, who despise it; and a small remnant by whom the zest of danger can no more
be resisted than the drunkard can resist wine. These last are always found in a boar hunt.

The preparation for this sport shows that it is seriously regarded. All who take part in it
must eat lightly on that morning. The host, before starting, gives such instructions as he
thinks necessary, especially to listen for a shout of "Take care!" Also, he warns all present
against the boar when he seems to be dying or even dead, for the brute is capable of doing
great damage in the very article of death. The final words spoken on these occasions are always
solemn--

"And may God have us in His keeping."

Although ladies were allowed upon this hunt, and were even armed with hunting knives, it was
not expected, nor indeed permitted, that they should take an active part in it, being mostly
spectators, and especially keeping at a safe distance when the final tussle with the boar is
on. A full-grown boar, luckily, is bulky and noisy and not swift of foot, as reckoned with
other animals, so it is quite possible to see the sport without being in actual danger. I was
in hopes that this was Gaston Cheverny's plan, but found I was mistaken. He had acquired considerable
dexterity with his left arm, and carried his boar spear in his left hand with both ease and
strength. But the command of a left arm gained by a man after he is thirty years of age is
not to be depended upon in an encounter with the most savage animal of which we have any record.

We set out as soon as the king appeared, and proceeded to a place in the forest, about two
leagues away, in which the beaters had found for us a marcassin, or wild pig, which would afford
very good sport, and not so dangerous as a full-grown boar. But the lovers of danger in our
party--and there were many--I knew, would never be satisfied with hunting the pig, and there
would probably be some dangerous business before we returned to the castle. We had dogs of
the ancient boar-hound breed, black marked with tan, as large as mastiffs, and with prodigious
ears. Our piqueurs were especially trained to hunt the boar, and it was inspiring to see how
both men and dogs took to their work. We reached the forest before the sun was high. The woods
had already been beaten by boys with kiaki--a kind of wooden clapper, of which the name describes
the noise. The marcassin had been found, and the dogs put in at once. The whole thing could
have been over in fifteen minutes, but the piqueurs, with great skill, managed to make a whole
morning's amusement out of it, and it was noon before the joyous hallili of the huntsman's
horn proclaimed that the wild pig was dead.

All the ceremonies of presenting the boar's head were gone through with before the king, in
an open glade in the forest. Although it was December, the day was mild and the sun warmed
the brown earth and the crystal-clear air. A great fire was built, and from it a royal dinner
was served by a regiment of cooks. The rude tables were covered with embroidered cloths, and
gold and silver plate abounded. It was a feast worthy of Francis the First. Monsieur Voltaire
was at the dinner, along with others of the guests who did not take part in the hunt; and the
notary's son kept the whole company in a roar with his witticisms. Francezka was in high spirits,
and had the honor of much notice by the king, by Count Saxe, and Monsieur Voltaire, to say
nothing of the Dukes of Bourbon and Richelieu.

It was two o'clock before the dinner was over, and then the major part of the company made
ready to return to the castle. The word was quietly passed around, however, that for those
who wished real work, there was an old "solitary" which had been placed, and those who liked
might go after him. The ladies were not informed of this, and when Count Saxe, and half a dozen
others remained, it was supposed that they would have nothing more dangerous or exciting than
another chase after a marcassin. When the cavalcade, including the king, were riding off, Francezka
turned in her saddle, and, looking toward Gaston, who remained behind, cried:

"Remember, you have but one good arm and part of another one--so, having so lately got you
back, let me not lose you now."

"I promise to take all care," Gaston answered. The look they exchanged, full of genuine affection,
made yesterday's interview seem dreamlike to me.

There were not more than a dozen of us in this party, including Count Saxe and Gaston Cheverny.
It was not for me to warn Gaston against what we were about to engage in. Count Saxe gave him
a gently civil intimation of the danger ahead, but Gaston took no note of it, and was as eager
as any one to find the "solitary." We put off into another part of the forest. I rode by Gaston
Cheverny's side, and privately resolved to remain there. We talked together and I found him
more like the old Gaston than I had yet seen him.

This foolhardy expedition was exactly like Gaston; but when I saw the quickness of his eye,
and the alertness of his movements, I concluded he could take care of himself better than any
of us supposed. It was about three o'clock when we got to the circle in which the beaters had
surrounded the old boar. He had been hunted twice that season and had escaped both times. Huntsmen
are very superstitious, and they had got the notion that if this boar were not killed in the
third chase, there was something unearthly about him. This was fostered by some laughing remark
of Count Saxe about the hunt of Thibaut of Champagne, and the "solitary" being the ghost of
a boar. His ghostship, however, was soon disproved, by finding his huge tracks in the soft
brown earth.

Soon the dogs gave tongue, and the chase was on. We could get occasional glimpses of the boar's
vast bulk, as he made prodigious speed for so heavy an animal through the thickets. There was
a small ravine through which a brook flowed, and for this the boar made. We could hear him
crashing through the underwood, and he got across the brook. The dogs and huntsmen followed
quickly after him. The dogs found the scent again immediately after crossing the water, but
on reaching a large, open plateau above the ravine, they suddenly and inexplicably lost it.
There were no tracks to be seen, and the boar must have turned off either to the right or the
left, in a fringe of thick underwood that bordered the ravine. The dogs ran aimlessly about,
keeping up a dismal yelping of despair. The huntsmen encouraged them by horn and voice, but
were evidently chagrined by this singular disappearance. My master twitted them with stories
of the ghostly hunt of Thibaut, but it was plain the huntsmen thought it no joking matter.
They succeeded in putting the hounds into the thicket on the right, but, although there was
an infinity of barking and yelping and whining, it was plain that the scent had not yet been found.

Meanwhile, as we were standing about this open space, in the clear December afternoon, listening
to the dogs and men, Gaston Cheverny dismounted, and ran a short distance toward the thicket
on the left. Count Saxe called out to him to keep a firm hold on his spear, which he held in
his left hand. He turned to answer, when we saw, breaking from the cover directly behind Gaston,
the boar, his horrible mouth wide open, his tusks grinding and churning blood and foam, his
eyeballs like coals of fire, and his bristles rising like a mane.

We all involuntarily shouted "Take care! Take care!" but no one of us was closer than thirty
yards to Gaston or the boar either. As the creature raised himself to bury his tusks in his
enemy, I saw Gaston, with the quickness of thought, drop the spear from his left hand, and
drawing his hunting knife with his right hand, plunge it once, twice, thrice in the boar's
throat. These powerful thrusts were the beast's deathblow, but he was still capable of killing
Gaston Cheverny, had there been the least remission in those tremendous strokes with the hunting
knife. By that time we were on the ground close to him, and I was about to use my spear when
Count Saxe motioned me away. The boar, although still fighting savagely, was clearly overmastered;
a dozen dogs were tearing at him from behind.

It would have been an outrage to interfere then, so we stood ready for emergencies, while Gaston,
with the assistance of the dogs, despatched the huge beast. The huntsmen were all on hand then,
and when, at last, the great carcass fell over, they surrounded Gaston with shouts of delight.
He was covered with blood, but had not a scratch on him. He could not explain how the boar
got so close to him, except that he was listening to the dogs in the distance, and the first
thing he knew he was looking down the boar's throat. The next thing he remembered, was the
plunging of his knife into the beast's throat, time after time. Like all truly brave men Gaston
did not try to make out the accidents of good fortune as deliberately planned by him. But seldom
have I, in war or sport, seen greater courage, address and strength than Gaston Cheverny showed
on this occasion.

Count Saxe congratulated him warmly, reminding him of that other occasion when by his quickness
he had passed himself off for Count Saxe, and so had earned for himself seven years of captivity,
but had saved Count Saxe. Gaston received this and all our congratulations with becoming modesty.
He turned away from our praises to give liberal drink-money to the huntsmen, who were delighted
beyond reason at the killing of the old "solitary," and that, too, without a man or a dog being
injured. It was then determined to return to Chambord, whose distant towers glowed in the sun.

Gaston, as may be imagined, was in a very wretched condition. He washed off some of the blood
in the little brook, threw away his handsome hunting coat, borrowed a jacket from one of the
huntsmen, and we set off at a smart pace toward the castle.

From the moment I had noticed that Gaston Cheverny wielded his knife in his right hand, my
mind had been in a whirl. That right hand and arm, so swift, so sure, so steady, so strong,
was the one he had said was so weak, that he could not even guide a pen with it, nor play the
guitar. Francezka's parting warning had been to remember the infirmity of that arm--and then--

We rode along briskly the two leagues to the castle. Gaston Cheverny was naturally elate, and
even in the bravest of men, there is an exhilaration, a sort of intoxication at finding one's
self alive when the chance of death was very imminent. I fell behind all the party, and was
rallied by Count Saxe on my taciturnity, and accused of jealousy of Gaston Cheverny's prowess,
but I let him have his joke.

When we reached the castle, we went to our rooms. Mine was the little one I speak of, next
to Count Saxe's bedchamber. When I was washing off by candle-light the stains of the chase--for
it was then after dark--my master entered. He looked at me significantly, going through with
Gaston's motion of plunging the knife into the wild boar; he knew the story of that weakly
arm. I looked back at him and shook my head; I could no more understand it than he.

We hastened down to the state supper in the great dining hall. The king was indisposed or lazy,
so his Majesty did not appear, and I think the party was the gayer thereby. There was but one
long table in the dining hall, and at it were seated above a hundred persons. I was near the
foot, and Gaston Cheverny, in honor of his exploit, sat next Count Saxe. Francezka sat about
midway the table, with a gallant on each side of her.

The aspect of happiness she had shown since the night before remained with her. She wore both
powder and patches, and according to the fashion, there was a tinge of rouge upon her cheek.
She was magnificently dressed in a pale green gown, the color of water-cress, embroidered in
silver, and wore a splendid head-dress. I thought I had never seen her more truly the great
lady. She knew, of course, what Gaston's adventure had been, but I suppose he had not given
her all the particulars.

The supper was singularly merry, perhaps owing to the absence of the king. The singing at the
table was entirely of hunting songs; the little rascals of pages took good care to keep Gaston's
glass filled--he was a great hero with them then. When it came time for the toasts, Count Saxe
arose and after drinking to the king and the ladies, gave Gaston Cheverny's health, together
with an account, as only Maurice of Saxe could give it, of the exploit of the afternoon.

I knew not at the time if Count Saxe intended it, but he seemed to lay the greatest stress
upon Gaston's feat being performed with the right arm--as if any man could have done it with
his left one. My master told me afterward, that it was quite involuntary with him mentioning
Gaston Cheverny's right arm, that he meant rather to avoid it, but, to his chagrin, the words
kept coming up in his speech, he, all the while, feeling that it sounded foolish to mention
that it was done with the right arm.

I glanced toward Francezka while Count Saxe was speaking. There are some inconveniences attached
to sharpness of intellect--nothing escapes it. As Count Saxe proceeded with his recital, I
saw that Francezka had seen at a glance the mystery in it. I had no apprehension of any show
of agitation on her part, she was a woman of too flawless courage and too good an actress,
but she would not suffer the less. I saw a shadow come over her eyes as I had seen a black
cloud darken the face of the lake at Capello. I saw her hands tremble slightly. She looked
steadily at Count Saxe, and avoided the gaze of Gaston Cheverny which became fixed on her.
He had taken more wine than usual. His steady glances, although smiling enough, were calculated
to draw her gaze toward him.

At last, as if forced against her will, she raised her eyes to his, and in them was doubt and
despair. All this went on secretly as it were, amid the talking, the laughing, the singing
of a hundred persons at the supper, with a band of more than forty musicians twanging in the
music gallery above us. Soon after this, the company arose and went into the grand ball room.
The branle was at once formed, and Francezka, as on the night before, led it with Count Saxe.
She showed not the slightest tremor or agitation, but I knew of the wild beating of her heart
under the lace and jewels.

Gaston Cheverny was the hero of the hour. He danced, too, and the women, who all adore brute
courage, wooed him with their smiles and arch glances. I saw him dancing with Madame Fontange,
whom both Francezka and I had seen him chasing up the great staircase two days before. Francezka
was dancing in the same minuet de la cour. There is a part when, to languorous music, the gentlemen,
with their plumed hats, sweeping the ground, bow low to the ladies. As Gaston Cheverny did
this, I saw suddenly flash into his eyes that look of Regnard Cheverny's. Francezka saw it,
too. It was the very end of the minuet.

In the confusion that followed the breaking up of the dance Francezka disappeared. In a little
while there was a hue and cry raised for Madame Cheverny. Messengers were sent after her. She
was in her rooms, and sent word back that she was fatigued with the chase that day, and as
she was to rehearse next day as well as act, she begged to be excused. When I heard this message
repeated, I left the ball room, and going up the great spiral staircase, open to the moonlight
which flooded the earth, stopped opposite Francezka's window. The sky was studded with glowing
stars, and a great silver lamp of a moon made the night radiant. Below, lights were shining
from every window, and the swell of the music kept rhythm with the beat of the dancers' feet.
But there, at that lonely height, all was still as death. Francezka's window opened. It was
not four feet from me.

"I knew your step," she said.

I remained silent and awkward. My heart, aching for her pain, had brought my body thither,
but after I had reached her, I knew not what to say. She still wore her splendid gown and all
her jewels.

"I know all about that coup de grâce with his right arm," she said in a voice quiet, though
trembling a little. "Do you wonder that I am always in terror of something, I know not what?
One thing is certain. I do not know Gaston any longer. He is as strange, even stranger to me
than he is to you. Also, he is as kind, as devoted to me as ever he was. I hate and dread mysteries--and
I am enveloped in one."

She continued looking at me for a moment; I still knew not what to say. Then, she softly closed
the window. I remained out there on the stairs until the December cold forced me to seek the
fire in the great hall below. There sat Gaston Cheverny, among a number of gentlemen. He was
the gayest, and might be adjudged the comeliest, gracefullest, most accomplished man there,
excepting always Maurice, Count of Saxe.

The next day, the king left Chambord, but the other guests stayed on for a full fortnight.

It often occurred to me, that Chambord in its palmiest days, of Francis the First with his
Ronsard, of Louis le Grand with his Molière, never sheltered more wit, beauty and courage,
than it did at this time. The wit and courage of Count Saxe are too well-known to need comment,
and the same may be said of the Duc de Noailles, Marshal Boufflers, Monsieur d'Argental, and
others then at Chambord. As for beauty, combined with wit, Francezka Capello led all the ladies,
but there were other gifted ones. Even Madame du Châtelet, in spite of her everlasting algebra
and Newton's Principia, was not an ill-looking woman. Madame Villars and Madame Fontange were
charming. The presence of these ladies and others, all remarkable for spirit, was ever after
alleged as the reason for the disappearance of the celebrated pane of glass, in one of the
windows of the yellow saloon which was used as the theater.

On this window pane Francis the First had scratched this ungallant distich:

                       Toute femme varie,
                       Mal habile qui s'y fie.

One night, Monsieur Voltaire read this aloud, and kept the whole saloon in a roar over his
idea of what Francis the First would have said were he to come to life then. His tirade was
interrupted by Francezka and Madame Villars seizing him, blindfolding and tying him with their
scarfs and putting him for punishment into a sort of improvised stocks. In vain Monsieur Voltaire
called upon the gentlemen to assist him; he was left helpless in the hands of the ladies, who
maltreated him severely. Monsieur Voltaire's evident enjoyment of his punishment at the hands
of these captivating creatures brought about one of those domestic tempests which frequently
disturbed the atmosphere of Cirey and of the "Petit Palais" on the isle of St. Louis.

It was said that in the heat of the discussion next morning about it, Madame du Châtelet threw
Newton's Principia at Monsieur Voltaire's head, and he made a narrow miss by dodging. Certain
it is, they had high words, and Madame du Châtelet in a huff left the castle some days before
Monsieur Voltaire; and it was noted that he seemed much gayer and more gallant after the lady's
departure than before.

Meanwhile, the pane of glass mysteriously disappeared. I have no doubt it was accidentally
broken by one of those little rogues of pages of honor, who was afraid to acknowledge his fault;
but Monsieur Voltaire chose to put it on the ladies in general and on Francezka in particular,
and there was great sport and much wit over the matter. Francezka was the gayest, the airiest,
the most daring of the ladies; she never more said a single word to me concerning that misery
which she had represented to me as eating her heart out; and though as kind, as tender to me
as ever, she rather avoided private conversations with me--for which I was glad.

Gaston seemed to me to become more like the Gaston of old than he had been, but my heart did
not warm to him, nor could I forget that incident of his killing the wild boar. He made no
allusion to this whatever, and continued to use his left arm only. I would have given much
to know what he supposed we thought of it.

Of course, the play was high, on the nights when there were cards, and Count Saxe enriched
several of his guests by his losses. He lost magnificently, and won with the greatest modesty.

During this fortnight the consumption of victuals, wine and horse feed was something stupendous,
but my master never grumbled about the charges. Luckily, he had Beauvais to look after the
wine and victual, and myself to look after the horse feed.

At last came the day of departure. The servants and baggage wagons were sent on some hours
in advance and at nine o'clock in the morning the company all set out together for Blois, where
they were to disperse. Gaston Cheverny rode with the gentlemen, and Francezka traveled alone
in her coach. She bade me an affectionate good by and begged me to come with Count Saxe to
the château of Capello, in the spring. Apparently she was happy and composed, but I knew she
was neither. There was a searching and anxious expression in her eyes which, in spite of her
smiles and gaiety, showed me a heart disturbed. That night every soul in the castle was in
bed a little after nine o'clock, and I think we all slept a week.

CHAPTER XXXI

THE BITTERNESS OF DOUBT

My master went to Paris for Christmas, to our old lodging at the Luxembourg. The king was very
anxious for Count Saxe to be permanently lodged at Versailles, but my master, by a variety
of clever subterfuges, declined to exchange his splendid and spacious apartments at the Luxembourg,
for the dog-hole which was all they had to offer him at Versailles. Two thousand persons were
lodged in the palace. It may be imagined what sort of lodging much of it was; mere closets
for ladies of quality, a landing at a stair's head curtained off for gentlemen. My master was
offered a couple of rooms under the roof for himself, myself and Beauvais. Count Saxe responded
that he was not a snail, and required a lodging somewhat larger than himself. He was told that
a bishop was satisfied with one room and an alcove for his valet. My master replied that a
bishop was a holier man than he. The fact is, my master did not like the everlasting restraints
of Versailles. Some malicious people said he preferred Paris on account of Mademoiselle Verières,
the actress. God knows. There are always people who can ascribe the worst motives to the simplest
actions.

Francezka and Gaston Cheverny spent the winter at the Hôtel Kirkpatrick. Madame Riano had gone
to England then, but only made a brief stay. From thence she went to Rome, and Monsieur Voltaire
declared it was for the purpose of getting the pope to put himself at the head of the Kirkpatricks
to march to London and wrest the throne of England from the Hanoverians for Prince Charles
Edward Stuart. At all events, news reached Paris that Madame Riano had fallen out violently
with the Holy Father, as she had done with the Kings of France, of Spain and of England, and
was breathing out fire and slaughter against the Holy See.

It was to be expected that Francezka and Gaston should live with splendor and gaiety at the
Hôtel Kirkpatrick, and they did; this, too, upon a scale that probably made Francezka's father,
the prudent old Scotchman, writhe in his grave. Balls, masques, concerts and ballets followed
each other with dazzling swiftness. A temporary theater was built in the garden on the site
of the one where Francezka had made her first dramatic adventure with the baker's boy, under
the management of Jacques Haret. Here were given the best comedies of the day, with Francezka
as the star. Monsieur Voltaire was often in the cast, and some of his own masterpieces were
given at this theater for the first time.

Nor was he the only wit who frequented the Hôtel Kirkpatrick. Not only wits, but scholars like
Maupertius, the two Bernouillis, many poets and literary men, Cardinal de Polignac and Marquis
de Beauvau, soldiers like Marshal Count de Belle-Isle, his brother the Chevalier, the Prince
de Soubise, the Prince de Clermont, and others, made Francezka's saloon shine. She was the
extreme of the mode and her saloon became the rage. Monsieur Voltaire went about threatening
the ladies, that if they did not look out, Madame Cheverny would bring virtue into fashion.
But there was no panic among them, although it can not be denied that Francezka was admired
for her virtue as for her wit, and, with such a fortune as hers, neither would be likely to
remain under an eclipse.

She was in the greatest demand at Versailles, too, and danced in all of the finest ballets
given for the king. She had her English curricle, and with her English joki standing up behind
her, was often seen driving in the Bois de Boulogne. She dressed superbly, and was altogether
glorious. The same felicity seemed to attend Gaston. The Duc de Richelieu took a violent fancy
to him, which, of course, recommended him to the king. He was of all the royal hunting parties.
The king loved to hear him tell of his adventures in the East, which were extremely interesting,
and Gaston was ever eloquent of tongue. He was gallant to the ladies, and much run after by
them, but I do not think he ever gave Francezka cause for a moment's jealousy. In short, if
two human beings might be supposed to walk the sunny heights of joy, it was Francezka and Gaston
Cheverny.

Paris was seething during the winter of 1740-41, which preceded the outbreak of the first Silesian
war on the part of the great Frederick of Prussia against the greater Maria Theresa of Austria-Hungary.
France and Paris were dragged hither and thither, Cardinal Fleury, a peaceful old man, urging
that France remain neutral; Marshal Belle-Isle, a genius in war, insisting that France must
side with Prussia. Naturally, the military element wanted war, and when it seemed likely that
Cardinal Fleury would keep France at peace, Marshal Belle-Isle went about storming that this
old parson would ruin everything. It was understood that no active military operations would
take place until the late summer, so the gay dogs of officers and the merry ladies who danced
in the court ballets, and flitted about like butterflies in the sun, had to make the most of
Paris then. The pace at which they went was killing--and Francezka and Gaston Cheverny were
not the last in this race.

One day, shortly before the carnival, there was a great fête at the Louvre, and the courtyard
was filling up with magnificent coaches. The finest of all was a gilt coach superbly horsed
with six horses, with four outriders in the crimson and gold of Francezka's liveries. She sat
alone in the coach, waiting her turn to drive up to the great entrance. She was, as always,
dressed with splendor, and as she sat back in the coach, fanning herself with a beautiful fan
that slightly moved the white plumes of her head-dress, I made my way through the crush and
spoke to her. She had one of her lackeys let down the coach steps, and I stood on them while
speaking to her. I congratulated her on her splendid equipage.

"It is very superb, I know," she replied, but a shade came over her face. "Is it not trying,
Babache, to have one's lightest word taken seriously? Here is the story of this coach. I had
a handsome one--fine enough for any one--but happening to say one day, in pure carelessness,
that I should like to have a gilt coach, Gaston orders this one for me, secretly, and it arrives
this morning, to my astonishment. Moreover, in order to do it, Gaston, himself, went without
some horses he needs. He is by no means so well mounted as he should be."

"At least, Madame," I replied, "few wives have your cause of complaint."

I noticed then some dissatisfaction in Francezka's face; the pursuit of pleasure, night and
day, is bound to leave its marks on the strongest frame, and the best balanced nerves. I suspected
Francezka was in the mood to find fault.

"Yes," she replied to my last words, "few wives can complain of too great complaisance on the
part of their husbands. But it is, surely, not a comfortable way to live, for a woman, to watch
and weigh her words with her husband, lest he act upon the most lightly expressed wish. Depend
upon it, Babache, a great passion is a great burden."

Francezka said this to me--Francezka, less than a year after Gaston's return. Oh, how strange
a thing is a great passion after all!

In a minute or two more, I heard Gaston's voice over my shoulder. He was standing on the coach
step below me, and looked smiling and triumphant.

"I see you approve of this equipage," said he to me. "It is not unworthy even of Francezka."

I agreed with him; admired the horses--six superb roans--and then the time came to move on,
and I sprang to the ground, while Gaston stepped into the coach.

As I walked away, I reflected that the money to pay for the gilt coach and six came out of
Francezka's estate. But Gaston, I knew, had the management of it; and it is not the husband
of every heiress who is satisfied to keep indifferent horses for himself, and provide his wife
with six for her coach, and four for her outriders, to say nothing of the finest coach in Paris.

But was Francezka happy? Her air that day did not indicate it, but rather weariness, and disgust
of the pleasures she followed so assiduously. It is never a sign of happiness to follow pleasure
madly.

In walking and riding about the streets of Paris I kept a lookout for Jacques Haret. I had
not forgotten my promise to give him a good beating the next time I saw him, and felt conscientious
scruples that I had not done it when I had met him the spring before. But the news he gave
me on that occasion was so startling it put my duty out of my head. I had not the slightest
doubt that some time or other he would drift back to Paris. Fellows of Jacques Haret's kidney
can no more keep away from Paris than cats can keep away from cream.

So I watched for him, and one evening, soon after the carnival, as I was walking along the
Rue St. Jacques, I came face to face with Jacques Haret. It was dusk, but the lamps which hung
across the street had not yet been lighted. Jacques Haret was stepping debonairly along, whistling
cheerfully Sur le pont d'Avignon. I noticed, even in the dim February evening, that he was
shabbily dressed, but bore the marks of good eating and drinking on his face. When we came
face to face he involuntarily halted. I stepped up to him and said:

"Where will you take it?"

The fellow knew I meant the beating I had promised. I continued:

"Here in the public street, where we shall be recognized, arrested, and Count Saxe will see
that I come to no harm, while you will cool your heels in the Châtelet prison where you belong;
or in the Luxembourg gardens which are deserted now, and where I can beat you more at my leisure,
but not the less hard?"

"In the Luxembourg gardens," said the scoundrel, coolly, after a pause.

I have ever admired Jacques Haret's courage and I admired it now. He knew I meant to thrash
him, that I had the strength to do it, and that if he killed me Count Saxe would tear him limb
from limb. Ay, but when didst thou see thyself a lost creature for want of faith in the son
of Mary? If not, thou hast not yet been savingly convinced by the Spirit of Christ; for that,
when it convinceth effectually of sin, it convinceth of unbelief;
though thou hast been never so much convinced of sins against the
law, if thou hast not seen thyself under the power and dominion, guilt
and punishment of sin, because thou didst not believe in Christ, thou
hast not yet been savingly convinced; for that's one work of the Spirit
to convince of sin, 'Because they believe not on me,' saith Jesus
the Son of Mary, who was espoused to Joseph the carpenter: But on
the contrary, dost thou not say in thy heart, thou never hadst thy
faith to seek, but hast always believed with as good a faith as any
one alive?

If so, then know for certain that thou hast no faith of the operation of God in thee, according
to God's ordinary working; and if so, then know, that if the Son
of Man should come to judge the world at this moment of time, that
thou with all thy faith (thou thinkest thou hast) wouldst fall in
the judgment (2 Thess 2:12).

Exam. 3. Art thou born again? Then thou seest that thy great sin was want of faith in the Son of
Mary. Then thou seest that it is he that was sent of God to die for the sins of the world (John
1:29, 3:16-19; Acts 13:38,39) and that thou art complete in him,
without any works of the law (Rom 4:5), then thou rejoicest in Christ
Jesus, and puttest no confidence in the flesh (Phil 3:3) yet thou
rejoicest in the flesh and blood of the Son of Mary, knowing that
his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed (John 6:55)
out of which thou wouldest very willingly make thy life all thy days;
out of his birth, obedience, death, resurrection, ascension, and glorious
intercession, now at the right hand of his Father (Heb 7:24,25), but
if thou art wavering in these things, know that thou art but a babe
at the best, and for ought thou knowest, God may cut thee off in thy
unbelief, and cast thee into utter darkness, where there shall be
weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.



When I was through with him he presented a very battered appearance.

"I am now in the class with Monsieur Voltaire," he said, as he wiped the blood from his nose.
"He has had two beatings so far and so have I. But faith! the world is so unjust! It will not
sympathize with me as it did with Voltaire. However, he was beaten by the Duc de Rohan's lackeys,
while I was pummeled by a prince, a Tatar prince born in the Marais."

"I ought to have run you through," I said, "except that I am squeamish about taking human life.
Now, go your ways, Jacques Haret, but if you do not want this dose repeated keep out of my way."

He bowed to the ground.

"My dear sir," he said, "I never sought your society in my life, nor even that of your master.
The inducement which you offer me to keep out of your way is sufficient. I hope I shall never
see you or your cross eye again."

As I turned and went into my lodgings I felt how futile a thing I had done; the dog should
have been killed, but as I said, I am squeamish about taking human life. However, I knew that
such punishment as I had given him would mightily please Francezka, and I determined to take
the first occasion of telling her.

It came the next night, when there was to be a great mi-carême rout and ball at the Hôtel Kirkpatrick.
I did not usually go to these balls unless commanded by my master, and he was a merciful man;
but on this night I went with him of my own free will. It was a very splendid company, and
few there were not above my quality. Madame Riano, who had just returned from Rome, sparkled
with diamonds like a walking Golconda; but Francezka wore only a few gems, but those exquisite.
She looked very weary; the months of gaiety and dissipation she had led were telling on her.
Gaston was a noble host, attentive to all, and not forgetting the kind and quality of respect
due to each.

When the rout was at its height, and the floor of the dancing saloon crowded, I had occasion
to pass through the great suite of rooms, which were nearly deserted for the ball room. There
was a little curtained alcove, in which either the lights had been forgotten or had been put
out, and from that place, dark and still, although the wild racket of the ball was going on
in the same building, I heard Francezka's voice calling me. I went in and found her sitting
on a sofa.

"I am so very tired," she said. "I came here for a moment's rest, not thinking I should be
fortunate enough to have a word with my Babache."

I sat down by her and told her the story of my beating Jacques Haret. I could not see her face
in the darkness, but she clapped her hands joyously.

"I am afraid I want vengeance to be mine instead of the Lord's," she cried with her old spirit.
"I am like my Aunt Peggy in that. Thank you for every blow you gave Jacques Haret. I shall
tell Peter, but not poor Lisa. That girl has the nature of a spaniel. I believe she reproaches
herself for having thrown in his face the silver snuff-box Jacques Haret gave her."

I knew that Francezka and Gaston had been invited to visit Chambord in the spring, and I expressed
a wish that they might come.

"No," replied Francezka, relapsing into the weary tone she had first used. "We have declined
the invitation. I am so tired of balls and hunting parties and ballets, and everything in the
world, that I feel sometimes as if I wished to be a hermit."

I listened in sorrow, but hardly in surprise. It is as true as the forty-seventh proposition
of Euclid that to give a human being all he or she wants of anything is to cure all liking
for it. Francezka's natural taste, however, was so strongly in favor of gaiety and splendor,
and she had tasted so little of it, that I thought satiety would spare her longer than most.
There was a pause, after which I said:

"You will be missed at Chambord, but Capello is so sweet in the spring and summer."

"Yes," answered Francezka, "but even there I shall not be able to escape people. Do you remember
how they flocked there when Gaston came home? And I verily believe half Paris means to follow
us to Capello. Gaston has invited many persons to visit us."

"Against your wish Madame?" I asked in surprise.

"Oh, no, he never does anything against my wish, but he never knows what my wish is--since
his return. Before he went away he always knew my wishes in advance. Sometimes he combatted
them. We had our little wrangles from the time we first met and loved, and often showed temper,
one to the other, until his return. Now we never have any wrangles. As soon as I express my
will Gaston immediately makes it his will. That, you will grant, is an unnatural way for two
merely human creatures to live."

"At least not many are afflicted with that form of unhappiness, Madame."

"It is a form of unhappiness, though. I dare not express the smallest disapproval of a thing
or a person that Gaston does not seem to take it as law. The most casual wish is fulfilled,
but, as I say, he has not the clairvoyance of love with all this devotion. He might have seen
that I longed for rest and quiet at Capello, but he did not. Now, if I express the slightest
distaste for company there he will withdraw every invitation. To have one's lightest word taken
seriously, and one's smallest inclination influence the conduct of another person, is highly
uncomfortable."

I knew not what to say. Francezka's grievance appeared to me to be a strange one though not
wholly unreasoning. But I saw what gave me the sharpest pain. It flashed upon me that she no
longer loved Gaston Cheverny. As if she had the clairvoyance that she complained of Gaston's
lacking, she continued:

"Yes; outwardly, all is the same; inwardly, all is changed. I have a growing sense of strangeness
with my husband. At first I felt the same intimate friendship I had felt during our short married
life, but by insensible degrees I have come to feel that I do not know Gaston, nor does Gaston
know me. It is an appalling feeling."

"I should think so," I replied, and fell silent.

It was all strange and painful to me. I knew Francezka's faults well, but I had never seen
in her any deficiency in good sense. Even her obstinate hanging on to the belief that Gaston
was alive when the world believed him dead had been justified, and her course had been most
practical during it all. But this new disgust at life, this fault-finding with her husband,
seemed to me lacking in reason. Yet there was undoubtedly something changed in Gaston's personality.
As this thought passed through my mind she answered it, again as if by intuition:

"You remember, Babache, you always told me you loved Gaston from the moment you beheld him.
But you don't love him now. You have not loved him since his return."

Oh, what a misfortune it is to be too quick of wit!

Francezka then rose and said to me:

"I return now to my guests. Think not that I have uttered to any other human being what I have
said to you. But I have looked my last on happiness. I do not love you any the less, Babache.
As you were my chief consolation in that dreadful time of waiting, so now that Destiny has
played me this shabby trick in giving me back the shadow of happiness and withholding the substance,
I still look to you for comfort. Remember, whoever wearies me at Capello, you never will. Not
since that first hour we met in this old garden, when you saw me in the beginning of my career
of headstrong folly, have I ever beheld your honest face without pleasure."

I returned to the ballroom, and the first thing I saw was Francezka dancing the wildest branle
I ever saw with the most graceful abandon imaginable. I concluded that all women were singular
beings, in which my master agreed, when I made the observation to him; and some persons said
that Count Saxe had great experience with the sex.

CHAPTER XXXII

IN SNUFF-COLORED CLOTHES

I was much on the road between Paris and Chambord for the next month. It was true that Francezka
and Gaston had declined with thanks to visit Chambord that year on account of returning to
Capello, but they very cordially invited Count Saxe to be their guest some time during the
summer, and Count Saxe, of course, included Captain Babache. About that time we knew for a
certainty that Marshal Belle-Isle would take an army of observation across the Rhine in August,
and my master would be given command of the vanguard. So it was arranged that on our way to
Fort Louis, where the crossing was to be made, we should make a détour and visit Francezka
and Gaston at Capello.

It was in April that one afternoon, being at leisure, and my master being of the king's party
at Choisy, I was minded to go to the Hôtel Kirkpatrick. Madame Riano was there then, and I
wished to pay her my respects.

I was shown into the garden where, in the very same sweet, retired spot where I had first seen
Francezka, Madame Riano and Francezka were sitting. I was invited by a lackey to join them.
As I passed through the rooms I saw old Peter, who came forward and spoke to me, as he always
did, and I was glad to see the honest old soul. I asked him if he was pleased at the prospect
of seeing Capello soon.

"More than I can say, Monsieur; my Lisa is there, and she is longing to see her poor old uncle
again. Yes, Monsieur, glad shall I be to see Capello again. I was born and reared close by--"
He stopped; I knew that he meant Castle Haret.

In the garden sat Madame Riano and Francezka. Madame Riano had on her head a great hat with
a thousand black plumes on it, and she clutched her huge fan menacingly at my approach, although
I must say she had ever treated me with condescension. I think she reserved her fire for great
guns, like Count Saxe and the pope.

Francezka looked cheerful and even gay. She was by no means steady in that sad condition of
mind in which I had found her the night of the rout. But it seemed to me an evil sign to find
her always brightening at the prospect of a change, showing thereby that nothing suited her.
I remember she wore a pale flowered silk, with sleeves that fell back from her elbow, and she,
too, had a hat on, but it might have been worn by one of Watteau's shepherdesses. Both the
ladies gave me kindly greeting. Madame Riano began to ask me something about Chambord.

"I suppose Count Saxe will have forty or fifty of his ladies there this bout," remarked this
terrible old Scotch woman.

I replied respectfully that I did not understand her allusion.

"Fudge!" she cried; "you are an infant, forsooth! You know less about Maurice of Saxe than
any man in Paris, I warrant."

Francezka's laughing arch glance showed me that I could expect no help in that quarter, so
I prepared to defend myself.

"Madame, you are quite right," I replied. "I do know less than any man on this planet about
Count Saxe and the ladies."

"You would not be the better for such information," tartly responded Madame Riano. "He will
run after anything in petticoats, a milliner's apprentice or the queen's sister, it is all
one to that Maurice of Saxe."

"Madame," said I, rising, "I perceive there is a dampness in this garden. I do not look like
a delicate flower, but I am and I feel myself obliged to leave."

"Sit down," answered Madame Riano; "you are an honest fellow, and I'll not mention Saxe again
except to say that he is the wildest, craftiest, boldest roué--"

I was going, but Francezka, looking warningly at Madame Riano, said to me, with something softly
trenchant in her voice:

"Remain, Babache."

At that moment I looked up and saw Gaston Cheverny walking across the grass in company with
Jacques Haret.

