I do not propose to take you down into the deep places where Jacob Behmen dwells and works.
And that for a very good reason.  For I have found no firm footing in those deep places for
my own feet.  I wade in and in to the utmost of my ability, and still there rise up above me,
and stretch out around me, and sink down beneath me, vast reaches of revelation and speculation,
attainment and experience, before which I can only wonder and worship.  See Jacob Behmen working
with his hands in his solitary stall, when he is suddenly caught up into heaven till he beholds
in enraptured vision The Most High Himself.  And then, after that, see him swept down to hell,
down to sin, and down into the bottomless pit of the human heart.  Jacob Behmen, almost more
than any other man whatsoever, is carried up till he moves like a holy angel or a glorified
saint among things unseen and eternal.  Jacob Behmen is of the race of the seers, and he stands
out a very prince among them.  He is full of eyes, and all his eyes are full of light.  It
does not stagger me to hear his disciples calling him, as HEGEL does, 'a man of a mighty mind,'
or, as LAW does, 'the illuminated Behmen,' and 'the blessed Behmen.'  'In speculative power,'
says dry DR. KURTZ, 'and in poetic wealth, exhibited with epic and dramatic effect, Behmen's
system surpasses everything of the kind ever written.'  Some of his disciples have the hardihood
to affirm indeed that even ISAAC NEWTON ploughed with Behmen's heifer, but had not the boldness
to acknowledge the debt.  I entirely accept it when his disciples assert it of their master
that he had a privilege and a passport permitted him such as no mortal man has had the like
since JOHN'S eyes closed upon his completed Apocalypse.  After repeated and prolonged reading
of Behmen's amazing books, nothing that has been said by his most ecstatic disciples about
their adored master either astonishes or offends me.  Dante himself does not beat such a soaring
wing as Behmen's; and all the trumpets that sound in Paradise Lost do not swell my heart and
chase its blood like Jacob Behmen's broken syllables about the Fall.  I would not wonder to
have it pointed out to me in the world to come that all that Gichtel, and St. Martin, and Hegel,
and Law, and Walton, and Martensen, and Hartmann have said about Jacob Behmen and his visions
of GOD and Nature and Man were all but literally true.  No doubt,--nay, the thing is certain,--that
if you open Jacob Behmen anywhere as Gregory Richter opened the Aurora; if a new idea is a
pain and a provocation to you; if you have any prejudice in your heart for any reason against
Behmen; if you dislike the sound of his name because some one you dislike has discovered him
and praised him, or because you do not yourself already know him and love him, then, no doubt,
you will find plenty in Behmen at which to stumble, and which will amply justify you in anything
you wish to say against him.  But if you are a true student and a good man; if you are an open-minded
and a humble- minded man; if you are prepared to sit at any man's feet who will engage to lead
you a single step out of your ignorance and your evil; if you open Behmen with a predisposition
to believe in him, and with the expectation and the determination to get good out of him,--then,
in the measure of all that; in the measure of your capacity of mind and your hospitality of
heart; in the measure of your humility, seriousness, patience, teachableness, hunger for truth,
hunger for righteousness,--in that measure you will find Jacob Behmen to be what MAURICE tells
us he found him to be, 'a generative thinker.'  Out of much you cannot understand,--wherever
the blame for that may lie,--out of much slag and much dross, I am mistaken if you will not
lay up some of your finest gold; and out of much straw and chaff some of the finest of the
wheat. The Divine Nature, human nature, time, space, matter, life, love, sin, death, holiness,
heaven, hell,--Behmen's reader must have lived and moved all his days among such things as
these: he must be at home, as far as the mind of man can be at home, among such things as these,
and then he will begin to understand Behmen, and will still strive better and better to understand
him; and, where he does not as yet understand him, he will set that down to his own inattention,
incapacity, want of due preparation, and want of the proper ripeness for such a study.

At the same time let all intending students of Jacob Behmen take warning that they will have
to learn an absolutely new and an unheard-of language if they would speak with Behmen and have
Behmen speak with them.  For Behmen's books are written neither in German nor in English of
any age or idiom, but in the most original and uncouth Behmenese.  Like John Bunyan, but never
with John Bunyan's literary grace, Behmen will borrow, now a Latin word or phrase from his
reading of learned authors, or, more often, from the conversations of his learned friends;
and then he will take some astrological or alchemical expression of AGRIPPA, or PARACELSUS,
or some such outlaw, and will, as with his awl and rosin-end, sew together a sentence, and
hammer together a page of the most incongruous and unheard- of phraseology, till, as we read
Behmen's earlier work especially, we continually exclaim, O for a chapter of John Bunyan's
clear, and sweet, and classical English!  The Aurora was written in a language, if writing
and a language it can be called, that had never been seen written or heard spoken before, or
has since, on the face of the earth.  And as our students learn Greek in order to read Homer
and Plato and Paul and John, and Latin in order to read Virgil and Tacitus, and Italian to
read Dante, and German to read Goethe, so William Law tells us that he learned Behmen's Behmenite
High Dutch, and that too after he was an old man, in order that he might completely master
the Aurora and its kindred books. And as our schoolboys laugh and jeer at the outlandish sounds
of Greek and Latin and German, till they have learned to read and love the great authors who
have written in those languages, so WESLEY, and SOUTHEY, and even HALLAM himself, jest and
flout and call names at Jacob Behmen, because they have not taken the trouble to learn his
language, to master his mind, and to drink in his spirit.  At the same time, and after all
that has been said about Behmen's barbarous style, Bishop Martensen tells us how the readers
of SCHELLING were surprised and enraptured by a wealth of new expressions and new turns of
speech in their mother tongue.  But all these belonged to Behmen, or were fashioned on the
model of his symbolical language.  As it is, with all his astrology, and all his alchemy, and
all his barbarities of form and expression, I for one will always take sides with the author
of The Serious Call, and The Spirit of Prayer, and The Spirit of Love, and The Way to Divine
Knowledge, in the disputed matter of Jacob Behmen's sanity and sanctity; and I will continue
to believe that if I had only had the scholarship, and the intellect, and the patience, and
the enterprise, to have mastered, through all their intricacies, the Behmenite grammar and
the Behmenite vocabulary, I also would have found in Behmen all that Freher and Pordage and
Law and Walton found.  Even in the short way into this great man that I have gone, I have come
upon such rare and rich mines of divine and eternal truth that I can easily believe that they
who have dug deeper have come upon uncounted riches.  'Next to the Scriptures,' writes William
Law, 'my only book is the illuminated Behmen.  For the whole kingdom of grace and nature was
opened in him.  In reading Behmen I am always at home, and kept close to the kingdom of GOD
that is within me.' 'I am not young,' said CLAUDE DE ST. MARTIN, 'being now near my fiftieth
year, nevertheless I have begun to learn German, in order that I may read this incomparable
author in his own tongue.  I have written some not unacceptable books myself, but I am not
worthy to unloose the shoestrings of this wonderful man.  I advise you to throw yourself into
the depths of Jacob Behmen.  There is such a profundity and exaltation of truth in them, and
such a simple and delicious nutriment.'

The Town Council of Goerlitz, hounded on by their Minister, sentenced Behmen to be banished,
and interdicted him from ever writing any more. But in sheer shame at what they had done they
immediately recalled Behmen from banishment; only, they insisted that he should confine himself
to his shop, and leave all writing of books alone.  Behmen had no ambition to write any more,
and, as a matter of fact, he kept silence even to himself for seven whole years.  But as those
years went on it came to be with him, to use his own words, as with so much grain that has
been buried in the earth, and which, in spite of storms and tempests, will, out of its own
life, spring up, and that even when reason says it is now winter, and that all hope and all
power is gone.  And thus it was that, under the same instigation which had produced the Aurora,
Behmen at a rush wrote his very fine if very difficult book, The Three Principles of the Divine
Essence.  He calls The Three Principles his A B C, and the easiest of all his books.  And William
Law recommends all beginners in Behmen to read alone for some sufficient time the tenth and
twelfth chapters of The Three Principles.  I shall let Behmen describe the contents of his
easiest book in his own words.  'In this second book,' he says, 'there is declared what GOD
is, what Nature is, what the creatures are, what the love and meekness of GOD are, what GOD'S
will is, what the wrath of GOD is, and what joy and sorrow are.  As also, how all things took
their beginning: with the true difference between eternal and transitory creatures.  Specially
of man and his soul, what the soul is, and how it is an eternal creature.  Also what heaven
is, wherein GOD and the holy angels and holy men dwell, and hell wherein the devils dwell:
and how all things were originally created and had their being.  In sum, what the Essence of
all Essences is.  And thus I commit my reader to the sweet love of GOD.'  The Three Principles,
according to CHRISTOPHER WALTON, was the first book of Behmen's that William Law ever held
in his hand.  That, then, was the title-page, and those were the contents, that threw that
princely and saintly mind into such a sweat.  It was a great day for William Law, and through
him it was, and will yet be acknowledged to have been, a great day for English theology when
he chanced, at an old bookstall, upon The Three Principles, Englished by a Barrister of the
Inner Temple.  The picture of that bookstall that day is engraven in lines of light and love
on the heart of every grateful reader of Jacob Behmen and of William Law's later and richer
and riper writings.

In three months after he had finished The Three Principles, Behmen had composed a companion
treatise, entitled The Threefold Life of Man. Modest about himself as Behmen always was, he
could not be wholly blind about his own incomparable books.  And he but spoke the simple truth
about his third book when he said of it--as, indeed, he was constantly saying about all his
books--that it will serve every reader just according to his constellation, his inclination,
his disposition, his complexion, his profession, and his whole condition.  'You will be soon
weary of all contentious books,' he wrote to CASPER LINDERN, 'if you entertain and get The
Threefold Life of Man into your mind and heart.' 'The subject of regeneration,' says Christopher
Walton, 'is the pith and drift of all Behmen's writings, and the student may here be directed
to begin his course of study by mastering the first eight chapters of The Threefold Life, which
appear to have been in great favour with Mr. Law.'

Behmen's next book was a very extraordinary piece of work, and it had a very extraordinary
origin.  A certain BALTHAZAR WALTER, who seems to have been a second Paracelsus in his love
of knowledge and in his lifelong pursuit of knowledge, had, like Paracelsus, travelled east,
and west, and north, and south in search of that ancient and occult wisdom of which so many
men in that day dreamed.  But Walter, like his predecessor Paracelsus, had come home from his
travels a humbler man, a wiser man, and a man more ready to learn and lay to heart the truth
that some of his own countrymen could all the time have taught him.  On his return from the
east, Walter found the name of Jacob Behmen in everybody's mouth; and, on introducing himself
to that little shop in Goerlitz out of which the Aurora and The Threefold Life had come, Walter
was wise enough to see and bold enough to confess that he had found a teacher and a friend
there such as neither Egypt nor India had provided him with.  After many immensely interested
visits to Jacob Behmen's workshop, Walter was more than satisfied that Behmen was all, and
more than all, that his most devoted admirers had said he was.  And, accordingly, Walter laid
a plan so as to draw upon Behmen's profound and original mind for a solution of some of the
philosophical and theological problems that were agitating and dividing the learned men of
that day.  With that view Walter made a round of the leading universities of Germany, conversed
with the professors and students, collected a long list of the questions that were being debated
in that day in those seats of learning, and sent the list to Behmen, asking him to give his
mind to them and try to answer them. 'Beloved sir,' wrote Behmen, after three months' meditation
and prayer, 'and my good friend: it is impossible for the mind and reason of man to answer
all the questions you have put to me.  All those things are known to GOD alone.  But, that
no man may boast, He sometimes makes use of very mean men to make known His truth, that it
may be seen and acknowledged to come from His own hand alone.'  It is told that when Charles
the First read the English translation of Behmen's answers to the Forty Questions, he wrote
to the publisher that if Jacob Behmen was no scholar, then the Holy Ghost was still with men;
and, if he was a learned man, then his book was one of the best inventions that had ever been
written.  The Forty Questions ran through many editions both on the Continent and in England,
and it was this book that gained for Jacob Behmen the denomination of the Teutonic Philosopher,
a name by which he is distinguished among authors to this day.  The following are some of the
university questions that Balthazar Walter took down and sent to Jacob Behmen for his answer:
'What is the soul of man in its innermost essence, and how is it created, soul by soul, in
the image of GOD?  Is the soul propagated from father to son like the body? or is it every
time new created and breathed in from GOD?  How comes original sin into each several soul?
How does the soul of the saint feed and grow upon the word of GOD?  Whence comes the deadly
contrariety between the flesh and the spirit?  Whither goes the soul when it at death departs
from the body?  In what does its rest, its awakening, and its glorification consist?  What
kind of body shall the glorified body be?  The soul and spirit of CHRIST, what are they? and
are they the same as ours?  What and where is Paradise?'  Through a hundred and fourteen large
quarto pages Behmen's astonishing answers to the forty questions run; after which he adds this:
'Thus, my beloved friend, we have set down, according to our gifts, a round answer to your
questions, and we exhort you as a brother not to despise us.  For we are not born of art, but
of simplicity.  We acknowledge all who love such knowledge as our brethren in CHRIST, with
whom we hope to rejoice eternally in the heavenly school.  For our best knowledge here is but
in part, but when we shall attain to perfection, then we shall see what GOD is, and what He
can do.  Amen.'

A Treatise of the Incarnation of the Son of God comes next, and then we have three smaller
works written to clear up and to establish several difficult and disputed matters in it and
in some of his former works.  To write on the Incarnation of the Son of GOD would need, says
Behmen, an angel's pen; but his defence is that his is better than any angel's pen, because
it is the pen of a sinner's love.  The year 1621 saw one of Behmen's most original and most
powerful books finished,--the Signatura Rerum.  In this remarkable book Behmen teaches us that
all things have two worlds in which they live,--an inward world and an outward.  All created
things have an inner and an invisible essence, and an outer and a visible form.  And the outward
form is always more or less the key to the inward character.  This whole world that we see
around us, and of which we ourselves are the soul,--it is all a symbol, a 'signature,' of an
invisible world.   This deep principle runs through the whole of creation.  The Creator went
upon this principle in all His work; and the thoughtful mind can see that principle coming
out in all His work,--in plants, and trees, and beasts.

   As German Boehme never cared for plants
   Until it happed, a-walking in the fields,
   He noticed all at once that plants could speak,
   Nay, turned with loosened tongue to talk with him.
   That day the daisy had an eye indeed--
   Colloquized with the cowslips on such themes!
   We find them extant yet in Jacob's prose.

But, best of all, this principle comes out clearest in the speech, behaviour, features, and
face of a man.  Every day men are signing themselves from within.  Every act they perform,
every word they speak, every wish they entertain,--it all comes out and is fixed for ever in
their character, and even in their appearance.  'Therefore,' says Behmen in the beginning of
his book, 'the greatest understanding lies in the signature.  For by the external form of all
creatures; by their voice and action, as well as by their instigation, inclination, and desire,
their hidden spirit is made known.  For Nature has given to everything its own language according
to its innermost essence.  And this is the language of Nature, in which everything continually
speaks, manifests, and declares itself for what it is,--so much so, that all that is spoken
or written even about GOD, however true, if the writer or speaker has not the Divine Nature
within himself, then all he says is dumb to me; he has not got the hammer in his hand that
can strike my bell.'

The Way to Christ was Behmen's next book, and in the four precious treatises that compose that
book our author takes an altogether new departure.  In his Aurora, in The Three Principles,
in the Forty Questions, and in the Signatura Rerum, Jacob Behmen has been writing for philosophers
and theologians.  Or, if in all these works he has been writing for a memorial to himself in
the first place,--even then, it has been for himself on the philosophical and theological side
of his own mind.  But in The Way to Christ he writes for himself under that character which,
once taken up by Jacob Behmen, is never for one day laid down.  Behmen's favourite Scripture,
after our Lord's promise of the Holy Spirit to them that ask for Him, was the parable of the
Prodigal Son.  In all his books Behmen is that son, covered with wounds and bruises and putrefying
sores, but at last beginning to come to himself and to return to his Father.  The Way to Christ
is a production of the very greatest depth and strength, but it is the depth and the strength
of the heart and the conscience rather than the depth and the strength of the understanding
and the imagination.  This nobly evangelical book is made up of four tracts, entitled respectively,
Of True Repentance, Of True Resignation, Of Regeneration, and Of the Supersensual Life.  And
a deep vein of autobiographic life and interest runs through the four tracts and binds them
into a quick unity.  'A soldier,' says Behmen, 'who has been in the wars can best tell another
soldier how to fight.'  And neither Augustine nor Luther nor Bunyan carries deeper wounds,
or broader scars, nor tells a nobler story in any of their autobiographic and soldierly books
than Behmen does in his Way to Christ.  At the commencement of The True Repentance he promises
us that he will write of a process or way on which he himself has gone.  'The author herewith
giveth thee the best jewel that he hath.'  And a true jewel it is, as the present speaker will
testify.  If The True Repentance has a fault at all it is the fault of Rutherford's Letters.
For the taste of some of his readers Behmen, like Rutherford, draws rather too much on the
language and the figures of the married life in setting forth the love of CHRIST to the espoused
soul, and the love of the espoused soul to CHRIST. But with that, and all its other drawbacks,
The True Repentance is such a treatise that, once discovered by the proper reader, it will
be the happy discoverer's constant companion all his earthly and penitential days.  As the
English reader is carried on through the fourth tract, The Supersensual Life, he experiences
a new and an increasing sense of ease and pleasure, combined with a mystic height and depth
and inwardness all but new to him even in Behmen's books.  The new height and depth and inwardness
are all Jacob Behmen's own; but the freedom and the ease and the movement and the melody are
all William Law's.  In his preparations for a new edition of Behmen in English, William Law
had re-translated and paraphrased The Supersensual Life, and the editor of the 1781 edition
of Behmen's works has incorporated Law's beautiful rendering of that tract in room of JOHN
SPARROW'S excellent but rather too antique rendering.  We are in John Sparrow's everlasting
debt for the immense labour he laid out on Behmen, as well as for his own deep piety and personal
worth.  But it was service enough and honour enough for Sparrow to have Englished Jacob Behmen
at all for his fellow-countrymen, even if he was not able to English him as William Law would
have done.  But take Behmen and Law together, as they meet together in The Supersensual Life,
and not A Kempis himself comes near them even in his own proper field, or in his immense service
in that field.  There is all the reality, inwardness, and spirituality of The Imitation in
The Supersensual Life, together with a sweep of imagination, and a grasp of understanding,
as well as with both a sweetness and a bitterness of heart that even A Kempis never comes near.
The Supersensual Life of Jacob Behmen, in the English of William Law, is a superb piece of
spiritual work, and a treasure-house of masculine English.  (If Christopher Walton is right,
we must read 'Lee' for 'Law' in this passage. It actually seems to live and breathe. How vast
a deference between this exquisitely finished painting and the mere
outlines you first saw!

This illustration teaches us, better than abstract words could do, how the human soul is like God
from the very first, and how that likeness gradually increases by grace and the practice of
virtue, until it receives the last touch and finish in the Beatific Vision.

From the very first moment of her existence, the soul is like to God, because she is a spirit, and
therefore immortal. She is endowed with intelligence, free-will, memory, and whatever else belongs
to a spiritual substance. Evidently, this is already the image of God, though, compared with
what it will be by grace and the Beatific Vision, it is as yet nothing more than the mere outlines.

Next
comes baptism, by which the soul is raised to the supernatural state. She is washed with the
blood of Jesus, and clothed with the robe of innocence, which, if we may use the expression, begins
the coloring or beautifying process. Faith, hope, and charity are infused into her, by which
she is enabled to lead a supernatural life. Then come other sacraments, which have for their
object to wash away stains, remove imperfections, and to nourish, strengthen, beautify, and
gradually develop a greater resemblance to God.

But there is an immense difference between the senseless image we saw on the canvas and the soul. The
portrait is a lifeless image, which is totally passive, and has, therefore, nothing whatever
to do with its gradual growth and its resemblance to the original. Not so with the soul. She is
a living and rational image of the eternal God, and has the power to aid very materially in her gradual
development, and in her greater resemblance to the original which is God. Not only has she the
power, but also the strict obligation of co-operating with God, in perfecting what He began
without her co-operation Hence, while of herself she is incapable of having even a good thought,
aided by the grace of God she not only has good thoughts and desires, but also the strength
to carry them into effect. With God's assistance, she can and does reproduce in herself the
virtues which Jesus taught and practised--His humility, purity, meekness, obedience, patience,
and resignation to God's will. Especially does she reproduce His life of love--love or God and love
for man.

As soon as this divine charity becomes the mainspring of her actions,
everything she does develops in her a greater resemblance to God.
Then, not only prayer, the sacraments, pious reading, and other spiritual
exercises, but voluntary mortifications, temptations from the devil,
the world, and the flesh--even eating, drinking, and innocent recreations--all
help powerfully to develop and perfect in her the image of God.  Till I remembered that far deeper and far truer saying, that
'simply to say man at all is to say melancholy.'  No: with all respect, the real fact is surely
as near as possible the exact opposite.  A light, elastic, Erasmus- like nature, is the exception
among men of real genius.  At any rate, Jacob Behmen was the exact opposite of Erasmus, and
of all such light and elastic men.  Melancholy was Jacob Behmen's special temperament and peculiar
complexion.  He had long studied, and watched, and wrestled with, and prayed over that complexion
at home.  And thus it is, no doubt, that he is so full, and so clear, and so sure-footed, and
so impressive, and so full of fellow-feeling in his treatment of this special complexion. 
Behmen's greatest disciple has assimilated his master's teaching in this matter of complexion
also, and has given it out again in his own clear, plain, powerful, classical manner, especially
in his treatise on Christian Regeneration.  Let all preachers and pastors who would master
the rationale of temptation, and who would ground their directions and their comforts to their
people in the nature of things, as well as in the word of GOD, make Jacob Behmen and William
Law and Prebendary Clark their constant study.  'I write for no other purpose,' says Behmen,
'than that men may learn how to know themselves.  Seek the noble knowledge of thyself.  Seek
it and you will find a heavenly treasure which will not be eaten by moths, and which no thief
shall ever take away.'

I shall not attempt to enter on the thorny thicket of Jacob Behmen's polemical and apologetical
works.  I shall not even load your mind with their unhappy titles.  His five apologies occupy
in bulk somewhere about a tenth part of his five quarto volumes.  And full as his apologies
and defences are of autobiographic material, as well as of valuable expansions and explanations
of his other books, yet at their best they are all controversial and combative in their cast
and complexion; and, nobly as Behmen has written on the subject of controversy, it was not
given even to him, amid all the misunderstandings, misrepresentations, injuries, and insults
he suffered from, always to write what we are glad and proud and the better to read.

About his next book Behmen thus writes: 'Upon the desire of some high persons with whom I did
converse in the Christmas holidays, I have written a pretty large treatise upon Election, in
which I have done my best to determine that subject upon the deepest grounds.  And I hope that
the same may put an end to many contentions and controversies, especially of some points betwixt
the Lutherans and Calvinists, for I have taken the texts of Holy Scripture which speak of GOD'S
will to harden sinners, and then, again, of His unwillingness to harden, and have so tuned
and harmonised them that the right understanding and meaning of the same may be seen.'  'This
author,' says John Sparrow, 'disputes not at all.  He desires only to confer and offer his
understanding of the Scriptures on both sides, answering reason's objections, and manifesting
the truth for the conjoining, uniting, and reconciling of all parties in love.'  And that he
has not been wholly unsuccessful we may believe when we hear one of Behmen's ablest commentators
writing of his Election as 'a superlatively helpful book,' and again, as a 'profoundly instructive
treatise.'  The workman-like way in which Behmen sets about his treatment of the Election of
Grace, commonly called Predestination, will be seen from the titles of some of his chapters.
Chap. i.  What the One Only GOD is.  Chap. ii.  Concerning GOD'S Eternal Speaking Word.  Chap.
v.  Of the Origin of Man; Chap. vi.  Of the Fall of Man.  Chap. viii.  Of the sayings of Scripture,
and how they oppose one another.  Chap. ix. Clearing the Right Understanding of such Scriptures.
Chap. xiii.  A Conclusion upon all those Questions.  And then, true to his constant manner,
as if wholly dissatisfied with the result of all his labour in things and in places too deep
both for writer and reader, he gave all the next day after he had finished his Election to
an Appendix on Repentance, in order to making his own and his reader's calling and election
sure.  And it may safely be said that, than that day's work, than those four quarto pages,
not Augustine, not Luther, not Bunyan, not Baxter, not Shepard has ever written anything of
more evangelical depth, and strength, and passion, and pathos.  It is truly a splendid day's
work!  But it might not have been possible even for Behmen to perform that day's work had he
not for months beforehand been dealing day and night with the deepest and the most heart-searching
things both of GOD and man.  What a man was Jacob Behmen, and chosen to what a service! Hence,
we shall no longer be tossed to and fro by every wind of passion, nor by the vicissitudes of present
time.

We shall no longer, as now, be joyful one day, and then be cast down and sorrowful on the next;
in the enjoyment of perfect health one day, and racked with the pangs of disease on the next;
enjoying the society of our fellow-beings one day, and finding it intolerable on the next;
overflowing now with devotion and the love of God, and then ready to abandon His service in disgust.
We shall become immutable, and therefore when millions of ages have rolled by, we shall still
be enjoying the same happiness as we did when the vision of God first flashed upon tour souls.

2.
  To say that the Mysterium Magnum is
a mystical and allegorical commentary upon the Book of Genesis is to say nothing.  Philo himself
is a tyro and a timid interpreter beside Jacob Behmen.  'Which things are an allegory,' says
the Apostle, after a passing reference to Sarah and Hagar and Isaac and Ishmael; but if you
would see actually every syllable of Genesis allegorised, spiritualised, interpreted of CHRIST,
and of the New Testament, from the first verse of its first chapter to the last verse of its
last chapter, like the nobleman of Silesia, when you have leisure, read Behmen's deep Mysterium
Magnum.  I would recommend the enterprising and unconquerable student to make leisure so as
to master Behmen's Preface to the Mysterium Magnum at the very least.  And if he does that,
and is not drawn on from that to be a student of Behmen for the rest of his days, then, whatever
else his proper field in life may be, it is not mystical or philosophical theology.  It is
a long step both in time and in thought from Behmen to SCHOPENHAUER; but, speaking of one of
Schelling's books, Schopenhauer says that it is all taken from Jacob Behmen's Mysterium Magnum;
every thought and almost every word of Schelling's work leads Schopenhauer to think of Behmen.
'When I read Behmen's book,' says Schopenhauer, 'I cannot withhold either admiration or emotion.'
At his far too early death Behmen left four treatises behind him in an unfinished condition.
The Theoscopia, or Divine Vision, is but a fragment; but, even so, the study of that fragment
leads us to believe that, had Behmen lived to the ordinary limit of human life, and had his
mind continued to grow as it was now fast growing in clearness, in concentration, and in simplicity,
Behmen would have left to us not a few books as classical in their form as all his books are
classical in their substance; in their originality, in their truth, in their depth, and in
their strength.  As it is, the unfinished, the scarcely-begun, Theoscopia only serves to show
the student of what a treasure he has been bereft by Behmen's too early death.  As I read and
re-read the Theoscopia I felt the full truth and force of Hegel's generous words, that German
philosophy began with Behmen.  This is both German and Christian philosophy, I said to myself
as I revelled in the Theoscopia.  Let the serious student listen to the titles of some of the
chapters of the Theoscopia, and then let him say what he would not have given to have got such
a book from such a pen in its completed shape:  'What GOD is, and how we men shall know the
Divine Substance by the Divine Revelation.  Why it sometimes seems as if there were no GOD,
and as if all things went in the world by chance.  Why GOD, who is Love itself, permits an
evil will contrary to His own.  The reason and the profit, why evil should be found along with
good.  Of the mind of man, and how it is the image of GOD, and how it can still be filled with
God. Why this Temporal Universe is created; to what it is profitable; and how God is so near
unto all things': and so on.  'But no amount of quotation,' says Mrs. Penney, that very able
student of Behmen, lately deceased, 'can give an adequate glimpse of the light which streams
from the Theoscopia when long and patiently studied.'

Another unfinished fragment that Behmen's readers seek for and treasure up like very sand of
gold is his Holy Week.  This little work, its author tells us, was undertaken upon the entreaty
and desire of some loving and good friends of his for the daily exercise of true religion in
their hearts and in the little church of their families.  The following is Behmen's method
of prayer for Monday, which is the only day's prayer he got finished before his death:  'A
short prayer when we awake early and before we rise.  A prayer and thanksgiving after we are
risen.  A prayer while we wash and dress.  A prayer when we begin to work at our calling. 
A prayer at noon.  A prayer toward evening.  A prayer when we undress.  A prayer of thanks
for the bitter passion and dying of JESUS CHRIST.'  What does the man mean? many of his contemporaries
who came upon his Holy Week would say, What does the madman mean?  Would he have us pray all
day?  Would he have us pray and do nothing else?  Yes; it would almost seem so.  For in his
Supersensual Life the Master says to the disciple who has asked, 'How shall I be able to live
aright amid all the anxiety and tribulation of this world?': 'If thou dost once every hour
throw thyself by faith beyond all creatures into the abysmal mercy of GOD, into the sufferings
of CHRIST, and into the fellowship of His intercession, then thou shalt receive power from
above to rule over the world, and death, and the devil, and hell itself.'  And again, 'O thou
of little courage, if thy will could but break itself off every half-hour from all creatures,
and plunge itself into that where no creature is or can be, presently it would be penetrated
with the splendour of the Divine glory, and would taste a sweetness no tongue can express.
Then thou wouldst love thy cross more than all the glory and all the goods of this world.'
The author had begun a series of reflections and meditations on the Ten Commandments for devotional
use on Tuesday, but got no further than the Fifth.  Behmen is so deep and so original in his
purely philosophical, theological, and speculative books, that in many places we can only stand
back and wonder at the man.  But in his Holy Week Behmen kneels down beside us.  Not but that
his characteristic depth is present in his prayers also; but we all know something of the nature,
the manner, and the blessedness of prayer, and thus it is that we are so much more at home
with Behmen, the prodigal son, than we are with Behmen, the theosophical theologian. Moreover,
mindful that our Divine Model spoke of the Kingdom of Heaven in parables, he has laid aside, as
far as possible, the technical language of the schools, and has replaced it by illustrations, which
are better adapted to the capacity of all.  When Behmen's philosophy
and theology become penitence, prayer, and praise, then by their fruits we know how good his
philosophy and his theology must be, away down in their deepest and most hidden nature.  I
agree with Walton that those prayers are full of unction and instruction, and that some of
them are of the 'highest magnetical power'; and that, as rendered into modern phraseology,
they are most beautiful devotional compositions, and very models of all that a divinely illuminated
mind would address to GOD and CHRIST.  For myself, immediately after the Psalms of David I
put Jacob Behmen's Holy Week and the prayers scattered up and down through his True Repentance,
and beside Behmen I put Bishop Andrewes' Private Devotions.  I have discovered no helps to
my own devotional life for a moment to set beside Behmen and Andrewes.

A Treatise on Baptism and the Lord's Supper; A Key to the Principal Points and Expressions
in the Author's Writings; and then a most valuable volume of letters--Epistolae Theosophicae--complete
the extraordinarily rich bibliography of the illuminated and blessed Jacob Behmen.

