2.  Spiritual.  He had been converted in a wonderful way and had received a special revelation
from Christ (Acts 9:3-15; 1 Cor. 15:3; Gal. 1:11, 12).  He had been called to his great work
among the Gentiles by Christ and the Holy Ghost (Acts 9:15; 13:2).  He was absolutely absorbed
in the work of Christ and in making known His gospel.

+How the Epistles are Best Understood.+--Each one should be studied in the light of the occasion
which called it forth and in connection with the church, group of churches, or the individual
to which it is addressed.

+Titles and Groups.+--The thirteen Epistles fall naturally into four groups; in each of which
is set forth some great doctrinal and ethical truth.

First Group, First and Second Thessalonians.  "These Epistles are short, simple, and practical.
They may be regarded as illustrating Paul's earlier missionary instruction to his converts--hence
the name 'Missionary Epistles,' sometimes applied to them.  They treat of but one doctrinal
subject--the second coming of Christ."  It should be borne in mind, however, that Paul speaks
of Jesus Christ as "The Lord," "Our Lord," about twenty-five times in First Thessalonians;
this shows how thoroughly he believed in the Deity of Christ.

Second Group, Galatians, First and Second Corinthians and Romans.  "This group is the great
repertory of Paul's doctrinal and ethical teaching.  Galatians and Romans deal chiefly with
his doctrine of justification by faith.  They are designed to disprove the current Jewish teaching
(which was invading the churches) that men might be saved by obedience to the Mosaic law. 
On the contrary Paul maintained that the sole basis of salvation is the grace of God to be
appropriated by faith on man's part."

Third Group, Colossians, Philemon, Ephesians, and Philippians.  "This group is predominantly
Christological. Errors had invaded the churches addressed, which tended to degrade the person
and work of Christ, and the Apostle writes with a view to showing his pre-eminence and saving
power, so that the readers may be induced to keep their allegiance to Christ and His gospel."

Fourth Group, First Timothy, Titus and Second Timothy. "These are called 'The Pastoral Epistles,'
and were designed to instruct Timothy and Titus as superintendents of the churches in Ephesus
and Crete, and were thus semi-official in character.  But they have also a strong personal
element and a tone of warm sympathy and affection."  The above characterization of the four
groups of these Epistles by Prof. G. B. Stevens is brief and to the point.

+Common Plan.+--The plan in all of Paul's Epistles, with slight variations, is much the same.
The outlines of these letters fall uniformly into six divisions.  "First, a greeting sometimes
very brief, sometimes extending over several verses, in which he generally manages with consummate
skill to strike the keynote of the whole letter. Secondly, a thanksgiving to God for the Christian
gifts and graces of his converts.  Thirdly, a doctrinal part, in which he argues out or explains
some great topic of Christian truth, specially required by the condition of the church to which
he is writing.  Fourthly, a practical section, in which he applies to daily moral duties the
great doctrines which he has developed.  Fifthly, personal messages, salutations, and details.
Sixthly, a brief autograph conclusion to ratify the genuineness of the entire letter."

+The Supreme Purpose+ was to make known the Divine Christ as the Savior of all men, both Jew
and Gentile (1 Cor. 2:1-16; Col. 1:9-29; Phil. 2:9-11; Acts 26:22, 23; Rom. 3:9-31).

THE FUTURE OF CHRIST'S KINGDOM

FIRST GROUP OF EPISTLES

THE FIRST AND SECOND EPISTLES TO THE THESSALONIANS

+The First Group of Epistles.+--The First and Second Epistles to the Thessalonians are the
earliest writings of Paul of which we have any certain knowledge.  He may possibly have written
earlier epistles, which are now lost. He speaks of writing a salutation "in every epistle"
(2 Thess. 3:17), "with mine own hand," which may imply that he had already written a number
of Epistles. In regard to later writings he also speaks of an Epistle (1 Cor. 5:9) to the Corinthians
written to them before that now known as First Corinthians and of one written to the Laodiceans
(Col. 4:16); of these writings we have no record save these incidental notices, if these notices
refer to lost Epistles.

+The Chief Doctrinal Point+ considered in this group is "The Future of Christ's Kingdom" as
it was related to His second coming (1 Thess. 4:13-5:9, compare 2 Thess. 2:1-17). It was natural
that, after so great a manifestation of the Divine Christ, the earlier believers in Him should
make much of the promise that He said He would come again, and amid their troubles and difficulties
the strong tendency would be to think that second coming was close at hand.  It is a well known
fact however that the near approach of a great joy or sorrow unfits men and women for the ordinary
pursuits of life.  Paul, in his first letter to the members of the church of Thessalonica,
spoke of the second coming of Christ to relieve their minds of a worry over those who had died
since he had preached to them (lest they should not see the Lord when He came), and also to
encourage them in their faith (1 Thess. 4:13-18).  It seems that Paul was taken to mean by
what he wrote that Christ's coming was near at hand. The believers in Christ, in Thessalonica,
began to give up their ordinary avocations and pursuits in speedy anticipation of this great
event.  He therefore takes occasion in his second letter to the church to correct the impression
that Christ's coming (2 Thess. 2:1-17) was near at hand. He exhorts them to true and faithful
living in the sight of their Lord Jesus Christ (2 Thess. 3:1-18) as the best way to serve their
Divine Master.  The principle of the true Christian life is here set forth in a masterly way;
it holds good for all time and all peoples.

THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS

+The Founding of the Church at Thessalonica+ (Acts 17:1-10).--Paul was on his second missionary
journey and this church was the second which he organized in Europe. (Acts 17:3).  It appears
from this account that the church was mostly made up of Gentiles.  But through the opposition
of the Jews all the city was set in an uproar and Paul was sent away by night to Berea.

+Occasion, Time, and Place of Writing.+--Paul left Thessalonica unwillingly for he had a great
affection for his converts in this city.  Twice he endeavored to return, but was prevented
from doing so (2:17, 18).  When he reached Athens (Acts 17:15) he grew so anxious about the
church at Thessalonica that he sent Timothy back to see how it prospered (3:1, 2).  While Timothy
was gone on his mission Paul went on to Corinth (Acts 18:1).  Here Timothy found him when he
returned with his report of the church (Acts 18:5; 1 Thess. 3:6). Paul was greatly pleased
with what Timothy had to say about the converts.  While enduring persecution they were standing
fast in the Lord and devoted to their faith in Christ (3:7-13).  The report which Timothy brought
was the occasion of the first letter to this church.

The time was, in all probability, in the winter of 52-53 A.D., and the place of writing was
at Corinth, where Paul remained for over a year and a half (Acts 18:1, 11, 18).

+Contents.+--The first three chapters are of a personal character and show how dear to Paul's
heart were these converts of Thessalonica.  They also show the good record made for the short
time since they had embraced Christianity.  But nothing could be more revolutionary in those
days than to become a Christian; therefore Paul takes occasion to correct social, moral, and
doctrinal faults and to instruct them more fully in the faith, in Christ, which they professed.
In the matter of doctrine Paul mentions Christ as "the Lord," "our Lord" about twenty-five
times, showing his belief in and teaching of the Deity of Christ.  In regard to Christ's speedy
second coming, of which many seem to have had a lively expectation so that they were troubled
when some died lest these had lost their opportunity to see this glorious event, Paul writes
to reassure them that all believers, those who have died and those who are alive at that time,
"will enter together and share equally in the blessings of Christ's heavenly kingdom" (4:13-18).
The Epistle closes with exhortations to be joyful, thankful, and prayerful.

+Principal Divisions and Chief Points.+

1.  Introduction (1:1-10).  Personal address and salutation.  Thanksgiving for their faith,
love and hope in Jesus Christ and for their conversion.

2.  Narrative (2:1-4:12).  How the gospel was given and how it was received at Thessalonica.
An account of Paul's care and anxiety for the church.  Paul's prayer for their establishment
in the faith of Jesus Christ.  Exhortation to abstain as followers of Christ from impurity
and fraud; to follow after holiness and brotherly love.

3.  Doctrinal (4:13-5:11).  The second advent of Christ.  The parts which the dead and living
will have when Christ shall come again.  The uncertainty of the time.  The need of constant
watchfulness.

4.  Practical (5:12-28).  Rules for the conduct of the church, its overseers and members. 
Exhortation to be joyful, prayerful, and thankful.  Greeting and benediction.

THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS

+Occasion, Time, and Place of Writing.+--What Paul wrote about the second coming of Christ,
in the First Epistle, seems to have been misunderstood by the church at Thessalonica (1:7-3:11).
Then too there was probably a spurious epistle (and this may have occasioned much of the trouble)
in circulation, in which Paul is evidently made to declare that the day of Christ is close
at hand (2:2).  He writes of this false epistle very vigorously that they be not troubled in
spirit by a letter, "as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand."  Evidently some were
neglecting their work, becoming impatient at the delay in Christ's coming (3:5, 11, 12) and
walking disorderly.

The Epistle opens, with an expression of thanks for the general condition of the church and
that it was enduring persecutions and tribulations well (1:2-6).  Hence it is evident that
some but not all of the church members were out of accord with an earnest sensible faith in
Christ. This Epistle reflects certain conditions which Paul had to meet in his work and shows
how he sought to check any defections from right conceptions of true Christian doctrine and
life.  In the second chapter Paul shows that the "day of Christ" may not speedily come, that
certain other things must come to pass before it is revealed (compare Matthew ch. 24), and
that the true Christian way is to stand fast always in the Lord.  In thus standing fast every
believer will grow in faith and grace.

The duties taught are "courage and faith under persecution and calmness and quiet industry
in the presence of the greatest expectations."

The time of writing was probably, a few months after that of the First Epistle, in 53 A.D.
The place of writing was Corinth.  Salutation.  Thanksgiving for the growth of faith in the
Thessalonian church.

2.  Doctrinal (1:5-2:17).  The great day of the Lord.  The Thessalonians seemingly misunderstood
Paul's first letter and he now more fully explains the second advent of Christ.  It will be
a day of terrible retribution for the unbeliever but one of glory for all who trust in Him.
A warning is given not to think the day near at hand.  Certain things must first come to pass;
"a falling away," "a man of sin," "signs and lying wonders."  Thanksgiving that the Thessalonians
have been chosen to salvation through the sanctification of the Spirit.

3.  Conclusion (Ch. 3).  Paul gives command to discipline the disorderly and that every man
earn his own living.  Exhortation to be not weary in well doing. Salutation and benediction.

QUESTIONS

What can be said of epistolary writings; their place and usefulness?  Give some reasons for
Paul's writings.  What were the qualifications of Paul?  How are the Epistles best understood?
What can be said of the four groups and their characteristics? What is the common plan?  What
is the supreme purpose?  What can be said of the first group of Epistles; First and Second
Thessalonians?  What is the chief doctrinal point?  The First Epistle; what can be said of
the founding of the church at Thessalonica?  What can be said of the occasion, time, and place
of writing?  What are the contents?  Give the four parts of the principal divisions and chief
points.  The Second Epistle; what can be said of the occasion, time, and place of writing?
FIRST AND SECOND CORINTHIANS.  ROMANS.

ANALYSIS

+Problems of Early Christianity+--The Old Faiths and the New. The Great Question.  The Jewish
Faith.  The Heathen Faith. The New Faith in Christ.  Practical Bearing upon Present Day Living.
The Epistles of this Group.

+The Epistle to the Galatians+--The Galatians.  Time of Writing. Occasion and Purpose.  Principal
Divisions and Chief Points.

+The Epistles to the Corinthians+--The Church at Corinth.  The City of Corinth.

+The First Epistle to the Corinthians+--Occasion and Purpose. Place and Time.  The Supremacy
of Christ.  Principal Divisions and Chief Points.

+The Second Epistle to the Corinthians+--Occasion and Purpose. Place and Time.  Principal Divisions
and Chief Points.

+The Epistle to the Romans+--The Church at Rome.  Occasion and Purpose.  Place and Time.  Central
Thought.

PROBLEMS OF EARLY CHRISTIANITY

+The Old Faiths and the New.+--In this second group of Epistles, Galatians, First and Second
Corinthians, and Romans, we enter upon a period of conflict in which Christianity is being
defined, and differentiated from Judaism and Heathenism.  No great truth ever came into the
world without a battle for its right to the attention of men.

The new faith in Christ made large claims for itself. It marked an advance upon Judaism and
maintained that in Christ was fulfilled all the promises made by the prophets of the coming
of the Jewish Messiah.  It radically antagonized the heathen religions.  It had a double task
to win men out of Judaism and heathenism.  Only by a careful study of these great doctrinal
Epistles, and the circumstances out of which they arose, can it be seen how really great was
this task.

+The Great Question+ was: "On what terms does God save men?  Does He owe salvation to any because
of what they have done, or does He bestow it as an unmerited favor upon condition of trust
and self-surrender?"  This is still the great question.

+The Jewish Faith+ had been long in the world.  Its prophets had two great themes, the Messiah
and the Messianic Kingdom.  All Israel, while observing feast and fast days, the precepts of
the Mosaic law and offering sacrifices, looked forward to the coming of the Messiah and the
establishment of His kingdom upon earth, as the supreme fulfillment of its hopes.

It is the contention of Paul in these Epistles that this Messiah has come in the person of
Jesus Christ and fulfilled all the promises made to Israel, and that, through faith in Him,
believers are released from the observance of the precepts of the Mosaic law.

There were two parties of Jews who sought to check the advance of the early church, with its
all sufficient Savior.  First, there were the Jews who denied any and every claim of Christ
to be the Messiah; of this party were the rioters who drove Paul out of city after city and
sought to kill him in the temple.  Second, there were the Jewish Christians who "asserted that
their faith was Judaism with a new prophet; that the law of Moses and Mosaic ceremonial practices
were binding on Christians as well as on unbelieving Jews; that Gentile believers must first
become proselytes to Judaism before they could become Christians; and lastly that circumcision
was the only gateway to baptism."  With the first class of Jews it was not so difficult to
deal, for they were out and out antagonists, but the Jewish Christians, (who still clung to
the Jewish law) were constantly making trouble not only amongst the Christian Jews, who had
fully come out from under the law of Moses and expressed their faith in Christ, but also among
the Christian Gentiles who had come out of the heathen religions.  The masterly arguments of
Paul, presented in Galatians and Romans, deal chiefly with the doctrine of justification by
faith in Jesus Christ alone.  In Gal. 5:1-4 he calls the return to Jewish belief and practice,
"falling from grace."

+The Heathen Faith.+--The people of the Roman empire were idolaters.  Temples for the worship
of idols occupied prominent positions in every city.  Some of them were very beautiful, from
an architectural point of view.  But the objects of worship, frequently, were of the basest
sort.  This worship caused a notorious laxness of view in regard to the relations between the
sexes.  This state of things is not overstated by Paul in his epistle to the Romans (1:18-23).
It was this condition of idolatrous worship which led to the decision of the Jerusalem Council
in regard to the Gentile converts (Acts 15:29). The Christianity which Paul taught called for
a pure and upright life and a subjugation of human passion.  We see the effects of former idolatrous
lives manifesting themselves in the evils which Paul sought to correct in his letters to the
Corinthians.  It was no small conflict in which the Great Apostle to the Gentiles engaged when
he sought to cleanse, through Christ, the base idolatrous hearts of the men of his times.

+The New Faith in Christ.+--Paul stands for spiritual freedom in Christ and loyalty to Him
as Divine Lord without the necessity of observing the minute regulations of the Jewish ritual.
He insists upon purity of soul and outward life as opposed to the laxness of the idolaters.
Each individual soul is related to Christ to whom it is responsible.

+Practical Bearing upon Present Day Living.+--The things contended for, the evils scored in
these Epistles may seem to belong to dead controversies, but they do not.  While it is a fact
that Christianity has freed itself from Judaism and the heathen religions have been conquered,
the old evils still manifest themselves and the same remedies must be applied to them.  Many
to-day will do works of the law (Gal. 2:16) who have no use for Christ, or His church, thinking
in this way to buy their way to God.  These are the old Judaizers come to life again.  They
often know nothing and care less for spiritual things and heart righteousness.  Sensuality,
and all its attendant evils, driven from the old heathen temples, manifests itself in many
ways; it still seeks to array itself in beautiful garments that it may lure many to ruin. There
is need of repeating over again the arguments of Paul for a pure life lived in the faith of
Jesus Christ, and the spiritual upbuilding of the soul through Him.  Paul also insists upon
good works as the outcome of faith, but faith must come first.

+The Epistles of this Group were Written+ on the third missionary journey.

THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS

+The Galatians+ to whom this Epistle was addressed; who were they?  The name Galatia was used
in two ways. Geographically to denote the country inhabited by the Celtic tribes (who were
descended from the Gauls and who formerly inhabited the country we now call France). Politically
it meant the Roman province which also included "Psidia, Lycaonia, and part of Phrygia to the
south of Galatia proper."  It has been a question which of the two Paul intended to address
in his letter.  There are no particular names of churches which are specified.  Many scholars
think that Paul means to address his Epistle to the churches of the Roman province.  In this
case the letter would be sent to the churches of a wide area, and primarily addressed to those
founded in the first missionary journey at Antioch, Iconium, Derbe, and Lystra (Acts 14:1-28).

Luke speaks also of a region lying roundabout Derbe and Lystra where the gospel was preached
on this first journey (Acts 14:6).  The passage in Galatians (2:5) in which Paul refers to
the Jerusalem Council where he contended for the liberty in Christ of the Gentiles would naturally
be taken to mean these first churches (however wide the application) as the Jerusalem Council
was held at the close of the first missionary journey.  The word Galatia may be used in the
narrower sense also by Luke in speaking of the beginning of Paul's second (Acts 16:6) and third
(Acts 18:23) missionary journeys.  It would be natural for the Judaizers, who sought to turn
back the converts of Paul to Judaism, to begin with the churches in South Galatia first.

+Time of Writing.+--The common opinion is that this epistle was written at Ephesus, during
Paul's long stay there on his third missionary journey or between 54 and 56 A.D.  Some however
would place the date earlier.

+Occasion and Purpose.+--That which caused Paul to write this first of his great doctrinal
Epistles was the teaching of certain Judaizers who had found their way into the churches of
Galatia.  They claimed that the Jewish law was binding upon believers in Christ, and declared
that salvation was through works of the law. They insisted upon the rite of circumcision. 
Paul's gospel and authority were disparaged.

Paul wrote this Epistle for the purpose of showing that "faith in Christ was the sole and sufficient
condition of salvation."  Subject of the Epistle; the defection of the Galatian churches.

2.  The divine commission given to Paul as an apostle (1:11-2:21).  He makes a statement of
his claims and gives a sketch of his life.  The gospel he preached came not from man but through
a revelation of Jesus Christ. All this is to show the authenticity of his claims.

3.  Doctrinal.  Justification is by faith (ch. 3-4). The Galatian churches had received the
Spirit through faith and not by law; why should they turn back?  The superiority of faith is
shown by Abraham's faith.  The covenant of the promise of Christ was before the law. The law
is subordinate to faith, its purpose is to bring men to Christ.  There is serious danger in
returning to the law.

4.  Practical.  Application of the doctrinal teaching (ch. 5-6:10).  An exhortation to stand
fast in the liberty of Christ; this liberty excludes Judaism.  A warning against the abuse
of Christian liberty.  The works of the flesh and the fruits of the Spirit.  Sowing and reaping.

5.  Autograph conclusion (6:11-18).  Summary of the Epistle.  The glory of the Apostle is in
the cross of Christ.  Benediction.

THE EPISTLES TO THE CORINTHIANS

+The Church at Corinth+ was founded during Paul's second missionary journey (Acts 18:1-18).
When the Apostle came to Corinth he found a home with Aquila and Priscilla and worked with
them at his trade as a tent-maker.  He preached in Corinth for over a year and a half.  Although
Paul was the means of converting Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, and his family, he had
no large success with the Jews and consequently turned to the Gentiles.  The Gentiles gladly
heard him and there was a great ingathering into the church.

+The City of Corinth+ was the largest and most important city of Greece.  The commerce of the
world flowed through its two harbours.  The population consisted of Greeks, Jews, Italians,
and a mixed multitude; it was excitable, pleasure loving, and mercurial.  In this city was
held a perpetual vanity fair.  The vices of the east and west met and clasped hands in the
work of human degradation.  The Greek goddess Aphrodite had a magnificent temple in which a
thousand priestesses ministered to a base worship.  While it was a center of wealth and fashion
it was a city of gilded vice.  In the philosophical schools there was an endless discussion
about words and non-essentials and a strong tendency to set intellectual above moral distinctions.

THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS

+Occasion and Purpose.+-It was natural that the pressure of heathen customs and practices should
be very great upon this young church.  It was also to be expected that parties and divisions
would arise.  The immediate cause of this Epistle was that strifes and divisions had arisen
in the church.  It was the reporting of these matters to Paul by those "of the house of Chloe"
(1 Cor. 1:11) that led him to write in the way in which he did.  To settle the strifes of this
church and to define the relations which Christians should assume towards the political, religious,
and domestic institutions of the heathen was a matter of no little delicacy and difficulty.
The mastery of Paul is shown in the laying down of principles, in accordance with the gospel
of Christ, that were effective not only for the Corinthian church but which are applicable
to-day to all such church difficulties and the conduct of Christians towards non-Christians.

+A Former Epistle.+--Previous to the one now called "The First," had been written to the Corinthians
(1 Cor. 5:9) and "it appears that the church had replied and requested further explanation
and instruction on certain points" (5:11; 7:1; 8:1; 12:1; 16:12).

+Place and Time.+--This Epistle was written during Paul's long stay in Ephesus (Acts 19:10;
1 Cor. 16:19) and the date is in all probability 57 A.D.

+The Supremacy of Christ+ over all parties, His love as the touchstone of all service, and
His resurrection are the great subjects of this Epistle.

+Principal Divisions and Chief Points.+

1.  Salutation and thanksgiving (1:1-9).

2.  Correction of divisions of party spirit (1:10-4:21). It having been reported to Paul that
four parties were striving for mastery in the church and there was great contention; he rebukes
the party spirit, sets forth the principles of his teaching, and declares that Christ alone
is the center of the Christian system.  Faith stands not in the wisdom of men.  The only foundation
is in Christ.

3.  Correction of moral disorders (ch. 5-7).  In consequence of the close contact of the church
with heathendom grave moral evils found their way into the fold.  (a) The case of an incestuous
person, Paul writes that such a person is to be expelled because the leaven of evil separates
men from Christ.  (b) The sin of going to law in heathen courts.  Christians ought to settle
their own disputes.  (c) Sins of the body.  No man should commit a sin as his body is the temple
of the Holy Ghost.

(d) Advice concerning marriage.  The purpose of the gospel is not to antagonize but to Christianize
the natural relations between society and the believer.

4.  Correction of social and ecclesiastical misconceptions (ch. 8-14).  (a) The question of
eating of meats offered in idol worship is decided on the ground of love rather than knowledge.
(b) The preacher of the gospel has the right to be supported by the church.  (c) The true Christian
liberty to be observed in the matters of eating and drinking.  The proper celebration of the
Lord's Supper.  (d) The use and abuse of spiritual gifts.

