"The Dark Ages of Juvenile Literature do not afford a chronicle of greater atrocity!

"Than that furnished by a very glum, grim, gruesome, gory, but connubially-minded gentleman,
whose ugly blue beard was a perfect monstrosity!

"He also had an unfortunate predilection for leading unattached ladies to the altar, constantly
marrying wives, six wives, successively one after another, on a regular railroad of matrimonial
velocity!

"But, finding them intoto, all very so-so, determined to turn each one of them into a good
woman by cutting off her head!

"As a punishment for the most unmitigatedly determined and persevering female curiosity!"

(With naivete') "But to our tale!"

The "tale" introduces the lovely, luckless Fatima, sitting at her cottage window, dreaming
the dreams of girl-hood. She has received Bluebeard's message of love, and is awaiting his
coming as the hero of her heart's romance. This "Traum" theme is almost precisely like the
"Guileless Fool Motive" of "Parsifal," and the application to Fatima is unmistakable.

ARIA

"Within sight of his castle, a short hour's ride, "An impecunious old lady lived, two marriageable
and impecunious daughters beside, "Whom Bluebeard had seen and at love's highest pitch "Sent
to say he would marry, he didn't care which! "Sent to say he would marry, he didn't care which!"

We now have Bluebeard's triumphal journey toward Fatima's cottage, from whence he is to bring
her as his bride. If this brutal bigamist had any preference it was for Anne, Fatima's younger
sister, but he knew that it was only a matter of a few weeks anyway, so there is not the slightest
hint in the music of anything but the tempered joy with which the accustomed bridegroom approaches
the familiar altar.

We have the "Blaubart Motiv" again here, and we must not be disturbed to find it heralded thus:

(noisily and fussily: Repeated deep notes)

We find the same thing later on. This is merely an introductory phrase, the "LosgehenlassenMotiv"
(See Me Getting Ready to Go Motive). Here we note Wagner's sublime regard for truth and realism.
Does Bluebeard go--does anybody go--without getting ready to go? Certainly not; yet they have
gone for years when-ever they liked, in the shiftless operas of the Italian school, without
the least preparation. They would even come back before they went, if it were any more pleasing,
pictorial, or melodious. 

There are many numerous interesting sights to be seen in Chamonix. The less tiring of which to
visit are the Bois and Bossons refrigerators, which can be seen by car or by foot. The high hills
are called the Gardens. Buet Brevent is not tolerated but for those with strong emotion and know
how to march on end with energy, they are ideal. Finally the Sea-to-Ice and Flegere are preferred
by those who wish to closely and lovingly observe the snow on horseback or sedan chair.
 The "LosgehenlassenMotiv" is simplicity itself when
it first appears in C major (see motive). But Bluebeard's exits are many --partly because his
entrances are so numerous--and for every exit this motive conveys a new meaning. Blue-beard
is always getting ready to go, but with what different purposes in mind! He goes for pastime
and for passion; he goes for wooing and for wantoning; for marriage and for murder. He goes
in D sharp with pomp, pride, and power, and we can distinguish the tread of his servants' feet,
the clatter of arms, and the hurrying together of his escort and retinue. He goes again in
B flat minor, stealthily and unattended, the orchestra giving the motive with muted violins
and subdued brass. We seem to hear naught but the soft pad-pad of his felt bedroom slippers
on the marble steps, and we murmur to one another: "What does he propose to do now?

We have next the "Dragon," "Elephant," and "Tiger" motive: the "Dragon Motive" being intentionally
reminiscent of the one in "Siegfried."

There is not in the entire range of modern music anything more impressive than this splendid
journey of a barbaric prince toward his chosen victim. No stage picture could be more dazzling
than the one brought before the mind's eye in the majestic, munificent measures that herald
the pageant:

ARIA

"And true to his message the lover did come With cymbals and horns and a big Indian drum!

The measures that follow these describe the tiger swinging on behind the triumphal cab. This
is a delicious whimsicality, and the music is as gay and sportive as anything in "Die Meistersinger."

ARIA

"And an elephant, huge, to his cab... was confined."....

How the character of Bluebeard stands out in these passages--Bluebeard, morbid, erotic, megalophonous
megalomaniac, with his grandiose air and outlandish accoutrements! Being bitter and mourning the death of her husband whom she idolized, dressed in drab mourning
garb, she lived a solitary life, and in the twenty years up to this day, which is the beginning
of this narration, she didn't stray from the castle other than to
take walks alone. In any event, one would think the sight of the lover's approach, with
lions and elephants in attendance and a tiger hanging on behind the chariot, might have shown
Fatima that, although Bluebeard might be admirable as an advance agent for a menagerie, he
would hardly be a pleasant fireside companion. However, it was the old story! Moved by love,
ambition, poverty, ennui, or what not, Fatima lost her head, as all Bluebeard's previous wives
had done, both before and after marriage, and left the humble home of her childhood for the
unknown castle. Simple chords give us this information thus:

(Semplice, piano for the Humble Home; Agitato, fortissimo for the Unknown Castle.)

Then comes the "LiebesgrussMotiv" (Love's Greeting Motive). No single instrument can give this
exquisite theme. The whole symphony of human nature seems to rise and spread its wings in a
glorious harmony of pairs and twos of a kind melting in passionate octaves and triplets.  
The groping, ardent, distracted, thwarted, but ever protesting bass, set against a coquettish,
evasive, yet timidly yielding treble; the occasional introduction of a mysterious minor in
the midst of a well-authenticated major, gives us an intimation that wooing is not an exact
science.

Next come the "HochzeitsreiseundFlitterWochenMotive" (The Bridal Tour and Honeymoon motives).
Here are harp glissandos; here are voices soaring, voices roaring, voices darting, voices floating,
weaving an audible embroidery of sound. They make up the most exquisitely tender scene of the
opera, and arc especially interesting to us in America, since they are built upon one of our
national songs. This can only be regarded as a flattering recognition of our support of German
opera in this country.

ARIA

"Midst the treasures of his palaces, dee-lighted to roam,

"Sister Anne with fair Fatima explored their new home! "Home! Home! Sweet, sweet Home! "There's
no place like home when a maid's too poor to roam!"

