MOTHER

By Owen Wister

     To My Favourite Broker With The Earnest Assurance
     That Mr. Beverly Is Not Meant For Him

NOTE

IN 1901, this story appeared anonymously as the ninth of a sequence of short stories by various
authors, in a volume entitled A House Party. It has been slightly remodelled for separate publication.

June 7, 1907, OWEN WISTER

MOTHER

When handsome young Richard Field--he was very handsome and very young--announced to our assembled
company that if his turn should really come to tell us a story, the story should be no invention
of his fancy, but a page of truth, a chapter from his own life, in which himself was the hero
and a lovely, innocent girl was the heroine, his wife at once looked extremely uncomfortable.
She changed the reclining position in which she had been leaning back in her chair, and she
sat erect, with a hand closed upon each arm of the chair.

"Richard," she said, "do you think that it is right of you to tell any one, even friends, anything
that you have never yet confessed to me?"

"Ethel," replied Richard, "although I cannot promise that you will be entirely proud of my
conduct when you have heard this episode of my past, I do say that there is nothing in it to
hurt the trust you have placed in me since I have been your husband. Only," he added, "I hope
that I shall not have to tell any story at all."

"Oh, yes you will!" we all exclaimed together; and the men looked eager while the women sighed.

The rest of us were much older than Richard, we were middle-aged, in fact; and human nature
is so constructed, that when it is at the age when making love keeps it busy, it does not care
so much to listen to tales of others' love-making; but the more it recedes from that period
of exuberance, and ceases to have love adventures of its own, the greater become its hunger
and thirst to hear about this delicious business which it can no longer personally practice
with the fluency of yore. It was for this reason that we all yearned in our middle-aged way
for the tale of love which we expected from young Richard. He, on his part, repeated the hope
that by the time his turn to tell a story was reached we should be tired of stories and prefer
to spend the evening at the card tables or in the music room.

We were a house party, no brief "week-end" affair, but a gathering whose period for most of
the guests covered a generous and leisurely ten days, with enough departures and arrivals to
give that variety which is necessary among even the most entertaining and agreeable people. I
wore my badge and my armlet when I was on duty and sometimes when I was not. Even when I joined
our Volunteer Corps I was not seriously embarrassed. After all, one
could alternate the badges and the armlets and, at a pinch, wear them
all together. By day, the grounds afforded
us both golf and tennis, the stables provided motor cars and horses to ride or drive over admirable
roads, through beautiful scenery that was embellished by a magnificent autumn season. At nightfall,
the great house itself received us in the arms of supreme comfort, fed us sumptuously, and
after dinner ministered to our middle-aged bodies with chairs and sofas of the highest development.

The plan devised by our hostess, Mrs. Davenport, that a story should be told by one of us each
evening, had met with courtesy, but not I with immediate enthusiasm. But Mrs. Davenport had
chosen her guests with her usual wisdom, and after the first experiment, story telling proved
so successful that none of us would have readily abandoned it. When the time had come for Richard
Field to entertain the company with the promised tale from his life experience, his hope of
escaping this ordeal had altogether vanished.

Mrs. Field, it had been noticed as early as breakfast time, was inclined to be nervous on her
husband's account. Five years of married life had not cured her of this amiable symptom, and
she made but a light meal. He, on the other hand, ate heartily and without signs of disturbance.
Apparently he was not even conscious of the glances that his wife so frequently stole at him.

"Do at least have some omelet, my dear," whispered Mrs. Davenport urgently. "It's quite light."

But Mrs. Field could summon no appetite.

"I see you are anxious about him," Mrs. Davenport continued after breakfast. "You are surely
not afraid his story will fail to interest us?"

"No, it is not that."

"It can't be that he has given up the one he expected to tell us and can think of no other?"

"Oh, no; he is going to tell that one."

"And you don't like his choice?"

"He won't tell me what it is!" Mrs. Davenport put down her embroidery. "Then, Ethel," she laid
with severity, "the fault is yours. When I had been five years married, Mr. Davenport confided
everything to me."

"So does Richard. Except when I particularly ask him."

"There it is, Ethel. You let him see that you want to know."

"But I do want to know. Richard has had such interesting experiences, so many of them. And
I do so want him to tell a thoroughly nice one. There's the one when he saved a man from drowning
just below our house, the second summer, and the man turned out to be a burglar and broke into
the pantry that very night, and Richard caught him in the dark with just as much courage as
he had caught him in the water and just as few clothes, only it was so different. Richard makes
it quite thrilling. And I mentioned another to him. But he just went on shaving. And now he
has gone out walking, and I believe it's going to be something I would rather not hear. But
I mean to hear it."

At lunch Mrs. Field made a better meal, although it was clear to Mrs. Davenport that Richard
on returning from his walk had still kept his intentions from Ethel. "She does not manage him
in the least," Mrs. Davenport declared to the other ladies, as Ethel and Richard started for
an afternoon drive together. "She will not know anything more when she brings him back."

But in this Mrs. Davenport did wrong to Ethel's resources. The young wife did know something
more when she brought her husband back from their drive through the pleasant country. They
returned looking like an engaged couple, rather than parents whose nursery was already a song
of three little voices.

"He has told her," thought Mrs. Davenport at the first sight of them, as they entered the drawing-room
for an afternoon tea. "She does understand some things."

And when after dinner the ladies had withdrawn to the library, and waited for the men to finish
their cigars, Mrs. Davenport spoke to Ethel. "My dear, I congratulate you. I saw it at once."

"But he hasn't. Richard hasn't told me anything."

"Ethel! Then what is the matter?"

"I told him something. I told him that if it was going to be any story about--about something
I shouldn't like, I should simply follow it with a story about him that he wouldn't like."

"Ethel! You darling!"

"Oh, yes, and I said I was sure you would all listen, even though I was not an author myself.
And I have it ready, you know, and it's awfully like Richard, only a different side of him
from the burglar one."

"But, my dear, what did he do when you--"

This enquiry was, however, cut short by the entrance of the men. And from the glance that came
from Richard's eyes as they immediately sought out his wife, Mrs. Davenport knew that he could
not have done anything very severe to Ethel when she made that threat to him during their drive.

Richard at once made his way to the easy-chair arranged each night in a good position for the
narrator of the evening, and baptised "The Singstool" by Mr. Graves. Mr. Graves was an ardent
Wagnerian, and especially devoted to The Mastersingers of Nuremberg.

"Shall we have," he whispered to Mr. Hillard, "a Beckmesser fiasco to-night, or will it be
a Walter success?"

But Mr. Hillard, besides being an author and a critic, cared little for the too literary cleverness
of Mr. Graves. He therefore heavily crushed that gentleman's allusion to Wagner's opera. We must
all do our bit now, so here's our chance. The Vet says the horse has laminitis in his off fore
foot, but it's all my eye.

Anyhow he's the useful sort they require for the Army. They wouldn't look at me if I offered him,
but you can get round them.

"Why, Mr. Field," said Mrs. Davenport, "you look as if you could find nothing to suggest your
story to you."

"On the contrary," said Richard, "it is the number of things that suggest it. This newspaper
here, that has arrived since I was last in the room, has a column which reminds me very forcibly
of the experience that I have selected to tell you. But I think the most appropriate of all
is that picture." He pointed to the largest picture on the wall. "'Breaking Home Ties' is its
title, I remember very well. It is a replica of the original that drew such crowds in the Art
Building at the World's Fair."

While Richard was saying this, his wife had possessed herself of the newspaper, and he now
observed how eagerly she was scanning its pages. "It is the financial column, Ethel, that recalls
my story."

Ethel, after a hopeless glance at this, resumed her seat near the sofa by Mrs. Davenport.

"There were many paintings," continued Richard, "in that Art Building, of merit incomparably
greater than 'Breaking Home Ties'; and yet the crowd never looked at those, because it did
not understand them. But at any hour of the day, if you happened to pass this picture, it took
you some time to do so. You could pass any of John Sargeant's pictures, for instance, at a
speed limited only by your own powers of running; but you could never run past 'Breaking Home
Ties.' You had to work your way through the crowd in front of that just as you have to do at
a fire, or a news office during a football game. The American people could never get enough
of that mother kissing her boy goodbye, while the wagon waits at the open door to take him
away from her upon his first journey into the world. The idea held a daily pathos for them.
Many had themselves been through such leave takings; and no word so stirs the general heart
as the word 'mother'. Song writers know this; and the artist knew it when he decided to paint
'Breaking Home Ties.' And 'Mother' is the title of my story to-night."

"Mother!" This was Ethel's bewildered echo, "Whose Mother?" she softly murmured to herself.

Richard continued. "It concerns the circumstances under which I became engaged to my wife."

There was a movement from Ethel as she sat by the sofa.

"Not all the circumstances, of course," the narrator continued, with a certain guarded candour
in his tone. "There are certain circumstances which naturally attend every engagement between
happy and--and devoted--young people that they keep to themselves quite carefully, in spite
of the fact that any one who has been through the experience of being engaged two or three times--"

There was another movement from Ethel by the sofa.

"--or even only once, as is my case," the narrator went on, "any body, I say, who has been
through the experience of being engaged only once, can form a very correct idea of the circumstances
that attend the happy engagements of all young people. I imagine they prevail in all countries,
just as the feeling about 'mother' prevails. Yes, 'Mother' is the right title for my story,
as you shall see. Is it not strange that if you add 'in-law' to the word 'mother,' how immediately
the sentiment of the term is altered?--as strongly indeed as when you prefix the word 'step'
to it. But it is with neither of these composite forms of mother that any story deals.

"Ethel has always maintained that if I had really understood her, it never would have happened.
She says--"

"Richard, I"--

"My dear, you shall tell your story afterwards, and I promise to listen without a word until
you are finished. Mrs. Field says that if I had understood her nature as a man ought to understand
the girl he has been thinking about for several years, I should have known she cared nothing
about my income."

"I didn't care! I'd have"--but Mr. Field checked her outburst.

"She was going to say," said Mr. Field, "that had I asked her to marry me when I became sure
that I wished to marry her, she would have been willing to leave New York and go to the waste
land in Michigan that was her inheritance from a grandfather, and there build a cabin and live
in it with me; and that while I shot prairie chickens for dinner she would have milked the
cow which some member of the family would have been willing to give us as a wedding present
instead of a statue of the Winged Victory, or silver spoons and forks, had we so desired."

Richard made a pause here, and looked at his wife as if he expected her to correct him. But
Ethel was plainly satisfied with his statement, and he therefore continued.

"I think it is ideal when a girl is ready to do so much as that for a man. But I should not
think it ideal in a man to allow the girl he loved to do it for him. Nor did I then know anything
about the lands in Michigan--though this would have made no difference. Ethel had been accustomed
to a house several stories high, with hot and cold water in most of them, and somebody to answer
the door-bell."

"The door-bell!" exclaimed Ethel. "I could have gone without hearing that."

"Yes, Ethel, only to hear the welkin ring would have been enough for you. I know that you are
sincere in thinking so. And the ringing welkin is all we should have heard in Michigan. But
the more truly a man loves a girl, the less can he bear taking her from an easy to a hard life.
I am sure that all the men here agree with me."

There was a murmur and a nod from the men, and also from Mrs. Davenport. But the other ladies
gave no sign of assenting to Richard's proposition.

"In those days," said he, "I was what in the curt parlance of the street is termed a six-hundred-dollar
clerk. And though my ears had grown accustomed to this appellation, I never came to feel that
it completely described me. In passing Tiffany's window twice each day (for my habit was to
walk to and from Nassau Street) I remember that seeing a thousand-dollar clock exposed for
sale caused me annoyance. Of course my salary as a clerk brought me into no unfavourable comparison
with the clock; and I doubt if I could make you understand my sometimes feeling when I passed
Tiffany's window that I should like to smash the clock."

"I met Ethel frequently in society, dancing with her, and sitting next her at dinners. And
by the time I had dined at her own house, and walked several afternoons with her, my lot as
a six-hundred-dollar clerk began to seem very sad to me. I wrote verses about it, and about
other subjects also. From an evening passed with Ethel, I would go next morning to the office
and look at the other clerks. One of them was fifty-five, and he still received six hundred
dollars--his wages for the last thirty years. I was then twenty-one; and though I never despaired
to the extent of believing that years would fail to increase my value to the firm by a single
cent, still, for what could I hope? If my salary were there and then to be doubled, what kind
of support was twelve hundred dollars to offer Ethel, with her dresses, and her dinners, and
her father's carriage? For two years I was wretchedly unhappy beneath the many hours of gaiety
that came to me, as to every young man."

"Those two years we could have been in Michigan," said Ethel, "had you understood."

