SENSATIONS AND OUR PERCEPTION OF THEM

       MIND'S SOURCE OF SUPPLIES                                  9
       DOES MATTER EXIST?                                        10
       FIRST-HAND KNOWLEDGE                                      11
       SECOND-HAND KNOWLEDGE                                     12
       ETHERIC VIBRATIONS AS CAUSING SENSATIONS                  13
       THE ROAD TO PERCEPTION                                    14
       THE PLACE WHERE SENSATION OCCURS                          15
       LABORATORY PROOF OF SENSE-PERCEPTIVE PROCESS              16
       REACTION-TIME                                             17
       THE HUMAN TELEPHONE                                       18
       THE LIVING TELEGRAPH                                      19
       THE SIX STEPS TO REACTION                                 20
       UNOPENED MENTAL MAIL                                      21
       SELECTIVE PROCESS THAT DETERMINES CONDUCT                 22
       IN TUNE WITH LIFE-INTEREST                                23
       PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF PERCEPTION PROCESS                   24

  III. SENSORY ILLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THEIR USE

       UNRELIABILITY OF SENSE-ORGANS                             27
       BEING AND SEEMING                                         29
       USE OF ILLUSIONS IN BUSINESS                              31
       MAKING AN ARTICLE LOOK BIG                                32
       TESTING THE CONFIDENTIAL MAN                              33
       TESTS FOR CREDULITY                                       34
       WHAT COLORS LOOK NEAREST                                  35
       TESTING THE RANGE OF ATTENTION                            36
       A GUIDE TO OCCUPATIONAL SELECTION                         37
       TEST FOR ATTENTION TO DETAILS                             38
       OTHER BUSINESS APPLICATIONS                               39

   IV. 

With the Knights, Uribe threw the rest of the courtesy and kindness, I knew coated whenever it suited
him, with the servants, but came on behalf of people with high position, was dry and sparing
in civil demonstrations.                                   48
       "THINGS" AND THEIR MENTAL DUPLICATES                      49
       EFFECT OF CLOSING ONE'S EYES                              50
       IF MATTER WERE ANNIHILATED                                51
       IF MIND WERE ANNIHILATED                                  52
       AS MANY WORLDS AS MINDS                                   53

    V. ESSENTIAL LAW OF PRACTICAL SELF-MASTERY

       OPTION AND OPPORTUNITY                                    57
       PRE-ARRANGING YOUR CONSCIOUSNESS                          58
       HOW TO DEFINITELY SELECT ITS ELEMENTS                     59
       AN INFALLIBLE RECIPE FOR SELF-POSSESSION                  60
       USING "UNSEEN EAR PROTECTORS"                             61
       HOW TO AVOID WORRY, MELANCHOLY                            62
       PUTTING CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER FOOT                          63
       RUNNING YOUR MENTAL FACTORY                               64
       ACQUIRING MENTAL BALANCE                                  65
       DISSIPATING MENTAL SPECTERS                               66
       HOW TO CONTROL YOUR DESTINY                               67

CHAPTER I

THE TWO FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES OF MIND

[Sidenote: Mind as a Means to Achievement]

In the preceding book, "Psychology and Achievement," we established the truth of two propositions:

I. All human achievement comes about through bodily activity.

II. All bodily activity is caused, controlled and directed by the mind.

To these two fundamental propositions we now append a third, which needs no proof, but follows
as a natural and logical conclusion from the other two:

III. The Mind is the instrument you must employ for the accomplishment of any purpose.

[Sidenote: Three Postulates for this Course]

With these three fundamental propositions as postulates, it will be the end and aim of this
Course of Reading to develop plain, simple and specific methods and directions for the most
efficient use of the mind in the attainment of practical ends.

To comprehend these mental methods and to make use of them in business affairs you must thoroughly
understand the two fundamental processes of the mind.

These two fundamental processes are the Sense-Perceptive Process and the Judicial Process.

The Sense-Perceptive Process is the process by which knowledge is acquired through the senses.
Knowledge is the result of experience and all human experience is made up of sense-perceptions.

[Sidenote: Experience and Abstractions]

The Judicial Process is the reasoning and reflective process. It is the purely "intellectual"
type of mental operation. It deals wholly in abstractions. Abstractions are constructed out
of past experiences.

Consequently, the Sense-Perceptive Process furnishes the raw material, sense-perceptions or
experience, for the machinery of the Judicial Process to work with.

[Sidenote: Primary Mental Operations]

In this book we shall give you a clear idea of the Sense-Perceptive Process and show you some
of the ways in which an understanding of this process will be useful to you in everyday affairs.
The succeeding book will explain the Judicial Process.

CHAPTER II

SENSATIONS AND OUR PERCEPTION OF THEM

[Sidenote: Mind's Source of Supplies]

Whatever you know or think you know, of the external world comes to you through some one of
your five primary senses, sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell, or some one of the secondary
senses, such as the muscular sense and the sense of heat and cold.

The impressions you receive in this way may be true or they may be false. They may constitute
absolute knowledge or they may be merely mistaken impressions. So what!
Could anyone seriously believe that the revolution suddenly going to take away all our ills, all the vices
and abuses that occurred? The revolution may eventually, if it becomes strong, correct many of these
evils and vices and abuses, but for today it is inevitable they yet appear. They would do so
even though those who fought in Alcolea for the revolution had been angels of heaven, which neither
they presume, nor anyone gives them superhuman nature, condition
and virtues.

Ponder well what I said, those of you who saw the revolution with joy, who accepted it and today they
repent, and also those who always called it evil and continue to call it evil today. Reflect
on it, and know that there is no evil now that is not derived from the past, as derived is from
premise the consequence, as born is the offspring off the root of an old plant, if not uprooted
and removed outright; an operation more difficult than you think.

This is not to say that the state of our country is delightful, enviable and flourishing. Nothing
less than that. In our country there is much despondency, much anger, and enormous disgust.
And do not seek too much, do not to sink into the dark depths to unravel the cause. The reason is
that where there is no flour, all is dour. Evil, the foundation of all evil among us is a shortage
of money, or to avail ourselves of a better term, hardship or poverty. In our times we grieve
over this the more, because aspirations and the knowledge of plenty is more widespread, not
because evil is new. From behing comes the bird for the chickpeas, as the saying goes. It would therefore
be an insult to require the revolution to renew the miracle of loaves and fishes, or turn stones
into loaves. What will the revolution do besides what we've always done? This brings to memory
the way they usually have to greet in some parts of Andalusia, which cannot be more traditional
or more their own. Two Gentlemen come out in the sun, much too wrapped in their cloaks, and
meet around a corner .-- "Hi, compadre, says one: how are we going?" - And other answers:
"Cheating and V, compadre ?»--« cheating, cheating, too," replies the one who asked the question.
So they have nothing to reproach each other, and can go for a walk together, in good love and
company.

You know that part of these nerves are sensory nerves and part of them are motor nerves. You
know that the sensory nerves convey to the brain the impressions received from the outer world
and that the motor nerves relay this information to the rest of the body coupled with commands
for appropriate muscular action.

[Sidenote: The Road to Perception]

The outer end of every sensory nerve exposes a sensitive bit of gray matter. These sensitive,
impression-receiving ends constitute together what is called the "sensorium" of the body.

When vibrations of light or sound impinge upon the sensorium, they are relayed from nerve cell
to nerve cell until they reach the central brain. Then it is, and not until then, that sensations
and perceptions occur.

Consider, now, the infinitesimal size of a nerve cell and you will have some conception of
the number of hands through which the message must pass before it is received by the central
office.

Many of our sensations, especially those of touch, seem to occur on the periphery of the body--that
is to say, at that part of the exposed surface of the body which is apparently affected. If
your finger is crushed in a door, the sensation of the blow and the pain all seem to occur
in the finger itself.

[Sidenote: The Place Where Sensation Occurs]

As a matter of fact, this is not the case, for if one of your arms should be amputated, you
would still feel a tingling in the fingers of the amputated arm. Thus has arisen a superstition
that leads many people to bury any part of the body lost in this way, thinking that they will
never be entirely relieved of pain until the absent member is finally at rest.

Of course, the fact is that you would only seem to have feeling in the amputated arm. The sensation
would really occur in the central brain tissue as the organ of the governing intelligence,
the organ of consciousness.

[Sidenote: Laboratory Proof of Sense-Perceptive Process]

And you may set it down as an established principle that all states of consciousness, whether
seemingly localized on the surface of the body or not, are connected with the brain as the
dominant center.

The facts we have been recounting have been established by the experiments of physiological
psychology. Thus, the work of the laboratory has shown that between the moment when a sense
vibration reaches the body and the moment when sensation occurs a measurable interval of time
intervenes.

If your eyes were to be blindfolded and your hand unexpectedly pricked with a white-hot needle,
the time that would elapse before you could jerk your hand away could be readily measured in
fractions of a second with appropriate instruments.

[Sidenote: Reaction Time]

This interval is known as reaction-time. It varies greatly with different persons. During this
reaction-time, the cell or cells attacked upon the surface of the hand have conveyed news of
the assault through numberless intermediate sensory nerve cells to the brain. The brain in
turn has sent out its mandate through the appropriate motor nerve cells to all the muscle and
other cells surrounding the injured cell, commanding them to remove it from the point of danger.

The work of the nervous system in dealing with the ether vibrations that are constantly impinging
upon the surface of the body has been likened to that of the transmitter, connecting wire and
receiver of a telephone. Air-waves striking against the transmitter of the telephone awaken
a similar vibratory movement in the transmitter itself. This movement is passed along the wire
to the receiver, which vibrates responsively and imparts a corresponding wave-like motion to
the air.

[Sidenote: The Human Telephone]

These air-waves when heard are what we call sound.

In the same way, air-waves striking the ear are communicated by the auditory nerve to the brain,
where they awaken a corresponding sensation of sound. But these waves must be vibrating at
between 30 and 20,000 times a second. If they are vibrating so slowly or so rapidly as not
to come within this range, we cannot hear them.

[Sidenote: The Living Telegraph]

This process is by no means a mechanical affair. On the contrary, it is a series of mental
acts. Every cell in the living telegraph must receive the message and transmit it. Every cell
must exercise a form of intelligence, from the auditory cell reporting a sound-wave or the
skin cell reporting an injury to the muscle cells that ultimately receive and understand a
message directing them to remove the part from danger.

Reaction-time, so called, is thus occupied by cellular action in the form of mental processes
intervening between the nerve-ends and the brain center, in much the same way that light and
sound vibrations intervene between the object perceived and the surface of the body.

[Sidenote: The Six Steps to Reaction]

For even the simplest of sense-perceptions we have, then, this sequence of events: first, the
object perceived; second, the series of vibrations of ether particles intervening between the
object and the body; third, the impression upon the surface of the body; fourth, the series
of mental processes, cell after cell, in the nerve filaments leading to the brain; fifth, when
these impressions or messages have reached the brain, a determination of what is to be done;
and, sixth, a transmission by cellular action of a new message that will awaken some response
in the muscular tissues.

[Sidenote: Unopened Mental Mail]

This process is completely carried out, however, in only comparatively few instances. The vast
majority of sense-impressions awaken no reaction. They are registered in the mind, but they
are not perceived. We are not conscious of them. They form a part, not of consciousness, but
of subconsciousness. They are messages that reach the mind but are laid aside like unopened
mail because they possess no present interest.

Wherever and however you may be placed, you are always and everywhere immersed in a flood of
etheric vibrations. Light, sound and tactual vibrations press upon you from every side. At
a busy corner of a city street these vibrations rise to a tumultuous fortissimo; in the hush
of a night upon the plains they sink to pianissimo. Yet at every moment of your day or night
they are there in greater or less degree, titillating the unsleeping nerve-ends of the sensorium.

[Sidenote: Selective Process that Determines Conduct]

Your mind cannot take time to make all these sense-impressions the subject of conscious thought.
It can trouble itself only with those that bear in some way upon your interests in life.

Your mind is like the receiving apparatus of the wireless telegraph which picks from the air
those particular vibrations to which it is attuned. Your mind is selective. It is discriminating.
It seizes upon those few sensory images that are related to your interests in life and thrusts
them forward to be consciously perceived and acted upon. All others it diverts into a subconscious
reservoir of temporary oblivion.

[Sidenote: In Tune with Life-Interest]

You will have a clearer understanding of the sense-perceptive processes and a more vital realization
of the practical significance of these facts when you consider how they affect your knowledge
of material things and your conception of the external world.

This subject possesses two distinct aspects.

One aspect has to do with the inability of the sense-organs to record the facts of the outer
world with perfect precision. These organs are the result of untold ages of evolution, and,
generally speaking, have become wonderfully efficient, but they display surprising inaccuracies.
These inaccuracies are called Sensory Illusions.

[Sidenote: Practical Aspects of Perception Process]

The other aspect of the Sense-Perceptive Process has to do with the mental interpretation of
environment.

Both these aspects are distinctly practical.

You should know something of the weaknesses and deficiencies of the sense-perceptive organs,
because all your efforts at influencing other men are directed at their organs of sense.

You should understand the relationship between your mind and your environment, since they are
the two principal factors in your working life.

CHAPTER III

SENSORY ILLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THEIR USE

[Sidenote: Unreliability of Sense-Organs]

Figure 1 shows two lines of equal length, yet the vertical line will to most persons seem longer
than the horizontal one.

In Figure 2 the lines A and B are of the same length, yet the lower seems much longer.

Those things look smallest over which the eye moves with least resistance.

In Figure 3, the distance from A to B looks longer than the distance from B to C because of
the time we involuntarily take to notice each dot, yet the distances are equal.

[Sidenote: Being and Seeming]

For the same reason, the hatchet line (A-B) appears longer than the unbroken line (C-D) in
Figure 4, and the lines E and F appear longer than the space (G) between them, although all
are of equal length.

Filled spaces look larger than empty ones because the eye unconsciously stops to look over
the different parts of the filled area, and we base our estimate upon the extent of the eye
movements necessary to take in the whole field. Thus the filled square in Figure 5 looks larger
than the empty one, though they are of equal size.

White objects appear much larger than black ones. A white square looks larger than a black
one. It is said that cattle buyers who are sometimes compelled to guess at the weight of animals
have learned to discount their estimate on white animals and increase it on black ones to make
allowances for the optical illusion.

[Sidenote: Use of Illusions in Business]

The dressmaker and tailor are careful not to array stout persons in checks and plaids, but
try to convey an impression of sylph-like slenderness through the use of vertical lines. On
the other hand, you have doubtless noticed in recent years the checkerboard and plaid-covered
boxes used by certain manufacturers of food products and others to make their packages look
larger than they really are.

The advertiser who understands sensory illusions gives an impression of bigness to the picture
of an article by the artful use of lines and contrasting figures. If his advertisement shows
a picture of a building to which he wishes to give the impression of bigness, he adds contrasting
figures such as those of tiny men and women so that the unknown may be measured by the known.
If he shows a picture of a cigar, he places the cigar vertically, because he knows that it
will look longer that way than if placed horizontally.

[Sidenote: Making an Article Look Big]

A subtle method of conveying an idea of bigness is by placing numbers on odd-shaped cards or
blocks, or on any blank white space. The object or space containing the figures always appears
larger than the corresponding space without the figures.

This fact has been made the basis of a psychological experiment to determine the extent to
which a subject's judgment is influenced by suggestion. To perform this experiment cut bits
of pasteboard into pairs of squares, circles, stars and octagons and write numbers of two figures
each, say 25, 50, 34, 87, etc., upon the different pieces. Tell the subject to be tested to
pick out the forms that are largest. The susceptible person who is not trained to discriminate
closely will pick out of each pair the card that has the largest number upon it.

[Sidenote: Testing the Confidential Man]

This test can be made one of a series used in examining applicants for commercial positions.
It can also be used to discover the weakness of certain employees, such as buyers, secretaries
and others who are entrusted with secrets and commissions requiring discretion, and who must
be proof against the deceptions practiced by salesmen, promoters and others with seductive
propositions.

[Sidenote: Tests for Credulity]

This examination can be carried still further to test the subject's credulity or power of discrimination.
What is known as the "force card" test was originally devised by a magician, but has been adopted
in experimental psychology. Take a pack of cards and shuffle them loosely in the two hands,
making some one card, say the ace of spades, especially prominent. The subject is told to "take
a card." The suggestive influence of the proffered card will cause nine persons out of ten
to pick out that particular card.

Turning from illusions of suggestion, shape and size, another field of peculiar sensory illusions
is found in color aberration. Some colors look closer than others. For instance, paint an object
red and it seems nearer than it would if painted green.

[Sidenote: What Colors Look Nearest]

Aside from the obvious uses to which these sense-illusions can be put, they form the basis
for a number of psychological experiments to test the abilities of persons in many ways. Here
is a test which deals with the range of attention. If you desire to discover the capacity of
any person to pay attention to unfamiliar questions or subjects which might at some future
time have great importance, try this test. Have a piece of pasteboard cut into squares, circles,
triangles, halfmoons, stars and other forms. Then write upon each piece some such word as hat,
coat, ball or bat. The objects are then placed under a cloth cover and the subject to be examined
is told to concentrate his attention on the shapes alone, paying no attention to the words.
The cloth is lifted for five seconds and then replaced. The subject is then told to draw with
a pencil the different shapes and such words as he may chance to remember. The experiment should
then be repeated, with the injunction to pay no attention to the shapes but to remember as
many words as possible, and write them down on such forms as he may happen to recall.

[Sidenote: Testing the Range of Attention]

Of course, the real object is to determine whether the subject will see more than he is told,
or whether he is a mere automaton. The result will tell whether his attention is of the narrow
or broad type. If it be narrow, he will see only the forms in the first case and no words,
and in the second case he will remember the words but be unable to recall the shape of the
pieces of cardboard.

[Sidenote: A Guide to Occupational Selection]

His breadth of attention will be shown by the number of correct forms and words combined which
he is able to remember in both cases. In other words, this will measure his ability to pay
attention to more than one thing at a time.

Other things being equal, the narrow type of attention belongs to a man fitted for work as
a bookkeeper or mechanic, while the broad type of attention fits one for work as a foreman
or superintendent or, lacking executive ability, for work requiring the supervision of mechanical
operations widely separated in space.

[Sidenote: Test for Attention to Details]

The ordinary man sees but one thing at a time, while the exceptional man sees many things at
every glance and is prepared to remember and act upon them in emergency.

Having determined a person's scope of attention, you may want to test his accuracy in details
as compared with other men. To conduct such an experiment dictate a statement which will form
one typewritten letterhead sheet. This statement should comprise facts and figures about your
business of which the subjects to be tested are supposed to have accurate knowledge. After
this original page is written, have your typist write out another set of sheets in which there
are a large number of errors both in spelling and figures. Then have each of the persons to
be examined go through one of these sheets and cross out all the wrong letters or figures.
Time this operation. The man who does it in the quickest time and overlooks the fewest errors,
naturally ranks highest in speed and accuracy of work.

[Sidenote: Other Business Applications]

Look into your own business and you will undoubtedly find some department, whether it be store
decoration, office furnishing, window dressing, advertising, landscape work or architecture,
in which a systematic application of a knowledge of sensory illusions will produce good results.

CHAPTER IV

INWARDNESS OF ENVIRONMENT

[Sidenote: Factors of Success or Failure]

The aspect of the sense-perceptive process that deals with the relation of mind to environment
is of greatest practical value.

Look at this subject for a moment and you will see that the world in which you live and work
is a world of your own making. All the factors of success or failure are factors of your own
choosing and creation.

If there is anything in the world you feel sure of, it is that you can depend upon the "evidence
of your own senses," eyes, ears, nose, etc. You rest serene in the conviction that your senses
picture the world to you exactly as it is. It is a common saying that "Seeing is believing."

[Sidenote: Should Seeing Be Believing?]

Yet how can you be sure that any object in the external world is actually what your sense-perceptions
report it to be?

You have learned that a countless number of physical agencies must intervene before your mind
can receive an impression or message through any of the senses.

Under these conditions you cannot be sure that your impression of a green lamp-shade, for instance,
comes through the same sort of etheric and cellular activities that convey a picture of the
same lamp-shade to the brain of another. If the physical agencies through which your sense-impressions
of the lamp-shade filter are not identical with the agencies through which they pass to the
other person's brain, then your mental picture and his mental picture cannot be the same. You
can never be sure that what both you and another may describe as green may not create an entirely
different impression in your mind from the impression it creates in his.

Other facts add to your uncertainty. Thus, the same stimulus acting on different organs of
sense will produce different sensations. A blow upon the eye will cause you to "see stars";
a similar blow upon the ear will cause you to hear an explosive sound. In other words, the
vibratory effect of a touch on eye or ear is the same as that of light or sound vibrations.

[Sidenote: Hearing the Lightning]

The notion you may form of any object in the outer world depends solely upon what part of your
brain happens to be connected with that particular nerve-end that receives an impression from
the object.

You see the sun without being able to hear it because the only nerve-ends tuned to vibrate
in harmony with the ether-waves set in action by the sun are nerve-ends that are connected
with the brain center devoted to sight. "If," says Professor James, "we could splice the outer
extremities of our optic nerves to our ears, and those of our auditory nerves to our eyes,
we should hear the lightning and see the thunder, see the symphony and hear the conductor's
movements."

[Sidenote: Importance of the Mental Make-Up]

In other words, the kind of impressions we receive from the world about us, the sort of mental
pictures we form concerning it, in fact the character of the outer world, the nature of the
environment in which our lives are cast--all these things depend for each one of us simply
upon how he happens to be put together, simply upon his individual mental make-up.

There is another way of examining into the intervening agencies that influence our mental conception
of the material world about us.

[Sidenote: Unreality of "The Real"]

Look at the table or any other familiar object in the room in which you are sitting. Has it
ever occurred to you that this object may have no existence apart from your mental impression
of it? Have you ever realized that no object ever has been or ever could be known to exist
unless there was an individual mind present to note its existence?

If you have never given much thought to questions of this kind, you will be tempted to answer
boldly that the table is obviously a reality, that you have a direct intuitive knowledge of
it, and that you can at once assure yourself of its existence by looking at it or touching
it. You will conceive your perception of the table as a sort of projection of your mind comfortably
enfolding the table within itself.

[Sidenote: "Things" and their Mental Duplicates]

But perception is obviously only a state of mind. Can it, then, go outside of the mind to meet
the table or even "hover in midair like a bridge between the two"? If you perceive the table,
must not your perception of it exist wholly within your own mind? If, then, the table has any
existence outside of and apart from your perception of it, then the table and your mental image
of the table are two separate and distinct things.

In other words, you are on the horns of a dilemma. If you insist that the table exists outside
of your mind, you must admit that your knowledge of it is not direct, immediate and intuitive,
but indirect and representative, because of intervening physical agencies, and that the only
thing directly known is the mental impression of the table. On the other hand, if you insist
that your knowledge of the table is direct, immediate and intuitive you must admit that the
table is only a mental image, a mental reality, if it is any sort of reality at all, and that
it has no existence outside of the mind.

[Sidenote: Effect of Closing One's Eyes]

You may easily convince yourself that the table you directly perceive can be nothing other
than a mental picture. How? Simply close your eyes. It has now ceased to exist. What has ceased
to exist? The external table of wood and glue and bolts? By no means. Simply its mental duplicate.
And by alternately opening and closing your eyes, you can successively create and destroy this
mental duplicate.

[Sidenote: If Matter Were Annihilated]

Clearly, then, the table of which you are directly and immediately conscious when your eyes
are open is always this mental duplicate, this aggregate of color, form, size and touch impressions;
while the real table, the physical table, may be something other than the one of which you
are directly aware. This other thing, this physical table, whatever it is, can never be directly
known, if indeed it has any existence, a fact that many distinguished philosophers have had
the courage to deny.

Imagine, then, for a moment that everything except mind should suddenly cease to exist, but
that your sense-perceptions--that is to say, your perception of sensory impressions--were to
continue to follow one another as before. Would not the physical world be for you just exactly
what it is today, and would you not have the same reasons for believing in its existence that
you now have? 

It was a black satin jacket, dotted with bright green bees that were woven into the fabric. Leonardo
hadn't tried it on, but the tailor didn't feel that was necessary. Either way, there wasn't the
time to do so, because by that point most of the parishioners of Uribe were arriving. Among
them was Fernando O'Reilly, younger brother of Earl O'Reilly. After him came the Marquis of Aguas
Claras, followed by the eldest son of Filomeno, the young Marquis de Villalta, the Steward of the
Earl of Lombillo, and one they called Seiso Ferino, protected by the wealthy Valdés Herrera
family. Almost all of these men had ordered clothing for either themselves or their masters in
the expert tailoring Uribe requested, and had purposely picked this time to enter the store while
on their way to the Paseo outside of the walls in their carriages.

Upon entrance, the first of the elite placed his hand upon Leonardo's shoulder and called him
by name. They had been philosophy classmates in the College of San Carlos from 1827 to 1828. That is,
until Leonardo had left to continue his studies in Spain and become a lawyer, making top dollar
just a few months prior to this reunion with the help of the mayor. As Leonardo had had no inclination
to visit him, this is the first time they had seen each other in two years. This is perhaps because,
even though they were former classmates, he had not stopped being a member of the proud Havana
family, the first greatness of Spain.


Perception as an independent mental process thus enables you to predetermine what elements
of passing sensory experience may be made the basis of your conscious judgments and of your
feelings and emotions.

[Sidenote: How to Definitely Selects its Elements]

Bear this in mind when you think of your environment and its supposed influence upon your life.
Remember that your environment is no hard-and-fast thing, an aggregate of physical realities.
Your environment, so far as it affects your judgment and your conduct, is made up, not of physical
realities, but of mental pictures.

Your environment is within you. Get this conclusion clearly in your mind.

Hold fast to the point of view that, Environment, the environment that influences your conduct
and your life, is not a chance massing of outward circumstances, but is the product of your
own mind.

[Sidenote: An Infallible Recipe for Self-Possession]

Think what this means to you. It means that by deliberately selecting for attention only those
sense-impressions, those elements of consciousness, that can serve your purpose, you can free
yourself from all distractions and make peaceful progress in the midst of turmoil.

[Sidenote: Using "Unseen Ear Protectors"]

"In the busiest part of New York, a broker occupied a desk in a room with six other men who
had many visitors constantly moving about and talking. The gentleman was at first so sensitive
to disturbances that he accomplished almost nothing during business hours, and returned home
every evening with a severe headache. One day a man of impressive personality and extremely
calm demeanor entered the office, and noticing the agitated broker, smilingly said: 'I see
that you are disturbed by the noise made by your neighbors in the conduct of their affairs;
pardon me if I leave with you an infallible recipe for peace in the midst of commotion: Hear
only what you will to hear.' With this terse counsel he quietly bade the astonished listener
adieu. After his visitor had departed, the nervous man felt unaccountably calm, and was constrained
to meditate upon his friend's advice, and no sooner did he seek to put it into practical use
than he learned for the first time that it was his rightful prerogative to use unseen ear protectors
as well as to employ his ears. Six or seven weeks elapsed before he saw his mysterious visitor
again, and by that time he had so successfully practiced the simple though forceful injunction,
that he had reached a point in self-control where the Babel of tongues about him no longer
reached his consciousness."

[Sidenote: How to Avoid Worry, Melancholy]

Herein lies a remedy for worry, with its sleepless nights and kindred torments; for melancholy
and despair, with their train of physical and financial disaster.

How? Simply by shutting off the flow of disagreeable thoughts and substituting others that
are pleasant and refreshing.

You are master. You can change the setting of your mental stage from portentous gloom to sun-lit
assurance. You can concentrate your thought upon the useful, the helpful and the cheerful,
ignore the useless and annoying, and make your life a life of hope and joy, of promise and
fulfilment.

[Sidenote: Putting Circumstances Under Foot]

You will not question the statement that what you do with your life is the combined result
of heredity and environment. At the same time you doubtless possess a more or less hazy belief
in the freedom of your own will.

The chances are that in any previous reflections on this subject you have magnified the influence
of outside agencies and wondered just how a man could make himself the master rather than the
victim of circumstances.

You now realize that your environment is an environment of thought, that your material universe
is a thing your own making, and that you can mold it as you will simply by the intelligent
control of your own thinking.

In this volume you have added to these propositions a third, namely:

III. The mind is the instrument you must employ for the accomplishment of any purpose.

Acting on this third postulate, you have begun the consideration of primary mental operations
with a view to evolving methods and devices for the scientific and systematic employment of
the mind in the attainment of success. You have concluded your study of the first of the two
fundamental processes of the mind, the Sense-Perceptive Process, and have learned to distinguish
between seeing or hearing or feeling on the one hand and perceiving on the other.

[Sidenote: Acquiring Mental Balance]

Realizing this distinction and applying it to your daily life, you can at once set to work
to acquire mental poise and practical self-mastery, the essence of personal efficiency.

There never has been a moment in all your life when sense-impressions were not pouring in upon
you from every side, tending to disturb and annoy you and interfere with your concentration
and progress. Heretofore you have struggled blindly with these distracting influences, not
knowing the elements with which you had to deal nor how to deal with them.

[Sidenote: Dissipating Mental Specters]

But the mask has been torn from the specter of distraction, and hereafter when irrelevant sights,
sounds and other sensations threaten to interrupt your work, just stop a moment and consider.
So far as you and your actual knowledge are concerned, nothing exists in substance and reality
outside your mental picture of it. So far as you and your actual knowledge are concerned, all
matter is simply thought, and you have never doubted your ability to dismiss a thought. It
is for you, then, here and now, to decide whether you will harbor sensory pictures that impede
your progress and allow them to harass and dominate you and interfere with the achievement
of your ambition, or whether you will ignore these intruders and thereby annihilate them.

[Sidenote: How to Control Your Destiny]

Success is a variable term. In the last analysis, it means simply getting the thing that you
want to have.

Whether you succeed or fail depends altogether upon your own attitude toward the external facts
of life.

You have within you a living Force against which all the world is powerless. You have only
to know it and to learn how to use it.

Learn the lesson of your own powers, the secret of controlling the selective and creative energy
within you, and you can bring any project to the goal of accomplishment.

In the closing volumes of this Course we shall instruct you in practical methods by which the
selection of those elements of experience that are helpful may be made absolutely automatic.

Duplicate chapter headers have been removed from the text version of this ebook and hidden
in the HTML version.

The word 'prearranging' appears both with and without a hyphen. This variance matches the original
text.

