    "That by existing arrangements for the sailing of the Cunard
    line of steamers between Boston and Liverpool, it becomes
    necessary for them to leave this port on the Sabbath, whenever
    that happens to be the regular day appointed for sailing; and
    that this occurs a number of times in the course of a year. That
    the sailing of a steamer on that day is a source of deep regret
    to many good citizens, who are compelled, whenever the event
    happens, either to defer their departure to a future day, or to
    yield to an arrangement which violates their Christian feelings.
    And what is still more to be lamented, as a consequence growing
    out of the present regulation, is that aside from the tumult
    necessarily attendant on the sailing of these vessels on the
    Lord's day, it furnishes an occasion for the needless
    profanation of the day by thousands who assemble as spectators
    on our wharves to witness their departure.

    "The undersigned regard a proper observance of the Sabbath as
    vital to the general peace, good order, and welfare of society;
    and they are deeply impressed with the belief that nothing of a
    secular or worldly nature should be done on that day by
    individuals, by governments, or by any of their departments,
    Which is not in the strictest sense a work of necessity or
    mercy; and they most respectfully represent, that they are
    unable to perceive any reasons which render the sailing of
    steamers from this port on the Lord's day such a work. And
    believing as they do, that it will be the pleasure of your
    lordships at all times to cherish and promote, so far as you may
    be able, a due observance of the Sabbath, they respectfully and
    earnestly request your lordships so to vary the present
    arrangements as to the times for the sailing of these steamers,
    that their departure from this port shall be changed to another
    day, whenever the appointed day for sailing shall fall upon the
    Christian Sabbath. And they venture to express their confident
    belief that not only the public welfare, but also the private
    advantage of individuals concerned in the enterprize, would be
    ultimately promoted by the arrangements here prayed for.

    "The undersigned cannot conclude their memorial without
    adverting to the high and responsible station that has been
    assigned by Providence to the English and American people, in
    the great work which they and we rejoice to know is now so
    rapidly progressing, of improving the moral and religious
    character and condition of the world; nor can they be unmindful
    of the fact, that to the same extent as their standing before
    the world in this respect is permanent, so will be the influence
    of their example on the nations around them, whether it be good
    or bad.

    "That the subject here presented may receive your Lordship's
    favorable and Christian consideration is the sincere and earnest
    desire of your Lordships' most respectful memorialists."

    "The undersigned having been personally engaged in obtaining the
    signatures to the memorial, asking a change in the sailing of
    the Cunard steamers, when the regular sailing day occurs on the
    Sabbath, hereby certifies that the memorialists are among the
    most respectable and influential of their respective
    professions, that the memorial was received with almost
    universal favor, and that, had time been allowed, and had it
    been deemed necessary to do it, thousands of names might have
    been obtained.

    "AMOS A. PHELPS."

    "Boston, July 31, 1841."

