463. I. THERE ARE TWO KINDS OF CONCUBINAGE, WHICH DIFFER EXCEEDINGLY FROM EACH OTHER, THE ONE
CONJOINTLY WITH A WIFE, THE OTHER APART FROM A WIFE. That there are two kinds of concubinage,
which differ exceedingly from each other, and that the one kind consists in taking a substituted
partner to the bed and living conjointly and at the same time with her and with a wife; and
that the other kind is when, after a legitimate and just separation from a wife, a man engages
a woman in her stead as a bed-fellow; also that these two kinds of concubinage differ as much
from each other as dirty linen from clean, may be seen by those who take a clear and distinct
view of things, but not by those whose view of things is confused and indistinct: yea, it may
be seen by those who are in conjugial love, but not by those who are in the love of adultery.
The latter are in obscurity respecting all the derivations of the love of the sex, whereas
the former are enlightened respecting them: nevertheless, those who are in adultery, can see
those derivations and their distinctions, not indeed in and from themselves, but from others
when they hear them: for an adulterer has a similar faculty with a chaste husband of elevating
his understanding; but an adulterer, after he has acknowledged the distinctions which he has
heard from others, nevertheless forgets them, when he immerses his understanding in his filthy
pleasure; for the chaste and the unchaste principles, and the sane and the insane, cannot dwell
together; but, when separated, they may be distinguished by the understanding. I once inquired
of those in the spiritual world who did not regard adulteries as sins, whether they knew a
single distinction between fornication, keeping a mistress, the two kinds of concubinage, and
the several degrees of adultery? They said they were all alike. I then asked them whether marriage
was distinguishable? Upon this they looked around to see whether any of the clergy were present,
and as there were not, they said, that in itself it is like the rest. The case was otherwise
with those who in the ideas of their thought regarded adulteries as sins: these said, that
in their interior ideas, which are of the perception, they saw distinctions, but had not yet
studied to discern and know them asunder. This I can assert as a fact, that those distinctions
are perceived by the angels in heaven as to their minutiae. In order therefore that it may
be seen, that there are two kinds of concubinage opposite to each other, one whereby conjugial
love is destroyed, the other whereby it is not, we will first describe the kind which is condemnatory,
and afterwards that which is not.

464. It is unlawful, because it is contrary to the conjugial covenant; and it is detestable,
because it is contrary to religion; and what is contrary to religion, and at the same time
to the conjugial covenant, is contrary to the Lord: wherefore, as soon as any one, without
a really conscientious cause, adjoins a concubine to a wife, heaven is closed to him; and by
the angels he is no longer numbered among Christians. From that time also he despises the things
of the church and of religion, and afterwards does not lift his face above nature, but turns
himself to her as a deity, who favors his lust, from whose influx his spirit thenceforward
receives animation. The interior cause of this apostasy will be explained in what follows.
That this concubinage is detestable is not seen by the man himself who is guilty of it; because
after the closing of heaven he becomes a spiritual insanity: but a chaste wife has a clear
view of it, because she is a conjugial love, and this love nauseates such concubinage; wherefore
also many such wives refuse actual connection with their husbands afterwards, as that which
would defile their chastity by the contagion of lust adhering to the men from their courtezans.

465. III. IT IS POLYGAMY WHICH HAS BEEN CONDEMNED, AND IS TO BE CONDEMNED, BY THE CHRISTIAN
WORLD. That simultaneous concubinage, or concubinage conjoined with a wife, is polygamy, although
not acknowledged to be such, because it is not so declared, and thus not so called by any law,
must be evident to every person of common discernment; for a woman taken into keeping, and
made partaker of the conjugial bed is like a wife. That polygamy has been condemned, and is
to be condemned by the Christian world, has been shewn in the chapter on polygamy, especially
from these articles therein: A Christian is not allowed to marry more than one wife; n. 338:
If a Christian marries several wives, he commits not only natural, but also spiritual adultery;
n. 339: The Israelitish nation was permitted to marry several wives, because the Christian
church was not with them; n. 349. From these considerations it is evident, that to adjoin a
concubine to a wife, and to make each a partner of the bed, is filthy polygamy.

466. That it is more opposed to conjugial love than simple adultery; and that it is a deprivation
of every faculty and inclination to conjugial life, which is implanted in Christians from birth,
may be evinced by arguments which will have great weight with the reason of a wise man. In
regard to the FIRST POSITION,--that simultaneous concubinage, or concubinage conjoined with
a wife, is more opposed to conjugial love than simple adultery, it may be seen from these considerations:
that in simple adultery there is not a love analogous to conjugial love; for it is only a heat
of the flesh, which presently cools, and sometimes does not leave any trace of love behind
it towards its object; wherefore this effervescing lasciviousness, if it is not from a purposed
or confirmed principle, and if the person guilty of it repents, detracts but little from conjugial
love. It is otherwise in the case of polygamical adultery: herein there is a love analogous
to conjugial love; for it does not cool and disperse, or pass off into nothing after being
excited, like the foregoing; but it remains, renews and strengthens itself, and so far takes
away from love to the wife, and in the place thereof induces cold towards her; for in such
case it regards the concubine courtezan as lovely from a freedom of the will, in that it can
retract if it pleases; which freedom is begotten in the natural man: and because this freedom
is thence grateful, it supports that love; and moreover, with a concubine the unition with
allurements is nearer than with a wife; but on the other hand it does not regard a wife as
lovely, by reason of the duty of living with her enjoined by the covenant of life, which it
then perceives as far more constrained in consequence of the freedom enjoyed with another woman.
It is plain that love for a wife grows cold, and she herself grows vile, in the same degree
that love for a courtezan grows warm, and she is held in estimation. In regard to the SECOND
POSITION--that simultaneous concubinage, or concubinage conjoined with a wife, deprives a man
of all faculty and inclination to conjugial life, which is implanted in Christians from birth,
it may be seen from the following considerations: that so far as love to a wife is changed
into love to a concubine, so far the former love is rent, exhausted, and emptied, as has been
shewn just above: that this is effected by a closing of the interiors of the natural mind,
and an opening of its inferior principles, may appear from the seat of the inclination with
Christians to love one of the sex, as being in the inmost principles, and that this seat may
be closed, but cannot be destroyed. The reason why an inclination to love one of the sex, and
also a faculty to receive that love, is implanted in Christians from birth, is, because that
love is from the Lord alone, and is esteemed religious, and in Christendom the Lord's divine
is acknowledged and worshipped, and religion is from his Word; hence there is a grafting, and
also a transplanting thereof, from generation to generation. We have said, that the above Christian
conjugial principle perishes by polygamical adultery: we thereby mean, that with the Christian
polygamist it is closed and intercepted; but still it is capable of being revived in his posterity,
as is the case with the likeness of a grandfather or a great-grandfather returning in a grandson
or a great-grandson. Hence, that conjugial principle is called the most precious jewel of the
Christian life, and (see above, n. 457, 458,) the storehouse of human life, and the reservoir
of the Christian religion. That that conjugial principle is destroyed with the Christian who
practises polygamical adultery, is manifest from this consideration; that he cannot like a
Mahometan polygamist, love a concubine and a wife equally; but so far as he loves a concubine,
or is warm towards her, so far he does not love his wife, but is cold towards her; and, what
is yet more detestable, so far he also in heart acknowledges the Lord only as a natural man,
and the son of Mary, and not at the same time as the Son of God, and likewise so far he makes
light of religion. It is, however, well to be noted, that this is the case with those who add
a concubine to a wife, and connect themselves actually with each; but it is not at all the
case with those, who from legitimate, just, and truly excusatory causes, separate themselves,
and keep apart from a wife as to actual love, and have a woman in keeping. We now proceed to
treat of this kind of concubinage.

467. V. CONCUBINAGE APART FROM A WIFE, WHEN IT IS ENGAGED IN FROM CAUSES LEGITIMATE, JUST,
AND TRULY EXCUSATORY, IS NOT UNLAWFUL. What causes we mean by legitimate, what by just, and
what by truly excusatory, shall be shewn in their order: the bare mention of the causes is
here premised, that this concubinage, which we are about to treat of, may be distinguished
from that which we have previously described. (See note to No. 450, and the Preliminary note.)

468. By divorce is meant the annulling of the conjugial covenant, and thence an entire separation,
and after this a full liberty to marry another wife. The one only cause of this total separation
or divorce, is adultery, according to the Lord's precept, Matt. xix. 9. To the same cause are
to be referred manifest obscenities, which bid defiance to the restraints of modesty, and fill
and infest the house with flagitious practices of lewdness, giving birth to adulterous immodesty,
and rendering the whole mind abandoned. To these things may be added malicious desertion, which
involves adultery, and causes a wife to commit whoredom, and thereby to be divorced, Matt.
v. 32. These three causes, being legitimate causes of divorce,--the first and third before
a public judge, and the middle one before the man himself, as judge, are also legitimate causes
of concubinage, when the adulterous wife is retained at home. The reason why adultery is the
one only cause of divorce is, because it is diametrically opposite to the life of conjugial
love, and totally destroys and annihilates it; see above, n. 255.

469. The reasons why, by the generality of men, the adulterous wife is still retained at home,
are, 1. Because the man is afraid to produce witnesses in a court of justice against his wife,
to accuse her of adultery, and thereby to make the crime public; for unless eye-witnesses,
or evidences to the same amount, were produced to convict her, he would be secretly reproached
in companies of men, and openly in companies of women. 2. He is afraid also lest his adulteress
should have the cunning to clear her conduct, and likewise lest the judges should show favor
to her, and thus his name suffer in the public esteem. 3. Moreover, there may be domestic reasons,
which may make separation from the house unadvisable: as in case there are children, towards
whom also the adulteress has natural love; in case they are bound together by mutual services
which cannot be put an end to; in case the wife is connected with and dependent upon her relatives,
whether on the father's or mother's side, and there is a hope of receiving an increase of fortune
from them; in case he lived with her in the beginning in habits of agreeable intimacy; and
in case she, after she became meretricious, has the skill to soothe the man with engaging pleasantry
and pretended civility, to prevent blame being imputed to herself; not to mention other cases,
which, as in themselves they are legitimate causes of divorce, are also legitimate causes of
concubinage; for the causes of retaining the wife at home do not take away the cause of divorce,
supposing her guilty of adultery. Who, but a person of vile character, can fulfil the duties
of the conjugial bed, and at the same time have commerce with a strumpet? If instances of this
sort are occasionally to be met with, no favorable conclusions are to be drawn from them.

470. VII. THE JUST CAUSES OF THIS CONCUBINAGE ARE THE JUST CAUSES OF SEPARATION FROM THE BED.
There are legitimate causes of separation, and there are just causes: legitimate causes are
enforced by the decisions of judges, and just causes by the decisions come to by the man alone.
That these are just causes of concubinage, since they are just causes of separation, reason
sees without the help of a judge.

471. VIII. OF THE EXCUSATORY CAUSES OF THIS CONCUBINAGE SOME ARE REAL AND SOME ARE NOT. Since
besides the just causes which are just causes of separation, and thence become just causes
of concubinage, there are also excusatory causes, which depend on judgement and justice with
the man, therefore these also are to be mentioned: but as the judgements of justice may be
perverted and be converted by confirmations into the appearances of what is just, therefore
these excusatory causes are distinguished into real and not real, and are separately described.

472. IX. THE REALLY EXCUSATORY CAUSES ARE SUCH AS ARE GROUNDED IN WHAT IS JUST. To know these
causes, it may be sufficient to mention some of them; such as having no natural affection towards
the children, and a consequent rejection of them, intemperance, drunkenness, uncleanliness,
immodesty, a desire of divulging family secrets, of disputing, of striking, of taking revenge,
of doing evil, of stealing, of deceiving; internal dissimilitude, whence comes antipathy; a
froward requirement of the conjugial debt, whence the man becomes as cold as a stone; being
addicted to magic and witchcraft; an extreme degree of impiety; and other similar evils.

473. There are also milder causes, which are really excusatory and which separate from the
bed, and yet not from the house; as a cessation of prolification on the part of the wife, in
consequence of advanced age, and thence a reluctance and opposition to actual love, while the
ardor thereof still continues with the man; besides similar cases in which rational judgement
sees what is just, and which do not hurt the conscience.

474. X. THE EXCUSATORY CAUSES WHICH ARE NOT REAL ARE SUCH AS ARE NOT GROUNDED IN WHAT IS JUST,
ALTHOUGH IN THE APPEARANCE OF WHAT IS JUST. These are known from the really excusatory causes
above mentioned, and, if not rightly examined, may appear to be just, and yet are unjust; as
that times of abstinence are required after the bringing forth of children, the transitory
sicknesses of wives, from these and other causes a check to prolification, polygamy permitted
to the Israelites, and other like causes of no weight as grounded in justice. These are fabricated
by the men after they have become cold, when unchaste lusts have deprived them of conjugial
love, and have infatuated them with the idea of its likeness to adulterous love. When such
men engage in concubinage, they, in order to prevent defamation, assign such spurious and fallacious
causes as real and genuine,--and very frequently also falsely charge them against their wives,
their companions often favorably assenting and applauding them.

475. We say that such may at the same time be principled in conjugial love; and we thereby
mean, that they may keep this love stored up in themselves; for this love, in the subject in
which it is, does not perish, but is quiescent. The reasons why conjugial love is preserved
with those who prefer marriage to concubinage, and enter into the latter from the causes above
mentioned, are these; that this concubinage is not repugnant to conjugial love; that it is
not a separation from it; that it is only a clothing encompassing it; that this clothing is
taken away from them after death. 1. That this concubinage is not repugnant to conjugial love,
follows from what was proved above; that such concubinage, when engaged in from causes legitimate,
just, and really excusatory, is not unlawful, n. 467-473. 2. That this concubinage is not a
separation from conjugial love; for when causes legitimate, or just, or really excusatory,
arise, and persuade and compel a man, then, conjugial love with marriage is not separated,
but only interrupted; and love interrupted, and not separated, remains in the subject. The
case in this respect is like that of a person, who, being engaged in a business which he likes,
is detained from it by company, by public sights, or by a journey; still he does not cease
to like his business: it is also like that of a person who is fond of generous wine, and who,
when he drinks wine of an inferior quality, does not lose his taste and appetite for that which
is generous. 3. The reason why the above concubinage is only a clothing of conjugial love encompassing
it, is, because the love of concubinage is natural, and the love of marriage spiritual; and
natural love is a veil or covering to spiritual, when the latter is interrupted: that this
is the case, is unknown to the lover; because spiritual love is not made sensible of itself,
but by natural love, and it is made sensible as delight, in which there is blessedness from
heaven: but natural love by itself is made sensible only as delight. 4. The reason why this
veil is taken away after death, is, because then a man from natural becomes spiritual, and
instead of a material body enjoys a substantial one, wherein natural delight grounded in spiritual
is made sensible in its perfection. That this is the case, I have heard from communication
with some in the spiritual world, even from kings there, who in the natural world had engaged
in concubinage from really excusatory causes.

476. XII. WHILE THIS CONCUBINAGE CONTINUES, ACTUAL CONNECTION WITH A WIFE IS NOT ALLOWABLE.
The reason of this is, because in such case conjugial love, which in itself is spiritual, chaste,
pure, and holy, becomes natural, is defiled and disregarded, and thereby perishes; wherefore
in order that this love may be preserved, it is expedient that concubinage grounded in really
excusatory causes, n. 472, 473, be engaged in with one only, and not with two at the same time.

       *       *       *       *       *

477. To the above I will add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. I heard a certain spirit, a
youth, recently deceased, boasting of his libertinism, and eager to establish his reputation
as a man of superior masculine powers; and in the insolence of his boasting he thus expressed
himself; "What is more dismal than for a man to imprison his love, and to confine himself to
one woman? and what is more delightful than to set the love at liberty? Who does not grow tired
of one? and who is not revived by several? What is sweeter than promiscuous liberty, variety,
deflorations, schemes to deceive husbands, and plans of adulterous hypocrisy? Do not those
things which are obtained by cunning, deceit, and theft, delight the inmost principles of the
mind!" On hearing these things, the bystanders said, "Speak not in such terms; you know not
where and with whom you are; you are but lately come hither. Hell is beneath your feet, and
heaven over your head; you are now in the world which is between those two, and is called the
world of spirits. All who depart out of the world, come here, and being assembled are examined
as to their quality; and here they are prepared, the wicked for hell, and the good for heaven.
Possibly you still retain what you have heard from priests in the world, that whoremongers
and adulterers are cast down into hell, and that chaste married partners are raised to heaven."
At this the novitiate laughed, saying, "What are heaven and hell? Is it not heaven where any
one is free; and is not he free who is allowed to love as many as he pleases? and is not it
hell where any one is a servant: and is not he a servant who is obliged to keep to one?" But
a certain angel, looking down from heaven, heard what he said, and broke off the conversation,
lest it should proceed further and profane marriages; and he said to him, "Come up here, and
I will clearly shew you what heaven and hell are, and what the quality of the latter is to
continued adulterers." He then shewed him the way, and he ascended: after he was admitted he
was led first into the paradisiacal garden, where were fruit-trees and flowers, which from
their beauty, pleasantness and fragrance, tilled the mind with the delights of life. When he
saw these things, he admired them exceedingly; but he was then in external vision, such as
he had enjoyed in the world when he saw similar objects, and in this vision he was rational;
but in the internal vision, in which adultery was the principal agent, and occupied every point
of thought, he was not rational; wherefore the external vision was closed, and the internal
opened; and when the latter was opened, he said, "What do I see now? is it not straw and dry
wood? and what do I smell now? is it not a stench? What is become of those paradisiacal objects?"
The angel said, "They are near at hand and are present; but they do not appear before your
internal sight, which is adulterous, for it turns celestial things into infernal, and sees
only opposites. Every man has an internal and an external mind, thus an internal and an external
sight: with the wicked the internal mind is insane, and the external wise; but with the good
the internal mind is wise, and from this also the external; and such as the mind is, so a man
in the spiritual world sees objects." After this the angel, from the power which was given
him, closed his internal sight, and opened the external, and led him away through gates towards
the middle point of the habitations: there he saw magnificent palaces of alabaster, marble,
and various precious stones, and near them porticos, and round about pillars overlaid and encompassed
with wonderful ornaments and decorations. When he saw these things, he was amazed, and said,
"What do I see? I see magnificent objects in their own real magnificence, and architectonic
objects in their own real art." At that instant the angel again closed his external sight,
and opened the internal, which was evil because filthily adulterous: hereupon he exclaimed,
"What do I now see? Where am I? What is become of those palaces and magnificent objects? I
see only confused heaps, rubbish, and places full of caverns." But presently he was brought
back again to his external sight, and introduced into one of the palaces; and he saw the decorations
of the gates, the windows, the walls, and the ceilings, and especially of the utensils, over
and round about which were celestial forms of gold and precious stones, which cannot be described
by any language, or delineated by any art; for they surpassed the ideas of language and the
notions of art. On seeing these things he again exclaimed, "These are the very essence of whatever
is wonderful, such as no eye had ever seen." But instantly, as before, his internal sight was
opened, the external being closed, and he was asked what he then saw? He replied, "Nothing
but decayed piles of bulrushes in this place, of straw in that, and of fire brands in a third."
Once again he was brought into an external state of mind, and some maidens were introduced,
who were extremely beautiful, being images of celestial affection; and they, with the sweet
voice of their affection, addressed him; and instantly, on seeing and hearing them, his countenance
changed, and he returned of himself into his internals, which were adulterous; and since such
internals cannot endure any thing of celestial love, and neither on the other hand can they
be endured by celestial love, therefore both parties vanished,--the maidens out of sight of
the man, and the man out of sight of the maidens. After this, the angel informed him concerning
the ground and origin of the changes of the state of his sights; saying, "I perceive that in
the world, from which you are come, you have been two-fold, in internals having been quite
a different man from what you were in externals; in externals you have been a civil, moral,
and rational man; whereas in internals, you have been neither civil, moral, nor rational, because
a libertine and an adulterer: and such men, when they are allowed to ascend into heaven, and
are there kept in their externals, can see the heavenly things contained therein; but when
their internals are opened, instead of heavenly things they see infernal. Know, however, that
with every one in this world, externals are successively closed, and internals are opened,
and thereby they are prepared for heaven or hell; and as the evil of adultery defiles the internals
of the mind above every other evil, you must needs be conveyed down to the defiled principles
of your love, and these are in the hells, where the caverns are full of stench arising from
dunghills. Who cannot know from reason, that an unchaste and lascivious principle in the world
of spirits, is impure and unclean, and thus that nothing more pollutes and defiles a man, and
induces in him an infernal principle? Wherefore take heed how you boast any longer of your
whoredoms, as possessing masculine powers therein above other men. I advertise you before hand,
that you will become feeble, so that you will scarce know where your masculine power is. Such
is the lot which awaits those who boast of their adulterous ability." On hearing these words
he descended, and returned into the world of spirits, to his former companions, and converse
with them modestly and chastely, but not for any considerable length of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON ADULTERIES AND THEIR GENERA AND DEGREES.

478. None can know that there is any evil in adultery, who judge of it only from its externals;
for in these it resembles marriage. Such external judges, when they hear of internals, and
are told that externals thence derive their good or their evil, say with themselves, "What
are internals? Who sees them? Is not this climbing above the sphere of every one's intelligence?"
Such persons are like those who accept all pretended good as genuine voluntary good, and who
decide upon a man's wisdom from the elegance of his conversation; or who respect the man himself
from the richness of his dress and the magnificence of his equipage, and not from his internal
habit, which is that of judgement grounded in the affection of good. This also is like judging
of the fruit of a tree, and of any other eatable thing, from the sight and touch only, and
not of its goodness from a knowledge of its flavor: such is the conduct of all those who are
unwilling to perceive any thing respecting man's internal. Hence comes the wild infatuation
of many at this day, who see no evil in adulteries, yea, who unite marriages with them in the
same chamber, that is, who make them altogether alike; and this only on account of their apparent
resemblance in externals. That this is the case, was shewn me by this experimental proof: on
a certain time, the angels assembled from Europe some hundreds of those who were distinguished
for their genius, their erudition, and their wisdom, and questioned them concerning the distinction
between marriage and adultery, and in treated them to consult the rational powers of their
understandings: and after consultation, all, except ten, replied, that the judicial law constitutes
the only distinction, for the sake of some advantage; which distinction may indeed be known,
but still be accommodated by civil prudence. They were next asked, Whether they saw any good
in marriage, and any evil in adultery? They returned for answer, that they did not see any
rational evil and good. Being questioned whether they saw any sin in it? they said, "Where
is the sin? Is not the act alike?" At these answers the angels were amazed, and exclaimed,
Oh, the gross stupidity of the age! Who can measure its quality and quantity? On hearing this
exclamation, the hundreds of the wise ones turned themselves, and said one among another with
loud laughter, "Is this gross stupidity? Is there any wisdom that can bring conviction that
to love another person's wife merits eternal damnation?" But that adultery is spiritual evil,
and thence moral and civil evil, and diametrically contrary to the wisdom of reason; also that
the love of adultery is from hell and returns to hell, and the love of marriage is from heaven
and returns to heaven, has been demonstrated in the first chapter of this part, concerning
the opposition of adulterous and conjugial love. But since all evils, like all goods, partake
of latitude and altitude, and according to latitude have their genera, and according to altitude
their degrees, therefore, in order that adulteries may be known as to each dimension, they
shall first be arranged into their genera, and afterwards into their degrees; and this shall
be done in the following series: I. There are three genera of adulteries,--simple, duplicate,
and triplicate. II. Simple adultery is that of an unmarried man with another's wife, or of
an unmarried woman with another's husband. III. Duplicate adultery is that of a husband with
another's wife, or of a wife with another's husband. IV. Triplicate adultery is with relations
by blood. V. There are four degrees of adulteries, according to which they have their predications,
their charges of blame, and after death their imputations. VI. Adulteries of the first degree
are adulteries of ignorance, which are committed by those who cannot as yet, or cannot at all,
consult the understanding, and thence check them. VII. In such cases adulteries are mild. VIII.
Adulteries of the second degree are adulteries of lust, which are committed by those who indeed
are able to consult the understanding, but from accidental causes at the moment are not able.
IX. Adulteries committed by such persons are imputatory, according as the understanding afterwards
favors them or not. X. Adulteries of the third degree are adulteries of the reason, which are
committed by those who with the understanding confirm themselves in the persuasion that they
are not evils of sin. XI. The adulteries committed by such persons are grievous, and are imputed
to them according to confirmations. XII. Adulteries of the fourth degree are adulteries of
the will, which are committed by those who make them lawful and pleasing, and who do not think
them of importance enough, to consult the understanding respecting them. XIII. The adulteries
committed by these persons are exceedingly grievous, and are imputed to them as evils of purpose,
and remain with them as guilt. XIV. Adulteries of the third and fourth degrees are evils of
sin, according to the quantity and quality of understanding and will in them, whether they
are actually committed or not. XV. .Adulteries grounded in purpose of the will, and adulteries
grounded in confirmation of the understanding render men natural, sensual, and corporeal. XVI.
And this to such a degree, that at length they reject from themselves all things of the church
and of religion. XVII. Nevertheless they have the powers of human rationality like other men.
XVIII. But they use that rationality while they are in externals, but abuse it while in their
internals. We proceed to an explanation of each article.

479. I. THERE ARE THREE GENERA OF ADULTERIES,--SIMPLE, DUPLICATE, AND TRIPLICATE. The Creator
of the universe has distinguished all the things which he has created into genera, and each
genus into species, and has distinguished each species, and each distinction in like manner,
and so forth, to the end that an image of what is infinite may exist in a perpetual variety
of qualities. Thus the Creator of the universe has distinguished goods and their truths, and
in like manner evils and their falses, after they arose. That he has distinguished all things
in the spiritual world into genera, species, and differences, and has collected together into
heaven all goods and truths, and into hell all evils and falses, and has arranged the latter
in an order diametrically opposite to the former, may appear from what is explained in a work
concerning HEAVEN AND HELL, published in London in the year 1758. That in the natural world
he has also thus distinguished and does distinguish goods and truths, and likewise evils and
falses, appertaining to men, and thereby men themselves, may be known from their lot after
death, in that the good enter into heaven, and the evil into hell. Now, since all things relating
to good, and all things relating to evil, are distinguished into genera, species, and so forth,
therefore marriages are distinguished into the same, and so are their opposites, which are
adulteries.

480. By adultery here and in the following pages we mean the adultery which is opposite to
marriage; it is opposite because it violates the covenant of life contracted between married
partners: it rends asunder their love, and defiles it, and closes the union which was begun
at the time of betrothing, and strengthened in the beginning of marriage: for the conjugial
love of one man with one wife, after engagement and covenant, unites their souls. Adultery
does not dissolve this union, because it cannot be dissolved; but it closes it, as he that
stops up a fountain at its source, and thence obstructs its stream, and fills the cistern with
filthy and stinking waters: in like manner conjugial love, the origin of which is a union of
souls, is daubed with mud and covered by adultery; and when it is so daubed with mud there
arises from beneath the love of adultery; and as this love increases, it becomes fleshly, and
rises in insurrection against conjugial love, and destroys it. Hence comes the opposition of
adultery and marriage.

481. That it may be further known how gross is the stupidity of this age, in that those who
have the reputation of wisdom do not see any sin in adultery, as was discovered by the angels
(see just above, n. 478), I will here add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. There were certain
spirits who, from a habit they had acquired in the life of the body, infested me with peculiar
cunning, and this they did by a sottish and as it were waving influx, such as is usual with
well-disposed spirits; but I perceived that they employed craftiness and similar means, to
the intent that they might engage attention and deceive. At length I entered into conversation
with one of them who, it was told me, had while he lived in the world been the general of an
army: and as I perceived that in the ideas of his thought there was a lascivious principle,
I conversed with him by representatives in the spiritual language which fully expresses what
is intended to be said, and even several things in a moment. He said that, in the life of the
body in the former world, he had made no account of adulteries: but it was granted me to tell
him, that adulteries are wicked, although from the delight attending them, and from the persuasion
thence resulting, they appear to the adulterer as not wicked but allowable; which also he might
know from this consideration, that marriages are the seminaries of the human race, and thence
also the seminaries of the heavenly kingdom, and therefore that they ought not to be violated,
but to be accounted holy; also from this consideration, that he ought know, as being in the
spiritual world, and in a state of perception, that conjugial love descends from the Lord through
heaven, and that from that love, as a parent, is derived mutual love, which is the main support
of heaven; and further from this consideration, that adulterers, whenever they only approach
the heavenly societies, are made sensible of their own stench, and throw themselves headlong
thence towards hell: at least he might know, that to violate marriages is contrary to the divine
laws, to the civil laws of all kingdoms, also to the genuine light of reason, and thereby to
the right of nations, because contrary to order both divine and human; not to mention other
considerations. But he replied, that he entertained no such thoughts in the former life: he
wished to reason whether the case was so or not; but he was told that truth does not admit
of reasonings, since they favor the delights of the flesh against those of the spirit, the
quality of which latter delights he was ignorant of; and that he ought first to think about
the things which I had told him, because they are true; or to think from the well-known maxim,
that no one should do to another what he is unwilling another should do to him; and thus, if
any one had in such a manner violated his wife, whom he had loved, as is the case in the beginning
of every marriage, and he had then been in a state of wrath, and had spoken from that state,
whether he himself also would not then have detested adulteries, and being a man of strong
parts, would not have confirmed himself against them more than other men, even to condemning
them to hell; and being the general of an army, and having brave companions, whether he would
not, in order to prevent disgrace, either have put the adulterer to death, or have driven the
adulteress from his house.

482. III. DUPLICATE ADULTERY IS THAT OF A HUSBAND WITH ANOTHER'S WIFE, OR OF A WIFE WITH ANOTHER'S
HUSBAND. This adultery is called duplicate, because it is committed by two, and on each side
the marriage-covenant is violated; wherefore also it is twofold more grievous than the former.
That the souls of two unite themselves together, when love to the sex is confined to one of
the sex, which is the case when a maiden engages herself wholly to a youth, and on the other
hand a youth engages himself wholly to a maiden, is clearly manifest from this consideration,
that the lives of both unite themselves, consequently their souls, because souls are the first
principles of life. This union of souls can only take place in monogamical marriages, or those
of one man with one wife, but not in polygamical marriages, or those of one man with several
wives; because in the latter case the love is divided, in the former it is united. The reason
why conjugial love in its supreme abode is spiritual, holy, and pure, is because the soul of
every man from its origin is celestial; wherefore it receives influx immediately from the Lord,
for it receives from him the marriage of love and wisdom, or of good and truth; and this influx
makes him a man, and distinguishes him from the beasts. From this union of souls, conjugial
love, which is there in its spiritual sanctity and purity, flows down into the life of the
whole body, and fills with blessed delights, so long as its channel remains open; which is
the case with those who are made spiritual by the Lord. That nothing but adultery closes and
stops up this abode of conjugial love, thus its origin or fountain and its channel, is evident
from the Lord's words, that it is not lawful to put away a wife and marry another, except on
account of adultery: Matt. xix. 3-9; and also from what is said in the same passage, that he
that marries her that is put away commits adultery, verse 9. When therefore, as was said above,
that pure and holy fountain is stopped up, it is clogged about with filthiness of sundry kinds,
as a jewel with ordure, or bread with vomit; which things are altogether opposite to the purity
and sanctity of that fountain, or of conjugial love: from which opposition comes conjugial
cold, and according to this cold is the lascivious voluptuousness of adulterous love, which
consumes itself of its own accord. The reason why this is an evil of sin is because the holy
principle is covered and thereby its channel into the body is obstructed, and in the place
thereof a profane principle succeeds, and its channel into the body is opened, whence a man
from celestial becomes infernal.

483. To the above I will add some particulars from the spiritual world, which are worthy to
be recorded. I have been informed in that world, that some married men are inflamed with the
lust of committing whoredom with maidens or virgins; some with those who are not maidens but
harlots; some with married women or wives; some with women of the above description who are
of noble descent; and some with such as are not of noble descent: that this is the case, was
confirmed to me by several instances from the various kingdoms in that world. While I was meditating
concerning the variety of such lusts, I asked whether there are any who find all their delight
with the wives of others, and none with unmarried women? Wherefore to convince me that there
are some such spirits, several were brought to me from a certain kingdom, who were obliged
to speak according to their libidinous principles. These declared that it was, and still is
their sole pleasure and delight to commit whoredom with the wives of others; and that they
look out for such as are beautiful, and hire them for themselves at a great price according
to their wealth, and in general bargain about the price with the wife alone. I asked, why they
do not hire for themselves unmarried women? They said, that they consider this would be cheap
and worthless, and therefore undelightful to them. I asked also, whether those wives afterwards
return to their husbands and live with them? They replied, that they either do not return,
or they return cold, having become courtezans. Afterwards I asked them seriously, whether they
ever thought, or now think, that this is twofold adultery, because they commit this at the
time they have wives of their own, and that such adultery deprives a man of all spiritual good?
But at this several who were present laughed, saying, "What is spiritual good?" Nevertheless
I was still urgent, and said, "What is more detestable than for a man to mix his soul with
the soul of a husband in his wife? Do you not know, that the soul of a man is in his seed?"
Hereupon they turned themselves away and muttered, "What harm can this do her?" At length I
said, "Although you do not fear divine laws, do you not fear civil laws?" They replied, "No,
we only fear certain of the ecclesiastical order; but we conceal this in their presence; and
if we cannot conceal it, we keep upon good terms with them." I afterwards saw the former divided
into companies, and some of the latter cast into hell.

484. IV. TRIPLICATE ADULTERY IS WITH RELATIONS BY BLOOD. This adultery is called triplicate,
because it is threefold more grievous than the two former. The relations, or remains of the
flesh, which are not to be approached, are mentioned in Levit. xviii. 6-18. There are internal
and external reasons why these adulteries are threefold more grievous than the two above-mentioned:
the internal reasons are grounded in the correspondence of those adulteries with the violation
of spiritual marriage, which is that of the Lord and the church, and thence of good and truth;
and the external reasons are for the sake of guards, to prevent a man's becoming a beast. We
have no leisure, however, to proceed to the further disclosure of these reasons.

485. V. THERE ARE FOUR DEGREES OF ADULTERIES, ACCORDING TO WHICH THEY HAVE THEIR PREDICATIONS,
THEIR CHARGES OF BLAME, AND AFTER DEATH THEIR IMPUTATIONS. These degrees are not genera, but
enter into each genus, and cause its distinctions between more and less evil or good; in the
present case, deciding whether adultery of every genus from the nature of the circumstances
and contingencies, is to be considered milder or more grievous. That circumstances and contingencies
vary every thing is well known. Nevertheless things are considered in one way by a man from
his rational light, in another by a judge from the law, and in another by the Lord from the
state of a man's mind: wherefore we mention predications, charges of blame, and after death
imputations; for predications are made by a man according to his rational light, charges of
blame are made by a judge according to the law, and imputations are made by the Lord according
to the state of the man's mind. That these three differ exceedingly from each other, may be
seen without explanation: for a man, from rational conviction according to circumstances and
contingencies, may acquit a person, whom a judge, when he sits in judgement, cannot acquit
from the law: and also a judge may acquit a person, who after death is condemned. The reason
of this is, because a judge gives sentence according to the actions done, whereas after death
every one is judged according to the intentions of the will and thence of the understanding,
and according to the confirmations of the understanding and thence of the will. These intentions
and confirmations a judge does not see; nevertheless each judgement is just; the one for the
sake of the good of civil society, the other for the sake of the good of heavenly society.

486. All evils, and thus also all adulteries, viewed in themselves, are at once of the internal
and the external man; the internal intends them, and the external does them; such therefore
as the internal man is in the deeds done by the external, such are the deeds viewed in themselves:
but since the internal man with his intention, does not appear before man, every one must be
judged in a human court from deeds and words according to the law in force and its provisions:
the interior sense of the law is also to be regarded by the judge. But to illustrate the case
by example: if adultery be committed by a youth, who does not as yet know that adultery is
a greater evil than fornication; if the like be committed by a very simple man; if it be committed
by a person who is deprived by disease of the full powers of judgement; or by a person, as
is sometimes the case, who is delirious by fits, and is at the time in a state of actual delirium;
yet further, if it be committed in a fit of insane drunkenness, and so forth, it is evident,
that in such cases, the internal man, or mind, is not present in the external, scarcely any
otherwise than in an irrational person. Adulteries in these instances are predicated by a rational
man according to the above circumstances; nevertheless the perpetrator is charged with blame
by the same rational man as a judge, and is punished by the law; but after death those adulteries
are imputed according to the presence, quality, and faculty of understanding in the will of
the perpetrators.

487. VII. IN SUCH CASES ADULTERIES ARE MILD. This is manifest from what was said just above,
n. 486, without further confirmation; for it is well known that the quality of every deed and
in general the quality of every thing, depends upon circumstances, and which mitigate or aggravate
it; but adulteries of this degree are mild at the first times of their commission; and also
remain mild so far as the offending party of either sex, in the future course of life, abstains
from them for these reasons;--because they are evils against God, or against the neighbour,
or against the goods of the state, and because, in consequence of their being such evils, they
are evils against reason; but on the other hand, if they are not abstained from for one of
the abovementioned reasons, they are reckoned amongst grievous adulteries; thus it is according
to the divine law, Ezek. xviii, 21, 22, 24, and in other places: but they cannot, from the
above circumstances, be pronounced either blameless or culpable, or be predicated and judged
as mild or grievous, because they do not appear before man, neither are they within the province
of his judgement; wherefore it is meant, that after death they are so accounted or imputed.

488. There are two things which, in the beginning, with every man who from natural is made
spiritual, are at strife together, which are commonly called the spirit and the flesh; and
since the love of marriage is of the spirit, and the love of adultery is of the flesh, in such
case there is also a combat between those loves. If the love of marriage conquers, it gains
dominion over and subjugates the love of adultery, which is effected by its removal; but if
it happens that the lust of the flesh is excited to a heat greater than what the spirit can
control from reason, it follows that the state is inverted, and the heat of lust infuses allurements
into the spirit, to such a degree, that it is no longer master of its reason, and thence of
itself: this is meant by adulteries of the second degree, which are committed by those who
indeed are able to consult the understanding, but by reason of accidental causes at the moment
are not able. But the matter may be illustrated by particular cases; as in case a meretricious
wife by her craftiness captivates a man's mind (animum), enticing him into her chamber, and
inflaming his passions to such a degree as to leave him no longer master of his judgement;
and especially if, at the same time, she also threatens to expose him if he does not consent:
in like manner, in case any meretricious wife is skilled in deceitful allurements, or by powerful
stimulants inflames the man to such a degree, that the raging lust of the flesh deprives the
understanding of the free use of reason: in like manner, in case a man, by powerful enticements,
so far works upon another's wife, as to leave her no longer mistress of herself, by reason
of the fire kindled in her will; besides other like cases. That these and similar accidental
circumstances lessen the grievousness of adultery, and give a milder turn to the predications
of the blame thereof in favor of the party seduced, is agreeable to the dictates and conclusions
of reason. The imputation of this degree of adultery comes next to be treated of.

489. IX. ADULTERIES COMMITTED BY SUCH PERSONS ARE IMPUTATORY, ACCORDING AS THE UNDERSTANDING
AFTERWARDS FAVORS THEM OR NOT. So far as the understanding favors evils, so far a man appropriates
them to himself and makes them his own. Favor implies consent; and consent induces in the mind
a state of the love of them: the case is the same with adulteries, which in the beginning were
committed without the consent of the understanding, and are favored: the contrary comes to
pass if they are not favored. The reason of this is, because evils or adulteries, which are
committed in the blindness of the understanding, are committed from the concupiscence of the
body; and such evils or adulteries have a near resemblance to the instincts of beasts: with
man (homo) indeed the understanding is present, while they are committing, but in a passive
or dead potency and not in active and living potency. From these considerations it follows
of course, that such things are not imputed, except so far as they are afterwards favored or
not. By imputation we here mean accusation after death, and hence judication, which takes place
according to the state of a man's spirit: but we do not mean inculpation by a man before a
judge; for this does not take place according to the state of a man's spirit, but of his body
in the deed; and unless there was a difference herein, those would be acquitted after death
who are acquitted in the world, and those would be condemned who are condemned in the world;
and thus the latter would be without any hope of salvation.

490. Every man knows that there exist such principles as the will and the understanding; for
in his common speaking he says, "This I will, and this I understand;" but still he does not
distinguish them, but makes the one the same as the other; because he only reflects upon the
things which belong to the thought grounded in the understanding, and not upon those which
belong to the love grounded in the will; for the latter do not appear in light as the former.
Nevertheless, he that does not distinguish between the will and the understanding, cannot distinguish
between evils and goods, and consequently he must remain in entire ignorance concerning the
blame of sin. But who does not know that good and truth are two distinct principles, like love
and wisdom? and who cannot hence conclude, while he is in rational illumination, that there
are two faculties in man, which distinctly receive and appropriate to themselves those principles,
and that the one is the will and the other the understanding, by reason that what the will
receives and reproduces is called good, and what the understanding receives is called truth;
for what the will loves and does, is called truth, and what the understanding perceives and
thinks, is called truth? Now as the marriage of good and truth was treated of in the first
part of this work, and in the same place several considerations were adduced concerning the
will and the understanding, and the various attributes and predicates of each, which, as I
imagine, are also perceived by those who had not thought at all distinctly concerning the understanding
and the will, (for human reason is such, that it understands truths from the light thereof,
although it has not heretofore distinguished them); therefore, in order that the distinctions
of the understanding and the will may be more clearly perceived, I will here mention some particulars
on the subject, that it may be known what is the quality of adulteries of the reason and the
understanding, and afterwards what is the quality of adulteries of the will. The following
points may serve to illustrate the subject: 1. That the will of itself does nothing; but whatever
it does, it does by the understanding. 2. On the other hand also, that the understanding alone
of itself does nothing; but whatever it does, it does from the will. 3. That the will flows
into the understanding but not the understanding into the will; yet that the understanding
teaches what is good and evil, and consults with the will, that out of those two principles
it may choose and do what is pleasing to it. 4. That after this there is effected a twofold
conjunction; one, in which the will acts from within, and the understanding from without; the
other in which the understanding acts from within, and the will from without: thus are distinguished
the adulteries of the reason, which are here treated of, from the adulteries of the will, which
are next to be treated of. They are distinguished, because one is more grievous than the other;
for the adultery of the reason is less grievous than that of the will; because in adultery
of the reason, the understanding acts from within, and the will from without; whereas in adultery
of the will, the will acts from within, and the understanding from without; and the will is
the man himself, and the understanding is the man as grounded in the will; and that which acts
within has dominion over that which acts without.

491. XI. THE ADULTERIES COMMITTED BY SUCH PERSONS ARE GRIEVOUS, AND ARE IMPUTED TO THEM ACCORDING
TO CONFIRMATIONS. It is the understanding alone that confirms, and when it confirms, it engages
the will to its party, and sets it about itself, and thus compels it to compliance. Confirmations
are affected by reasonings, which the mind seizes for its use, deriving them either from its
superior region or from its inferior; if from the superior region, which communicates with
heaven, it confirms marriages and condemns adulteries; but if from the inferior region, which
communicates with the world, it confirms adulteries and makes light of marriages. Every one
can confirm evil just as well as good; in like manner what is false and what is true; and the
confirmation of evil is perceived with more delight than the confirmation of good, and the
confirmation of what is false appears with greater lucidity than the confirmation of what is
true. The reason of this is, because the confirmation of what is evil and false derives its
reasonings from the delights, the pleasures, the appearances, and the fallacies of the bodily
senses; whereas the confirmation of what is good and true derives its reasons from the region
above the sensual principles of the body. Now, since evils and falses can be confirmed just
as well as goods and truths, and since the confirming understanding draws the will to its party,
and the will together with the understanding forms the mind, it follows that the form of the
human mind is according to confirmations, being turned to heaven if its confirmations are in
favor of marriage, but to hell if they are in favor of adulteries; and such as the form of
a man's mind is such is his spirit; consequently such is the man. From these considerations
then it is evident, that adulteries of this degree after death are imputed according to confirmations.

492. These adulteries are distinguished from the foregoing from their origins. The origin of
these adulteries is from the depraved will connate to man, or from hereditary evil, which a
man blindly obeys after he is capable of exercising his own judgement, not at all considering
whether they are evils or not; wherefore it is said, that he does not think them of importance
enough to consult the understanding respecting them: but the origin of the adulteries which
are called adulteries of reason, is from a perverse understanding; and these adulteries are
committed by those who confirm themselves in the persuasion that they are not evils of sin.
With the latter adulterers, the understanding is the principal agent; with the former the will.
The distinctions in these two cases do not appear to any man in the natural world; but they
appear plainly to the angels in the spiritual world. In the latter world all are in general
distinguished according to the evils which originate in the will and in the understanding,
and which are accepted and appropriated; they are also separated in hell according to those
evils: those who are in evil from the understanding, dwell there in front, and are called satans;
but those who are in evil from the will, dwell at the back, and are called devils. It is on
account of this universal distinction that mention is made in the Word of satan and the devil.
With those wicked ones, and also those adulterers, who are called satans, the understanding
is the principal agent; but with those who are called devils, the will is the principal agent.
It is not however possible to explain these distinctions, so as to render them visible to the
understanding, unless the distinctions of the will and the understanding be first known; and
also unless a description be given of the formation of the mind from the will by the understanding,
and of its formation from the understanding by the will. The knowledge of these subjects is
necessary, before the distinctions above-mentioned can be seen by reason; but to express this
knowledge on paper would require a volume.

493. The reason why they are exceedingly grievous, and more grievous than the foregoing, is,
because in them the will is the principal agent, whereas in the foregoing the understanding
is the principal agent, and a man's life essentially is his will, and formally is his understanding:
the reason of this is, because the will acts in unity with the love, and love is the essence
of a man's life, and forms itself in the understanding by such things as are in agreement with
it: wherefore the understanding viewed in itself is nothing but a form of the will; and since
love is of the will, and wisdom of the understanding, therefore wisdom is nothing but a form
of love; in like manner truth is nothing but a form of good. That which flows from the very
essence of a man's life, thus which flows from his will or his love, is principally called
purpose; but that which flows from the form of his life, thus from the understanding and its
thought is called intention. Guilt also is principally predicated of the will: hence comes
the common observation, that everyone has the guilt of evil from inheritance, but that the
evil is from the man. Hence these adulteries of the fourth degree are imputed as evils of purpose,
and remain in as guilt.

494. That adulteries of the reason or the understanding, which are of the third degree, and
adulteries of the will, which are of the fourth, are grievous, consequently evils of sin, according
to the quality of the understanding and of the will in them, may be seen from the comment above
concerning them, n. 490-493. The reason of this is, because a man (homo) is a man by virtue
of the will and the understanding; for from these two principles exist not only all the things
which are done in the mind, but also all those which are done in the body. Who does not know,
that the body does not act of itself, but the will by the body? also that the mouth does not
speak of itself, but the thought by the mouth? Wherefore if the will were to be taken away,
action would instantly be at a stand, and if thought were to be taken away, the speech of the
mouth would instantly cease. Hence it is clearly manifest, that adulteries which are actually
committed, are grievous according to the quantity and quality of the understanding of the will
in them. That they are in like manner grievous, if the same are not actually committed, appears
from the Lord's words: It was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery; but
I say unto you, that if any one hath looked at another's woman, to lust after her, he hath
already committed adultery with her in heart; Matt. v. 27, 28: to commit adultery in the heart
is to commit it in the will.

495. A man (homo) is a man, and is distinguished from the beasts, by this circumstance, that
his mind is distinguished into three regions, as many as the heavens are distinguished into:
and that he is capable of being elevated out of the lowest region into the next above it, and
also from this into the highest, and thus of becoming an angel of one heaven, and even of the
third: for this end, there has been given to man a faculty of elevating the understanding thitherto;
but if the love of his will is not elevated at the same time, he does not become spiritual,
but remains natural: nevertheless he retains the faculty of elevating the understanding. The
reason why he retains this faculty is, that he may be reformed; for he is reformed by the understanding:
and this is effected by the knowledges of good and truth, and by a rational intuition grounded
therein, if he views those knowledges rationally, and lives according to them, then the love
of the will is elevated at the same time, and in that degree the human principle is perfected,
and the man becomes more and more a man. It is otherwise if he does not live according to the
knowledges of good and truth: in this case the love of his will remains natural, and his understanding
by turns becomes spiritual: for it raises itself upwards alternately, like an eagle, and looks
down upon what is of its love beneath; and when it sees this, it flies down to it, and conjoins
itself with it: if therefore it loves the concupiscences of the flesh, it lets itself down
to these from its height, and in conjunction with them, derives delight to itself from their
delights; and again in quest of reputation, that it may be believed wise, it lifts itself on
high, and thus rises and sinks by turns, as was just now observed. The reason why adulterers
of the third and fourth degree, who are such as from purpose of the will and continuation of
the understanding have made themselves adulterers, are absolutely natural, and progressively
become sensual and corporeal, is, because they have immersed the love of their will, and together
with it their understanding, in the impurities of adulterous love, and are delighted therewith,
as unclean birds and beasts are with stinking and dunghill filth as with dainties and delicacies:
for the effluvia arising from their flesh fill the recesses of the mind with their dregs, and
cause that the will, perceives nothing more dainty and desirable. It is these who after death
become corporeal spirits, and from whom flow the unclean things of hell and the church, spoken
of above n. 430, 431.

496. There are three degrees of the natural man; in the first degree are those who love only
the world, placing their heart on wealth; these are properly meant by the natural: in the second
degree are those who love only the delights of the senses, placing their heart on every kind
of luxury and pleasure; these are properly meant by the sensual: in the third degree are those
who love only themselves, placing their heart on the quest of honor; these are properly meant
by the corporeal, because they immerse all things of the will, and consequently of the understanding,
in the body, and look backward at themselves from others, and love only what belongs to themselves:
but the sensual immerse all things of the will and consequently of the understanding in the
allurements and fallacies of the senses, indulging in these alone; whereas the natural pour
forth into the world all things of the will and understanding, covetously and fraudulently
acquiring wealth, and regarding no other use therein and thence but that of possession. The
above-mentioned adulteries change men in these degenerate degrees, one into this, another into
that, each according to his favorite taste for what is pleasurable, in which taste his peculiar
genius is grounded.

497. XVI. AND THIS TO SUCH A DEGREE THAT AT LENGTH THEY REJECT FROM THEMSELVES ALL THINGS OF
THE CHURCH AND OF RELIGION. The reason why determined and continued adulterers reject from
themselves all things of the church and religion is, because the love of marriage and the love
of adultery are opposite, n. 425, and the love of marriage acts in unity with the church and
religion; see n. 130, and throughout the former part; hence the love of adultery, as being
opposite, acts in unity with those things which are contrary to the church. A further reason
why those adulterers reject from themselves all things of the church and of religion, is, because,
their delights commence from the flesh, and are of the flesh also in the spirit, n. 440, 441;
and the flesh is contrary to the spirit, that is, contrary to the spiritual things of the church:
hence also the delights of adulterous love are called the pleasures of insanity. If you desire
demonstration in this case, go, I pray, to those whom you know to be such adulterers, and ask
them privately, what they think concerning God, the church, and eternal life, and you will
hear. The genuine reason is, because as conjugial love opens the interiors of the mind; and
thereby elevates them above the sensual principles of the body, even into the light and heat
of heaven, so, on the other hand, the love of adultery closes the interiors of the mind, and
thrusts down the mind itself, as to its will, into the body, even into all things which its
flesh lusts after; and the deeper it is so thrust down, the further it is removed and set at
a distance from heaven.

498. XVII. NEVERTHELESS THEY HAVE THE POWERS OF HUMAN RATIONALITY LIKE OTHER MEN. That the
natural man, the sensual, and the corporeal, is equally rational, in regard to understanding,
as the spiritual man, has been proved to me from satans and devils arising by leave out of
hell, and conversing with angelic spirits in the world of spirits; concerning whom, see the
MEMORABLE RELATIONS throughout; but as the love of the will makes the man, and this love draws
the understanding into consent, therefore such are not rational except in a state removed from
the love of the will; when they return again into this love, they are more dreadfully insane
than wild beasts. But a man, without the faculty of elevating the understanding above the love
of the will, would not be a man but a beast; for a beast does not enjoy that faculty; consequently
neither would he be able to choose any thing, and from choice to do what is good and expedient,
and thus he would not be in a capacity to be reformed, and to be led to heaven, and to live
for ever. Hence it is, that determined and confirmed adulterers, although they are merely natural,
sensual, and corporeal, still enjoy, like other men, the powers of understanding or rationality:
but when they are in the lust of adultery, and think and speak from that lust concerning it,
they do not enjoy that rationality; because then the flesh acts on the spirit, and not the
spirit on the flesh. It is however to be observed, that these at length after death become
stupid; not that the faculty of growing wise is taken away from them, but that they are unwilling
to grow wise, because wisdom is undelightful to them.

499. XVIII. BUT THEY USE THAT RATIONALITY WHILE THEY ARE IN EXTERNALS, BUT ABUSE IT WHILE THEY
ARE IN INTERNALS. They are in externals when they converse abroad and in company, but in their
internals when at home or with themselves. If you wish, make the experiment; bring some person
of this character, as, for example, one of the order called Jesuits, and cause him to speak
in company, or to teach in a temple, concerning God, the holy things of the church, and heaven
and hell, and you will hear him a more rational zealot than any other; perhaps also he will
force you to sighs and tears for your salvation; but take him into your house, praise him excessively,
call him the father of wisdom, and make yourself his friend, until he opens his heart, and
you will hear what he will then preach concerning God, the holy things of the church, and heaven
and hell,--that they are mere fancies and delusions, and thus bonds invented for souls, whereby
great and small, rich and poor, may be caught and bound, and kept under the yoke of their dominion.
Let these observations suffice for illustration of what is meant by natural men, even to corporeal,
enjoying the powers of human rationality like others, and using it when they are in externals,
but abusing it when in their internals. The conclusion to be hence deduced is, that no one
is to be judged of from the wisdom of his conversation, but of his life in union therewith.

       *       *       *       *       *

500. To the above I will add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. On a certain time in the spiritual
world I heard a great tumult: there were some thousands of people gathered together, who cried
out, LET THEM BE PUNISHED, LET THEM BE PUNISHED: I went nearer, and asked what the cry meant?
A person that was separate from the crowd, said to me, "They are enraged against three priests,
who go about and preach every where against adulterers, saying, that adulterers have no acknowledgement
of God, and that heaven is closed to them and hell open; and that in hell they are filthy devils,
because they appear there at a distance like swine wallowing in mire, and that the angels of
heaven abominate them." I inquired, "Where are the priests? and why is there such a vociferation
on that account?" He replied, "The three priests are in the midst of them, guarded by attendants;
and those who are gathered together are of those who believe adulteries not to be sins, and
who say, that adulterers have an acknowledgement of God equally with those who keep to their
wives. They are all of them from the Christian world; and the angels have been to see how many
there were there who believe adulteries to be sins; and out of a thousand they did not find
a hundred." He then told me that the nine hundred say concerning adulteries, "Who does not
know that the delight of adultery is superior to the delight of marriage; that adulterers are
in continual heat, and thence in alacrity, industry, and active life, superior to those who
live with only one woman; and that on the other hand, love with a married partner grows cold,
and sometimes to such a degree, that at length scarce a single expression or act of fellowship
with her is alive; that it is otherwise with harlots; that the mortification of life with a
wife, arising from defect of ability, is recruited and vivified by adulteries; and is not that
which recruits and vivifies of more consequence than that which mortifies? What is marriage
but allowed adultery? Who knows any distinction between them? Can love be forced? and yet love
with a wife is forced by a covenant and laws. Is not love with a married partner the love of
the sex, which is so universal that it exists even among birds and beasts? What is conjugial
love but the love of the sex? and the love of the sex is free with every woman. The reason
why civil laws are against adulteries is, because lawgivers have believed that to prohibit
adultery was connected with the public good; and yet lawgivers and judges sometimes commit
adultery, and say among themselves, 'Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.' Who
does not know that the simple and religious alone believe adulteries to be sins, and that the
intelligent think otherwise, who like us view them by the light of nature? Are not adulteries
as prolific as marriages? Are not illegitimate children as alert and qualified for the discharge
of offices and employments as the legitimate? Moreover families, otherwise barren, are provided
with offspring; and is not this an advantage and not a loss? What harm can come to a wife from
admitting several rivals? And what harm can come to a man? To say that it brings disgrace upon
a man, is a frivolous idea grounded in mere fancy. The reason why adultery is against the laws
and statutes of the church, is owing to the ecclesiastic order for the sake of power; but what
have theological and spiritual things to do with a delight merely corporeal and carnal? Are
not there instances of adulterous presbyters and monks? and are they incapable on that account
of acknowledging and worshipping God? Why therefore do those three priests preach that adulterers
have no acknowledgement of God? We cannot endure such blasphemies; wherefore let them be judged
and punished." Afterwards I saw that they called judges, whom they requested to pass sentence
of punishment upon them: but the judges said, "This is no part of our jurisdiction; for the
point in question is concerning the acknowledgement of God, and concerning sin, and thus concerning
salvation and damnation; and sentence in these cases must come from heaven: but we will suggest
a method to you, whereby you may know whether these three priests have preached truths. There
are three places which we judges know, where such points are examined and revealed in a singular
manner: One place is, where a way into heaven is open to all; but when they come into heaven,
they themselves perceive their own quality as to the acknowledgement of God: the second is,
where also a way is open into heaven; but no one can enter into that way unless he has heaven
in himself: and the third is where there is a way to hell; and those who love infernal things
enter that way of their own accord, because from delight. We judges charge all to go to those
places who require judgement from us concerning heaven and hell." On hearing this, those who
were gathered together, said, "Let us go to those places;" and while they were going to the
first, where a way into heaven is open to all, it suddenly became dark; wherefore some of them
lighted torches and carried them before. The judges who were with them said, "This happens
to all who go to the first place; as they approach, the fire of the torches becomes more dim,
and is extinguished in that place by the light of heaven flowing in, which is a sign that they
are there; the reason of this is, because at first heaven is closed to them, and afterwards
is opened." They then came to that place, and when the torches were extinguished of themselves,
they saw a way tending obliquely upwards into heaven: this those entered who were enraged against
the priests; among the first, these who were determined adulterers, after them those who were
confirmed adulterers; and as they ascended, the first cried out, "Follow;" and those who followed
cried out, "Make haste;" and they pressed forward. After near an hour, when they were all within
in the heavenly society, there appeared a gulph between them and the angels; and the light
of heaven above the gulph flowing into their eyes, opened the interiors of their minds, whereby
they were bound to speak as they interiorly thought; and then they were asked by the angels,
whether they acknowledged that God is? The first, who were determined adulterers, replied,
"What is God?" And they looked at each other, and said, "Which of you has seen him?" The second,
who were confirmed adulterers, said, "Are not all things of nature? What is there above nature
but the sun?" And instantly the angels said to them, "Depart from us; now you yourselves perceive
that you have no acknowledgement of God: when you descend, the interiors of your mind will
be closed and its exteriors opened, and then you can speak against the interiors, and say that
God is. Be assured that as soon as a man actually becomes an adulterer, heaven is closed to
him; and when heaven is closed, God is not acknowledged. Hear the reason; every filthy principle
of hell is from adulterers, and it stinks in heaven like putrid mire of the streets." On hearing
these things they turned themselves and descended by three ways; and when they were below,
the first and second groups conversing together said, "The priests have conquered there; but
we know that we can speak of God equally with them: and when we say that he is, do we not acknowledge
him? The interiors and exteriors of the mind, of which the angels told us, are devised fictions.
But let us go to the second place pointed out by the judges, where a way is open into heaven
to those who have heaven in themselves, thus to those who are about to come into heaven." When
they were come thither, a voice proceeded from that heaven, saying, "Shut the gates; there
are adulterers at hand." Then suddenly the gates were shut, and the keepers with sticks in
their hands drove them away; and they delivered the three priests, against whom they had been
tumultuous, from the hands of their keepers, and introduced them into heaven: and instantly,
when the gates were open for the priests, there issued from heaven upon the rebels the delightful
principle of marriage, which, from its being chaste and pure, almost deprived them of animation;
wherefore, for fear of fainting away through suffocation, they hastened to the third place,
concerning which the judges said, that thence there was a way to hell; and instantly there
issued from thence the delight of adultery, whereby those who were either determined or confirmed
adulterers, were so vivified, that they descended as it were dancing, and there like swine
immersed themselves in filth.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE LUST OF DEFLORATION.

501. The lusts treated of in the four following chapters, are not only lusts of adultery, but
are more grievous than those since they exist only from adulteries, being taken to after adulteries
are become loathsome; as the lust of defloration, which is first treated of, and which cannot
previously exist with any one; in like manner the lust of varieties, the lust of violation,
and the lust of seducing innocencies, which are afterwards treated of. They are called lusts,
because according to the quantity and quality of the lust for those things, such and so great
is their appropriation. In reference specifically to the lust of defloration, its infamous
villany shall be made manifest from the following considerations: I. The state of a maiden
or undeflowered woman before and after marriage. II. Virginity is the crown of chastity, and
the certificate of conjugial love. III. Defloration, without a view to marriage as an end,
is the villany of a robber. IV. The lot of those who have confirmed themselves in the persuasion
that the lust of defloration is not an evil of sin, after death is grievous. We proceed to
explain them.

502. I. THE STATE OF A MAIDEN OR UNDEFLOWERED WOMAN BEFORE AND AFTER MARRIAGE. What is the
quality of the state of a maiden, before she has been instructed concerning the various particulars
of the conjugial torch, has been made known to me by wives in the spiritual world, who have
departed out of the natural world in their infancy, and have been educated in heaven. They
said, that when they arrived at a marriageable state, from seeing conjugial partners they began
to love the conjugial life, but only for the end that they might be called wives, and might
maintain friendly and confidential society with one man; and also, that being removed from
the house of obedience, they might become their own mistresses: they also said, that they thought
of marriage only from the blessedness of mutual friendship and confidence with a husband, and
not at all from the delight of any flame; but that their maiden state after marriage was changed
into a new one, of which they previously had not the least knowledge: and they declared, that
this was a state of the expansion of all things of the life of their body from first principles
to last, to receive the gifts of their husband, and to unite these gifts to their own life,
that thus they might become his love and his wife; and that this state commenced from the moment
of defloration, and that after this the flame of love burned to the husband alone, and that
they were sensible of the heavenly delights of that expansion; and further, that as each wife
was introduced into this state by her own husband, and as it is from him, and thereby his in
herself, it is altogether impossible for her to love any other than him alone. From this account
it was made manifest what is the quality of the state of maidens before and after marriage
in heaven. That the state of maidens and wives on earth, whose first attachments prove successful,
is similar to this of the maidens in heaven, is no secret. What maiden can know that new state
before she is in it? Inquire, and you will hear. The case is different with those who before
marriage catch allurement from being taught.

503. II. VIRGINITY IS THE CROWN OF CHASTITY AND THE CERTIFICATE OF CONJUGIAL LOVE. Virginity
is called the crown of chastity, because it crowns the chastity of marriage: it is also the
badge of chastity; wherefore the bride at the nuptials wears a crown on her head: it is also
a badge of the sanctity of marriage; for the bride, after the maiden flower, gives and devotes
herself wholly to the bridegroom, at that time the husband, and the husband in his turn gives
and devotes himself wholly to the bride, at that time the wife. Virginity is also called the
certificate of conjugial love, because a certificate has relation to a covenant; and the covenant
is, that love may unite them into one man, or into one flesh. The men themselves also before
marriage regard the virginity of the bride as a crown of her chastity, and as a certificate
of conjugial love, and as the very dainty from which the delights of that love are about to
commence and to be perpetuated. From these and the foregoing considerations, it is manifest,
that after the zone is taken away, and the virginity is sipped, a maiden becomes a wife, and
if not a wife, she becomes a harlot; for the new state into which she is then introduced, is
a state of love for her husband, and if not for her husband, it is a state of lust.

504. III. DEFLORATION, WITHOUT A VIEW TO MARRIAGE AS AN END, IS THE VILLANY OF A ROBBER. Some
adulterers are impelled by the cupidity of deflowering maidens, and thence also of deflowering
young girls in their state of innocence: the enticements offered are either persuasions suggested
by pimps, or presents made by the men, or promises of marriage; and those men after defloration
leave them, and continually seek for others: moreover, they are not delighted with the objects
they have left, but with a continual supply of new ones; and this lust increases even till
it becomes the chief of the delights of their flesh. They add also to the above this abominable
deed, that by various cunning artifices they entice maidens about to be married or immediately
after marriage, to offer them the first-fruits of marriage, which also they thus filthily defile.
I have heard also, that when that heat with its potency has failed, they glory in the number
of virginities, as in so many golden fleeces of Jason. This villany, which is that of committing
a rape, since it was begun in an age of strength, and afterwards confirmed by boastings, remains
rooted in, and thereby infixed after death. What the quality of this villany is, appears from
what was said above, that virginity is the crown of chastity, the certificate of future conjugial
love, and that a maiden devotes her soul and life to him to whom she devotes it; conjugial
friendship and the confidence thereof are also founded upon it. A woman likewise, deflowered
by a man of the above description, after this door of conjugial love is broken through, loses
all shame, and becomes a harlot, which is likewise to be imputed to the robber as the cause.
Such robbers, if, after having run through a course of lewdness and profanation of chastity,
they apply their minds (animus) to marriage, have no other object in their mind (mens) than
the virginity of her who is to be their married partner; and when they have attained this object,
they loathe both bed and chamber, yea also the whole female sex, except young girls: and whereas
such are violators of marriage, and despisers of the female sex, and thereby spiritual robbers,
it is evident that the divine Nemesis pursues them.

505. Their lot is this: after they have passed the first time of their stay in the spiritual
world, which is a time of modesty and morality, because spent in company with angelic spirits,
they are next, from their externals, led into their internals, and in this case into the concupiscences
with which they had been ensnared in the world, and the angelic spirits into theirs, to the
intent that it may appear in what degree they had been ensnared; and if a lesser degree, that
after they have been let into them, they may be let out again, and may be covered with shame.
But those who had been principled in this malignant lust to such a degree as to be made sensible
of its eminent delight, and to make a boast of those thefts as of the choicest spoils, do not
suffer themselves to be drawn away from it; wherefore they are let into their freedom, and
then they instantly wander about, and inquire after brothels, and also enter them when they
are pointed out; (these brothels are on the sides of hell:) but when they meet with none but
prostitutes there, they go away, and inquire where there are maidens; and then they are carried
to harlots, who by phantasy can assume supereminent beauty, and a florid girlish complexion,
and boast themselves of being maidens; and on seeing these they burn with desire towards them
as they did in the world: wherefore they bargain with them; but when they are about to enjoy
the bargain, the phantasy induced from heaven is taken away, and then those pretended maidens
appear in their own deformity, monstrous and dark, to whom nevertheless they are compelled
to cleave for a time: those harlots are called sirens. But if by such fascinations they do
not suffer themselves to be draw away from that wild lust, they are cast down into the hell
lying to the south and west, beneath the hell of the crafty courtezans, and there they are
associated with their companions. I have also been permitted to see them in that hell, and
have been told that many of noble descent, and the more opulent, are therein; but as they had
been such in the world, all remembrance of their descent and of the dignity derived from their
opulence is taken from them, and a persuasion is induced on them that they have been vile slaves,
and thence were unworthy of all honor. Among themselves indeed they appear as men: but when
seen by others, who are allowed to look in thither, they appear as apes, with a stern look
instead of a courteous one, and a horrid countenance instead of one of pleasantry. They walk
with their loins contracted, and thereby bent, the upper part of the body hanging forward in
front, as if they were ready to fall, and they emit a disagreeable smell. They loathe the sex,
and turn away from those they see; for they have no desire towards them. Such they appear when
seen near at hand; but when viewed from afar, they appear like dogs of indulgences, or whelps
of delight; and there is also heard somewhat like barking in the tone of their speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE LUST OF VARIETIES.

506. The lust of varieties here treated of, does not mean the lust of fornication, which was
treated of above in its proper chapter: the latter lust, notwithstanding its being usually
promiscuous and vague, still does not occasion the lust of varieties, unless when it is immoderate,
and the fornicator looks to number, and boasts thereof from a principle of cupidity. This idea
causes a beginning of this lust; but what its quality is as it advances, cannot be distinctly
perceived, unless in some such series as the following: I. By the lust of varieties is meant
the entirely dissolute lust of adultery. II. That lust is love and at the same time loathing
in regard to the sex. III. That lust altogether annihilates conjugial love appertaining to
itself. IV. The lot of those (who have been addicted to that lust), after death, is miserable,
since they have not the inmost principle of life. We proceed to an explanation of each article.

507. I. BY THE LUST OF VARIETIES IS MEANT THE ENTIRELY DISSOLUTE LUST OF ADULTERY. This lust
insinuates itself with those who in youth have relaxed the bonds of modesty, and have had opportunities
of association with many loose women, especially if they have not wanted the means of satisfying
their pecuniary demands. They implant and root this lust in themselves by immoderate and unlimited
adulteries, and by shameless thoughts concerning the love of the female sex, and by confirming
themselves in the idea that adulteries are not evils, and not at all sins. This lust increases
with them as it advances, so much so that they desire all the women in the world, and wish
for whole troops, and a fresh one every day. Whereas this love separates itself from the common
love of the sex implanted in every man, and altogether from the love of one of the sex, which
is conjugial love, and inserts itself into the exteriors of the heart as a delight of love
separate from those loves, and yet derived from them; therefore it is so thoroughly rooted
in the cuticles, that it remains in the touch when the powers are decayed. Persons addicted
to this lust make light of adulteries; wherefore they think of the whole female sex as of a
common harlot, and of marriage as of a common harlotry, and thereby mix immodesty in modesty,
and from the mixture grow insane. From these considerations it is evident what is here meant
by the lust of varieties, that it is the lust of entirely dissolute adultery.

508. II. THAT LUST IS LOVE AND AT THE SAME TIME LOATHING IN REGARD TO THE SEX. Persons addicted
to that lust have a love for the sex, because they derive variety from the sex; and they have
a loathing for the sex, because after enjoying a woman they reject her and lust after others.
This obscene lust burns towards a fresh woman, and after burning, it grows cold towards her;
and cold is loathing. That this lust is love and at the same time loathing in regard to the
sex, may be illustrated as follows: set on the left side a company of the women whom they have
enjoyed, and on the right side a company of those whom they have not; would not they look at
the latter company from love, but at the former from loathing? and yet each company is the sex.

509. III. THAT LUST ALTOGETHER ANNIHILATES CONJUGIAL LOVE APPERTAINING TO ITSELF. The reason
of this is, because that lust is altogether opposite to conjugial love, and so opposite, that
it not only rends it asunder, but as it were grinds it to powder, and thereby annihilates it:
for conjugial love is confined to one of the sex; whereas that lust does not stop at one, but
within an hour or a day is as intensely cold as it was before hot towards her; and since cold
is loathing, the latter by forced cohabitation and dwelling together is so accumulated as to
become nauseous, and thus conjugial love is consumed to such a degree that nothing of it is
left. From these considerations it may be seen, that this lust is fatal to conjugial love;
and as conjugial love constitutes the inmost principle of life with man, that it is fatal to
his life; and that that lust, by successive interceptions and closings of the interiors of
the mind, at length becomes cuticular, and thus merely alluring; while the faculty of understanding
or rationality still remains.

510. Every one has excellence of life according to his conjugial love; for that excellence
conjoins itself with the life of the wife, and by conjunction exalts itself; but as with those
of whom we are speaking there does not remain the least principle of conjugial love, and consequently
not anything of the inmost principle of life, therefore their lot after death is miserable.
After passing a certain period of time in their externals, in which they converse rationally
and act civilly, they are let into their internals, and in this case into a similar lust and
its delights, in the same degree as in the world: for every one after death is let into the
same state of life which he had appropriated to himself, to the intent that he may be withdrawn
from it; for no one can be withdrawn from this evil, unless he has first been led into it;
if he were not to be led into it, the evil would conceal itself, and defile the interiors of
the mind, and spread itself as a plague, and would next burst through all barriers and destroy
the external principles of the body. For this end there are opened to them brothels, which
are on the side of hell, where there are harlots with whom they have an opportunity of varying
their lusts; but this is granted with the restriction to one harlot in a day, and under a penalty
in case of communication with more than one on the same day. Afterwards, when from examination
it appears that that lust is so inbred that they cannot be withdrawn from it, they are conveyed
to a certain place which is next above the hell assigned for them, and then they appear to
themselves as if they fall into a swoon, and to others as if they fall down with the face upward;
and also the ground beneath their backs is actually opened, and they are absorbed, and sink
down into hell among their like; thus they are gathered to their own. I have been permitted
to see them there, and likewise to converse with them. Among themselves they appear as men,
which is granted them lest they should be a terror to their companions; but at a certain distance
they seem to have white faces consisting only of skin, and this because they have no spiritual
life in them, which every one has according to the conjugial principle sown in him. Their speech
is dry, parched, and sorrowful: when they are hungry, they lament; and their lamentations are
heard as a peculiar clashing noise. Their garments are tattered, and their lower garments are
drawn above the belly round about the breast; because they have no loins, but their ankles
commence from the region of the bottom of the belly: the reason of this is, because the loins
with men (homines) correspond to conjugial love, and they are void of this love. They said
that they loathe the sex on account of their having no potency. Nevertheless, among themselves
they can reason as from rationality; but since they are cutaneous, they reason from the fallacies
of the senses. This hell is in the western quarter towards the north. These same persons, when
seen from afar, appear not as men or as monsters, but as frozen substances. It is however to
be observed, that those become of this description who have indulged in the above lust to such
a degree as to rend and annihilate in themselves the conjugial human principle.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE LUST OF VIOLATION.

511. The lust of violation does not mean the lust of defloration, which is the violation of
virginities, but not of maidens when it is effected from consent; whereas the lust of violation,
which is here treated of, retreats in consequence of consent, and is sharpened in consequence
of refusal; and it is the passion of violating all women whatever, who altogether refuse, and
violently resist, whether they be maidens, or widows, or wives. Persons addicted to this lust
are like robbers and pirates, who are delighted with spoil and plunder, and not with what is
given and justly acquired; and they are like malefactors, who covet what is disallowed and
forbidden, and despise what is allowed and granted. These violators are altogether averse to
consent, and are set on fire by resistance, which if they observe to be not internal, the ardor
of their lust is instantly extinguished, as fire is by water thrown upon it. It is well known,
that wives do not spontaneously submit themselves to the disposal of their husbands as to the
ultimate effects of love, and that from prudence they resist as they would resist violation,
to the end that they may take away from their husbands the cold arising from the consideration
of enjoyments being cheap in consequence of being continually allowed, and also in consequence
of an idea of lasciviousness on their part. These repugnancies, although they enkindle, still
are not the causes, but only the beginnings of this lust: its cause is, that after conjugial
love and also adulterous love have grown insipid by practice, they are willing, in order that
those loves may be repaired, to be set on fire by absolute repugnances. This lust thus begun,
afterwards increases, and as it increases it despises and breaks through all bounds of the
love of the sex, and exterminates itself, and from a lascivious, corporeal, and fleshly love,
becomes cartilaginous and bony; and then, from the periosteurns, which have an acute feeling,
it becomes acute. Nevertheless this lust is rare, because it exists only with those who had
entered into the married state, and then had lived in the practice of adulteries until they
became insipid. Besides this natural cause of this lust, there is also a spiritual cause, of
which something will be said in what follows.

512. The lot of persons of this character after death is as follows: these violators then separate
themselves from those who are in the limited love of the sex, and altogether from those who
are in conjugial love, thus from heaven: afterwards they are sent to the most cunning harlots,
who not only by persuasion, but also by imitation perfectly like that of a stage-player, can
feign and represent as if they were chastity itself. These harlots clearly discern those who
are principled in the above lust: in their presence they speak of chastity and its value; and
when the violator comes near and touches them, they are full of wrath, and fly away as through
terror into a closet, where there is a couch and a bed, and slightly close the door after them,
and recline themselves; and hence by their art they inspire the violator with an ungovernable
desire of breaking down the door, of rushing in, and attacking them; and when this is effected,
the harlot raising herself erect with the violator begins to fight with her hands and nails,
tearing his face, rending his clothes, and with a furious voice crying to the harlots her companions,
as to her female servants, for assistance, and opening the window with a loud outcry of thief,
robber, and murderer; and when the violator is at hand she bemoans herself and weeps: and after
violation she prostrates herself, howls, and calls out that she is undone, and at the same
time threatens in a serious tone, that unless he expiates the violation by paying a considerable
sum, she will attempt his destruction. While they are engaged in these venereal scenes, they
appear at a distance like cats, which nearly in like manner before their conjunctions combat
together, run forward, and make an outcry. After some such brothel-contests, they are taken
away, and conveyed into a cavern, where they are forced to some work: but as their smell is
offensive, in consequence of having rent asunder the conjugial principle, which is the chief
jewel of human life, they are sent to the borders of the western quarters, where at a certain
distance they appear lean, as if consisting of bones covered over with skin only; but when
seen at a distance they appear like panthers. When I was permitted to see them nearer, I was
surprised that some of them held books in their hands, and were reading; and I was told that
this is the case, because in the world they said various things concerning the spiritual things
of the church, and yet defiled them by adulteries, even to their extremities, and that such
was the correspondence of this lust with the violation of spiritual marriage. But it is to
be observed, that the instances of those who are principled in this lust are rare: certain
it is, that women, because it is unbecoming for them to prostitute love, are repugnant thereto,
and that repugnance enervates; nevertheless this is not from any lust of violation.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LUST OF SEDUCING INNOCENCIES.

513. The lust of seducing innocencies is neither the lust of defloration, nor the lust of violation,
but is peculiar and singular by itself; it prevails more especially with the deceitful. The
women, who appear to them as innocencies, are such as regard the evil of adultery as an enormous
sin, and who therefore highly prize chastity, and at the same time piety: these women are the
objects which set them on fire. In Roman Catholic countries there are maidens devoted to the
monastic life; and because they believe these maidens to be pious innocencies above the rest
of their sex, they view them as the dainties and delicacies of their lust. With a view of seducing
either the latter or the former because they are deceitful, they first devise arts, and next,
when they have well digested them, without receiving any check from shame, they practise them
as from nature. These arts are principally pretences of innocence, love, chastity, and piety;
by these and other cunning stratagems, they enter into the interior friendship of such women,
and thence into their love, which they change from spiritual into natural by various persuasions
and at the same time by insinuations, and afterwards into corporeal-carnal by irritations,
and then they take possession of them at pleasure; and when they have attained this end, they
rejoice in heart, and make a mock of those whom they have violated.

514. The lot of these seducers after death is sad, since such seduction is not only impiety,
but also malignity. After they have passed through their first period in the spiritual world,
which is in externals, wherein they excel many others in the elegance of their manners and
the courteousness of their speech, they are reduced to another period of their life, which
is in internals, wherein their lust is set at liberty, and commences its sport; and then they
are first conveyed to women who had made vows of chastity, and with these they are examined
as to the quality of their malignant concupiscence, to the intent that they may not be judged
except on conviction: when they are made sensible of the chastity of those women, their deceit
begins to act, and to attempt its crafty arts; but as this is to no purpose, they depart from
them. They are afterwards introduced to women of genuine innocence; and when they attempt to
deceive these in like manner, by virtue of a power given to those women, they are heavily fined;
for they occasion in their hands and feet a grievous numbness; likewise in their necks, and
at length make them feel as it were a swoon; and when they have inflicted this punishment,
they run away and escape from the sufferers. After this there is a way opened to them to a
certain company of courtezans, who have been versed in the art of cunningly feigning innocence:
and these first expose them to laughter among themselves, and at length after various engagements
suffer themselves to be violated. After some such scenes, a third period takes place, which
is that of judgement; and in this case, being convicted, they sink down, and are gathered to
their like in the hell which is in the northern quarter, and there they appear at a distance
like weasels; but if they have allured by deceit, they are conveyed down from this hell to
that of the deceitful, which is in the western quarter at a depth to the back; in this hell
they appear at a distance like serpents of various kinds; and the most deceitful like vipers:
but in the hell into which I was permitted to look, they appeared to me as if they were ghastly
pale, with faces of chalk: and as they are mere concupiscences, they do not like to speak:
and if they do speak, they only mutter and stammer various things, which are understood by
none but their companions who are near them; but presently, as they sit or stand, they make
themselves unseen, and fly about in the cavern like phantoms; for on this occasion they are
in phantasy, and phantasy appears to fly: after flying they rest themselves, and then, what
is wonderful, one does not know another; the cause of this is, because they are principled
in deceit, and deceit does not believe another, and thereby withdraws itself. When they are
made sensible of any thing proceeding from conjugial love, they fly away into hiding places
and conceal themselves. They are also void of all love of the sex, and are real impotencies,
and are called infernal genii.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ADULTERIES WITH THE VIOLATION OF SPIRITUAL MARRIAGE.

515. I should here say something, in the way of preface, concerning correspondence; but the
subject does not properly belong to the present work. The nature and meaning of correspondence
may be seen in a brief summary above, n. 76, and n. 342; and fully in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED,
from beginning to end, that it is between the natural sense of the Word and the spiritual sense.
That in the Word there is a natural and a spiritual sense, and a correspondence between them,
has been demonstrated in the DOCTRINE OF THE NEW JERUSALEM CONCERNING THE SACRED SCRIPTURE,
and especially, n. 5-26.

516. The spiritual marriage means the marriage of the Lord and the church, spoken of above,
n. 116-131; and hence also the marriage of good and truth, likewise spoken of above, n. 83-102;
and as this marriage of the Lord and the church, and the consequent marriage of good and truth,
is in everything of the Word, it is the violation of this which is here meant by the violation
of the spiritual marriage; for the church is from the Word, and the Word is the Lord: the Lord
is the Word, because he is divine good and divine truth therein. That the Word is that marriage,
may be seen fully confirmed in the DOCTRINE OF THE NEW JERUSALEM CONCERNING THE SACRED SCRIPTURE,
n. 80-90.

517. Since therefore the violation of the spiritual marriage is the violation of the Word,
it is evident that this violation is the adulteration of good and the falsification of truth,
for the spiritual marriage is the marriage of good and truth; whence it follows, that when
the good of the Word is adulterated, and its truth falsified, the above marriage is violated.
How this violation is effected, and by whom, is in some measure evident from what follows.

518. Above, in treating of the marriage of the Lord and the church, n. 116, and the following
numbers, and in treating of the marriage of good and truth, n. 83, and the following numbers,
it was shewn, that that marriage corresponds to marriages in the world: hence it follows, that
the violation of that marriage corresponds to whoredoms and adulteries. That this is the case,
is very manifest from the Word itself, in that whoredoms and adulteries there signify the falsifications
of truth and the adulterations of good, as may be plainly seen from numerous passages adduced
out of the Word in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 134.

519. The Word is violated by those in the Christian church who adulterate its goods and truths;
and those do this who separate truth from good and good from truth; also, who assume and confirm
appearances of truth and fallacies for genuine truths; and likewise, who know truths of doctrine
derived from the Word, and live evil lives, not to mention other like cases. These violations
of the Word and the church correspond to the prohibited degrees, mentioned in Levit, chap. xviii.

520. As the natural principle and the spiritual appertaining to every man (homo), cohere as
soul and body, (for a man without the spiritual principle which flows into and vivifies his
natural principle, is not a man), it hence follows, that whoever is in spiritual marriage is
also in happy natural marriage; and on the contrary, that whoever is in spiritual adultery
is also in natural adultery, and whoever is in natural adultery is also in spiritual adultery.
Now since all who are in hell are in the nuptial connection of evil and the false, and this
is essential spiritual adultery; and all who are in heaven are in the marriage of good and
truth, and this is essential marriage; therefore hell in the total is called adultery, and
heaven in the total is called marriage.

       *       *       *       *       *

521. To the above shall be added this MEMORABLE RELATION. My sight being opened, I saw a shady
forest, and therein a crowd of satyrs: the satyrs as to their breasts were rough and hairy,
and as to their feet some were like calves, some like panthers, and some like wolves, and they
had beasts' claws instead of toes. These were running to and fro like wild beasts, crying out,
"Where are the women?" and instantly I saw some harlots who were expecting them, and who in
various ways were monstrous. The satyrs ran towards them, and laid hold of them, dragging them
into a cavern, which was in the midst of the forest deep beneath the earth; and upon the ground
round about the cavern lay a great serpent in spiral foldings, breathing poison into the cavern:
in the branches of the forest above the serpent dismal birds of night croaked and screeched.
But the satyrs and harlots did not see these things, because they were the correspondences
of their lasciviousnesses, and therefore their usual appearances at a distance. Afterwards
they came out of the cavern, and entered a certain low cottage, which was a brothel; and then
being separated from the harlots they talked together, and I listened; for conversation in
the spiritual world may be heard by a distant person as if he was present, the extent of space
in that world being only an appearance. They talked about marriages, nature, and religion.
Those who as to the feet appeared like calves, spoke concerning MARRIAGES, and said, "What
are marriages but licit adulteries? and what is sweeter than adulterous hypocrisies, and the
making fools of husbands?" At this the rest clapped their hands with a loud laugh. The satyrs
who as to the feet appeared as panthers, spoke concerning NATURE, and said, "What is there
but nature? What distinction is there between a man and a beast, except that a man can speak
articulately and a beast sonorously? Does not each derive life from heat, and understanding
from light, by the operation of nature?" Hereupon the rest exclaimed, "Admirable! you speak
from judgement." Those who as to the feet appeared like wolves, spoke concerning RELIGION,
saying, "What is God or a divine principle, but the inmost principles of nature in action?
What is religion but a device to catch and bind the vulgar?" Hereupon the rest vociferated,
"Bravo!" After a few minutes they rushed forth, and in so doing they saw me at a distance looking
attentively at them. Being provoked at this, they ran out from the forest, and with a threatening
countenance directed their course hastily towards me, and said, "What are you doing here, listening
to our whispers?" I replied, "Why should I not? what is to hinder me? you were only talking
together:" and I related what I had heard from them. Hereupon their minds (animi) were appeased,
which was through fear lest their sentiments should be divulged; and then they began to speak
modestly and to act bashfully; from which circumstance I knew that they were not of mean descent
but of honorable birth; and then I told them, how I saw them in the forest as satyrs, twenty
as calf-satyrs, six as panther-satyrs, and four as wolf-satyrs; they were thirty in number.
They were surprised at this, because they saw themselves there as men, and nothing else, in
like manner as they saw themselves here with me. I then taught them, that the reason of their
so appearing was from their adulterous lust, and that this satyr-like form was a form of dissolute
adultery, and not a form of a person. This happened, I said, because every evil concupiscence
presents a likeness of itself in some form, which is not perceived by those who are in the
concupiscence, but by those who are at a distance: I also said, "To convince you of it, send
some from among you into that forest, and do you remain here, and look at them." They did so,
and sent away two; and viewing them from near the above brothel-cottage, they saw them altogether
as satyrs; and when they returned, they saluted those satyrs, and said, "Oh what ridiculous
figures!" While they were laughing, I jested a good deal with them, and told them that I had
also seen adulterers as hogs; and then I recollected the fable of Ulysses and the Circe, how
she sprinkled the companions and servants of Ulysses with poisonous herbs, and touched them
with a magic wand, and turned them into hogs,--perhaps into adulterers, because she could not
by any art turn any one into a hog. After they had made themselves exceedingly merry on this
and other like subjects, I asked them whether they then knew to what kingdoms in the world
they had belonged? They said, they had belonged to various kingdoms, and they named Italy,
Poland, Germany, England, Sweden; and I enquired, whether they had seen any one from Holland
of their party? And they said, Not one. After this I gave the conversation a serious turn,
and asked them, whether they had ever thought that adultery is sin? They replied, "What is
sin? we do not know what it means." I then inquired, whether they ever remembered that adultery
was contrary to the sixth commandment of the Decalogue. Is not it the catechism? What have
we men to do with that childish pamphlet?" I asked them, whether they had ever thought at all
about hell. They replied, "Who ever came up thence to give us information?" I asked, whether
they had ever thought at all in the world about a life after death. They said, "Just as much
as about the future life of beasts, and at times as about phantoms, which exhale from dead
bodies and float about." I further asked them, whether they had heard any thing from the priests
on any of these subjects. They replied, that they had attended only to the sound of their voices,
and not to the matter; and what is it? Being astonished at these answers, I said to them, "Turn
your faces, and direct your eyes to the midst of the forest, where the cavern is in which you
have been;" and they turned themselves, and saw that great serpent around the cavern in spiral
foldings, breathing poison, and also the doleful birds in the branches over the serpents. I
then asked them, "What do you see?" But being much terrified, they did not answer; and I said,
"Do you see the dreadful sight? Know then that this is a representative of adultery in the
baseness of its lust." Suddenly at that instant an angel presented himself, who was a priest,
and opened the hell in the western quarter into which such spirits are at length collected;
and he said, "Look thither:" and they saw that firy lake, and knew there some of their friends
in the world, who invited them to themselves. Having seen and heard these things, they turned
themselves away, and rushed out of my sight, and retired from the forest; but I observed their
steps, that they only pretended to retire, and that by winding ways they returned into the forest.

522. After this I returned home, and the next day, from a recollection of these sad scenes,
I looked to the same forest, and saw that it had disappeared, and in its place there was a
sandy plain, and in the midst thereof a lake, in which were some red serpents. But some weeks
after when I was looking thither again, I saw on its right side some fallow land, and upon
it some husbandmen; and again, after some weeks I saw springing out of that fallow land some
tilled land surrounded with shrubs; and I then heard a voice from heaven, "Enter into your
chamber, and shut the door, and apply to the work begun on the Apocalypse, and finish it within
two years."

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE IMPUTATION OF EACH LOVE, ADULTEROUS AND CONJUGIAL.

523. THE LORD SAITH, JUDGE NOT, THAT YE BE NOT CONDEMNED, Matt. vii. 1; which cannot in any
wise mean judgement respecting any one's moral and civil life in the world, but respecting
his spiritual and celestial life. Who does not see, that unless a man was allowed to judge
respecting the moral life of those who live with him in the world, society would perish? What
would society be if there were no public judicature, and if every one did not exercise his
judgement respecting another? But to judge what is the quality of the interior mind, or soul,
thus what is the quality of any one's spiritual state, and thence what his lot is after death,
is not allowed; for that is known only to the Lord: neither does the Lord reveal this till
after the person's decease, to the intent that every one may act freely in whatever he does,
and thereby that good or evil may be from him, and thus be in him, and that thence he may live
to himself and live his own to eternity. The reason why the interiors of the mind, which are
kept hid in the world, are revealed after death is, because this is of importance and advantage
to the societies into which the man then comes; for in them all are spiritual. That those interiors
are then revealed, is plain from these words of the Lord: There is nothing concealed, which
shall not be revealed, or hidden, which shall not be known: therefore whatsoever things ye
have said in darkness, shall be heard in light: and that which ye have spoken into the ear
in closets shall be preached on the house-tops, Luke xii. 2, 3. A common judgement, as this
for instance,--"If you are such in internals as you appear to be in externals, you will be
saved or condemned," is allowed; but a particular judgement, as this, for instance,--"You are
such in internals, therefore you will be saved or condemned," is not allowed. Judgement concerning
the spiritual life of a man, or the internal life of the soul, is meant by the imputation which
is here treated of. Can any human being know and decide who is in heart an adulterer, and who
a conjugial partner? And yet the thoughts of the heart, which are the purposes of the will,
judge every one. But we will explain this subject in the following order: I. The evil in which
every one is principled is imputed to him after death; and so also the good. II. The transference
of the good of one person into another is impossible. III. Imputation, if by it is meant such
transference, is a frivolous term. IV. Evil is imputed to every one according to the quality
of his will and his understanding; in like manner good. V. Thus adulterous love is imputed
to every one. VI. In like manner conjugial love. We proceed to the explanation of each article.

524. I. THE EVIL IN WHICH EVERY ONE IS PRINCIPLED, IS IMPUTED TO HIM AFTER DEATH; AND SO ALSO
THE GOOD. To make this proposition in some degree evident, it shall be considered according
to the following arrangement: 1. That every one has a life peculiar to himself. 2. That every
one's life remains with him after death. 3. That to an evil person is then imputed the evil
of his life, and to a good person the good of his life. As to the first point,--that everyone
has a life peculiar to himself, thus distinct from that of another, it is well known; for there
is a perpetual variety, and there is not any thing the same as another, consequently everyone
has his own peculiar principle. This is evident from men's faces, the faces of no two persons
being absolutely alike, nor can there be two alike to eternity: the reason of this is, because
there are no two minds (animi) alike, and faces are derived from minds; for the face, as it
is said, is a type of the mind, and the mind derives its origin and form from the life. Unless
a man (homo) had a life peculiar to himself, as he has a mind and a face peculiar to himself,
he would not have any life after death, separate from that of another; yea, neither would there
be a heaven, for heaven consists of perpetual varieties; its form is derived solely from the
varieties of souls and minds arranged into such an order as to make a one; and they make a
one from the One, whose life is in every thing therein as the soul is in a man: unless this
was the case, heaven would be dispersed, because form would be dissolved. The One from whom
all things have life, and from whom form coheres, is the Lord. In general every form consists
of various things, and is such as is their harmonic co-ordination and arrangement to a one:
such is the human form; and hence it is that a man, consisting of so many members, viscera,
and organs, is not sensible of any thing in himself and from himself but as of a one. As to
the SECOND point,--that every one's life remains with him after death, it is known in the church
from these passages of the Word: The Son of Man will come and will then render to every one
according to his deeds, Matt. xvi. 27. I saw the books open; and all were judged according
to their works, Rev. xx. 12. In the day of judgement God will render to every one according
to his works, Rom. ii. 6; 2 Cor. v. 10. The works, according to which it will be rendered to
every one, are the life, because the life does the works, and they are according to the life.
As I have been permitted for several years to be associated with angels, and to converse with
the deceased, I can testify for certain, that every one is then examined as to the quality
of the life which he has led, and that the life which he has contracted in the world abides
with him to eternity. I have conversed with those who lived ages ago, whose life I have been
acquainted with from history, and I have known it to be like the description given of it; and
I have heard from the angels, that no one's life after death can be changed, because it is
organized according to his love and consequent works; and that if it were changed the organization
would be rent asunder, which cannot be done in any case; also that a change of organization
can only be effected in the material body, and is utterly impossible in the spiritual body,
after the former has been laid aside. The delights of the love of evil are different from those
of the love of good; and delights exhale from every one, as odors do from every vegetable in
the world; for they are not absorbed and concealed by the material body as heretofore, but
flow freely from their loves into the spiritual aura; and as evil is there made sensible as
in its odor, it is in this which accuses, fixes blame, and judges,--not before any judge, but
before every one who is principled in good; and this is what is meant by imputation. Moreover,
an evil person chooses companions with whom he may live in his delights; and because he is
averse from the delight of good, he spontaneously betakes himself to his own in hell. The imputation
of good is effected in like manner, and takes place with those who in the world have acknowledged
that all good in them is from the Lord, and nothing from themselves. These, after they have
been prepared, are let into the interior delights of good, and then there is opened to them
a way into heaven, to the society where its homogeneous delights are: this is effected by the Lord.

525. II. THE TRANSFERENCE OF THE GOOD OF ONE PERSON TO ANOTHER IS IMPOSSIBLE. The evidence
of this proposition may also be seen from the following points: 1. That every man is born in
evil. 2. That he is led into good by regeneration from the Lord. 3. That this is effected by
a life according to his precepts. 4. Wherefore good, when it is thus implanted, cannot be transferred.
The FIRST point,--that every man is born in evil, is well known in the church. It is generally
said that this evil is derived hereditarily from Adam; but it is from a man's parents. Every
one derives from his parents his peculiar temper, which is his inclination. That this is the
case, is evinced both by reason and experience; for the likenesses of parents as to face, genius,
and manners, appear extant in their immediate offspring and in their posterity; hence families
are known by many, and a judgement is also formed concerning their minds (animi); wherefore
the evils which parents themselves have contracted, and which they have transmitted to their
offspring, are the evils in which men are born. The reason why it is believed that the guilt
of Adam is inscribed on all the human race, is, because few reflect upon any evil with themselves,
and thence know it; wherefore they suppose that it is so deeply hid as to appear only in the
sight of God. In regard to the SECOND point,--that a man is led into good by regeneration from
the Lord, it is to be observed that there is such a thing as regeneration, and that unless
a person be regenerated, he cannot enter into heaven, as appears clearly from the Lord's words
in John iii. 3, 5. The regeneration consists in purification from evils, and thereby renovation
of life, cannot be unknown in the Christian world; for reason also sees this when it acknowledges
that every one is born in evil, and that evil cannot be washed and wiped away like filth by
soap and water, but by repentance. As to the THIRD point,--that a man is led into good by the
Lord, by a life according to his precepts, it is plain from this consideration, that there
are live precepts of regeneration; see above, n. 82; among which are these,--that evils are
to be shunned, because they are of and from the devil, and that goods are to be done, because
they are of and from God; and that men ought to go to the Lord, in order that he may lead them
to do the latter. Let any one consult himself and consider, whether a man derives good from
any other source; and if he has not good, he has not salvation. In regard to the FOURTH point,--that
good, when it is thus implanted, cannot be transferred, (that is, the good of one person into
another,) it is evident from what has been already said; for from that it follows, that a man
by regeneration is made altogether new as to his spirit, which is effected by a life according
to the Lord's precepts. Who does not see that this renewing can only be effected from time
to time, in nearly the same manner as a tree successively takes root and grows from a seed,
and is perfected? Those who have other perceptions of regeneration, do not know any thing about
the state of man, or about evil and good, which two are altogether opposite, and that good
can only be implanted so far as evil is removed; nor do they know, that so long as any one
is in evil, he is averse from the good which in itself is good; wherefore if the good of one
should be transferred into any one who is in evil, it would be as if a lamb should be cast
before a wolf, or as if a pearl should be tied to a swine's snout: from which considerations
it is evident, that any such transfer is impossible.

526. III. IMPUTATION, IF BY IT IS MEANT SUCH TRANSFERENCE, IS A FRIVOLOUS TERM. That the evil
in which every one is principled, is imputed to him after death, and so also the good, was
proved above, n. 524; hence it is evident what is meant by imputation: but if by imputation
is meant the tranference of good into any one that is in evil, it is a frivolous term, because
any such transference is impossible, as was also proved above, in 525. In the world, merits
may as it were be transferred by men; that is, good may be done to children for the sake of
their parents, or to the friends of any client out of favor; but the good of merit cannot be
inscribed on their souls, but only be externally adjoined. The like is not possible with men
as to their spiritual life: this, as was shewn above, must be implanted; and if it is not implanted
by a life according to the Lord's precepts, as above-mentioned, a man remains in the evil in
which he was born. Before such implantation, it is impossible for any good to reach him, or
if it reaches him, it is instantly struck back and rebounds like an elastic ball falling upon
a rock, or it is absorbed like a diamond thrown into a bog. A man not reformed as to the Spirit,
is like a panther or an owl, and may be compared to a bramble and a nettle; but a man regenerated
is like a sheep or a dove, and may be compared to an olive and a vine. Consider, I pray, if
you are so disposed, how can a man-panther be changed into a man-sheep, or an owl into a dove,
or a bramble into an olive, or a nettle into a vine, by any imputation, if by it is meant transference?
In order that such a change may be effected is it not necessary that the ferine principle of
the panther and the owl, or the noxious principle of the bramble and the nettle, be first taken
away, and thereby the truly human and innocent principle be implanted? How this is effected,
the Lord also teaches in John, chap. xv. 1-7.

527. IV. EVIL OR GOOD IS IMPUTED TO EVERY ONE ACCORDING TO THE QUALITY OF HIS WILL AND HIS
UNDERSTANDING. It is well known that there are two principles which make a man's life, the
will and the understanding; and that all things which a man does, are done from his will and
his understanding; and that without these acting principles he would have neither action nor
speech other than as a machine; hence it is evident, that such as are a man's will and understanding,
such is the man; and further, that a man's action in itself is such as is the affection of
his will which produces it, and that a man's conversation in itself is such as is the thought
of his understanding which produces it: wherefore several men may act and speak alike, and
yet they act and speak differently: one from a depraved will and thought, the other from an
upright will and thought. From these considerations it is evident that by the deeds or works
according to which every one will be judged, are meant the will and the understanding; consequently
that evil works means the works of an evil will, whatever has been their appearance in externals,
and that good works mean the works of a good will, although in externals they have appeared
like the works done by an evil man. All things which are done from a man's interior will, are
done from purpose, since that will proposes to itself what it acts by its intention; and all
things which are done from the understanding, are done from confirmation, since the understanding
confirms. From these considerations it may appear, that evil or good is imputed to every one
according to the quality of his will therein, and of his understanding concerning them. These
observations I am allowed to confirm by the following relation: In the spiritual world I have
met several who in the natural world had lived like others, being sumptuous in their dress,
giving costly entertainments, frequenting the exhibitions of the stage, jesting loosely on
love topics, with other similar practices; and yet the angels accounted those things as evils
of sin to some, and not to others, declaring the latter guiltless, and the former guilty. Being
questioned why they did so, when all had done alike, they replied that they regard all from
their purpose, intention, or end, and distinguish accordingly; and that therefore they excuse
or condemn those whom the end either excuses or condemns, since an end of good influences all
in heaven, and an end of evil all in hell.

528. To the above I will add the following observation: it is said in the church that no one
can fulfil the law, and the less so, because he that offends against one precept of the decalogue,
offends against all: but this form of speaking is not such as it sounds; for it is to be understood
thus, that he who, from purpose or confirmation, acts against one precept, acts against the
rest; since to act so from purpose or confirmation is to deny that it is a sin; and he who
denies that it is a sin, makes nothing of acting against the rest of the precepts. Who does
not know, that he that is an adulterer is not on that account a murderer, a thief, and a false
witness, or wishes to be so? But he that is a determined and confirmed adulterer makes no account
of anything respecting religion, thus neither does he make any account of murder, theft, and
false witness; and he abstains from these evils, not because they are sins, but because he
is afraid of the law and of the loss of reputation. That determined and confirmed adulterers
make no account of the holy things of the church and religion, may be seen above, n. 490-493,
and in the two MEMORABLE RELATIONS, n. 500, 521, 522: it is a similar case, if any one, from
purpose or confirmation, acts against any other precept of the decalogue; he also acts against
the rest because he does not regard anything as sin.

529. The case is similar with those who are principled in good from the Lord: if these from
will and understanding, or from purpose and confirmation, abstain from any one evil because
it is a sin, they abstain from all evil, and the more so still if they abstain from several;
for as soon as any one, from purpose or confirmation, abstains from any evil because it is
a sin, he is kept by the Lord in the purpose of abstaining from the rest: wherefore, if unwittingly,
or from any prevailing bodily concupiscence, he does evil, still this is not imputed to him,
because he did not purpose it to himself, and does not confirm it with himself. A man comes
into this purpose, if once or twice in a year he examines himself, and repents of the evils
which he discovers in himself: it is otherwise with him who never examines himself. From these
considerations it evidently appears to whom sin is not imputed, and to whom it is.

530. V. THUS ADULTEROUS LOVE IS IMPUTED TO EVERY ONE;--not according to his deeds, such as
they appear externally before men, nor either such as they appear before a judge, but such
as they appear internally before the Lord, and from him before the angels, which is according
to the quality of a man's will and of his understanding therein. Various circumstances exist
in the world which mitigate and excuse crimes, also which aggravate and charge them upon the
perpetrator: nevertheless, imputations after death take place, not according to the external
circumstances of the deed, but according to the internal circumstances of the mind; and these
are viewed according to the state of the church with every one: as for example, a man impious
in will and understanding, that is, who has no fear of God or love of his neighbour, and consequently
no reverence for any sanctity of the church,--he, after death, becomes guilty of all the crimes
which he did in the body; nor is there any remembrance of his good actions, since his heart,
from whence as from a fountain those things flowed, was averse from heaven, and turned to hell;
and deeds flow from the place of the habitation of every one's heart. In order that this may
be understood, I will mention an arcanum: Heaven is distinguished into innumerable societies,
and so is hell, from an opposite principle; and the mind of every man, according to his will
and consequent understanding, actually dwells in one society, and intends and thinks like those
who compose the society. If the mind be in any society of heaven, it then intends and thinks
like those who compose that society; if it be in any society of hell, it intends and thinks
like those who are in the same society; but so long as a man lives in the world, so long he
wanders from one society to another, according to the changes of the affections of his will
and of the consequent thoughts of his mind: but after death his wanderings are collected into
one, and a place is accordingly allotted him, in hell if he is evil, in heaven if he is good.
Now since all in hell are influenced by a will of evil, all there are viewed from that will;
and since all in heaven are influenced by will of good, all there are viewed from that will;
wherefore imputations after death take place according to the quality of every one's will and
understanding. The case is similar with adulteries, whether they be fornications, whoredoms,
concubinages, or adulteries; for those things are imputed to every one, not according to the
deeds themselves, but according to the state of the mind in the deeds; for deeds follow the
body into the tomb, whereas the mind rises again.

531. VI. THUS CONJUGIAL LOVE IS IMPUTED TO EVERY ONE. There are marriages in which conjugial
love does not appear, and yet is: and there are marriages in which conjugial love appears and
yet is not: there are several causes in both cases, which may be known in part from what was
related concerning love truly conjugial, n. 57-73; concerning the cause of colds and separations,
n. 234-260; and concerning the causes of apparent love and friendship in marriages, n. 271-292:
but external appearances decide nothing concerning imputation; the only thing which decides
is the conjugial principle, which abides in every one's will, and is guarded, in whatever state
of marriage a man is. The conjugial principle is like a scale, in which that love is weighed;
for the conjugial principle of one man with one wife is the storehouse of human life, and the
reservoir of the Christian religion, as was shewn above, n. 457, 458; and this being the case,
it is possible that that love may exist with one married partner, and not at the same time
with the other; and that it may lie deeper hid than that the man (homo) himself can observe
any thing concerning it; and also it may be inscribed in a successive progress of the life.
The reason of this is, because that love in its progress accompanies religion, and religion,
as it is the marriage of the Lord and the church, is the beginning and inoculation of that
love; wherefore conjugial love is imputed to every one after death according to his spiritual
rational life; and for him to whom that love is imputed, a marriage in heaven is provided after
his decease, whatever has been his marriage in the world. From these considerations then results
this short concluding observation, that no inference is to be drawn concerning any one, from
appearances of marriages or of adulteries, whereby to decide that he has conjugial love, or
not; wherefore Judge not, lest ye be condemned. Matt. vii. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

532. To the above I will add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. I was once raised, as to my
spirit, into one of the societies of the angelic heaven; and instantly some of the wise men
of the society came to me, and said, "What news from the earth?" I replied, "This is new; the
Lord has revealed arcana which in point of excellence surpass all the arcana heretofore revealed
since the beginning of the church." They asked, "What are they?" I said, "The following: 1.
That in every part of the Word there is a spiritual sense corresponding to the natural sense;
and that by means of the former sense the men of the church have conjunction with the Lord
and consociation with angels; and that the sanctity of the Word resides therein. 2. That the
correspondences are discovered of which the spiritual sense of the Word consists." The angels
asked, "Have the inhabitants of the earth had no previous knowledge respecting correspondences?"
I said, "None at all;" and that the doctrine of correspondences had been concealed for some
thousands of years, ever since the time of Job; and that with those who lived at that time,
and before it, the science of correspondences was their chief science, whence they derived
wisdom, because they derived knowledge respecting the spiritual things of heaven and the church;
but that this science, on account of its being made idolatrous, was so extirpated and destroyed
by the divine providence of the Lord that no visible traces of it were left remaining; that
nevertheless at this time it has been again discovered by the Lord, in order that the men of
the church may have conjunction with him, and consociation with the angels; which purposes
are effected by the Word, in which all things are correspondences. The angels rejoiced exceedingly
to hear that it has pleased the Lord to reveal this great arcanum, which had lain so deeply
hid for some thousands of years; and they said it was done in order that the Christian church,
which is founded on the Word, and is now at its end, may again revive and draw breath through
heaven from the Lord. They inquired whether by that science it is at this day discovered what
are signified by baptism and the holy supper, which have heretofore given birth to so many
various conjectures about their true meaning. I replied, that it is. 3. I said further, that
a revelation has been made at this day by the Lord concerning the life of man after death?
The angels said, "What concerning the life after death? Who does not know that a man lives
after death?" I replied, "They know it, and they do not know it: they say that it is not the
man that lives after death, but his soul, and that this lives a spirit; and the idea they have
of a spirit is as of wind or ether, and that it does not live a man till after the day of the
last judgement, at which time the corporeal parts, which had been left in the world, will be
recollected and again fitted together into a body, notwithstanding their having been eaten
by worms, mice, and fish; and that thus men will rise again." The angels said, "What a notion
is this! Who does not know that a man lives a man after death, with this difference alone,
that he then lives a spiritual man, and that a spiritual man sees a spiritual man, as a material
man sees a material man, and that they know no distinction, except that they are in a more
perfect state?" 4. The angels inquired, "What do they know concerning our world, and concerning
heaven and hell?" I said, "Nothing at all; but at this day it has been revealed by the Lord,
what is the nature and quality of the world in which angels and spirits live, thus what is
the quality of heaven and of hell; and further, that angels and spirits are in conjunction
with men; besides many wonderful things respecting them." The angels were glad to hear that
it has pleased the Lord to reveal such things, that men may no longer be in doubt through ignorance
respecting their immortality. 5. I further said, that at this day it has been revealed from
the Lord, that in your world there is a sun, different from that of our world, and that the
sun of your world is pure love, and the sun of our world is pure fire; and that on this account,
whatever proceeds from your sun, since it is pure love, partakes of life, and whatever proceeds
from our sun, since it is pure fire, does not partake of life; and that hence is the difference
between spiritual and natural, which difference, heretofore unknown, has been also revealed:
hereby also is made known the source of the light which enlightens the human understanding
with wisdom, and the source of the heat which kindles the human will with heat. 6. It has been
further discovered, that there are three degrees of life, and that hence there are three heavens;
and that the human mind is distinguished into those degrees, and that hence man (homo) corresponds
to the three heavens. The angels said, "Did not they know this heretofore?" I answered, "They
were acquainted with a distinction of degrees in relation to greater and less, but not in relation
to prior and posterior." 7. The angels inquired whether any other things have been revealed?
I replied "Several; namely, concerning the last judgement: concerning the Lord, that he is
God of heaven and earth; that God is one both in person and essence, in whom there is a divine
trinity; and that he is the Lord: also concerning the new church to be established by him,
and concerning the doctrine of that church; concerning the sanctity of the sacred scripture;
that the Apocalypse also has been revealed, which could not be revealed even as to a single
verse except by the Lord; moreover concerning the inhabitants of the planets, and the earths
in the universe; besides several memorable and wonderful relations from the spiritual world,
whereby several things relating to wisdom have been revealed from heaven."

533. The angels were exceedingly rejoiced at this information; but they perceived that I was
sorrowful, and asked the cause of my sorrow. I said, because the above arcana, at this day
revealed by the Lord, although in excellence and worth exceeding all the knowledges heretofore
published, are yet considered on earth as of no value. The angels wondered at this, and besought
the Lord that they might be allowed to look down into the world: they did so, and lo! mere
darkness was therein: and they were told, that those arcana should be written on a paper, which
should be let down to the earth, and they would see a prodigy: and it was done so; and lo!
the paper on which those arcana were written, was let down from heaven, and in its progress,
while it was in the world of spirits, it shone as a bright star; but when it descended into
the natural world, the light disappeared, and it was darkened in the degree to which it fell:
and while it was let down by the angels in companies consisting of men of learning and erudition,
both clergy and laity, there was heard a murmur from many, in which were these expressions,
"What have we here? Is it any thing or nothing? What matters it whether we know these things
or not? Are they not mere creatures of the brain?" And it appeared as if some of them took
the paper and folded it, rolling and unrolling it with their fingers, that they might deface
the writing; and it appeared as if some tore it in pieces, and some were desirous to trample
it under their feet: but they were prevented by the Lord from proceeding to such enormity,
and charge was given to the angels to draw it back and secure it: and as the angels were affected
with sadness, and thought with themselves how long this was to be the case, it was said, For
a time, and times, and half a time, Rev. xii. 14.

534. After this I conversed with the angels, informing them that somewhat further is revealed
in the world by the Lord. They asked, "What?" I said, "Concerning love truly conjugial and
its heavenly delights." The angels said, "Who does not know that the delights of conjugial
love exceed those of all other loves? and who cannot see, that into some love are collected
all the blessednesses, satisfactions, and delights, which can possibly be conferred by the
Lord, and that the receptacle thereof is love truly conjugial, which is capable of receiving
and perceiving them fully and sensibly?" I replied, "They do not know this, because they have
not come to the Lord, and lived according to his precepts, by shunning evils as sins and doing
goods; and love truly conjugial with its delights is solely from the Lord, and is given to
those who live according to his precepts; thus it is given to those who are received into the
Lord's new church, which is meant in the Apocalypse by the New Jerusalem." To this I added,
"I am in doubt whether in the world at this day they are willing to believe that this love
in itself is a spiritual love, and hence grounded in religion, because they entertain only
a corporeal idea respecting it." Then they said to me, "Write respecting it, and follow revelation;
and afterwards the book written respecting it shall be sent down from us out of heaven, and
we shall see whether the things contained in it are received; and at the same time whether
they are willing to acknowledge, that that love is according to the state of religion with
man, spiritual with the spiritual, natural with the natural, and merely carnal with adulterers."

535. After this I heard an outrageous murmur from below, and at the same time these words,
"Do miracles; and we will believe you." And I asked, "Are not the things above-mentioned miracles?"
Answer was made, "They are not." I again asked, "What miracles then do you mean?" And it was
said, "Disclose and reveal things to come; and we will have faith." But I replied, "Such disclosures
and revelation are not granted from heaven; since in proportion as a man knows things to come,
in the same proportion his reason and understanding, together with his wisdom and prudence,
fall into an indolence of inexertion, grow torpid, and decay." Again I asked, "What other miracles
shall I do?" And a cry was made, "Do such miracles as Moses did in Egypt." To this I answered,
"Possibly you may harden your hearts against them as Pharaoh and the Egyptians did." And reply
was made, "We will not." But again I said, "Assure me of a certainty, that you will not dance
about a golden calf and adore it, as the posterity of Jacob did within a month after they had
seen the whole Mount Sinai on fire, and heard Jehovah himself speaking out of the fire, thus
after the greatest of all miracles;" (a golden calf in the spiritual sense denotes the pleasure
of the flesh;) and reply was made from below, "We will not be like the posterity of Jacob."
But at that instant I heard it said to them from heaven, "If ye believe not Moses and the prophets,--that
is, the Word of the Lord, ye will not believe from miracles, any more than the sons of Jacob
did in the wilderness, nor any more than they believed when they saw with their own eyes the
miracles done by the Lord himself, while he was in the world."

GENERAL INDEX.

PART THE FIRST.

PRELIMINARY RELATIONS RESPECTING THE JOYS OF HEAVEN AND NUPTIALS THERE, n. 1-26.

ON MARRIAGES IN HEAVEN, n. 27-41.

A man lives a man after death, n. 28-31. In this case a male is a male, and a female a female,
n. 32, 33. Every one's peculiar love remains with him after death, n. 34-36. These things fully
confirmed by ocular demonstration, n. 39. Consequently there are marriages in heaven, n. 40.
Spiritual nuptials are to be understood by the Lord's words, "After the resurrection they are
not given in marriage," n. 41.

ON THE STATE OF MARRIED PARTNERS AFTER DEATH, n. 45-54. Conjugial love in like manner remains
such as it has been anteriorly; that is, such as it had been in the man's interior will and
thought in the world, n. 48. In this case there is given to the man a suitable wife, and to
the woman a suitable husband, n. 50. This is the case with those who go to heaven; but it is
otherwise with those who go to hell, n. 53, 54.

ON LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, n. 57-73. This love originates in the marriage of good and truth,
n. 60, 61. There is a correspondence of this love with the marriage of the Lord and the church,
n. 62, 63. It is also the foundation love of all celestial and spiritual loves, and thence
of all natural loves, n. 65-67. Into this love are collected all joys and delights from first
to last, n. 68, 69. There is neither solitary good nor solitary truth; but in all cases they
are conjoined, n. 87. With man conjugial love is in the love of the sex as a gem in its matrix,
n. 97.

ON THE MARRIAGE OF THE LORD AND THE CHURCH, AND ITS CORRESPONDENCE, n. 116-131. The Lord is
also called a Father, and the church, a mother, n. 118, 119. The Word is the medium of conjunction,
because it is from the Lord, and thereby is the Lord, n. 128. The church is from the Lord,
and exists with those who come to him and live according to his precepts, n. 129. Conjugial
love is according to the state of the church, because it is according to the state of wisdom
with man, n. 130. And as the church is from the Lord, conjugial love is also from him, n. 131.

ON THE CHASTE PRINCIPLE AND THE NON-CHASTE, n. 138-156. The Christian conjugial principle alone
is chaste, n. 142. Love truly conjugial is essential chastity, n. 143. All the delights of
love truly conjugial, even the ultimate, are chaste, n. 144. Chastity cannot be predicated
of infants, or of boys and girls, or of young men and maidens before they feel in themselves
a love of the sex, n. 150. Chastity cannot be predicated of eunuchs so made, n. 151. Chastity
cannot be predicated of those who abstain from adulteries only for various external reasons,
n. 153. Chastity cannot be predicated of those who believe marriages to be unchaste, n. 154.
A state of marriage is to be preferred to a state of celibacy, n. 156.

From creation there is implanted in each sex a faculty and inclination, whereby they are able
and willing to be joined together as it were into a one, n. 157. Conjugial love conjoins two
souls, and thence two minds, into a one, n. 158. The will of the wife conjoins itself with
the understanding of the man, and thence the understanding of the man with the will of the
wife, n. 159. The wife conjoins herself to the man by applications to the desires of his will,
n. 170. The wife is conjoined to her husband by the sphere of her life flowing from the love
of him, n. 171. Thus the wife receives in herself the image of her husband, and thence perceives,
sees, and is sensible of his affections, n. 173. These duties also, according to mutual aid,
conjoin the two into a one, and at the same time constitute one house, n. 176. Married partners,
according to these conjunctions, become one man more and more, n. 177. Those who are principled
in love truly conjugial, are sensible of their being a united man, as it were one flesh, n.
178. These things can only exist in the marriage of one man with one wife, n. 181. In like
manner a man's internal form, which is that of his spirit, is continually changing n. 186.
With both men and women, the states of life before marriage are different from what they are
afterwards, n. 190. Marriage also induces other forms in the souls and minds of married partners,
n. 192. The woman is actually formed into a wife, according to the description in the book
of creation, n. 193. This formation on the part of the wife, is effected by the conjunction
of her own will with the internal will of the man, n. 195. The end herein is, that the will
of both may become one, and that thus both may become one man, n. 196. This formation (on the
part of the wife) is effected by an appropriation of the affections of the husband, n. 197.
Thus a maiden is formed into a wife, and a youth into a husband, n. 199. Thus also their forms
are successively perfected and ennobled from within, n. 201. The reason of this is, because
the soul of the offspring is from the father, and its clothing from the mother, n. 206.

UNIVERSALS RESPECTING MARRIAGES, n. 209-230.

The sense proper to conjugial love is the sense of touch, n. 210. With those who are in love
truly conjugial, the faculty of growing wise increases; but with those who are not, it decreases,
n. 211, 212. With those who are in love truly conjugial, the happiness of dwelling together
increases; but with those who are not, it decreases, n. 213. Those who are in love truly conjugial,
in marriage have respect to what is eternal; but with those who are not, the case is reversed,
n. 216. Wives love the bonds of marriage, if the men do, n. 217. Wives are in no excitation
as men are; but they have a state of preparation for reception, n. 219. Determination is in
the good pleasure of the husband, n. 221. The conjugial sphere flows from the Lord through
heaven into everything in the universe, even to its ultimates, n. 222. This sphere is received
by the female sex, and through that is transferred to the male sex, n. 223. Where there is
love truly conjugial, this sphere is received by the wife, and only through her by the husband,
n. 224. Where there is love not conjugial, this sphere is received indeed by the wife, but
not by the husband through her, n. 225. Love truly conjugial may exist with one of the married
partners, and not at the same time with the other, n. 226. There are various similitudes and
dissimilitudes, both internal and external, with married partners, n. 227. Various similitudes
can be conjoined, but not with dissimilitudes, n. 228. The Lord provides similitudes for those
who desire love truly conjugial, and if not on earth he yet provides them in heaven, n. 229.
A man, according to the deficiency and loss of conjugial love, approaches to the nature of
a beast, n. 230.

ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESS, SEPARATION, AND DIVORCE IN MARRIAGES, n. 234-260. There are several
successive causes of cold, some internal, some external, and some accidental, n. 237. Internal
causes of cold are from religion, n. 238, 239. Of internal causes of cold the first is the
rejection of religion by each of the parties, n. 240. Of internal causes of cold the second
is that one of the parties has religion and not the other, n. 241. Of internal causes of cold
the third is, that one of the parties is of one religion and the other of another, n. 242.
Of internal causes of cold the fourth is, the falsity of the religion, n. 243. With many, the
above-mentioned are causes of internal cold, but not at the same time of external, n. 244,
245. There are also several external causes of cold, the first of which is dissimilitude of
minds and manner, n. 246. Of external causes of cold the third is, a striving for preeminence
between married partners, n. 248. Of external causes of cold the fifth is, inequality of external
rank and condition, n. 250. There are also causes of separation, n. 251. The first cause of
legitimate separation is a vitiated state of mind, n. 252. The second cause of legitimate separation
is a vitiated state of body, n. 253. The third cause of legitimate separation is impotence
before marriage, n. 254. Adultery is the cause of divorce, n. 255. There are also several accidental
causes of cold; the first of which is, that enjoyment is common (or cheap), because continually
allowed, n. 256.

ON THE CAUSES OF APPARENT LOVE, FRIENDSHIP, AND FAVOR IN MARRIAGES, n. 271-292. It is the external
affections, according to which matrimony is generally contracted in the world, n. 274. Nevertheless
those bonds must continue in the world till the decease of one of the parties, n. 276. Thence
come apparent love, friendship, and favor between married partners, n. 278. These appearances
are assumed conjugial semblances, and they are commendable, because useful and necessary, n.
279. These assumed conjugial semblances, in the case of a spiritual man conjoined to a natural,
are founded in justice and judgement, n. 280. They are for the sake of amendment and accommodation,
n. 282. They are for the sake of unanimity in the care of infants and the education of children,
n. 284. They are for the sake of peace in the house, n. 285. They are for the sake of reputation
out of the house, n. 286. They are for the sake of having blemishes excused, and thereby of
avoiding disgrace, n. 288. They are for the sake of reconciliations, n. 289.

ON BETROTHINGS AND NUPTIALS, n. 295-314.

The right of choice belongs to the man, and not to the woman, n. 296. The woman ought to consult
her parents, or those who are in the place of parents, and then deliberate with herself before
she consents, n. 298, 299. After a declaration of consent, pledges are to be given, n. 300.
Consent is to be secured and established by solemn betrothing, n. 301. By betrothing, each
party is prepared for conjugial love, n. 302. This is the case with those who think chastely
of marriages; but it is otherwise with those who think unchastely of them, n. 304. Within the
time of betrothing it is not allowable to be connected corporeally, n. 305. When the time of
betrothing is completed, the nuptials ought to take place, n. 306. Marriage is to be consecrated
by a priest, n. 308. The nuptials are to be celebrated with festivity, n. 309. Such is the
order of conjugial love with its modes, from its first heat to its first torch, n. 311. There
are successive and simultaneous order, and the latter is from the former and according to it,
n. 314.

ON REPEATED MARRIAGES, n. 317-355. After the death of a married partner, again to contract
wedlock, depends also on the state of marriage in which the parties had lived, n. 319. With
those who have not been in love truly conjugial, there is no obstacle or hindrance to their
again contracting wedlock, n. 320. The state of a marriage of a youth with a maiden differs
from that of a youth with a widow, n. 322. Also the state of marriage of a widower with a maiden
differs from that of a widower with a widow, n. 323. The varieties and diversities of these
marriages, as to love and its attributes, are innumerable, n. 324. The state of a widow is
more grievous that that of a widower n. 325.

ON POLYGAMY, n. 332-352. All those things can only exist from the Lord alone; and they do not
exist with any but those who come to him alone, and live according to his commandments, n.
336. Consequently love truly conjugial with its felicities can only exist with those who are
of the Christian church, n. 337. Polygamy is lasciviousness, n. 345. Conjugial chastity, purity,
and sanctity, cannot exist with polygamists, n. 346. A polygamist, so long as he remains such,
cannot become spiritual, n. 347. Polygamy is not sin with those who live in it from a religious
notion, n. 348. Polygamy is not sin with those who are in ignorance respecting the Lord, n.
349, 350. But none either of the latter or of the former can be associated with the angels
in the Christian heavens, n. 352.

ON JEALOUSY, n. 357-379.

Zeal considered in itself is like the ardent fire of love, n. 358. The zeal of conjugial love
is called jealousy, n. 367. There is spiritual jealousy with monogamists, and natural with
polygamists, n. 369, 370. In some instances there is not any jealousy; and this also from various
causes, n. 376. There is a jealousy also in regard to concubines, but not such as in regard
to wives, n. 377. Jealousy likewise exists among beasts and birds, n. 378. The jealousy of
men and husbands is different from that of women and wives, n. 379.

ON THE CONJUNCTION OF CONJUGIAL LOVE WITH THE LOVE OF INFANTS, n. 385-414. This sphere is also
a sphere of innocence and peace (from the Lord,) n. 394. The sphere of innocence flows into
infants, and through them into the parents, and affects them, n. 395. It also flows into the
souls of the parents, and unites with the same sphere with the infants; and it is principally
insinuated by means of the touch, n. 396, 397. The love of infants descends, and does not ascend,
n. 402. Wives have one state of love before conception, and another state after, even to the
birth, n. 403. The love of infants and children is different with spiritual married partners
from what it is with natural, n. 405-407. With the spiritual, that love is from what is interior
or prior, but with the natural, from what is exterior or posterior, n. 408. The love of infants
remains after death, especially with women, n. 410.

PART THE SECOND.

PRELIMINARY NOTE BY THE EDITOR.

ON THE OPPOSITION OF ADULTEROUS LOVE AND CONJUGIAL LOVE, n. 423-443.

It is not known what adulterous love is, unless it be known what conjugial love is, n. 424.
Adulterous love is opposed to conjugial love, n. 425. Hence adulterous love is opposed to conjugial
love as hell is to heaven, n. 429. In the church, the impurity and the purity are similarly
circumstanced, n. 431. There are a sphere of adulterous love and a sphere of conjugial love,
n. 434. Each sphere brings with it delights, n. 439.

ON FORNICATION, n. 444*-460.

Fornication is of the love of the sex, n. 445. Fornication is of the natural man, n. 447. Fornication
is lust, but not the lust of adultery, n. 448, 449. With some men, the love of the sex cannot
without hurt be totally checked from going forth into fornication, n. 450. Therefore in populous
cities public stews are tolerated, n. 451. Fornication is light, so far as it looks to conjugial
love, and gives this love the preference, n. 452. The lust of fornication is grievous, so far
as it looks to adultery, n. 453. The lust of fornication is more grievous as it verges to the
desire of varieties and of defloration, n. 454. Care is to be taken, lest by immoderate and
inordinate fornications conjugial love be destroyed, n. 456.

ON CONCUBINAGE, n. 462-476.

There are two kinds of concubinage, which differ exceedingly from each other, the one conjointly
with a wife, the other apart from a wife, n. 463. Concubinage conjointly with a wife, is altogether
unlawful for Christians, and detestable, n. 464. It is polygamy, which has been condemned,
and is to be condemned by the Christian world, n. 465. Concubinage apart from a wife, when
it is engaged in from causes legitimate, just, and truly excusatory, is not unlawful, n. 467.
The legitimate causes of this concubinage are the legitimate causes of divorce, while the wife
is nevertheless retained at home, n. 468, 469. The just causes of this concubinage are the
just causes of separation from the bed, n. 470. Of the excusatory causes of this concubinage
some are real and some not, n. 471. The really excusatory causes are such as are grounded in
what is just, n. 472, 473. The excusatory causes which are not real are such as are not grounded
in what is just, although in the appearance of what is just, n. 474. While this concubinage
continues, actual connection with a wife is not allowable, n. 476.

ON ADULTERIES AND THEIR GENERA AND DEGREES, n. 478-499.

There are three genera of adulteries,--simple, duplicate, and triplicate, n. 479. Duplicate
adultery is that of a husband with another's wife, or of a wife with another's husband, n.
482, 483. Triplicate adultery is with relations by blood, n. 484. There are four degrees of
adulteries, according to which they have their predications, their charges of blame, and after
death their imputation, n. 485. In such cases adulteries are mild, n. 487. Adulteries committed
by such persons are imputatory, according as the understanding afterwards favors them or not,
n. 489. The adulteries committed by such persons are grievous, and are imputed to them according
to confirmations, n. 491. Adulteries of the third and fourth degree are evils of sin, according
to the quantity and quality of understanding and will in them, whether they are actually committed
or not, n. 494. And this to such a degree, that at length they reject from themselves all things
of the church and of religion, n. 497. Nevertheless they have the powers of human rationality
like other men, n. 498. But they use that rationality while they are in externals, but abuse
it while they are in externals, n. 499.

ON THE LUST OF DEFLORATION, n. 501-505.

The state of a virgin or undeflowered woman before and after marriage, n. 502. Virginity is
the crown of chastity and the certificate of conjugial love, n. 503. Defloration, without a
view to marriage as an end, is the villany of a robber, n. 504.

ON THE LUST OF VARIETIES, n. 506-510.

By the lust of varieties is meant the entirely dissolute lust of adultery, n. 507. That lust
is love, and at the same time loathing, in regard to the sex, n. 508.

ON THE LUST OF VIOLATION, n. 511, 512.

ON THE LUST OF SEDUCING INNOCENCIES, n. 513, 514.

ON THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ADULTERIES WITH THE VIOLATION OF SPIRITUAL MARRIAGE, n. 515-520.

ON THE IMPUTATION OF EACH LOVE, ADULTEROUS AND CONJUGIAL, n. 523-531.

The evil in which every one is principled, is imputed to him after death; and so also the good,
n. 524. The transference of the good of one person into another is impossible, n. 525. Imputation,
if by it is meant such transference, is a frivolous term, n. 526. Evil or good is imputed to
every one according to the quality of his will and of his understanding, n. 527-529. Thus adulterous
love is imputed to every one, n. 530. Thus also conjugial love is imputed to every one, n. 531.

INDEX TO THE MEMORABLE RELATIONS.

Conjugial love seen in its form with two conjugial partners, who were conveyed down from heaven
in a chariot, n. 42, 43.

Three novitiates from the world receive information respecting marriages in heaven, n. 44.

On the chaste love of the sex, n. 55.

On the temple of wisdom, where the causes of beauty in the female sex are discussed by wise
ones, n. 56.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the golden age, n. 75.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the silver age, n. 76.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the copper age, n. 77.

On conjugial love with those who lived in the iron age, n. 78.

On conjugial love with those who lived after those ages, n. 79, 80.

On the glorification of the Lord by the angels in the heavens, on account of his advent, and
of conjugial love, which is to be restored at that time, n. 81.

On the precepts of the New Church, n. 82.

On the origin of conjugial love, and of its virtue or potency, discussed by an assembly of
the wise from Europe, n. 103, 104.

On a paper let down from heaven to the earth, on which was written, The marriage of good and
truth, n. 115.

What the image and likeness of God is, and what the tree of life, and the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil, n. 132-136.

Two angels out of the third heaven give information respecting conjugial love there, n. 137.

On the ancients in Greece, who inquired of strangers, What news from the earth? Also, on men
found in the woods, n. 151*-154*.

On the golden shower and hall, where the wives said various things respecting conjugial love,
n. 155*.

The opinion of the ancient sophi in Greece respecting the life of men after death, n. 182.

On the nuptial garden called Adramandoni, where there was a conversation respecting the influx
of conjugial love, n. 183.

A declaration by the ancient sophi in Greece respecting employments in heaven, n. 207.

On the golden shower and hall, where the wives again conversed respecting conjugial love, n. 208.

On the judges who were influenced by friendship, of whom it was exclaimed, O how just! n. 231.

On the reasoners, of whom it was exclaimed, O how learned! n. 232.

On the confirmatory, of whom it was exclaimed, O how wise! n. 233.

On those who are in the love of ruling from the love of self, n. 261-266.

On those who are in the love of possessing all things of the world, n. 267, 268.

On Lucifer, n. 269.

On conjugial cold, n. 270.

On the seven wives sitting on a bed of roses, who said various things respecting conjugial
love, n. 293.

Observations by the same wives on the prudence of women, n. 294.

A discussion what the soul is, and what is its quality, n. 315.

On the garden, where there was a conversation respecting the divine providence in regard to
marriages, n. 316.

On the distinction between what is spiritual and what is natural, n. 326-329.

Discussions, whether a woman who loves herself for her beauty, loves her husband; and whether
a man who loves himself for his intelligence, loves his wife, n. 330, 331.

On self-prudence, n. 353.

On the perpetual faculty of loving a wife in heaven, n. 355, 356.

A discussion, whether nature is of life, or life of nature; also respecting the centre and
expanse of life and nature, n. 380.

Orators delivering their sentiments on the origin of beauty in the female sex, n. 381-384.

That all things which exist and take place in the natural world, are from the Lord through
the spiritual world, n. 415-422.

On the angels who were ignorant of the nature and meaning of adultery, n. 444.

On delight, which is the universal of heaven and hell, n. 461.

On an adulterer who was taken up into heaven, and there saw things inverted n. 477.

On three priests who were accused by adulterers, n. 500.

That determined and confirmed adulterers do not acknowledge anything of heaven and the church,
n. 521, 522.

On the new things revealed by the Lord, n. 532.

INDEX TO CONJUGIAL LOVE.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Numbers refer to the Paragraphs, and not to the Pages.

       *       *       *       *       *

ABOMINATION OF DESOLATION. Matt. xxiv. 15, signifies the falsification and deprivation of all
truth, 80.

ABSENCE in the spiritual world, its cause, 171.

ACTION.--In all conjunction by love there must be action, reception, and reaction, 293. From
the will, which in itself is spiritual, actions flow, 220.

ACTIVITY is one of the moral virtues which respect life, and enter into it, 164. The activity
of love makes a sense of delight, 461. The influx of Love and wisdom from the Lord is the essential
activity from which comes all delight, 461. From conjugial love, as from a fountain, issue
the activities and alacrities of life, 249.

ACTORS.--In heaven, out of the cities, are exhibited stage entertainments, wherein the actors
represent the various virtues and graces of moral life, 17, 79.

ACTUALLY, 66, 98, 178, &c.

Obs.--This expression is used to distinguish Actualiter from Realiter, of which the author
also makes use; thus between actually and really, there is the same distinction as between
actual taken in a philosophical sense, and real.

ACUTION.--The spiritual purification of conjugial love may be compared with the purification
of natural spirits effected by chemists, and called acution, 145.

ADAM.--In what his sin consisted, 444. Error of those who believe that Adam was wise and did
good from himself, and that this was his state of integrity, 135. The evil in which each man
is born, is not derived hereditarily from Adam, but from his parents, 525. Adam and man are
one expression in the Hebrew tongue, 156*.

ADJUNCTION.--The union of the soul and mind of one married partner to those of the other, is
an actual adjunction, and cannot possibly be dissolved, 321. It may be called spiritual cohabitation,
which takes place with married partners who love each other tenderly, however remote their
bodies may be from each other, 158.

ADMINISTRATIONS in the spiritual world, 207. The discharge of them is attended with delight, 207.

ADMINISTRATORS.--In the spiritual world there are administrators, 207.

ADORATIONS.--Why the ancients in their adorations turned their faces to the rising sun, 342.

ADRAMANDONI is the name of a garden in the spiritual world; this word signifies the delight
of conjugial love, 183.

ADULTERERS.--As soon as a man actually becomes an adulterer, heaven is closed to him, 500.
Adulterers become more and more not men, 432. There are four kinds of adulterers:--1st, Adulterers
from a purposed principle are those who are so from the lust of the will; 2d, adulterers from
a confirmed principle are those who are so from the persuasion of the understanding; 3d, adulterers
from a deliberate principle are those who are so from the allurements of the senses; 4th, adulterers
from a non-deliberate principle are those who are not in the faculty or not in the liberty
of consulting the understanding, 432. Those of the two former kinds become more and more not
men, but the two latter kinds become men as they recede from those errors, 432. Reasonings
of adulterers, 500. Every unclean principle of hell is from adulterers, 500, 477. Whoever is
in spiritual adultery is also in natural adultery, 520.

ADULTERERS from a deliberate principle and from a non-deliberate principle, 432.

ADULTERY, by, is meant scortation opposite to marriage, 480. The horrible nature of adultery,
483. Spiritual adultery is the connection of evil and the false, 520. Adulteries are the complex
of all evils, 356. Why hell in the total is called adultery, 520. There are three genera of
adulteries, simple, duplicate, and triplicate, 478, 484. There are four degrees of adulteries,
according to which they have their predications, their charges of blame, and after death, their
imputations, 485-499:--1st, Adulteries of ignorance, &c., 486, 487; 2d, adulteries of lust,
488, 489; 3d, adulteries of the reason or understanding, &e., 490, 491; 4th, adulteries of
the will, 492, 493. The distinction between adulteries of the will and those of the understanding,
490. The adultery of the reason is less grievous than the adultery of the will, 490.--Accessories
of adultery and aggravations of it, 454. Adultery is the cause of divorce, 255. Representative
of adultery in its business, 521.

AFFECT.

Obs.--This word signifies to impress with affection either good or bad.

AFFECTIONS which are merely derivations of the love, form the will, and make and compose it,
197. Every affection of love belongs to the will, for what a man loves, that he also wills,
196. Every affection has its delight, 272. Affections, with the thoughts thence derived, appertain
to the mind, and sensations, with the pleasures thence derived, appertain to the body, 273.
In the natural world, almost all are capable of being joined together as to external affections,
but not as to internal affections, if these disagree and appear, 272. The external affections
by death follow the body, and are entombed with it, those only remaining which cohere with
internal principles, 320. Women were created by the Lord affections of the wisdom of men, 56.
Their affection of wisdom is essential beauty, 56.

AFFLICTION, great, Matt. xxiv. 21, signifies the state of the church infested by evils and
falses, 80.

AFFLUX, 293.

Obs.--Afflux is that which flows upon or towards, and remains generally in the external, without
penetrating interiorly, A.C., n. 7955. Efflux is that which flows from, and is generally predicated
of that which proceeds from below upwards. Influx is that which flows into, or which penetrates
interiorly, provided it meets with no obstacle; it is generally used when speaking of that
which comes from above, thus from heaven, that is, from the Lord through heaven.

AFRICANS more intelligent than the learned of Europe, 114. Unequal ages induce coldness in
marriage, 250. In the heavens there is no inequality of age, all there are in one flower of
youth, and continue therein to eternity, 250. Golden age, 75. Silver age or period, 76. Copper
age, 77. Iron age, 78. Age of iron mixed with miry clay, 79. Age of gold, 42, 75; of silver,
76; of copper, 77; of iron, 78; of iron mixed with clay, 79. The ages of gold, silver, and
copper are anterior to the time of which we have any historical records, 73.

AID, mutual, of husband and wife, 176.

ALACRITY is one of those moral virtues which have respect to life, and enter into it, 164.

ALCOHOL.--Wisdom purified may be compared with alcohol, which is a spirit highly rectified, 145.

ALCORAN, 342.

ALPHA, the, and the Omega.--Why the Lord is so called, 326.

ALPHABET in the spiritual world, each letter of it is significative, 326.

AMBASSADOR in the spiritual world discussing with two priests on the subject of human prudence,
354.

ANCIENTS.--Of marriages among the ancients, and the most ancient, 75, 77. The most ancient
people in this world did not acknowledge any other wisdom than the wisdom of life; but the
ancient people acknowledged the wisdom of reason as wisdom, 130. Precepts concerning marriages
left by the ancient people to their posterity, 77. Angels are men; their form is the human
form, 30. They appear to man when the eyes of his spirit are opened, 30. All the angels are
affections of love in the human form, 42. Angels who are loves, and thence wisdoms, are called
celestial, and with them conjugial love is celestial; angels who are wisdoms, and thence loves,
are called spiritual, and similar thereto is their conjugial principle, 64. Every angel has
conjugial love with its virtue, ability, and delights, according to his application to the
genuine use in which he is, 207. Every man has angels associated to him from the Lord, and
such is his conjunction with them, that if they were taken away, he would instantly fall to
pieces, 404.

ANGER.--Why it is attributed to the Lord, 366.

ANIMALS.--Wonderful things conspicuous in the productions of animals, 416. Every animal is
led by the love implanted in his science, as a blind person is led through the streets by a
dog, 96. See Beasts.

Obs.--These affections and inclinations constitute a sort of inferior mind.

ANTIPATHY.--In the spiritual world, antipathies are not only felt, but also appear in the face,
the discourse, and the gesture, 273. It is otherwise in the natural world, where antipathies
may be concealed, 272. Among certain married partners in the natural world, there is an antipathy
in their internals, and an apparent sympathy in their externals, 292. Antipathy derives its
origin from the opposition of spiritual spheres which emanate from subjects, 171.

ANTIQUITY.--Memorable things of antiquity seen in heaven amongst a nation that lived in the
copper age, 77.

AORTA, 315.

APES.--Of those in hell who appear like apes, 505.

APOCALYPSE.--A voice from heaven commanded Swedenborg to apply to the work begun in the Apocalypse,
and finish it within two years, 522, 532.

APOPLEXY.--Permanent infirmity, arising from apoplexy, a cause of separation, 253, 470.

APPEARANCE.--Spaces in the spiritual world are appearances; distances, also, and presences
are appearances, 158. The appearances of distances and presences there, are according to the
proximities, relationships, and affinities of love, 158. Those things which, from their origin,
are celestial and spiritual, are not in space, but in the appearances of space, 158.

Obs.--Those things which in the spiritual world are present to the sight of spirits and angels
are called appearances; those things are called appearances, because, corresponding to the
interiors of spirits and of angels, they vary according to the states of those interiors. There
are real appearances and appearances unreal; the unreal appearances are those which do not
correspond to the interiors. See Heaven and Hell.

APPROPRIATION of evil how it is effected, 489.

ARCANA of wisdom respecting conjugial love; it is important that they should be discovered,
43. Arcana of conjugial love concealed with wives, 166, 155*, 293. Arcanum relative to conception,
which takes place though the souls of two married partners be disjoined, 245. Arcanum respecting
the actual habitation of every man in some society, either of heaven or hell, 530. Arcana known
to the ancients, and at this day lost, 220. Arcana revealed, which exceed in excellence all
the arcana heretofore revealed since the beginning of the church, 532. These arcana are yet
reputed on earth as of no value, 533.

ARCHITECTONIC ART, the, is in its essential perfection in heaven, and hence are derived all
the rules of that art in the world, 12.

ARISTIPPUS, 151*.

ARISTOTLE, 151*.

ARMIES of the Lord Jehovah. Thus the most ancient people called themselves, 75.

ARTIFICERS in the spiritual world, 207: wonderful works which they execute there, 207.

AS FROM HIMSELF, 132, 134, 269, 340.

ASSAULT.--How love defends itself when assaulted, 361.

ASSES.--Of those who, in the spiritual world, appear at a distance like asses heavily laden,
232. Blazing ass upon which a pope was seated in hell, 265.

ASSOCIATE, to.--All in the heavens are associated according to affinities and relationships
of love, and have habitations accordingly, 50.

ASTRONOMY is one of those sciences by which an entrance is made into things rational, which
are the ground of rational wisdom, 163. Why the understanding of atheists, in spiritual light,
appeared open beneath but closed above, 421.

ATHENAEUM, city of, in the spiritual world, 151*, 182, 207. Sports of the Athenaeides, 207.
These games were spiritual exercises, 207.

ATMOSPHERES.--The world is distinguished into regions as to the atmospheres, the lowest of
which is the watery, the next above is the aerial, and still higher is the etherial, above
which there is also the highest, 188, The reason why the atmosphere appears of a golden color
in the heaven in which the love of uses reigns, 266.

AURA.--Thus the superior atmosphere is named, 145. See Atmospheres.

AUTHORESSES, learned.--Examination of their writings in the spiritual world in their presence, 175.

AVERSION between married partners arises from spiritual cold, 236. Whence arises aversion on
the part of the husband towards the wife, 305. Aversion between married partners arises from
a disunion of souls and a disjunction of minds, 236.

BACK, the.--The sphere which issues forth from man encompasses him on the back and on the breast,
lightly on the back, but more densely on the breast, 171, 224. The effect of this on married
partners, who are of different minds and discordant affections. 171.

BALANCE.--Love truly conjugal is like a balance in which the inclinations for iterated marriages
are made, 318. The mind is kept balancing to another marriage, according to the degree of love
in which it was principled in the former marriage, 318.

BANK of roses, 8, 294.

BATS, in the spiritual world, are correspondences and consequent appearances of the thoughts
of confirmators, 233. Those who only read the Word, and imbibe thence nothing of doctrine,
appear at a distance, in the spiritual world, like bears, 78.

BEASTS are born into natural loves, and thereby into sciences corresponding to them; still
they do not know, think, understand, and relish any sciences, but are led through them by their
loves, almost as blind persons are led through the streets by dogs, 134. Beasts are born into
all the sciences of their loves, thus into all that concerns their nourishment, habitation,
love of the sex, and the education of their young, 133. Difference between man and beasts,
133, 134. Every beast corresponds to some quality, either good or evil, 76. Beasts in the spiritual
world are representative, but in the natural world they are real, 133. Wild beasts in the spiritual
world are correspondences, and thus representatives of the lusts in which the spirits are,
79. The state of men compared with that of beasts, 151*. Men like beasts, found in the forests,
151*. Beast-men, 233.

BEAUTY.--The affection of wisdom is essential beauty, 56. Cause of beauty in the female sex,
56. Beauty in the spiritual world is the form of the love and manners, 330. Discussion on the
beauty of woman, 330. Origin of that beauty, 382-384. Ineffable beauty of a wife in the third
heaven, 42.

BEES.--Their wonderful instinct, 419.

BEHIND.--In the spiritual world, it is not allowed any one to stand behind another, and speak
to him, 444.

BEINGS.--The desire to continue in its form is implanted by creation in all living beings, 361.

BENEVOLENCE is one of those virtues which have respect to life and enter into it, 164.

BETROTHINGS, of, 295-314. Of betrothings in heaven, 20; 21.

BIRDS in the spiritual world are representative forms, 76. Every bird corresponds to some good
or bad quality, 76.

BIRDS OF PARADISE.--In heaven the forms under which the chaste delights of conjugial love are
presented to the view, are birds of paradise, &c., 430. A pair of birds of paradise represent
the middle region of conjugial love, 270.

BLESSEDNESS, 69, 180. Love receives its blessedness from communication by uses with others,
266. The infinity of all blessedness is in the Lord, 335.

BLESSING of marriages by the priests, 308

BLUE.--What the color blue signifies, 76.

BODY, the material, is composed of watery and earthy elements, and of aerial vapors thence
arising, 192. The material body of man is overcharged with lusts, which are in it as dregs
that precipitate themselves to the bottom when the must of wine is clarified, 272. Such are
the constituent substances of which the bodies of men in the world are composed, 272. See Mind.
Every thing which is done in the body is from a spiritual origin, 220. All things which are
done in the body by man flow in from his spirit, 310. Man when stripped of his body is in his
internal affections, which his body had before concealed, 273. What is in the spirit as derived
from the body does not long continue, but the love which is in the spirit and is derived from
the body does continue, 162, 191. Marriages of the spirit ought to precede marriages of the
body, 310.

BOND.--The internal or spiritual bond must keep the external or natural in its order and tenor,
320. Wives love the bonds of marriage if the men do, 217. Unless the external affections are
influenced by internal, which conjoin minds, the bonds of wedlock are loosed in the house, 275.

BOOKS.--In heaven, as in the world, there are books, 207.

BORN, to be.--Man is born in total ignorance, 134. He becomes rational in proportion as he
loves intelligence, and spiritual if he loves wisdom, 94, 102. Man is not born into any knowledge,
and if he does not receive instruction from others, is viler than a beast, 350. Man is born
without sciences, to the end that he may receive them all, and he is born into no love, to
the intent that he may come into all love, 134.

BREAST, the, of man signifies wisdom, 198. The sphere of the man's life encompasses him more
densely on the breast, but lightly on the back, 171, 224. See Back.

BRETHREN.--The Lord calls those brethren and sisters who are of his church, 120.

BRIDE.--The church in the Word is called the bride and wife, 117. Clothing of a bride in heaven,
20.

BRIDEGROOM.--The Lord in the Word is called the bridegroom and husband, 117. Clothing of a
bridegroom in heaven, 20.

BRIMSTONE signifies the love of what is false, 80. Lakes of fire and brimstone, 79, 80.

CABINET of antiquities in the spiritual world, 77.

CALF, a golden, signifies the pleasure of the flesh, 535.

CAP, a, signifies intelligence, 293. Turreted cap, 78.

CAROTID ARTERIES, 315.

CATS.--Comparison concerning them, 512.

CAUSE.--See End. To speak from causes is the speech of wisdom, 75. Causes of coldness, separations,
and divorces in marriages, 234-260. Causes of concubinage, 467-474.

CAUSES, the various, of legitimate separation, 253, 470.

CELEBRATION of the Lord from the Word, 81.

CELESTIAL.--In proportion as a man loves his wife he becomes celestial and internal, 77.

CELIBACY ought not to be preferred to marriage, 156. Those who live in celibacy, if they are
spiritual, are on the side of heaven, 54.

CENTRE of nature and of life, 380.

CERBERUS, 79.

CEREBELLUM, the, is beneath the hinder part of the head, and is designed for love and the goods
thereof, 444.

CEREBRUM, the, is beneath the anterior and upper part of the head, and is designed for wisdom
and the truths thereof, 444. The changes which take place in man's internal principles are
more perfectly continuous than those which take place in his external principles, 185. The
changes which take place in internal principles are changes of the state of the will as to
affections, and changes of the state of the understanding as to thoughts, 185. The changes
of these two faculties are perpetual with man from infancy even to the end of his life, and
afterwards to eternity, 185. These changes differ in the case of men and in the case of women, 187.

CHARGES of blame are made by a judge according to the law, 485. Difference between predications,
charges of blame, and imputations, 485.

CHARIOT, a, signifies the doctrine of truth, 76.

CHARITY is love, 10.

CHARITY AND FAITH.--Good has relation to charity, and truth to faith, 115, 124. To live well
is charity, and to believe well is faith, 233. Charity and faith are the life of God in man,
135. The Christian conjugial principle alone is chaste, 142. See Conjugial.

CHASTITY OF MARRIAGE, 138, and following. See Contents. The chastity of marriage exists by
a total abdication of what is opposed to it from a principle of religion, 147-149. The purity
of conjugial love is what is called chastity, 139. Love truly conjugial is essential chastity,
139, 143. Non-chastity is a removal of what is unchaste from what is chaste, 138.

CHEMISTS.--Spiritual purification compared to the natural purification of spirits effected
by chemists, 145.

CHILDREN born of parents who are principled in love truly conjugial, derive from their parents
the conjugial principle of good and truth, 202-205. Infants in heaven become men of stature
and comeliness, according to the increments of intelligence with them; it is otherwise with
infants on earth, 187. When they have attained the stature of young men of eighteen, and young
girls of fifteen years of age, in this world, then marriages are provided by the Lord for them,
444. Little children in the Word signify those who are in innocence, 414. The love of infants
corresponds to the defence of good and truth, 127.

CHRIST.--The kingdom of Christ, which is heaven, is a kingdom of uses, 7. To reign with Christ
signifies to be wise, and to perform uses, 7.

CHRISTIAN.--Love truly conjugial with its delights can only exist among those who are of the
Christian church, 337.

CHRYSALISES, 418.

CHURCH, the, is from the Lord, and exists with those who come to Him, and live according to
His precepts, 129. The church in general and in particular is a marriage of good and of truth,
115. The church with man is formed by the Lord by means of truths to which good is adjoined,
122-124. The church with its goods and truths can never exist but with those who live in love
truly conjugial with one wife, 76. The church is of both sexes, 21. The husband and wife together
are the church; with these the church first implanted in the man and by the man in the wife,
125. How the church is formed by the Lord with two married partners, and how conjugial love
is formed thereby, 68. The origin of the church and of conjugial love are in one place of abode,
238.

CIRCE, 521.

CIRCLE.--What circles round the head represent in the spiritual life, 269. Circle and increasing
progression of conjugial love, 78.

CIRCUMSTANCES and contingencies vary every thing, 485. The quality of every deed, and in general
the quality of every thing, depends upon circumstances, 487. Civil things with man reside beneath
spiritual things, and above natural things, 130.

CIVILITY is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and enter into it, 164. In
heaven they show each other every token of civility, 16.

CLAY mixed with iron, 79.

COHABIT, to.--When married partners have lived in love truly conjugial, the spirit of the deceased
cohabits continually with that of the survivor, and this even to the death of the latter, 321.
See Adjunction. Internal and external cohabitation, 322. With those who are principled in love
truly conjugial the happiness of cohabitation increases, but it decreases with those who are
not principled in conjugial love, 213. Spiritual cold in marriages is a disunion of souls,
236. Causes of cold in marriages, 237-250. Spiritual cold is the privation of spiritual heat,
285. Whence it arises, 235. Whence conjugial cold arises, 294. Every one who is insane in spiritual
things is cold towards his wife, and warm towards harlots, 294.

COLUMN.--Comparison of successive and simultaneous order to a column of steps, which, when
it subsides, becomes a body ushering in a plane, 314.

COMMUNICATIONS.--After death, married pairs enjoy similar communications with each other as
in the world, 51.

CONATUS is the very essence of motion, 215. From the endeavor of the two principles of good
and truth to join themselves together into one, conjugial love exists by derivation, 288.

CONCEPTIONS.--Between the disjoined souls of married partners there is effected conjunction
in a middle love, otherwise there would be no conceptions, 245.

CONCERTS of music and singing in the heavens, 17.

CONCLUDE, to, from an interior and prior principle, is to conclude from ends and causes to
effects, which is according to order; but to conclude from an exterior or posterior principle,
is to conclude from effects to causes and ends, which is contrary to order, 408.

CONCUBINAGE, 462-476. Difference between concubinage and pellicacy, 462. See Pellicacy. See
also 467, 476.

CONCUBINE, 462.

CONCUPISCENCE, concerning, 267. Every one is by truth interiorly in concupiscence, but by education
exteriorly in intelligence, 267. Interesting particulars concerning concupiscence not visionary
or fantastic, in which all men are born, 269. All the concupiscences of evil reside in the
lowest region of the mind, which is called the natural; but in the region above, which is called
the spiritual, there are not any concupiscences of evil, 305. In every thing that proceeds
from the natural man there is concupiscence, 448. Imputation of concupiscence, 455.

CONFIDENCE, full, is in conjugial love, and is derived from it, 180. Full confidence relates
to the heart, 180.

CONFINES OF HEAVEN.--Those who enter into extra-conjugial life are sent to their like, on the
confines of heaven, 155.

CONFIRM, to.--The understanding alone confirms, and when it confirms it engages the will to
its party, 491. Every one can confirm evil equally as well as good, in like manner what is
false as well as what is true. Every one may confirm himself in favor of the divine principle
or Being, by the visible things of nature, 416-419. Those who confirm themselves in favor of
a divine principle or Being, attend to the wonderful things which are conspicuous in the productions
both of vegetables and animals, 416. Those who had confirmed themselves in favor of nature,
by what is visible in this world, so as to become atheists, appeared in spiritual light with
the understanding open beneath, but closed above, 421.

CONFIRMATIONS are effected by reasonings, which the mind seizes for its use, deriving them
either from its superior region or its inferior, 491. Confirmations of falsities, so as to
make them appear like truths, are represented in the spiritual world under the forms of birds
of night, 233. See To Confirm.

CONFIRMATORS.--They are called such in the spiritual world who cannot at all see whether truth
be truth, but yet can make whatever they will to be truth, 233. Their fate in the other life,
233. The conjugial principle fills the universe from first principles to last, and from a man
even to a worm, 204. It is inscribed on the soul, to the end that soul may be propagated from
soul, 236. In every substance, even the smallest, there is a conjugial principle, 316. There
is implanted in every man from creation, and consequently from his birth, an internal conjugial
principle, and an external conjugial principle; man comes first into the latter, and as he
becomes spiritual he comes into the former. 148, 188. Children derive from their parents the
conjugial principle of good and truth, for it is that principle which flows into man from the
Lord, and constitutes his human life, 203. The conjugial human principle ever goes hand in
hand with religion, 80. The Christian conjugial principle alone is chaste, 142. By the Christian
conjugial principle is meant the marriage of one man with one wife, 142. The conjugial principle
is like a scale in which conjugial love is weighed, 531.

CONJUNCTION.--In every part, and even in every particular, there is a principle tending to
conjunction, 33, 37; it was implanted from creation, and thence remains perpetually, 37. The
conjunctive principle lies concealed in every part of the male, and in every part of the female,
37, 46.

CONJUNCTION of souls and minds by marriage, so that they are no longer two but one flesh, 156,
181. Spiritual conjunction cannot possibly be dissolved, 321. How there is a conjunction of
the created universe with its Creator, and by conjunction everlasting conservation, 85. There
is conjunction with the Lord by a life according to his commandments, 341. There is no conjunction
unless it be reciprocal, for conjunction on one part, and not on the other in its turn, is
dissolved of itself, 61.

CONNECTION, the connubial, of what is evil and false is the spiritual origin of adultery, 428,
520. It is the anti-church, 497. In hell all are in this conmibium, 520.

CONNUBIAL PRINCIPLE, the, of what is evil and false, is the opposite of the conjugial principle
of good and truth, 203. Beneath heaven there are only nuptial connections which are tied and
loosed, 192.

CONSCIENCE is a spiritual virtue which flows from love towards God, and love towards the neighbor,
164. See To Flow.

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS in regard to marriage, 271.

CONSECRATION of marriages, 308.

CONSENT constitutes marriage and initiates the spirit into conjugial love, 299. Consent against
the will, or extorted, does not initiate the spirit, 299.

CONSOCIATION, 45, 153*.

CONSUMMATION of the Age, signifies the last time or end of the church, 80.

CONTEMPT between married partners springs from disunion of souls, 236.

CONTINGENCIES and circumstances vary every thing, 485, 488.

CONTRARIES arise from an opposite principle in contrariety thereto, 425.

CONVICTION of the spirit of man, how it is effected, 295.

COPPER, the, signifies natural good, 77. The age or period of copper, 77.

CORPORA STRIATA, 315. Man is born corporeal as a worm, and he remains corporeal, unless he
learns to know, to understand, and to be wise from others, 133. By corporeal men are properly
meant those who love only themselves, placing their heart in the quest of honor, 496; they
immerse all things of the will, and consequently of the understanding in the body, and look
backward at themselves from others, and love only what is proper to themselves, 496. Corporeal
spirits, 495.

CORRESPONDENCES, 76, 127, 342, 532. Concerning the correspondence of the marriage of the Lord
and the church, 116. There is a correspondence of conjugial love with the marriage of the Lord
and the church, 62. Of the correspondence of the opposite with the violation of spiritual marriage,
515. See Science of Correspondences.

CORTICAL substance of the brain, 315.

COURAGE is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life and enter into it, 164.

COVENANT signifies conjunction, 128. As the Word is the medium of conjunction, it is therefore
called the old and the new covenant, 128. The covenant between Jehovah and the heavens, 75.

CRAB, the.--What it is to think as a crab walks, 295.

CREATE, to.--Why man was so created that whatever he wills, thinks, and does, appears to him
as in himself, and thereby from himself, 444. How man, created a form of God, could be changed
into a form of the devil, 153*.

CREATION cannot be from any other source than from divine love, by divine wisdom in divine
use, 183. All fructifications, propagations, and prolifications, are continuations of creation,
183. The creation returns to the Creator, through the angelic heaven which is composed of the
human race, 85. Creation of man for conjugial love, 66.

CROCODILES, in the spiritual world, represent the deceit and cunning of the inhabitants, 79.

CROWNS of flowers on the head, 183. The crown of chastity, 503.

CUPIDITIES, the, of the flesh are nothing but the conglomerated concupiscences of what is evil
and false, 440.

CUSTOMARY RITES, there are, which are merely formal, and there are others which at the same
time are also essential; among the latter are the nuptials, 306. Nuptials are to be reckoned
among essentials, 306.

DANES, the, 103, 111.

DARKNESS of the north signifies dulness of mind and ignorance of truth, 77.

DAUGHTERS-IN-LAW.--What daughters and sons-in-law signify in the Word, 120.

DAUGHTERS, in the Word, signifies the goods of the church, 120, 220.

DEATH.--Man after death is perfectly a man, yea, more perfectly a man than before in the world,
182.

DECALOGUE, why the, was promulgated by Jehovah God upon Mount Sinai with a stupendous miracle, 351.

DECLARATION, the, of love belongs to the men, 296. Heretofore the distinction of degrees in
relation to greater and less has been known, but not in relation to prior and posterior, 532.
There are three degrees of the natural man; the first degree is that properly meant by the
natural, the second the sensual, and the third the corporeal, 496. Adulteries change men into
these degenerate degrees, 496. Four degrees of adulteries, 485-494. Violations of the Word
and the church correspond to the prohibited degrees enumerated in Levit., ch. xviii., 519.

DELIGHTS, all, whatever, of which man has any sensation, are delights of his love, 68. By delights
love manifests itself, yea, exists and lives, 68. Delights follow use, and are also communicated
to man according to the love thereof, 68. The love of use derives its essence from love, and
its existence from wisdom. The love of use, which derives its origin from love by wisdom, is
the love and life of all celestial joys, 63. Delight is the all of life to all in heaven, and
to all in hell, 461. Delights are exalted in the same degree that love is exalted, and also
in the degree that the incident affections touch the ruling love more nearly, 68. Delights
of love truly conjugial, 68.

DELIGHTS, external, without internal have no soul, 8. The delight of the soul is derived from
love and wisdom proceeding from the Lord, 8. In conjugial love are collated all joys and delights
from first to last, 68, 69. The delights of conjugial love are the same with the delights of
wisdom, 293, 294. They proceed from the Lord, and now thence into the souls of men (homines),
and through their souls into their minds, and there into the interior affections and thoughts,
and thence into the body, 183, 69, 144, 155*, 193. As good is one with truth in spiritual marriage,
so wives desire to be one with their husband; and hence arise conjugial delights with them,
198. Paradisiacal delights, 8. The delights of conjugial love ascend to the highest heaven,
and in the way thither, and there, join themselves with the delights of all heavenly loves,
and thereby enter into their happiness, and endure forever, 294. Delirium in which those are,
in the spiritual world, who have been in the unrestrained love of self and the world, 267.

DEMOCRITUS, 182.

DEMOSTHENES, 182.

DEVILS.--Those are called devils who have lived wickedly, and thereby rejected all acknowledgment
of God from their hearts, 380. See Satans. With adulterers who are called devils, the will
is the principal agent, and with those who are called satans, the understanding is the principal
agent, 492. Devil of a frightful form, 263.

DIFFERENCE between the spiritual and the natural, 326-329.

DIGNITIES, concerning, in heaven, 7, 266, there they do not prefer dignity to use but the excellence
of use to dignity, 250.

DIOGENES, 182.

DISCIPLES, the twelve, together represented the church as to all its constituent principles,
119. Who they are who are called disciples of the Lord in the spiritual world, 261.

DISCORD between married partners arises from spiritual cold, 236.

DISCOURSE, man's, in itself is such as is the thought of his understanding which produces it,
527. Discourse itself is grounded in the thought of the understanding, and the tone of the
voice is grounded in the will affection, 140. Speech which is said to flow from the thought,
flows not from the thought, but from the affection through the thought, 36. Spiritual language
with representatives fully expresses what is intended to be said, and many things in a moment,
481. Conversation in the spiritual world may be heard by a distant person as if he were present,
521. Frequent discourse from the memory and from recollection, and not at the same time from
thought and intelligence, induces a kind of faith, 415.

DISSIMILITUDES in the spiritual world are separated, 273. See Likeness.

DISTANCES.--Spheres cause distances in the spiritual world, 171. Distances in the spiritual
world are appearances according to the states of mind, 78.

DISTINCTION, characteristic, of the woman and the man, 217.

DIVERSITIES.--Distinction between varieties and diversities. There are varieties between those
things which are of one genus, or of one species, also between the genera and species; but
there is a diversity between those things which are in the opposite principle, 324. In heaven
there is infinite variety, and in hell infinite diversity, 324.

DIVINE GOOD AND TRUTH.--The divine good is the esse of the divine substance, and the divine
truth is the existere of the divine substance, 115. The divine good and truth proceed as one
from the Lord, 87. The Lord God, the Creator, is essential divine good, and essential divine
truth, 84. The divine truth in the Word is united to the divine good, 129. All divine truth
in the heavens gives forth light, 77.

DIVINE ESSENCE, the, is composed of love, wisdom, and use, 183. Nothing but what is of the
divine essence can proceed from the Lord, and flow into the inmost principle of man, 183. There
is not any essence without a form, nor any form without an essence, 87. Every thing is divisible
in infinitum, 185.

DIVORCE, by, is meant the abolition of the conjugial covenant, and thence a plenary separation,
and after this an entire liberty to marry another wife, 468. The only cause of divorce is adultery,
according to the Lord's precept. Matt. xix. 9, 255, 468.

DOCTRINALS of the New Church in five precepts, 82.

DOGS in the spiritual world represent the lusts in which the inhabitants are principled, 79.
Who those are who appear like dogs of indulgences, 505.

DOVES, turtle.--In heaven, the appearances under which the chaste delights of conjugial love
are presented to the view, are turtle-doves, &c., 430. A pair of turtle-doves represents conjugial
love of the highest region, 270.

DRAGONS in the spiritual world represent the falsities and depraved inclinations of the inhabitants
to those things which appertain to idolatrous worship, 79.

DRESS of a bridegroom and bride during their marriage in heaven, 20, 21.

DRINK, to, water from the fountain signifies to be instructed concerning truths, and by truths
concerning goods, and thereby to grow wise, 182.

DRINKS.--In the heaven as well as in the world there are drinks, 6. See Food.

DRUNKENNESS, 252, 472.

DURA-MATER, 315.

DUTIES.--There are duties proper to the man, and duties proper to the wife, 174. In heaven
the right ear is the good of hearing, and the left the truth thereof, 316.

EARTH, the, or ground is the common mother of all vegetables, 206, 397; and of all minerals, 397.

EARTH, the lower, in the spiritual world, is next above hell, 231.

EAST, the.--The Lord is the East, because he is in the sun there, 261. To eat of the tree of
life, is to receive eternal life; to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, is to receive
damnation, 135, 444.

ECCLESIASTICAL ORDER, the, on the earth minister those things which appertain to the Lord's
priestly character, 308. What is the nature of ecclesiastical self-love, 264. They aspire to
be gods, so far as that love is unrestrained. 264.

EDEN.--See Garden.

EDUCATION of children in the spiritual world, 411-413.

EFFECT.--See End.

EFFIGY.--Two married partners, between or in whom conjugial love subsists, are an effigy and
form of it, 65. In the spiritual world the faces of spirits become the effigies of their internal
affections, 273.

ELECTION belongs to the man and not to the woman, 296. The women have the right of election
of one of their suitors, 296. These elevations considered in themselves are openings of the
mind, 188.

ELYSIAN FIELDS, 182.

EMPLOYMENTS in the spiritual world, 207.

END of this Work, 295.

END, the, and the cause, in what is to be effected and in effects, act in unity because they
act together, 387. The end, cause, and effect successively progress as three things, but in
the effect itself they make one, 401. Every end considered in itself is a love, 212. Every
end appertains to the will, every cause to the understanding, and every effect to action, 400.
All operations in the universe have a progression from ends, through causes into effects, 400.
Ends advance in a series, one after the other, and in their progress the last end becomes first,
387. Ends make progression in nature through times without time, but they cannot come forth
and manifest themselves, until the effect or use exists and becomes a subject, 401. The end
of marriage is the procreation of children, 254. All in heaven are influenced by an end of
good; and all in hell by an end of evil, 453, 527.

ENGLAND, 380

ENGLISH, 103, 107, 326.

ENUNCIATIONS, the.--The name of the prophetic books of the Word that was given to the inhabitants
of Asia, before the Israelitish Word, 77.

EPICURUS, 182.

EQUILIBRIUM, there is an, between the sphere of conjugial love, and between the sphere of its
opposite, and man is kept in this equilibrium, 437. This equilibrium is a spiritual equilibrium,
437. Spiritual equilibrium is that which exists between good and evil, or between heaven and
hell, 444. This equilibrium produces a free principle, 444. See Freedom.

ERUDITE, the pretended, in the spiritual world, 232.

ERUDITION appertains to rational wisdom, 163.

ERUDITION is one of the principles constituent of rational wisdom, 163.

ESSE and EXISTERE.--The esse of the substance of God is Divine good, and the existere of the
substance of God is Divine truth, 115.

ESSENTIALS.--Love, wisdom, and use, are three essentials, together constituting one divine
essence, 183. These three essentials flow into the souls of men, 183.

ETERNITY is the infinity of time, 185.

EUNUCHS.--Of those who are born eunuchs, or of eunuchs so made, 151.

EVIL is not from creation; nothing but good exists from creation, 444. Love without wisdom
is love from man, and this love is the origin of evil, 444. No one can be withdrawn from evil
unless he has been first led into it, 510. So far as any one removes evil, so far a capacity
is given for good to succeed in its place, 147. So far as evil is hated, so far good is loved,
147. Evils and falses, after they arose, were distinguished into genera, species, and differences,
479. All evils are together of the external and internal man; the internal intends them, and
the external does them, 486. So far as the understanding favors evils, so far a man appropriates
them to himself, and makes them his own, 489. See Hereditary.

EXTENSION cannot be predicated of things spiritual, 158. The reason why, 389.

EXTERNALS derive from their internals their good or evil, 478. Of the external derived from
the internal, and of the external separate from the internal, 148. How man after death puts
off externals, and puts on internals, 48*.

EYE, the, does not see and discern various particulars in objects, but they are seen and discerned
by the spirit, 440. In heaven the right eye is the good of vision, and the left the truth thereof,
316.

EYES, when the, of the spirit are opened, angels appear in their proper form, which is the
human, 30.

FABLES.--Things which are called fables at this day, were correspondences agreeable to the
primeval method of speaking, 182.

FACE, the, depends on the mind (animus), and is its type, 524. The countenance is a type of
the love, 35. The variety of countenances is infinite, 35. There are not two human faces which
arc exactly alike, 186. The faces of no two persons are absolutely alike, nor can there be
two faces alike to eternity, 524.

FACULTY.--Man is born faculty and inclination; faculty to know, and inclination to love, 134.
The faculty of understanding and growing wise as of himself, was implanted in man by creation,
444. The faculty of knowing, of understanding, and of growing wise, receives truths, whereby
it has science, intelligence, and wisdom, 122. Man has the faculty of elevating his understanding
into the light of wisdom, and his will into the heat of celestial love; these two faculties
are never taken away from any man, 230. The faculty of becoming wise increases with those who
are in love truly conjugial, 211.

FAITH is truth, 10, 24. Saving faith is to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 82.

FALLACIES of the senses are the darkness of truths, 152*.

FALSES, all, have been collated into hell, 479. See Evils.

FALSIFICATIONS of truth are spiritual whoredoms, 77, 80.

FATHER.--The Lord in the Word is called Father, 118. In what manner spiritual and natural fathers
act, 406. By father and mother, whom man is to leave, Matt. xix. 4, 5, in a spiritual sense,
is meant his proprium (self-hood) of will, and proprium of understanding, 194. See Proprium.

FAVOR, causes of, between married partners, 278, 287, 290.

FEAR.--In love truly conjugial there is a fear of loss, 318. This fear resides in the very
inmost principles of the mind, 318.

FEASTS.--There are in heaven, as in the world, both feasts and repasts, 6.

FEMALE.--See Male and Female. The female principle is derived from the male, or, the woman
was taken out of the man, 32. The female principle cannot be changed into the male principle,
nor the male into the female, 32. The difference between the essential feminine and masculine
principle, 32, 168. The good of truth, or truth from good, in the female principle, 61, 88,
90. The female principle consists in perceiving from love, 168, 220.

FEVERS, malignant and pestilential, 253, 470.

FIRE in heaven represents good, 326.

FIRE in the spiritual sense signifies love, 380. The fire of the angelic sun is divine love,
34. The fires of the west signify the delusive loves of evil, 77.

FISH.--In the spiritual world fishes are representative forms, 76. Every fish corresponds to
some quality, 76.

FLAME.--Celestial love with the angels of heaven appears at a distance as flame; and thus also
infernal love appears with the spirits of hell, 359. Flame in the spiritual world does not
burn like flame in the natural world, 359. Celestial flame in no case bursts out against another,
but only defends itself, and defends itself against an evil person, as when he rushes into
the fire and is burnt, 365.

FLESH, the, is contrary to the spirit, that is, contrary to the spiritual things of the church,
497. Combat between the flesh and the spirit, 488. The flesh is ignorant of the delights of
the spirit, 481. The flesh is not sensible of those things which happen in the flesh, but the
spirit perceives them, 440. What is signified by the words of our Lord, "They are no more twain
but one flesh," 50, 156*, 178, 321. By "all flesh," in the Word, is signified every man, 156*.

FLOW FROM, to.--All that which flows from a subject, and encompasses and environs it, is named
a sphere, 386. The marriage of good and truth flows thus from the Lord with man, immediately
into his soul, and thence proceeds to the principles next succeeding, and through these to
the extreme or outermost, 101.

FLOWERS.--The delights of conjugial love are represented in heaven by the flowers with which
the cloaks and tunics of married partners are embroidered, 137.

FLOWERY FIELDS.--In heaven there are flowery fields which are the appearances under which the
chaste pleasures of conjugial love are presented to the sight, 430. Food for the body is given
to every one in heaven, according to the use which he performs, 6.

FORM.--There is nothing that exists but in a form, 186. There is no substance without a form,
66. Every form consists of various things, and is such as is the harmonic co-ordination thereof
and arrangement to one, 524. All a man's affections and thoughts are in forms, and thence from
forms, 186. Truth is the form of good, 198. Two married partners are the very forms of love
and wisdom, or of good and truth, 66. The internal form of man is that of his spirit, 186.
The woman is a form of wisdom inspired with love-affection, 56. The male form is the intellectual
form, and the female is the voluntary, 228. The desire to continue in its form is implanted
from creation in all living things, 361. See Substance.

FORMATION.--As to formation, the masculine soul, as being intellectual, is thus truth, 220.
Formation of the woman into a wife according to the description in the Book of Creation, 193-198.

FOUNTAIN, a, signifies the truth of wisdom, 293. Fountain of Parnassus, 182. See Water.

FOWLS.--Wonderful things conspicuous respecting fowls, 417.

FRANCE, 380, 381.

FREEDOM originates in the spiritual equilibrium which exists between heaven and hell, or between
good and evil, and in which man is educated, 444. The freedom of love truly conjugial is most
free, 257. The Lord wills that the male man (homo) should act from principle according to reason,
208, 438. Without freedom and reason man would not be a man, but a beast, 438.

FRENCH, the, 103, 110, 326.

FRENSY, or furious wildness, a legitimate cause of separation, 252, 470.

FRIENDS meet after death, and recollect their friendships in the former world; but when their
consociation is only from external affections, a separation ensues, and they no longer see
or know each other, 273.

FRIENDSHIP is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and enter into it, 164.
Friendship increases with those who are principled in love truly conjugial, 214. Inmost friendship
is in love truly conjugial, and is derived from it, 180. Inmost friendship is seated in the
breast, 180. Friendship from conjugial love differs greatly from the friendship of every other
love, 214. There are various species of apparent friendship between married partners, one of
whom is brought under the yoke, and therefore subject to the other, 291. Difference between
conjugial friendship and servile friendship in marriages, 248. Under what circumstances there
may exist between married partners, when old, a friendship resembling that of conjugial love, 290.

FROZEN SUBSTANCES, 510. Fructifications are continuations of creation, 183. Fructification
in the heavens, 44, 355.

FUTURE, the.--The Lord does not permit any man to know the future, because in proportion as
he does so, in the same degree his reason and understanding, with his prudence and wisdom,
become inactive, are swallowed up and destroyed, 535.

GALLERY, open, 208.

GANGRENES, 253.

GARDENS.--In heaven the appearances under which the chaste delights of conjugial love are presented,
are gardens and flowery fields, 430. The garden of Eden signifies the wisdom of love, 135.
Nuptial gardens, 316. Paradisiacal gardens, 8. Description of the garden of the prince of a
heavenly society, 13.

GARLAND OF ROSES, a, in heaven signifies the delights of intelligence, 293.

GARLANDS in heaven represent the delights of conjugial love, 137, 293.

GENERA.--Distinction of all things into genera, species, and discriminations; the reason why,
479. There are three genera of adulteries, simple, duplicate, and triplicate, 479, 484.

GENERAL of an army, 481.

GENERALS cannot enter into particulars, 328.

GENEROSITY is one of those moral virtues which have respect to life, and enter into it, 164.

GENII.--Who those are who, in the spiritual world, are called infernal genii, 514.

GENITAL region, 183.

GENTILES.--Why there is no communication between the Christian heaven, and the heaven of the
Gentiles, 352.

GERMANS, 103, 109.

GERMANY, 380.

GESTURES.--In the spiritual world the internal affections appear even in the gestures, 273.

GIANTS, abode of, 77.

GLAND, pineal, 315.

GLORIFICATION of the Lord by the angels of the heavens on account of his coming, 81.

GLORIFYING, by, God is meant the discharging of all the duties of our callings with faithfulness,
sincerity, and diligence; hereby God is glorified, as well as by acts of worship at stated
times, succeeding these duties, 9.

GLORY, the, of the love of self, elevates the understanding even into the light of heaven,
269. The glory of honor with men induces, exalts, and sharpens jealousy, 378.

GOD, the, of heaven is the Lord, 78. There is only one God, in whom there is a divine trinity,
and He is the Lord Jesus Christ, 82, 532. God is love itself, and wisdom itself, 132. The esse
of the substance of God is divine good, and the existere of His substance is divine truth,
115. See Lord, obs.

GOOD and TRUTH.--What the will loves and does is called good, and what the understanding perceives
and thinks is called true, 490. All those things which pertain to the love are called good,
and all those things which pertain to wisdom are called truths, 60. All things in the universe
have relation to good and truth, 60. Good and truth are the universals of creation, and thence
are in all created things, 84. Good has relation to love, and truth to wisdom, 84. By truths,
man has understanding, perception, and all thought; and by goods, love, charity, and all affection,
121. Man receives truth as his own, and appropriates it as his own, for he thinks what is true
as from himself, 122; but he cannot take good as of himself, it being no object of his sight,
123. The truth of faith constitutes the Lord's presence, because it relates to light; and the
good of life constitutes conjunction, because it relates to heat, 72. In all things in the
universe, good is conjoined with truth, and truth with good, 60. There is not any truth without
good, nor good without truth, 87. Relations of good and truth to their objects, and their conjunction
with them, 87. See Marriage of Good and Truth.

GOVERNMENT.--In heaven there are governments and forms of government, 7.

GOVERNMENTS.--There are in heaven, as on the earths, distinctions of dignity and governments, 7.

GRAPES, good, and bad grapes, what they represent in the spiritual world, 294, 76.

GROVES, 76, 132, 183, 316.

GUILT, Reatus, is principally predicated of the will, 493.

GYMNASIA in the spiritual world, 151*, 207, 315, 380.

GYMNASIA, Olympic, in the spiritual world, where the ancient sophi and many of their disciples
met together, 151*.

HABITATIONS.--How men have ceased to be habitations of God, 153*.

HAND.--In heaven the right hand is the good of man's ability, and the left the truth thereof,
316. The angels can see in a man's hand all the thoughts and intentions of his mind, 314. Whatever
a man examines intellectually, appears to the angels as if inscribed on his hands, 261.

HAPPINESS, concerning eternal, 2 and following. Happiness ought to be within external joys,
and to flow from them, 6. From the reception of the love of uses, springs heavenly happiness,
which is the life of joys, 6. Heavenly happiness results from the eternal enjoyment of different
states derived from conjugial love, 180. The delights of the soul, with the thoughts of the
mind and the sensations of the body, constitute heavenly happiness, 16. The happiness which
results from the sensations of the body alone, is not eternal, but soon passes away, and in
some cases becomes unhappiness, 16. Eternal happiness does not arise from the place, but from
the state of the life of man (homo) 16.

HAPPINESS, the, of cohabitation increases with those who are principled in love truly conjugial,
213.

HEALING of the sick by the touch, 396.

HEARING, natural, is grounded in spiritual hearing, which is attention of the understanding,
and at the same time accommodation of the will, 220. The perception of a thing imbibed by hearing
only flows in indeed, but does not remain unless the hearer also thinks of it from himself,
and asks questions concerning it, 183.

HEART, the, signifies love, 75. The heart has relation to good, 87. The heart rules by the
blood in every part of the body, 179.

HEAT, spiritual, is love, 235. This heat is from no other source than the sun of the spiritual
world, 235. Heat is felt, and not seen, 123. When the heat of conjugial love removes and rejects
the heat of adulterous love, conjugial love begins to acquire a pleasant warmth, 147. The quality
of the heat of conjugial love with polygamists, 344.

HEAT and LIGHT.--In heaven heat is love, and the light with which heat is united, is wisdom,
137. Those things which have relation to light are seen, and those which have relation to heat
are felt, 168. The delight of spiritual heat with spiritual light is perceivable in human forms,
in which this heat is conjugial love, and this light is wisdom, 189.

HEAVEN.--The angelic heaven is formed from the human race, 156. There are three heavens, the
first or ultimate heaven, the second or middle heaven, and the third or highest heaven, 42.
The universal heaven is arranged in order according to the varieties of the affections of the
love of good, 36. In heaven human forms are altogether similar to those in the natural world.
Nothing is wanting in the male, and nothing in the female, 44. The heaven of infants, its situation,
410. Heaven of innocence, 444. Heaven of Mahometans, 342-344.

HELICON, 151*, 182.

HELICONIDES, sports of the, in the spiritual world, 207. These sports were spiritual exercises
and trials of skill, 207.

HELL.--The universal hell is arranged in order according to the affections of the love of evil,
36. Hell of the deceitful, 514.

HERACLITUS, 182.

HEREDITARY evil is not from Adam, but from a man's parents, 525. Whence it springs, 245.

HETEROGENEITES in the spiritual world are not only felt, but also appear in the face, the discourse,
and the gesture, 273.

HETEROGENEOUS or DISCORDANT, what is, causes disjunction and absence in the spiritual world, 171.

HIEROGLYPHICS, the, of the Egyptians derive their origin from the science of correspondences
and representations, 76, 342.

HOGS.--In hell, the forms of beasts under which the lascivious delights of adulterous love
are presented to the view are hogs, &c., 430. Companions of Ulysses changed into hogs, 521.

HOLLAND, 380.

HOLLANDERS or Dutchmen, 103, 105.

HOMOGENEITES, in the spiritual world, are not only felt, but also appear in the face, language,
and gesture, 273.

HOMOGENEOUS or CONCORDANT, what is, causes conjunction and presence, 171.

HONORS.--In heaven the angels feel that the honors of the dignities are out of themselves,
and are as the garments with which they are clothed, 266.

HOOF, by the, of the horse Pegasus is understood experiences whereby comes natural intelligence,
182.

HOUSE, the, signifies the understanding of truths, 76. See Pegasus.

HOUSE.--In heaven no one can dwell but in his own house, which is provided for him, and assigned
to him, according to the quality of his love, 50.

HUMAN PRINCIPLE, the, consists in desiring to grow wise, and in loving whatever appertains
to wisdom, 52.

HUNCH-BACKED.--When the love of the world constitutes the head, a man is not a man otherwise
than as hunch-backed, 269.

HUSBAND.--How with young men the youthful principle is changed into that of a husband, 199.
The husband represents wisdom, and the wife represents the love of the wisdom of the husband,
21. The husband is truth, and the wife the good thereof, 76. See Wife.

HYPOCRITE.--Every man who is not interiorly led by the Lord is a hypocrite, and thereby an
apparent man, and yet not a man, 267.

IDEA, every, of man's, however sublimated, is substantial--that is, affixed to substances,
66. To every idea of natural thought there adheres something derived from space and time, which
is not the case with any spiritual idea, 328. Spiritual ideas, compared with natural, are ideas
of ideas, 326. There is not any idea of natural thought adequate to any idea of spiritual thought,
326. One natural idea contains innumerable spiritual ideas, and one spiritual idea contains
innumerable celestial ideas, 329.

IDENTITY.--No absolute identity of two things exist, still less of several, 186.

IDOLATERS, ancient, in the spiritual world, 78.

IDOLATRY.--Its origin, 78, 342.

IJIM, the, in hell represent the images of the phantasies of the infernals, 264. See Phantasy.

ILLUSTRATE, to, 42, 48*, 130, 134, &c.

Obs.--In the writings of the Author, to illustrate is generally used in the sense of to enlighten.

ILLUSTRATION.--In the Word there is illustration concerning eternal life, 28.

Obs.--Illustration is an actual opening of the interiors which pertain to the mind, and also
an elevation into the light of heaven, H.D., 256.

IMAGE.--What are the image and likeness of God into which man was created, 182, 134. Image
of the husband in the wife, 173.

IMAGINATION, 4, 7. See Phantasy.

IMMODESTY, 252, 472. All in hell are in the immodesty of adulterous love, 429.

IMMORTALITY.--Man may no longer be in doubt through ignorance respecting his immortality, after
the discoveries which it has pleased the Lord to make, 532.

IMPLANT, to.--That which is implanted in souls by creation, and respects propagation, is indelible,
and not to be extirpated, 409. Good cannot be implanted, only so far as evil is removed, 525.

IMPLETION.--The soul is a spiritual substance, which is not a subject of extension, but of
impletion, 220.

IMPOSITION OF HANDS.--Whence it has originated, 396.

IMPURE.--To the impure every thing is impure, 140.

IMPURITY, the, of hell is from adulterous love, 480, 495. In like manner the impurity in the
church, 431, 495. There are innumerable varieties of impurities; all hell overflows with impurities,
430. Imputation of adulterous love, and imputation of conjugial love, 523-531. Imputation of
adulteries after death, how effected, 485, 489, 493; these imputations take place after death,
not according to circumstances, which are external of the deed, but according to internal circumstances
of the mind, 530. Imputation of good, how it is effected, 524. If by imputation is meant the
transcription of good into any one who is in evil, it is a frivolous term, 526.

IMPUTE, to.--The evil in which every one is, is imputed to him after death; in like manner
the good, 524, 530, 531. Evil or good is imputed to every one after death, according to the
quality of his will and or his understanding, 527. Who it is to whom sin is not imputed, and
who to whom it is imputed, 529, 527.

INACTIVITY or SLOTH occasions a universal languor, dulness, stupor, and drowsiness of the mind,
and thence of the body, 207.

INCLINATION.--In the truth of good, and in the good of truth, there is implanted from creation
an inclination to join themselves together into one, 88, 100; the reason why, 89. The conjunctive
inclination, which is conjugial love, is in the same degree with the conjunction of good and
truth, which is the church, 63. Every one derives from his parents his peculiar temper, which
is his inclination, 525. Children are born with inclinations to such things as their parents
were inclined to, 202; but it is of the Divine Providence that perverse inclinations may be
rectified, 202. Inclinations of married partners towards each other, 171. Husbands know nothing
at all of the inclinations and affections of their own love, but wives are well acquainted
with those principles in their husbands, 208. Inclination of the wife towards the husband,
160. Dissimilitude of internal inclinations is the origin and cause of cold, 275. External
inclinations, whence they arise, 246.

INDIFFERENCE with married partners comes from a disunion of souls and disjunction of minds,
236, 256.

INDUSTRY is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and enter into it, 164.

INEQUALITY of external rank and condition is one of the external causes of cold, 250. There
are many inequalities of rank and condition which put an end to the conjugial love commenced
before marriage, 250.

INFANCY is the appearance of innocence, 75.

