Just at the time when the City was meditating a transfer of their powers under the New River
Acts to Middleton, a scheme was being set on foot for colonising a vast tract of land in the
north of Ireland, which, after the flight of the earls of Tyrone and Tyrconnel in 1607, was
declared to be confiscated to the Crown. In October, 1608, commissioners had been appointed
to draw up a plan for the proposed colonisation, or, as it was called, the "Plantation of Ulster,"
and by the following January (1609) their reports were sent in.(90) The next step was the formulating
of orders and conditions to be observed by the undertakers of the plantation, and by the end
of January these were ready, although they do not appear to have been published before the
following March.(91) The object of promulgating these orders and conditions was to attract
persons to take a share in the work of the plantation, not so much with the view of benefiting
themselves as of doing service to the Crown and commonwealth. As an inducement to accept the
king’s offer the citizens were assured that the country was well watered and suitable for breeding
cattle; it grew hemp and flax better than elsewhere; it was well stocked with game and had
excellent sea and river fisheries, and it contained such abundance of provisions as not only
to supply the plantation, but also assist towards the relief of the London poor. Besides these
advantages the city, which was so overcrowded "that one tradesman was scarcely able to live
by another," would have an opportunity of getting rid of some of its surplus population, and
at the same time render itself less liable to infectious diseases. If the citizens wanted a
precedent for what they were now called upon to undertake, they were invited to look at what
Bristol had done for Dublin in the reign of Henry II. The plantation of Dublin by Bristol,
which reflected "eternal commendation" on the latter city, had done much towards civilising
and securing that part of Ireland, and it was greatly to be hoped that the precedent so set
would now be followed by London, more especially as the advantages to be gained were far greater.

(M32)

A goodly prospect indeed; but still the enterprise failed to commend itself to the Londoner.
A month went by and nothing was done. At length, on Saturday, the 1st July, the matter was
brought direct to the attention of a special Court of Aldermen and "divers selected comoners"
of the city by the lords of the council. Again the citizens were assured that by taking a part
in the work of the plantation they would not only be doing a work acceptable unto God but one
which would be at once honourable and profitable to themselves.

(M33)

The project was received with favour to the extent that it was resolved to invite the livery
companies to consider the matter, and to appoint committees to make suggestions to the court
in writing by the following Wednesday (5 July),(94) and precepts to the companies were issued
accordingly. The reply sent by the companies appears to have been considered unsatisfactory,
for on the following Saturday (8 July) the mayor issued another precept rebuking them for the
attitude taken up by their representatives, who had not, in his opinion, paid sufficient attention
to the matter nor fully realised the motives and reasons which had been propounded. He bade
them reconsider the matter and send their representatives to the Guildhall on Friday, 14th
July, with "such reasons and demands as are fit to be remembered, required or considered of
in the undertaking of so great and honourable an action" set down in writing.(95) Accordingly,
on the 14th, the committees of the various companies appeared before the Court of Aldermen
with their answer in writing, and a deputation was nominated to carry their answer to the lords
and to hear anything more that they might have to say on the matter.(96)

The lords of the council being angry with the companies for sending in their answer before
a conference had been held with them, the Recorder was instructed to inform them that the companies
had acted under a mistake, and intended nothing undutiful in what they had done, and a deputation
was again nominated to confer with their lordships.(97) This was on Tuesday, the 18th July.

(M34)

Before the end of the week "a full and large conference" took place, and the lords of the council
so satisfied the representatives of the companies of the profitable nature of the undertaking
that they were encouraged to become adventurers. It was an understood thing between the parties
that the citizens should send their own representatives over to Ireland to view the property,
and if the undertaking proved to be otherwise than had been represented, and unprofitable,
they were to be at liberty to withdraw from it altogether. The result of the conference was
signified to the masters and wardens of the several companies on Monday, the 24th July, by
precept of the mayor, who enjoined them to call together their companies on the following Wednesday,
and after explaining the whole matter to them, to learn from each individual member what amount
he was prepared to contribute towards the furtherance of so "famous a project," and to cause
the same to be entered in a book "to the intent his majesty may be informed of the readiness
of this city in a matter of such great consequence." A note was to be made of any who refused
to contribute, and those who failed to attend the summons were to be fined. No time was to
be lost, for the lords of the council expected a return of the amount to be contributed by
the companies by Friday (28 July).(98)

(M35)

On Sunday, the 30th July, a deputation of aldermen and commoners again waited on the lords
of the council, and received permission to elect four wise, grave and discreet citizens to
cross over to Ireland and view the proposed plantation. On Tuesday (1 Aug.) the Common Council
nominated John Broad, goldsmith, Hugh Hamersley, haberdasher, Robert Treswell, painter-stainer,
and John Rowley, draper, to be the City’s commissioners for the purpose.(99)

(M36)

The lords of the council anticipated the arrival of the City’s agents in Ireland by directing
Sir Thomas Philips to accompany them in their travels, and by sending instructions to Sir Arthur
Chichester, the deputy, to see that they were well supplied with necessaries and were assisted
in every way. The latter was more particularly instructed to use great care in the selection
of discreet persons to conduct and accompany them, men who from their experience and understanding
might be able, "both by discourse and reason, to controule whatsoever any man shall reporte
either out of ignorance or malice, and to give the undertakors satisfaccon when they shalbe
mistaken or not well informed of any particular."(100) The conductors were to take care to
lead the Londoners by the best roads, and to lodge them on their journeys where they might,
if possible, receive English entertainment in Englishmen’s houses. The lords of the council
at the same time forwarded to Sir Arthur Chichester a copy of the "Project," and desired him
to see that those who conducted the City’s agents were "well prepared before-hand to confirme
and strengthen every part thereof by demonstracon as they may plainly apprehend and conceive
the commodities to be of good use and profit." On the other hand, matters of distaste, such
as fear of the Irish, of the soldiers, of cess and such like must not be so much as named.
These could be set right afterwards and were only matters of discipline and order. Lastly,
if the Londoners should happen to express a wish respecting anything, "whether it be the fishing,
the admirallty, or any other particuler wch may serve for a motyve to enduce them," the same
was to be conceded at once, and no private interests, whether of Sir Arthur Chichester himself
or any other individual, were to be allowed to stand in the way.

These instructions were carried out to the letter, and the City’s representatives, as soon
as they set foot in Ireland, were treated right royally. Inspector Chizzlem. No, your Worship.
These are one ounce gloves. The gloves with which these men were to fight are known as "feather-weight"
gloves.

Mr. Pheasant. Ah, I see. Feather-weight, not feather-bed, I presume.
(Loud Laughter, in which both the accused joined.) Have you the actual
gloves with you?

Mr. Titan Chapel (from the Solicitor's table). I
have brought them, Sir. Here--dear me, what can I have done with them?
I thought I had them somewhere about me. (Pats his various pockets.
He goes on to say that one of the City’s agents had fallen sick, and would have returned, but
the lord-deputy and the rest had used every means to comfort and retain him, "lest this accident
shold discourage his fellow cittizens." In other respects, too, they saw the country at its
best, for they arrived at a time when the Irish were flocking in and making their submission
in far better fashion than they had done for years. So pleased were they with what they saw
that they assured Sir Arthur Chichester that the City would certainly undertake the plantation
upon the report they were about to make. The deputy on his part assured them that if the Londoners
did not undertake the work they would be enemies to themselves. He suggested that they should
send home to the lord mayor some samples of the commodities of the country. The suggestion
was adopted, and he obtained for them some raw hides, tallow, salmon, herrings, eels, pipe-staves,
beef and the like at a cheap rate. He also procured them some iron ore and promised to furnish
them with samples of lead and copper.(102)

(M37)

By November the City’s agents had returned to London. On the 28th they appeared before the
Court of Aldermen and presented their report, together with an answer made by Sir Arthur Chichester
to certain questions they had put to him on doubtful points, and also a map or "plott" of the
country they had viewed. The court in the first place authorised the Chamberlain to re-imburse
them the sum of £100 which they had found it necessary to borrow to supplement the allowance
of £300 originally allowed for their expenses by the court;(103) and in the next gave orders
for all the documents to be enrolled by the Remembrancer "in a faier booke, wherein the letters
and other things comytted to his charge and care are recorded and entred," and also in the
Journal by the Clerk of the Orphans.(104) The viewers’ report came before the court of Common
Council on the 2nd December, when it was openly read and referred to a committee specially
appointed.(105)

(M38)

On Friday, the 15th, the committee were ready with their report. They had met five times, and
had held long debate and consultation on the various matters incident to "so great a business,"
and on each and all of these they had something to say. As to the financial part of the undertaking
they were of opinion that the Common Council should pass an Act for raising a sum of £15,000,
and no more, upon the members of the wealthier livery companies, by poll, the inferior companies
being spared. The report having been approved by the court a deputation was appointed to wait
upon the Privy Council with the City’s answer on the following Sunday (17 December).(106)

(M39)

When the lords of the council came to consider the City’s proposals they found much to their
liking, but the clause which restricted the amount of money to be furnished by the City to
£15,000, and no more, was "much distasted" by them, seeing that that sum would scarcely suffice
to buy up private interests, let alone the work of plantation. The City’s offer in this respect
was therefore rejected, and the Common Council had therefore to increase its offer to £20,000.(107)

(M40)

Early in the following year (8 Jan., 1610) a committee was appointed, including the four commissioners
who had viewed the plantation, to confer with commissioners appointed by the Privy Council
as to the best means of carrying out the work. In the meantime the sum of £5,000, or one-fourth
part of the £20,000 required, was to be immediately levied on the principal companies according
to their corn assessment.(108) Some of the companies complained of the unfairness of assessing
them according to the existing corn rate, inasmuch as a great change had taken place since
that rate had been made: "Divers companies are decayed and others growne to bee of greater
liability, so as particuler men of some companies are now exceedinglie overcharged and others
greatelye favoured." It was too late to make any alteration in the payment of the first two
instalments, as the plantation was to commence in the summer,(109) but a new assessment for
corn was made in July with the view of making the rate more equitable.(110)

(M41)

On the 28th January (1610) the committee appointed by the court of Common Council came to terms
with the Privy Council, and a special agreement was signed by both parties embodying all the
essential conditions of the plantation in twenty-seven articles. A period of seven years was
allowed the City to make such other reasonable demands as time might show to be needful.(111)

(M42)

The articles were read at the Common Council held two days later (30 Jan.), when it was decided
to form a company in the city of London for the purpose of carrying out the plantation, the
company to consist of a governor, a deputy-governor and twenty-four assistants, of whom the
Recorder of the city was to be one. The governor and five of the assistants were to be aldermen
of the city, the rest commoners.(112) On the 4th February the lords of the council informed
Sir Arthur Chichester that the "noble and worthy work of the plantation in Ulster undertaken
by the city" was concluded, and the articles signed. The city had chosen a governor and a council
of assistants for the more orderly disposition of their affairs. They had also elected John
Rowley to be their agent, and he and others would shortly set out for Ireland. The lords commended
him to the deputy’s care, and he was instructed to see that they were furnished with a sufficient
number of labourers for felling timber, digging stone and burning lime. Sir Arthur’s services
in forwarding a work which the king had so much at heart would not go, they assured him, unrewarded.(113)

(M43)

The articles of the plantation had not long been signed before the government broke faith with
the City, and the latter were asked to forego no less than 2,000 acres of land agreed to be
assigned to them. This iniquitous proposal on the part of the king’s commissioners was laid
before a special court of Common Council (7 June, 1610) by Alderman Cockaine, the governor
of the Irish Society. After long deliberation the court decided to stand upon their rights,
and rejected the proposal. Six weeks later (22 July) they saw fit to change their minds, and
they agreed to surrender the 2,000 acres whilst refusing to accede to other demands.(114)

(M44)

