                    Up in the woods
                    Sleeps the fairy to-day:
                    The king, her lover,
                    Has strolled that way!
                    Will those who are young
                    Be married or nay?
                    Yea, yea!

Carried away by the rhythm, and the pleasure of treading the soft grass under their feet, the
dancers quickened their pace.  The chain of young folks disconnected for a moment, was reformed,
and twisted in and out among the trees; sometimes in light, sometimes in shadow, until they
disappeared, singing, into the very heart of the forest.  With the exception of Pere Theotime
and his wife, who had gone to superintend the furnace, all the guests, including Claudet, had
joined the gay throng. Reine and Julien, the only ones remaining behind, stood in the shade
near the borderline of the forest.  It was high noon, and the sun's rays, shooting perpendicularly
down, made the shade desirable.  Reine proposed to her companion to enter the hut and rest,
while waiting for the return of the dancers.  Julien accepted readily; but not without being
surprised that the young girl should be the first to suggest a tete-a-tete in the obscurity
of a remote hut.  Although more than ever fascinated by the unusual beauty of Mademoiselle
Vincart, he was astonished, and occasionally shocked, by the audacity and openness of her action
toward him.  Once more the spirit of doubt took possession of him, and he questioned whether
this freedom of manners was to be attributed to innocence or effrontery.  After the pleasant
friendliness of the midday repast, and the enlivening effect of the dance round the furnace,
he was both glad and troubled to find himself alone with Reine.  He longed to let her know
what tender admiration she excited in his mind; but he did not know how to set about it, nor
in what style to address a girl of so strange and unusual a disposition.  So he contented himself
with fixing an enamored gaze upon her, while she stood leaning against one of the inner posts,
and twisted mechanically between her fingers a branch of wild honeysuckle.  Annoyed at his
taciturnity, she at last broke the silence:

"You are not saying anything, Monsieur de Buxieres; do you regret having come to this fete?"

"Regret it, Mademoiselle?"  returned he; "it is a long time since I have had so pleasant a
day, and I thank you, for it is to you I owe it."

"To me?  You are joking.  It is the good-humor of the people, the spring sunshine, and the
pure air of the forest that you must thank.  I have no part in it."

"You are everything in it, on the contrary," said he, tenderly.  "Before I knew you, I had
met with country people, seen the sun and trees, and so on, and nothing made any impression
on me.  But, just now, when you were singing over there, I felt gladdened and inspired; I felt
the beauty of the woods, I sympathized with these good people, and these grand trees, all these
things among which you live so happily.  It is you who have worked this miracle.  Ah! you are
well named.  You are truly the fairy of the feast, the queen of the woods!"

Astonished at the enthusiasm of her companion, Reine looked at him sidewise, half closing her
eyes, and perceived that he was altogether transformed.  He appeared to have suddenly thawed.
He was no longer the awkward, sickly youth, whose every movement was paralyzed by timidity,
and whose words froze on his tongue; his slender frame had become supple, his blue eyes enlarged
and illuminated; his delicate features expressed refinement, tenderness, and passion.  The
young girl was moved and won by so much emotion, the first that Julien had ever manifested
toward her. Far from being offended at this species of declaration, she replied, gayly:

"As to the queen of the woods working miracles, I know none so powerful as these flowers."

She unfastened the bouquet of white starry woodruff from her corsage, and handed them over
to him in their envelope of green leaves.

"Do you know them?"  said she; "see how sweet they smell!  And the odor increases as they wither."

Julien had carried the bouquet to his lips, and was inhaling slowly the delicate perfume.

"Our woodsmen," she continued, "make with this plant a broth which cures from ill effects of
either cold or heat as if by enchantment; they also infuse it into white wine, and convert
it into a beverage which they call May wine, and which is very intoxicating."

Julien was no longer listening to these details.  He kept his eyes steadily fixed on Mademoiselle
Vincart, and continued to inhale rapturously the bouquet, and to experience a kind of intoxication.

"Let me keep these flowers," he implored, in a choking voice.

"Certainly," replied she, gayly; "keep them, if it will give you pleasure."

"Thank you," he murmured, hiding them in his bosom.

Reine was surprised at his attaching such exaggerated importance to so slight a favor, and
a sudden flush overspread her cheeks.  She almost repented having given him the flowers when
she saw what a tender reception he had given them, so she replied, suggestively:

"Do not thank me; the gift is not significant.  Thousands of similar flowers grow in the forest,
and one has only to stoop and gather them."

He dared not reply that this bouquet, having been worn by her, was worth much more to him than
any other, but he thought it, and the thought aroused in his mind a series of new ideas.  As
Reine had so readily granted this first favor, was she not tacitly encouraging him to ask for
others?  Was he dealing with a simple, innocent girl, or a village coquette, accustomed to
be courted?  And on this last supposition should he not pass for a simpleton in the eyes of
this experienced girl, if he kept himself at too great a distance.  He remembered the advice
of Claudet concerning the method of conducting love-affairs smoothly with certain women of
the country.  Whether she was a coquette or not, Reine had bewitched him.  The charm had worked
more powerfully still since he had been alone with her in this obscure hut, where the cooing
of the wild pigeons faintly reached their ears, and the penetrating odors of the forest pervaded
their nostrils.  Julien's gaze rested lovingly on Reine's wavy locks, falling heavily over
her neck, on her half-covered eyes with their luminous pupils full of golden specks of light,
on her red lips, on the two little brown moles spotting her somewhat decollete neck. He thought
her adorable, and was dying to tell her so; but when he endeavored to formulate his declaration,
the words stuck fast in his throat, his veins swelled, his throat became dry, his head swam.
In this disorder of his faculties he brought to mind the recommendation of Claudet: "One arm
round the waist, two sounding kisses, and the thing is done."  He rose abruptly, and went up
to the young girl:

"Since you have given me these flowers," he began, in a husky voice, "will you also, in sign
of friendship, give me your hand, as you gave it to Claudet?"

After a moment's hesitation, she held out her hand; but, hardly had he touched it when he completely
lost control of himself, and slipping the arm which remained free around Reine's waist, he
drew her toward him and lightly touched with his lips her neck, the beauty of which had so
magnetized him.

The young girl was stronger than he; in the twinkling of an eye she tore herself from his audacious
clasp, threw him violently backward, and with one bound reached the door of the hut.  She stood
there a moment, pale, indignant, her eyes blazing, and then exclaimed, in a hollow voice:

"If you come a step nearer, I will call the charcoalmen!"

But Julien had no desire to renew the attack; already sobered, cowed, and repentant, he had
retreated to the most obscure corner of the dwelling.

"Are you mad?"  she continued, with vehemence, "or has the wine got into your head?  It is
rather early for you to be adopting the ways of your deceased cousin!  I give you notice that
they will not succeed with me! "And, at the same moment, tears of humiliation filled her eyes.
"I did not expect this of you, Monsieur de Buxieres!"

"Forgive me!"  faltered Julien, whose heart smote him at the sight of her tears; "I have behaved
like a miserable sinner and a brute!  It was a moment of madness--forget it and forgive me!"

"Nobody ever treated me with disrespect before," returned the young girl, in a suffocated voice;
"I was wrong to allow you any familiarity, that is all.  It shall not happen to me again!"

Julien remained mute, overpowered with shame and remorse.  Suddenly, in the stillness around,
rose the voices of the dancers returning and singing the refrain of the rondelay:

                    I had a rose--
                    On my heart it lay
                    Will those who are young
                    Be married, or nay?
                    Yea, yea!

"There are our people," said Reine, softly, "I am going to them; adieu-- do not follow me!"
She left the but and hastened toward the furnace, while Julien, stunned with the rapidity with
which this unfortunate scene had been enacted, sat down on one of the benches, a prey to confused
feelings of shame and angry mortification.  No, certainly, he did not intend to follow her!
He had no desire to show himself in public with this young girl whom he had so stupidly insulted,
and in whose face he never should be able to look again.  Decidedly, he did not understand
women, since he could not even tell a virtuous girl from a frivolous coquette!  Why had he
not been able to see that the good-natured, simple familiarity of Reine Vincart had nothing
in common with the enticing allurements of those who, to use Claudet's words, had "thrown their
caps over the wall."  How was it that he had not read, in those eyes, pure as the fountain's
source, the candor and uprightness of a maiden heart which had nothing to conceal.  This cruel
evidence of his inability to conduct himself properly in the affairs of life exasperated and
humiliated him, and at the same time that he felt his self-love most deeply wounded, he was
conscious of being more hopelessly enamored of Reine Vincart. Never had she appeared so beautiful
as during the indignant movement which had separated her from him.  Her look of mingled anger
and sadness, the expression of her firm, set lips, the quivering nostrils, the heaving of her
bosom, he recalled it all, and the image of her proud beauty redoubled his grief and despair.

He remained a long time concealed in the shadow of the hut.  Finally, when he heard the voices
dying away in different directions, and was satisfied that the charcoal-men were attending
to their furnace work, he made up his mind to come out.  But, as he did not wish to meet any
one, instead of crossing through the cutting he plunged into the wood, taking no heed in what
direction he went, and being desirous of walking alone as long as possible, without meeting
a single human visage.

As he wandered aimlessly through the deepening shadows of the forest, crossed here and there
by golden bars of light from the slanting rays of the setting sun, he pondered over the probable
results of his unfortunate behavior.  Reine would certainly keep silence on the affront she
had received, but would she be indulgent enough to forget or forgive the insult?  The most
evident result of the affair would be that henceforth all friendly relations between them must
cease.  She certainly would maintain a severe attitude toward the person who had so grossly
insulted her, but would she be altogether pitiless in her anger?  All through his dismal feelings
of self-reproach, a faint hope of reconciliation kept him from utter despair.  As he reviewed
the details of the shameful occurrence, he remembered that the expression of her countenance
had been one more of sorrow than of anger.  The tone of melancholy reproach in which she had
uttered the words: "I did not expect this from you, Monsieur de Buxieres!"  seemed to convey
the hope that he might, one day, be forgiven.  At the same time, the poignancy of his regret
showed him how much hold the young girl had taken upon his affections, and how cheerless and
insipid his life would be if he were obliged to continue on unfriendly terms with the woodland
queen.

He had come to this conclusion in his melancholy reflections, when he reached the outskirts
of the forest.

He stood above the calm, narrow valley of Vivey; on the right, over the tall ash-trees, peeped
the pointed turrets of the chateau; on the left, and a little farther behind, was visible a
whitish line, contrasting with the surrounding verdure, the winding path to La Thuiliere, through
the meadow-land of Planche-au-Vacher.  Suddenly, the sound of voices reached his ears, and,
looking more closely, he perceived Reine and Claudet walking side by side down the narrow path.
The evening air softened the resonance of the voices, so that the words themselves were not
audible, but the intonation of the alternate speakers, and their confidential and friendly
gestures, evinced a very animated, if not tender, exchange of sentiments.  At times the conversation
was enlivened by Claudet's bursts of laughter, or an amicable gesture from Reine.  At one moment,
Julien saw the young girl lay her hand familiarly on the shoulder of the 'grand chssserot',
and immediately a pang of intense jealousy shot through his heart.  At last the young pair
arrived at the banks of a stream, which traversed the path and had become swollen by the recent
heavy rains. Claudet took Reine by the waist and lifted her in his vigorous arms, while he
picked his way across the stream; then they resumed their way toward the bottom of the pass,
and the tall brushwood hid their retreating forms from Julien's eager gaze, although it was
long before the vibrations of their sonorous voices ceased echoing in his ears.

"Ah!" thought he, quite overcome by this new development, "she stands less on ceremony with
him than with me!  How close they kept to each other in that lonely path!  With what animation
they conversed!  with what abandon she allowed herself to be carried in his arms!  All that
indicates an intimacy of long standing, and explains a good many things!"

He recalled Reine's visit to the chateau, and how cleverly she had managed to inform him of
the parentage existing between Claudet and the deceased Claude de Buxieres; how she had by
her conversation raised a feeling of pity in his mind for Claudet; and a desire to repair the
negligence of the deceased.

"How could I be so blind!"  thought Julien, with secret scorn of himself; "I did not see anything,
I comprehended none of their artifices!  They love each other, that is sure, and I have been
playing throughout the part of a dupe.  I do not blame him.  He was in love, and allowed himself
to be persuaded.  But she! whom I thought so open, so true, so loyal! Ah! she is no better
than others of her class, and she was coquetting with me in order to insure her lover a position!
Well!  one more illusion is destroyed.  Ecclesiastes was right.  'Inveni amarivrem morte mulierem',
'woman is more bitter than death'!"

Twilight had come, and it was already dark in the forest.  Slowly and reluctantly, Julien descended
the slope leading to the chateau, and the gloom of the woods entered his heart.

CHAPTER VI

LOVE BY PROXY

Jealousy is a maleficent deity of the harpy tribe; she embitters everything she touches.

Ever since the evening that Julien had witnessed the crossing of the brook by Reine and Claudet,
a secret poison had run through his veins, and embittered every moment of his life.  Neither
the glowing sun of June, nor the glorious development of the woods had any charm for him. In
vain did the fields display their golden treasures of ripening corn; in vain did the pale barley
and the silvery oats wave their luxuriant growth against the dark background of the woods;
all these fairylike effects of summer suggested only prosaic and misanthropic reflections in
Julien's mind.  He thought of the tricks, the envy and hatred that the possession of these
little squares of ground brought forth among their rapacious owners.  The prolific exuberance
of forest vegetation was an exemplification of the fierce and destructive activity of the blind
forces of Nature.  All the earth was a hateful theatre for the continual enactment of bloody
and monotonous dramas; the worm consuming the plant; the bird mangling the insect, the deer
fighting among themselves, and man, in his turn, pursuing all kinds of game.  He identified
nature with woman, both possessing in his eyes an equally deceiving appearance, the same beguiling
beauty, and the same spirit of ambuscade and perfidy. The people around him inspired him only
with mistrust and suspicion. In every peasant he met he recognized an enemy, prepared to cheat
him with wheedling words and hypocritical lamentations.  Although during the few months he
had experienced the delightful influence of Reine Vincart, he had been drawn out of his former
prejudices, and had imagined he was rising above the littleness of every-day worries; he now
fell back into hard reality; his feet were again embedded in the muddy ground of village politics,
and consequently village life was a burden to him.

He never went out, fearing to meet Reine Vincart.  He fancied that the sight of her might aggravate
the malady from which he suffered and for which he eagerly sought a remedy.

But, notwithstanding the cloistered retirement to which he had condemned himself, his wound
remained open.  Instead of solitude having a healing effect, it seemed to make his sufferings
greater.  When, in the evening, as he sat moodily at his window, he would hear Claudet whistle
to his dog, and hurry off in the direction of La Thuiliere, he would say to himself: "He is
going to keep an appointment with Reine."  Then a feeling of blind rage would overpower him;
he felt tempted to leave his room and follow his rival secretly--a moment afterward he would
be ashamed of his meanness.  Was it not enough that he had once, although involuntarily, played
the degrading part of a spy!  What satisfaction could he derive from such a course?  Would
he be much benefited when he returned home with rage in his heart and senses, after watching
a love-scene between the young pair?  This consideration kept him in his seat, but his imagination
ran riot instead; it went galloping at the heels of Claudet, and accompanied him down the winding
paths, moistened by the evening dew. As the moon rose above the trees, illuminating the foliage
with her mild bluish rays, he pictured to himself the meeting of the two lovers on the flowery
turf bathed in the silvery light.  His brain seemed on fire. He saw Reine in white advancing
like a moonbeam, and Claudet passing his arm around the yielding waist of the maiden.  He tried
to substitute himself in idea, and to imagine the delight of the first words of welcome, and
the ecstasy of the prolonged embrace.  A shiver ran through his whole body; a sharp pain transfixed
his heart; his throat closed convulsively; half fainting, he leaned against the window-frame,
his eyes closed, his ears stopped, to shut out all sights or sounds, longing only for oblivion
and complete torpor of body and mind.

He did not realize his longing.  The enchanting image of the woodland queen, as he had beheld
her in the dusky light of the charcoal-man's hut, was ever before him.  He put his hands over
his eyes.  She was there still, with her deep, dark eyes and her enticing cherry lips.  Even
the odor of the honeysuckle arising from the garden assisted the reality of the vision, by
recalling the sprig of the same flower which Reine was twisting round her fingers at their
last interview.  This sweet breath of flowers in the night seemed like an emanation from the
young girl herself, and was as fleeting and intangible as the remembrance of vanished happiness.
Again and again did his morbid nature return to past events, and make his present position
more unbearable.

"Why," thought he, "did I ever entertain so wild a hope?  This wood- nymph, with her robust
yet graceful figure, her clear-headedness, her energy and will-power, could she ever have loved
a being so weak and unstable as myself?  No, indeed; she needs a lover full of life and vigor;
a huntsman, with a strong arm, able to protect her.  What figure should I cut by the side of
so hearty and well-balanced a fellow?"

In these fits of jealousy, he was not so angry with Claudet for being loved by Reine as for
having so carefully concealed his feelings.  And yet, while inwardly blaming him for this want
of frankness, he did not realize that he himself was open to a similar accusation, by hiding
from Claudet what was troubling him so grievously.

Since the evening of the inauguration festival, he had become sullen and taciturn.  Like all
timid persons, he took refuge in a moody silence, which could not but irritate his cousin.
They met every day at the same table; to all appearance their intimacy was as great as ever,
but, in reality, there was no mutual exchange of feeling.  Julien's continued ill-humor was
a source of anxiety to Claudet, who turned his brain almost inside out in endeavoring to discover
its cause.  He knew he had done nothing to provoke any coolness; on the contrary, he had set
his wits to work to show his gratitude by all sorts of kindly offices.

By dint of thinking the matter over, Claudet came to the conclusion that perhaps Julien was
beginning to repent of his generosity, and that possibly this coolness was a roundabout way
of manifesting his change of feeling.  This seemed to be the only plausible solution of his
cousin's behavior.  "He is probably tired," thought he, "of keeping us here at the chateau,
my mother and myself."

Claudet's pride and self-respect revolted at this idea.  He did not intend to be an incumbrance
on any one, and became offended in his turn at the mute reproach which he imagined he could
read in his cousin's troubled countenance.  This misconception, confirmed by the obstinate
silence of both parties, and aggravated by its own continuance, at last produced a crisis.

