"And would you like to be a teacher?"

"If I could only be clever enough!" sighed Esther. "But then you see the teachers at our school
are real ladies and they dress, oh, so beautifully! With fur tippets and six-button gloves.
I could never afford it, for even when I was earning five shillings a week I should have to
give most of it to father and the children."

"But if you're very good--I dare say some of the great ladies like the Rothschilds will buy
you nice clothes. I have heard they are very good to clever children."

"No, then the other teachers would know I was getting charity! And they would mock at me. I
heard Miss Hyams make fun of a teacher because she wore the same dress as last winter. I don't
think I should like to be a teacher after all, though it is nice to be able to stand with your
back to the fire in the winter. The girls would know--'" Esther stopped and blushed.

"Would know what, dear?"

"Well, they would know father," said Esther in low tones. "They would see him selling things
in the Lane and they wouldn't do what I told them."

"Nonsense, Esther. I believe most of the teachers' fathers are just as bad--I mean as poor.
Look at Miss Hyams's own father."

"Oh Debby! I do hope that's true. Besides when I was earning five shillings a week, I could
buy father a new coat, couldn't I? And then there would be no need for him to stand in the
Lane with lemons or 'four-corner fringes,' would there?"

"No, dear. You shall be a teacher, I prophesy, and who knows? Some day you may be Head Mistress!"

Esther laughed a startled little laugh of delight, with a suspicion of a sob in it. "What!
Me! Me go round and make all the teachers do their work. Oh, wouldn't I catch them gossiping!
I know their tricks!"

"You seem to look after your teacher well. Do you ever call her over the coals for gossiping?"
inquired Dutch Debby, amused.

"No, no," protested Esther quite seriously. "I like to hear them gossiping. When my teacher
and Miss Davis, who's in the next room, and a few other teachers get together, I learn--Oh
such a lot!--from their conversation."

"Then they do teach you after all," laughed Debby.

"Yes, but it's not on the Time Table," said Esther, shaking her little head sapiently. "It's
mostly about young men. Did you ever have a young man, Debby?"

"Don't--don't ask such questions, child!" Debby bent over her needle-work.

"Why not?" persisted Esther. "If I only had a young man when I grew up, I should be proud of
him. Yes, you're trying to turn your head away. I'm sure you had. Was he nice like Lord Eversmonde
or Captain Andrew Sinclair? Why you're crying, Debby!"

"Don't be a little fool, Esther! A tiny fly has just flown into my eye--poor little thing!
He hurts me and does himself no good."

"Let me see, Debby," said Esther. "Perhaps I shall be in time to save him."

"No, don't trouble."

"Don't be so cruel, Debby. You're as bad as Solomon, who pulls off flies' wings to see if they
can fly without them."

"He's dead now. Go on with 'Lady Ann's Rival;' we've been wasting the whole afternoon talking.
Take my advice, Esther, and don't stuff your head with ideas about young men. You're too young.
Now, dear, I'm ready. Go on."

"Where was I? Oh yes. 'Lord Eversmonde folded the fair young form to his manly bosom and pressed
kiss after kiss upon her ripe young lips, which responded passionately to his own. At last
she recovered herself and cried reproachfully, Oh Sigismund, why do you persist in coming here,
when the Duke forbids it?' Oh, do you know, Debby, father said the other day I oughtn't to
come here?"

"Oh no, you must," cried Debby impulsively. "I couldn't part with you now."

"Father says people say you are not good," said Esther candidly.

Debby breathed painfully. "Well!" she whispered.

"But I said people were liars. You are good!"

"Oh, Esther, Esther!" sobbed Debby, kissing the earnest little face with a vehemence that surprised
the child.

"I think father only said that," Esther went on, "because he fancies I neglect Sarah and Isaac
when he's at Shool and they quarrel so about their birthdays when they're together. But they
don't slap one another hard. I'll tell you what! Suppose I bring Sarah down here!"

"Well, but won't she cry and be miserable here, if you read, and with no Isaac to play with?"

"Oh no," said Esther confidently. "She'll keep Bobby company."

Bobby took kindly to little Sarah also. He knew no other dogs and in such circumstances a sensible
animal falls back on human beings. He had first met Debby herself quite casually and the two
lonely beings took to each other. Before that meeting Dutch Debby was subject to wild temptations.
Once she half starved herself and put aside ninepence a week for almost three months and purchased
one-eighth of a lottery ticket from Sugarman the Shadchan, who recognized her existence for
the occasion. The fortune did not come off.

Debby saw less and less of Esther as the months crept on again towards winter, for the little
girl feared her hostess might feel constrained to offer her food, and the children required
more soothing. Esther would say very little about her home life, though Debby got to know a
great deal about her school-mates and her teacher.

One summer evening after Esther had passed into the hands of Miss Miriam Hyams she came to
Dutch Debby with a grave face and said: "Oh, Debby. Miss Hyams is not a heroine."

"No?" said Debby, amused. "You were so charmed with her at first."

"Yes, she is very pretty and her hats are lovely. But she is not a heroine."

"Why, what's happened?"

"You know what lovely weather it's been all day?"

"Yes."

"Well, this morning all in the middle of the Scripture lesson, she said to us, 'What a pity,
girls, we've got to stay cooped up here this bright weather'--you know she chats to us so nicely--'in
some schools they have half-holidays on Wednesday afternoons in the summer. Wouldn't it be
nice if we could have them and be out in the sunshine in Victoria Park?' 'Hoo, yes, teacher,
wouldn't that be jolly?' we all cried. Then teacher said: 'Well, why not ask the Head Mistress
for a holiday this afternoon? You're the highest standard in the school--I dare say if you
ask for it, the whole school will get a holiday. Who will be spokes-woman?' Then all the girls
said I must be because I was the first girl in the class and sounded all my h's, and when the
Head Mistress came into the room I up and curtseyed and asked her if we could have a holiday
this afternoon on account of the beautiful sunshine. Then the Head Mistress put on her eye-glasses
and her face grew black and the sunshine seemed to go out of the room. And she said 'What!
After all the holidays we have here, a month at New Year and a fortnight at Passover, and all
the fast-days! I am surprised that you girls should be so lazy and idle and ask for more. Why
don't you take example by your teacher? Look at Miss Hyams." We all looked at Miss Hyams, but
she was looking for some papers in her desk. 'Look how Miss Hyams works!' said the Head Mistress.
'She never grumbles, she never asks for a holiday!' We all looked again at Miss Hyams, but
she hadn't yet found the papers. There was an awful silence; you could have heard a pin drop.
There wasn't a single cough or rustle of a dress. Then the Head Mistress turned to me and she
said: 'And you, Esther Ansell, whom I always thought so highly of, I'm surprised at your being
the ringleader in such a disgraceful request. You ought to know better. I shall bear it in
mind, Esther Ansell.' With that she sailed out, stiff and straight as a poker, and the door
closed behind her with a bang."

"Well, and what did Miss Hyams say then?" asked Debby, deeply interested.

"She said: 'Selina Green, and what did Moses do when the Children of Israel grumbled for water?'
She just went on with the Scripture lesson, as if nothing had happened."

"I should tell the Head Mistress who sent me on," cried Debby indignantly.

"Oh, no," said Esther shaking her head. "That would be mean. It's a matter for her own conscience.
Oh, but I do wish," she concluded, "we had had a holiday. It would have been so lovely out
in the Park."

Victoria Park was the Park to the Ghetto. A couple of miles off, far enough to make a visit
to it an excursion, it was a perpetual blessing to the Ghetto. On rare Sunday afternoons the
Ansell family minus the Bube toiled there and back en masse, Moses carrying Isaac and Sarah
by turns upon his shoulder. Esther loved the Park in all weathers, but best of all in the summer,
when the great lake was bright and busy with boats, and the birds twittered in the leafy trees
and the lobelias and calceolarias were woven into wonderful patterns by the gardeners. Then
she would throw herself down on the thick grass and look up in mystic rapture at the brooding
blue sky and forget to read the book she had brought with her, while the other children chased
one another about in savage delight. Only once on a Saturday afternoon when her father was
not with them, did she get Dutch Debby to break through her retired habits and accompany them,
and then it was not summer but late autumn. There was an indefinable melancholy about the sere
landscape. Russet refuse strewed the paths and the gaunt trees waved fleshless arms in the
breeze. The November haze rose from the moist ground and dulled the blue of heaven with smoky
clouds amid which the sun, a red sailless boat, floated at anchor among golden and crimson
furrows and glimmering far-dotted fleeces. The small lake was slimy, reflecting the trees on
its borders as a network of dirty branches. A solitary swan ruffled its plumes and elongated
its throat, doubled in quivering outlines beneath the muddy surface. All at once the splash
of oars was heard and the sluggish waters were stirred by the passage of a boat in which a
heroic young man was rowing a no less heroic young woman.

Dutch Debby burst into tears and went home. After that she fell back entirely on Bobby and
Esther and the London Journal and never even saved up nine shillings again.

CHAPTER X.

A SILENT FAMILY.

Sugarman the Shadchan arrived one evening a few days before Purim at the tiny two-storied house
in which Esther's teacher lived, with little Nehemiah tucked under his arm. Nehemiah wore shoes
and short red socks. The rest of his legs was bare. Sugarman always carried him so as to demonstrate
this fact. Sugarman himself was rigged out in a handsome manner, and the day not being holy,
his blue bandanna peeped out from his left coat-tail, instead of being tied round his trouser band.

"Good morning, marm," he said cheerfully.

"Good morning, Sugarman," said Mrs. Hyams.

She was a little careworn old woman of sixty with white hair. Had she been more pious her hair
would never have turned gray. But Miriam had long since put her veto on her mother's black
wig. Mrs. Hyams was a meek, weak person and submitted in silence to the outrage on her deepest
instincts. Old Hyams was stronger, but not strong enough. He, too, was a silent person.

"P'raps you're surprised," said Sugarman, "to get a call from me in my sealskin vest-coat.
But de fact is, marm, I put it on to call on a lady. I only dropped in here on my vay."

"Won't you take a chair?" said Mrs. Hyams. She spoke English painfully and slowly, having been
schooled by Miriam.

"No, I'm not tired. But I vill put Nechemyah down on one, if you permit. Dere! Sit still or
I potch you! P'raps you could lend me your corkscrew."

"With pleasure," said Mrs. Hyams.

"I dank you. You see my boy, Ebenezer, is Barmitzvah next Shabbos a veek, and I may not be
passing again. You vill come?"

"I don't know," said Mrs. Hyams hesitatingly. She was not certain whether Miriam considered
Sugarman on their visiting list.

"Don't say dat, I expect to open dirteen bottles of lemonade! You must come, you and Mr. Hyams
and the whole family."

"Thank you. I will tell Miriam and Daniel and my husband."

"Dat's right. Nechemyah, don't dance on de good lady's chair. Did you hear, Mrs. Hyams, of
Mrs. Jonas's luck?"

"No."

"I won her eleven pounds on the lotteree."

"How nice," said Mrs. Hyams, a little fluttered.

"I would let you have half a ticket for two pounds."

"I haven't the money."

"Vell, dirty-six shillings! Dere! I have to pay dat myself."

"I would if I could, but I can't."

"But you can have an eighth for nine shillings."

Mrs. Hyams shook her head hopelessly.

"How is your son Daniel?" Sugarman asked.

"Pretty well, thank you. How is your wife?"

"Tank Gawd!"

"And your Bessie?"

"Tank Gawd! Is your Daniel in?"

"Yes."

"Tank Gawd! I mean, can I see him?"

"It won't do any good."

"No, not dat," said Sugarman. "I should like to ask him to de Confirmation myself."

"Daniel!" called Mrs. Hyams.

He came from the back yard in rolled-up shirt-sleeves, soap-suds drying on his arms. He was
a pleasant-faced, flaxen-haired young fellow, the junior of Miriam by eighteen months. There
was will in the lower part of the face and tenderness in the eyes.

"Good morning, sir," said Sugarman. "My Ebenezer is Barmitzvah next Shabbos week; vill you
do me the honor to drop in wid your moder and fader after Shool?"

Daniel crimsoned suddenly. He had "No" on his lips, but suppressed it and ultimately articulated
it in some polite periphrasis. His mother noticed the crimson. On a blonde face it tells.

"Don't say dat," said Sugarman. "I expect to open dirteen bottles of lemonade. I have lent
your good moder's corkscrew."

"I shall be pleased to send Ebenezer a little present, but I can't come, I really can't. You
must excuse me." Daniel turned away.

"Vell," said Sugarman, anxious to assure him he bore no malice. "If you send a present I reckon
it de same as if you come."

"That's all right," said Daniel with strained heartiness.

Sugarman tucked Nehemiah under his arm but lingered on the threshold. He did not know how to
broach the subject. But the inspiration came.

"Do you know I have summonsed Morris Kerlinski?"

"No," said Daniel. "What for?"

"He owes me dirty shillings. I found him a very fine maiden, but, now he is married, he says
it was only worth a suvran. He offered it me but I vouldn't take it. A poor man he vas, too,
and got ten pun from a marriage portion society."

"Is it worth while bringing a scandal on the community for the sake of ten shillings? It will
be in all the papers, and Shadchan will be spelt shatcan, shodkin, shatkin, chodcan, shotgun,
and goodness knows what else."

"Yes, but it isn't ten shillings," said Sugarman. "It's dirty shillings."

"But you say he offered you a sovereign."

"So he did. He arranged for two pun ten. I took the suvran--but not in full payment."

"You ought to settle it before the Beth-din," said Daniel vehemently, "or get some Jew to arbitrate.
You make the Jews a laughing-stock. It is true all marriages depend on money," he added bitterly,
"only it is the fashion of police court reporters to pretend the custom is limited to the Jews."

"Vell, I did go to Reb Shemuel," said Sugarman "I dought he'd be the very man to arbitrate."

"Why?" asked Daniel.

"Vy? Hasn't he been a Shadchan himself? From who else shall we look for sympaty?"

"I see," said Daniel smiling a little. "And apparently you got none."

"No," said Sugarman, growing wroth at the recollection. "He said ve are not in Poland."

"Quite true."

"Yes, but I gave him an answer he didn't like," said Sugarman. "I said, and ven ve are not
in Poland mustn't ve keep none of our religion?"

