THE BOY SCOUTS ON THE YUKON

By RALPH VICTOR Author of "Comrades Series"

Illustrated by RUDOLF MENCL

New York HURST & COMPANY Publishers.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE BOY SCOUTS By RALPH VICTOR

The Boy Scout Movement has secured a hold on the American boy that is remarkable in its far-reaching
effects. It is doing a great work in the development of manliness, self-confidence and physical
perfection and is making better citizens out of the members of the organization.

This series will foster interest in the Boy Scout Organization. There is excitement such as
every boy's book should contain. There are many and varied experiences, and much worth-while
information about out-door sports and camp life, in which the youths take part.

1. The Boy Scouts' Patrol 2. The Boy Scouts' Motor-Cycles 3. The Boy Scouts' Canoe Trip 4.
The Boy Scouts in the Canadian Rockies 5. The Boy Scouts' Air Craft 6. The Boy Scouts on the
Yukon 7. The Boy Scouts in the North Woods 8. The Boy Scouts in the Black Hills

Illustrated, 12mo, Cloth Price per Volume, 40 Cents

Copyright, 1912, By The Platt & Peck Co.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                  PAGE
     I.  The "Inside Passage."              9
    II.  "Swiftwater Jim."                 21
   III.  Into Rough Waters.                34
    IV.  On Alaskan Soil.                  46
     V.  A New Mode of Travel.             58
    VI.  The Biggest Bear in the World.    70
   VII.  Into the Wilderness.              83
  VIII.  Colonel Snow's Ranch.             96
    IX.  An Heirloom Returned.            108
     X.  Building the Camp.               121
    XI.  At the Mercy of the Pest.        136
   XII.  Alaska's First Airship.          150
  XIII.  Down the River to Nome.          158
   XIV.  On the Seward Peninsula.         168
    XV.  The Mammoth's Tusks.             179
   XVI.  Homeward Bound.                  189

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

BOY SCOUTS ON THE YUKON

CHAPTER I.

THE "INSIDE PASSAGE."

"Ar-r-rouse ye--r-r-rouse ye, me merry, merry men," boomed the voice of Gerald Moore, with
a slightly Celtic roll of the "r's," as he drummed impatiently on the shutter of the cabin
window, while his companion, Jack Blake, performed a similar tattoo on the adjoining window.
"Faith, and it was daylight hours ago, and ye don't know what ye're missing."

The shutter slid back, and the pleasant, if rather drowsy face of Randolph Peyton peered forth,
and behind his shoulder that of Donald Graeme.

"Daylight, did ye say?" remarked the latter. "It's my opinion it's been daylight all night,
for it surely wasn't dark when we retired, and we've only been in bed a few minutes."

The scene was the outside cabin deck of the well-appointed steamer "Queen" of the Alaska Steamship
Company, which was plowing her way through the quiet waters of the "Inside Passage," on her
way to the land of the Yukon and the Klondike.

The hour was only four in the morning, but the sun was high, and the day in those high latitudes
was well begun.

"No regrets, Don, you sleepyhead," said Gerald. "You've already had seven hours' sleep, and
on this trip one ought not to go to bed at all."

By this time, Jack had succeeded in arousing his brother, Pepper Blake, and the latter's bunk
mate, Dick Wilson, who gazed out a little resentfully, as they threw back the sash, but whose
faces quickly brightened at the scene that met their eyes.

"Yes," said Jack, "there's mighty little darkness up here at this time of year, and I suppose
Don thinks it's an awful waste of good daylight turning it on while we sleep."

"Ye'll see more than this 'wasted' when ye get further north, and I suppose Don will sit up
all night to save it," replied Gerald.

This reference to be cautious and prudent, not to say economical, nature of the canny Scot,
raised a laugh, and the four who had been routed out of their bunks, through the energy of
Jack, who, brought up in a newspaper office and atmosphere, hated to let anything unusual get
away from him, hastily dressed and joined their two chums on the deck.

"I couldn't miss a yard of this scenery," said Jack, "and we've a few things in that line,
along our native Hudson, to brag about, too."

The steamer was treading her way through straits and channels among hundreds of islands that
fenced these almost lake-like waters from the long swells of the North Pacific. Although it
was the latter part of April, early in the year for these latitudes, the influence of the warm
waters of the Japanese Gulf Stream could be seen in the bright green of the islands.

On the other side of the ship, the dark green forests that clothed the mountains of British
Columbia came down to the very water's edge, and swept by in one majestic panorama.

"There's certainly lots of scenery to the mile," said Rand, drawing a long breath, as he gazed
in admiration.

"My grandfather said that is what makes Scotland such a great country," remarked Don, catching
at Rand's half-humorous comment, "standing the land up on end."

"Let's give it the Scout's salute," suggested Pepper, with enthusiasm as the laugh over Don's
serious remark died away. "There ought to be a great echo in those hills."

"Hold on," cried Jack, catching Pepper's arm as he unshipped his bugle. "I had a talk with
the purser last night, and I'm afraid we'll have to 'cut out' the bugle calls on this trip.
He says they have an official bugler aboard, for the call to meals and for the salute at landings,
and we would interfere with him and perhaps affect the comfort of other passengers who may
not be so keen on the early morning hunt for scenery as we."

The Scout discipline and what might be called the Scout ritual, to which the boys had been
subjecting themselves for several years, was immediately apparent in the murmurs of approval
which greeted Jack's suggestion. To those who have followed the career of the Boy Scouts of
Creston on the Hudson, in the preceding volumes of this series, it is scarcely necessary to
introduce the young men with whom this narrative starts.

The formation of the Patrol of Boy Scouts, at the suggestion of Colonel Snow, a retired officer
of the United States army; a mysterious robbery, and a gallant rescue from the waters of the
Hudson, are told in the first volume, "Boy Scouts' Patrol." The second volume leads them into
adventures and difficulties incident to an excursion on motor cycles that have come to each
of them as a reward for their aid in the rescue referred to which are told under the title
of "Boy Scouts' Motorcycles," in the course of which Jack is captured by moonshiners on whom
the boys turn the tables. "Boy Scouts' Canoe Trip," brings the chums into conflict with Sound
pirates, during a canoe trip along the Long Island shore, and give Pepper and Dick, who are
lost in a fog, a chance to help a foghorn operator of the United States Lighthouse Service,
out of a very serious state of affairs. "Boy Scouts in the Rockies," the fourth volume, tells
of the perils attending a trip into the Canadian Northwest, in search of a lost mine in which
they have been given each an interest by the owner, Mr. Royce; their rescue of the latter from
enemies who are also hunting the same mine; of hunting among the Indians, and of the rediscovery
of the lost mine which has been named Uncas, in honor of their patrol.

The fifth volume, under the caption, "Boy Scouts' Aircraft," relates how their interest in
aviation is aroused by the evolutions of a military aviator viewed during a visit to an army
post; of the building by themselves of a glider with which they win a contest of these elementary
aircraft, the prize being complete airship motors of the highest efficiency. With these engines
they equip two aeroplanes and meet with various adventures of a thrilling nature, including
an aerial kidnapping and pursuit in aeroplanes, the winning of an aeroplane meet, and the discovery
and deciphering of the Narwhal's Tusk, which starts them on their way to Alaska.

The preceding February, the boys had graduated from Highcrest Academy, and some weeks before
that event Colonel Snow, who had been for several years on friendly terms with the boys; had
been the means of inducing them to form the Scouts' Patrol, and had looked after their promotion
to be first grade Scouts, had been in consultation with their parents over a mysterious matter
of which they had as yet learned nothing.

One day in March, as the boys were gathered in the club room in Mr. Scott's house, discussing
plans for a Scout encampment, of the Patrols of the nearby towns, Colonel Snow entered the
gate, and they crowded out on the porch to greet him.

"We were just planning to extend our Scout knowledge and experience by an actual encampment,
this summer--sort of 'Spring maneuvres' you know, like the regulars and National Guard," said Rand.

"Perhaps I can offer you something of actual field experience," said Colonel Snow. "That's
what I'm here for, and if you have time I've a proposition to make ... rather a cold one, however."

"I-i-ce c-c-cream soda?" inquired Pepper, flippantly, amid reproving frowns from the other Scouts.

"Why, you can't even think of that without shivering in your speech," said Jack, with scorn.

"Don't mind him, Colonel Snow, his appetite is like the poor, it's always with us," apologized
Rand.

The army officer smiled indulgently upon the somewhat abashed Pepper.

"Don't lose it, Pepper," said he. "That appetite may prove one of the best of assets in this
proposition of mine. How would you all like a trip to Alaska?"

The patrol came to "attention," every member on his feet and for the moment speechless.

"What! the North Pole?" gasped Rand, whose former residence in the Sunny South inclined him
to look upon all high latitudes with suspicion.

"Not exactly," replied Colonel Snow, with a laugh, in which all joined as a kind of relief
to their feelings. Then I thrust out my long tongue. It has a sharp, horny tip, and has barbs on
it too. Very tiny insects stick to a liquid like glue that covers my tongue. I suppose I must tell
you that I like a taste of the ripest fruit and grain.
 In our trip to
the Canadian Rockies, I secured personally, as an investment, certain timber lands in British
Columbia at the headwaters of the Yukon watershed, and my purpose is to cut the timber on these
lands, to be eventually floated down the rivers and used in the various mines and mining camps,
now being developed in both the Yukon and Alaska territories.

"On my way to my mission, this Spring, I intend to take in my sawmill plant and set it up and
get ready for next winter's cutting. I shall be obliged to employ about a dozen men to establish
the plant, and my experience with you Scouts in the field, in the Northwest, indicates to me
that you can be as useful to me as anyone I could pick up. It will also give you a chance to
see for the first time a new and growing country, by which you are bound by all the ties of
government and flag. I will say at once that I have talked with your parents and your experience
with me in Canada has given them sufficient confidence to furnish their consent. The decision
rests with you."

The magnitude of the suggestion stunned the boys for the time, but they soon regained their
self-possession, and promised an early decision. So it came about that after discussing the
matter with their parents they had another talk with the Colonel when final arrangements were
made. The boys, who had already banked three dividends from the Uncas mine, now a well paying
property, were to outfit themselves, Colonel Snow paying all other expenses to, in and from
Alaska, and allowing them fair wages while actually engaged on the sawmill work. Their outfits
were selected by Colonel Snow, who had to veto many highly colored and fanciful suggestions
of snowshoes, tents, sleeping bags and heavy furs.

"I have an idea," said the Colonel, "that there will be many days when you boys will be satisfied
with a thin suit of khaki and even yearn for linen. Even if we should reach the Arctic Circle
in winter, you will remember that our latest Arctic and Antarctic explorers have about discarded
furs for thick woolens. Above all things, don't forget the mosquito nettings."

The night before the Scouts were to leave Creston they were holding a final meeting at the
club-rooms, when Pepper burst forth excitedly:

"N-n-now we c-c-an s-solve it."

"What, your appetite?" asked Jack.

"N-n-no, the ivory mystery."

"What's that; your head?" put in Rand.

"N-n-no," yelped Pepper, whose face now rivaled his locks in color and whose fists were doubled
up. "I mean that ivory--that narwhal's horn. We're going to Alaska and we can find that cave."

"Faith, that's so. We might get all that ivory," put in Gerald, with interest.

"I think I heard somewhere, but I'll not be sure about it," suggested the cautious Don, "that
there's more than five hundred and ninety thousand square miles in Alaska, and I ha'e me doots
that we find it the verra first day."

Despite these gibes, their interest was aroused and the cave, whose mouth was shaped like the
ace of clubs, figured not a little in the imaginations of the boys, when, followed by the good
wishes of relatives, neighbors and friends, they entrained the next morning like true soldiers
in their patrol uniforms, and from the rear platform of the train, sounded the Scout salute
to their native town upon their bugles.

Four days later they joined Colonel Snow, who had preceded them, in Seattle, and, after two
days of sightseeing in the Washington metropolis, boarded the "Queen," and at ten o'clock at
night, steamed out upon Puget's Sound, for their long trip of nearly a thousand miles on the water.

Among the cases of machinery and other freight, traveling in the vessel's hold under Colonel
Snow's name, was a long box shaped like an old-fashioned piano case, which had nothing to do
with Colonel Snow's enterprises. Despite the fact that it weighed more than half a ton, the
boys had clubbed together to pay the rather exorbitant freight charges upon it. Superfluous
as it appeared at one time to the Colonel, it was destined to play an important part in the
Scouts' adventures in the land of gold and glaciers.

An hour of gazing on the scenic wonders that sped past on the right and left the morning after
their departure from Seattle, aroused the boys' appetites, and they were beginning to long
for the breakfast bugle call, when Colonel Snow came from his stateroom and bade them a hearty
good morning. He had just redrawn their attention to the magnificent land and waterscape, with
the remark that Major General Greeley, of Arctic fame, had made ten voyages to Alaska, and
on each trip found some new wonder in the "Inside Passage" when there arose a chorus of yells,
curses and vituperation from the deck below, and leaning over the railing, the boys saw a man
with a pistol in his hand backing away from two who were striking at him with handspikes that
they had grabbed from the side of the vessel.

At the same time a youth of about their own age dashed in behind the man with the pistol, and
dived between his legs, tripping him up. He doubled up like a jackknife, fell back against
the gangway gate, which had not been properly fastened, and shot through it into the tideway,
here very swift, and disappeared. The quickly raised cry of "Man Overboard," reached the pilot
house, the engine room gong boomed, the screw stopped and the "Queen" gradually lost headway.

CHAPTER II.

"SWIFTWATER JIM."

The Scouts had joined in the cry which notified the pilot house that a man had gone overboard,
but before the "Queen" lost headway and began to back the man in the water had slipped some
distance astern. Life preservers and life rings were quickly thrown after him, but no sooner
had the derelict come to the surface than it was seen that he was dazed and almost helpless
from the effects, probably, of some injury he had sustained as he went through the gangway.
Luckily, the gangway gate, which he had pushed out had floated alongside of him on the tideway,
and he had retained consciousness enough to grasp one side of it with a drowning man's grip,
but was in danger of momentarily losing it. The boys with Colonel Snow at their head had rushed
along the upper rail, where Rand began at once to strip off his coat and the soft canoe shoes
he was wearing on shipboard, while Gerald followed suit. All the boys, as became trained Scouts,
were good swimmers, but Rand pushed Gerald back, impetuously, saying:

"I'm the heavier, Gerald, let me go on this. It may be a fight," and at the same time mounted
the rail. As he did so, Colonel Snow seized a long thin line that hung for just such emergencies,
on a spike at the rail, threw the knotted loop over Rand's arm and shoulder, saying:

"These are cold waters, and you may need this. If it hampers you, cast it off, and take to
the gangplank."

Rand leaped from the rail, with his utmost strength, striving to escape the suction of the
now backward-revolving screw, and struck out toward the man whose head was sinking under the
surface, although his hands still grasped the gangplank with a feeble hold. With a dozen stalwart
strokes, Rand reached the almost unconscious man, threw the loop from his own shoulder over
his head and drew it under his arms and placed both his hands firmly upon the plank. Then grasping
the bolt staple of the timber, himself, he yelled:

"Pull in; don't back any further," and in a few minutes willing and stalwart hands dragged
them toward the steamer.

Already, a lifeboat had been dropped into the water and into this the half-drowned man was
lifted, while Rand, himself already numbed by the icy water had to be assisted aboard. He was
lifted to the deck amid the cheers of his chums, who rushed him to his stateroom for dry clothing.

"That was a great piece of work," said Captain Huxley, commander of the "Queen." "No professional
life saver could have got on the job in quicker time. Those are fine boys of yours, Colonel Snow."

"That's part of their training as Scouts," replied the Colonel, "and it's meant to be practical.
That's why I did not interfere with Peyton's attempt at a rescue. But what started this?"

"That's what I'm going to find out, good and quick," replied Captain Huxley. "As usual at this
time of year, I've got a tough crowd in the steerage, and I imagine the whole thing started
in a poker game that has been running on the engine room deck ever since we left Seattle. Will
you go along?"

Accompanied by Colonel Snow and the boys who joined them at that moment, Rand none the worse
for his first dip in Pacific waters, Captain Huxley strode down to the engine room, where first
aid had been administered to the half-drowned man, who had come to his senses.

"Well, well; if it isn't 'Swiftwater Jim,'" exclaimed the Captain. "Didn't know we had you aboard."

"Wa'al, ye come mighty near losin' me," the patient answered, and then continued. "I come on
board just as ye were castin' off last night."

