     "On the semi-tropical island of St. Helena, S.C., the native
     islanders have, in times past, been content to busy themselves in
     their beautiful cotton fields or in their own little
     palmetto-shaded houses, but the war has brought to them as to the
     rest of the world broader vision, and now, despite their very
     limited resources, 71 of them have formed Unit No. 29 of the
     Circle. They not only do war work, but they give whatever service
     is needed in the community. The members knit for the soldiers and
     write letters to St. Helena boys for their relatives. During the
     influenza epidemic the unit formed itself into a health committee
     in cooperation with the Red Cross and did most effective work in
     preventing the spread of the disease."

Similar and enlarged activities were characteristic of the units all over the nation. They
made manifest to the world the Negro's generosity and his willingness in so far as lies in
his power, to bear his part of the burden of helping his own race.

After the war the units of the Circle did not grow weary. Their inspiration to concentrate
was for the relief of physical suffering and need; to assist existing organizations in all
sorts of welfare work. As they had helped soldiers and soldiers' families, they proposed to
extend a helping hand to working girls, children, invalids and all Negroes deserving aid.

To the lasting glory of the race and the efficient self-sacrificing spirit of the men engaged,
was the wonderful work of the Negro Young Men's Christian Association among the soldiers of
this country and overseas. Some day a book will be written dealing adequately with this phase
of war activity.

The best writers of the race will find in it a theme well worthy of their finest talents. The
subject can be touched upon only briefly here.

To the untiring efforts and great ability of Dr. J.E. Moorland, senior secretary of the Negro
Men's Department of the International Committee, with his corps of capable assistants at Washington,
belongs the great credit of having organized and directed the work throughout the war.

Not a serious complaint has come from any quarter about the work of the Y.M.C.A. workers; not
a penny of money was wrongfully diverted and literally not a thing has occurred to mar the
record of the organization. Nothing but praise has come to it for the noble spirit of duty,
good will and aid which at all times characterized its operations. The workers sacrificed their
pursuits and pleasures, their personal affairs and frequently their remuneration; times innumerable
they risked their lives to minister to the comfort and well being of the soldiers. She and I will
be in the balcony that looks on the road: you have nothing to do
but to stop under it, and we will come down to you.

Do in this what you like best. After all, think very seriously. Your letter, which will be waited
for, is to determine everything. No less than fifty-five Y.M.C.A.
centers were conducted in cantonments in America, presided over by 300 Negro secretaries. Fourteen
additional secretaries served with Student Army Training Corps units in our colleges. Sixty
secretaries served overseas, making a grand total of 374 Y.M.C.A. secretaries doing war work.

