The plant set everything by her little berry. She thought there never was in all the airth
sech a beautiful berry as hern,--so pretty shaped and so whitey blue, with sech a soft skin
and pinky neck, and more partic'lar with that nice, white, striped stone inside of it. She
held it all day and all night tight and fast. When it rained real hard, and the wind blowed,
she kind o' stretched out some of her leaves, and covered her little berry up, and she done
the same when the sun was too hot. And the berry growed and growed, and was so fat and smooth
and pretty! And the plant was jest wropped up in her little berry, lovin' it terr'ble hard,
and bein' dreadful proud on it, too.

Well, one day, real suddent, when the plant wasn't thinkin' of any storm comin', a little wind
riz up. 'T wa'n't a gale, 't wa'n't half as hard a blow as the berry'd seen lots o' times and
never got hurt nor nothin'. And the plant wa'n't lookin' out for any danger, when all of a
suddent there come a little bit of a snap, and the slimsy little pink stem broke, and the little
berry fell and rolled away, and, 'fore you could say "Jack Robinson," 't was clean gone out
o' sight. I can't begin to tell ye how that plant took on. Seem 's if she'd die, or go ravin'
crazy. It's only folks that has lost jest what they set most by on airth that can understand
about it, I s'pose. She wouldn't b'leeve it fust off; she 'most knowed she'd wake up and feel
her little berry a-holdin' close to her, hangin' on her, snugglin' up to her under the shady
leaves. The other plants 'round there tried to chirk her up and help her. One on 'em told her
how it had lost all its little berries itself, a long spell back, and how it had some ways
stood it and got over it. "But they wa'n't like mine," thinks the poor plant. "There never,
never was no berry like mine, with its pretty figger, its pinky, slim little neck, and its
soft, smooth-feelin' skin." And another plant told her mebbe her berry was saved from growin'
up a trouble to her, gettin' bad and hard, with mebbe a worm inside on it, to make her ashamed
and sorry. "Oh, no, no!" thinks the mother plant. "My berry'd never got bad and hard, and I'd
'a' kep' any worm from touchin' its little white heart." Not a single thing the plant-folks
said to her done a mite o' good. Their talk only worried her and pestered her, when she jest
wanted to be let alone, so's she could think about her little berry all to herself.

Just where the berry used to hang, and where the little pinky stem broke off, there was a sore
place, a sort o' scar, that ached and smarted all day and all night, and never, never healed
up. And bimeby the poor plant got all wore out with the achin' and the mournin' and the missin'
and she 'peared to feel her heart all a-dryin' up and stoppin', and her leaves turned yeller
and wrinkled, and--she was dead. She couldn't live on, ye see, without her little berry.

They called it bein' dead, folks did, and it looked like it, for there she lay without a sign
of life for a long, long, long spell. 'Twas for days and weeks and months anyway. But it didn't
seem so long to the mother plant. She shet up her eyes, feelin' powerful tired and lonesome,
and the next thing she knowed she opened 'em again, and she was wide awoke. She hardly knowed
herself, though, she was so fresh and juicy and 'live, so kind o' young every way. Fust off
she didn't think o' anything but that, how good and well she felt, and how beautiful things
was all 'round her. Then all of a suddent she rec'lected her little berry, and she says to
herself, "Oh, dear, dear me! If only my own little berry was here to see me now, and know how
I feel!" She thought she said it to herself, but mebbe she talked out loud, for, jest as she
said it, somebody answered her. 'T was a Angel, and he says, "Why your little berry does see
you,--look there." And she looked, and she see he was p'intin' to the beautif'lest little plant
you never see,--straight and nice, with little bits o' soft green leaves, with the sun a-shinin'
through 'em, and,--well, somehow, you never can get it through your head how mothers take in
things,--she knowed cert'in sure that was her little berry.

The Angel begun to speak. He was goin' to explain how, if she hadn't never lost her berry,
'twouldn't never 'a' growed into this pretty plant, but, he see, all of a suddent, that he
needn't take the trouble. She showed in her face she knowed all about it,--every blessed thing.
I tell ye, even angels ain't much use explainin' when there's mothers, and it's got to do with
their own child'en. Yes, the mother plant see it all, without tellin'. She was jest a mite
'shamed but she was terr'ble pleased.

The Stony Head

V

When little Lib told the story I give below, Deacon Zenas Welcome was one of the listeners.
The deacon was a son of old Elder Welcome who had been many years before the pastor of the
little church in a neighboring village. Elder Welcome was one of the old-fashioned sort not
so common in these days, a good man, but stern and somewhat harsh. He preached only the terrors
of the law, dwelt much upon the doctrines, the decrees, election, predestination, and eternal
punishment, and rarely lingered over such themes as the fatherhood of God, his love to mankind,
and his wonderful gift to a lost world. The son followed in his father's footsteps. He was
a hard, austere, melancholy man, undemonstrative and reticent, shutting out all brightness
from his own life, and clouding many an existence going on around him. I have always thought
that his unwonted presence among us that day had a purpose, and that he had come to spy out
some taint of heterodoxy in Lib's tales, to reprove and condemn. He went away quietly, however,
when the story was ended, and we heard nothing of reproof or condemnation.

The Stony Head

Once there was somethin' way up on the side of a mountain that looked like a man's head. The
rocks up there'd got fixed so's they jest made a great big head and face, and everybody could
see it as plain as could be. Folks called it the Stony Head, and they come to see it from miles
away. There was a man lived round there jest where he could see the head from his winder. He
was a man that things had gone wrong with all along; he'd had lots o' trouble, and he didn't
take it very easy. He fretted and complained, and blamed it on other folks, and more partic'lar
on--God. And one day--he'd jest come to live in them parts--he looked out of his winder, and
he see, standin' out plain ag'in the sky, he see that Stony Head. It looked real ha'sh and
hard and stony and dark, and all of a suddent the man thought it was--God.

"Yes," he says to hisself, "that's jest the way I 'most knowed he looked, ha'sh and hard and
stony and dark, and that's him." The man was dreadful scaret of it, but some ways he couldn't
stop lookin' at it. And bimeby he shet hisself up there all alone, and spent his whole time
jest a-lookin' at that hard, stony face, and thinkin' who't was, and who'd brought all his
trouble on him. There was poor folks all 'round that deestrict, but he never done nothin' to
help 'em; let 'em be hungry or thirsty or ailin', or shet up in jail, or anything, he never
helped 'em or done a thing for 'em, 'cause he was a-lookin' every single minute at that head,
and seein' how stony and hard it was, and bein' scaret of it and the One he thought it looked like.

Folks that was in trouble come along and knocked at his door, and he never opened it a mite,
even to see who was there. Sheep and lambs that had got lost come a-strayin' into his yard,
but he never took 'em in, nor showed 'em the way home. He wa'n't no good to nobody, not even
to hisself, for he was terr'ble unhappy and scaret and angry. So 't went on, oh! I d'know how
long, years and years, I guess likely, and there the man was shet up all alone, lookin' and
lookin', and scaret at lookin' at that ha'sh, hard, stony face and head. But one day, as he
was settin' there by the winder lookin', he heerd a little sound. I d'know what made him hear
it jest then. There'd been sech sounds as that time and time ag'in, and he never took no notice.
'Twas like a child a-cryin', and that's common enough.

But this time it seemed diff'ent, and he couldn't help takin' notice. He tried not to hear
it, but he had to. 'T was a little child a-cryin' as if it had lost its way and was scaret,
and the man found he couldn't stand it somehow. Mebbe the reason was he'd had a little boy
of his own once, and he lost him. Now I think on 't, that was one o' the things he blamed on
God, and thought about when he looked at the Stone Head. Anyway, he couldn't stand this cryin'
that time, and he started up, and, fust thing he knowed, he'd opened the door and gone out.
He hadn't been out in the sunshine and the air for a long spell, and it made his head swimmy
at fust. But he heerd the little cryin' ag'in, and he run along on to find the child. But he
couldn't find it; every time he'd think he was close to it, he'd hear the cryin' a little further
off. And he'd go on and on, a-stumblin' over stones and fallin' over logs and a-steppin' into
holes, but stickin' to it, and forgettin' everything only that little cryin' voice ahead of
him. Seems 's if he jest must find that little lost boy or girl, 's if he'd be more 'n willin'
to give up his own poor lonesome old life to save that child. And, jest 's he come to thinkin'
that, he see somethin' ahead of him movin' and in a minute he knowed he'd found the lost child.

'Fore he thought what he was a-doin', he got down on his knees jest's he used to do 'fore he
got angry at God, and was goin' to thank him for helpin' him to save that child. Then he rec'lected.
It come back to him who God was, and how he'd seed his head, with the ha'sh stony face up on
the mountain, and that made him look up to see it ag'in.

And oh! what do you think he see? There was the same head up there,--he couldn't make a mistake
about that,--but the face, oh! the face was so diff'ent. It wasn't ha'sh nor hard nor dark
any more. There was such a lovin', beautiful, kind sort o' look on it now. Some ways it made
the man think a mite of the way his father, that had died ever so long ago, used to look at
him when he was a boy, and had been bad, and then was sorry and 'shamed. Oh, 't was the beautif'lest
face you never see! "Oh! what ever does it mean?" says the man out loud. "What's changed that
face so? Oh! what in the world's made it so diff'ent?" And jest that minute a Angel come up
close to him. 'T was a little young Angel, and I guess mebbe 't was what he'd took for a lost
child, and that he'd been follerin' so fur. And the Angel says, "The face ain't changed a mite.
'Twas jest like that all the time, only you're lookin' at it from a diff'ent p'int." And 'twas
so, and he see it right off. He'd been follerin' that cryin' so fur and so long that he'd got
into a diff'ent section o' country, and he'd got a diff'ent view, oh! a terr'ble diff'ent view,
and he never went back.

Diff'ent Kind o' Bundles

VI

Everybody in Greenhills knew "Stoopin' Jacob," the little humpbacked boy who lived at the north
end of the village. From babyhood he had suffered from a grievous deformity which rounded his
little shoulders and bowed the frail form. It was characteristic of the kindly folk of the
neighborhood, that, instead of calling the boy Hump-backed or Crooked-backed Jacob, they gave
him the name of Stoopin' Jacob, as if the bowed and bent posture was voluntary, and not enforced.

