are probably more familiar to the present generation than any of the originals. 'Pope in the
worsted stockings' is the title hit off for him by Horace Smith, and has about the same degree
of truth as most smart sayings of the kind. The 'worsted stockings' at least are characteristic.
Crabbe's son and biographer indicates some of the surroundings of his father's early life in
a description of the uncle, a Mr. Tovell, with whom the poet's wife, the Mira of his Journal,
passed her youth. He was a sturdy yeoman, living in an old house with a moat, a rookery, and
fishponds. The hall was paved with black and white marble, and the staircase was of black oak,
slippery as ice, with a chiming clock and a barrel-organ on the landing-places. The handsome
drawing-room and dining-rooms were only used on grand occasions, such as the visit of a neighbouring
peer. Mrs. Tovell jealously reserved for herself the duty of scrubbing these state apartments,
and sent any servant to the right-about who dared to lay unhallowed hands upon them. The family
sat habitually in the old-fashioned kitchen, by a huge open chimney, where the blaze of a whole
pollard sometimes eclipsed the feeble glimmer of the single candle in an iron candlestick,
intended to illuminate Mrs. Tovell's labours with the needle. Masters and servants, with any
travelling tinker or ratcatcher, all dined together, and the nature of their meals has been
described by Crabbe himself:--

    But when the men beside their station took,
    The maidens with them, and with these the cook;
    When one huge wooden bowl before them stood,
    Filled with huge balls of farinaceous food;
    With bacon, mass saline, where never lean
    Beneath the brown and bristly rind was seen;
    When from a single horn the party drew
    Their copious draughts of heavy ale and new;

then, the poet goes on to intimate, squeamish persons might feel a little uncomfortable. After
dinner followed a nap of precisely one hour. Then bottles appeared on the table, and neighbouring
farmers, with faces rosy with brandy, drifted in for a chat. One of these heroes never went
to bed sober, but scandalised all teetotallers by retaining all his powers and coursing after
he was ninety. Bowl after bowl of punch was emptied, and the conversation took so convivial
a character that Crabbe generally found it expedient to withdraw, though his son, who records
these performances, was held to be too young to be injured, and the servants were too familiar
for their presence to be a restraint.

It was in this household that the poet found his Mira. Crabbe's own father was apparently at
a lower point of the social scale; and during his later years took to drinking and to flinging
dishes about the room whenever he was out of temper. Crabbe always drew from the life; most
of his characters might have joined in his father's drinking bouts, or told stories over Mr.
Tovell's punchbowls. Doubtless a social order of the same kind survived till a later period
in various corners of the island. The Tovells of to-day get their fashions from London, and
their labourers, instead of dining with them in their kitchen, have taken to forming unions
and making speeches about their rights. If, here and there, in some remote nooks we find an
approximation to the coarse, hearty patriarchal mode of life, we regard it as a naturalist
regards a puny modern reptile, the representative of gigantic lizards of old geological epochs.
A sketch or two of its peculiarities, sufficiently softened and idealised to suit modern tastes,
forms a picturesque background to a modern picture. Some of Miss Brontë's rough Yorkshiremen
would have drunk punch with Mr. Tovell; and the farmers in the 'Mill on the Floss' are representatives
of the same race, slightly degenerate, in so far as they are just conscious that a new cause
of disturbance is setting into the quiet rural districts. Dandie Dinmont again is a relation
of Crabbe's heroes, though the fresh air of the Cheviots and the stirring traditions of the
old border life have conferred upon him a more poetical colouring. To get a realistic picture
of country life as Crabbe saw it, we must go back to Squire Western, or to some of the roughly-hewn
masses of flesh who sat to Hogarth. Perhaps it may be said that Miss Austen's delicate portrait
of the more polished society, which took the waters at Bath, and occasionally paid a visit
to London, implies a background of coarser manners and more brutal passions, which lay outside
her peculiar province. The question naturally occurs to social philosophers, whether the improvement
in the external decencies of life and the wider intellectual horizon of modern days prove a
genuine advance over the rude and homely plenty of an earlier generation. I refer to such problems
only to remark that Crabbe must be consulted by those who wish to look upon the seamy side
of the time which he describes. He very soon dropped his nymphs and shepherds, and ceased to
invoke the idyllic muse. In his long portrait gallery there are plenty of virtuous people,
and some people intended to be refined; but features indicative of coarse animal passions,
brutality, selfishness, and sensuality are drawn to the life, and the development of his stories
is generally determined by some of the baser elements of human nature. 'Jesse and Colin' are
described in one of the Tales; but they are not the Jesse and Colin of Dresden china. They
are such rustics as ate fat bacon and drank 'heavy ale and new;' not the imaginary personages
who exchanged amatory civilities in the old-fashioned pastorals ridiculed by Pope and Gay.

Crabbe's rough style is indicative of his general temper. It is in places at least the most
slovenly and slipshod that was ever adopted by any true poet. The authors of the 'Rejected
Addresses' had simply to copy, without attempting the impossible task of caricaturing. One
of their familiar couplets, for example, runs thus:--

    Emmanuel Jennings brought his youngest boy
    Up as a corn-cutter, a safe employ!

And here is the original Crabbe:--

    Swallow, a poor attorney, brought his boy
    Up at his desk, and gave him his employ.

When boy cannot be made to rhyme with employ, Crabbe is very fond of dragging in a hoy. In
the 'Parish Register' he introduces a narrative about a village grocer and his friend in these
lines:--

    Aged were both, that Dawkins, Ditchem this,
    Who much of marriage thought and much amiss.

Or to quote one more opening of a story:--

    Counter and Clubb were men in trade, whose pains,
    Credit, and prudence, brought them constant gains;
    Partners and punctual, every friend agreed
    Counter and Clubb were men who must succeed.

But of such gems anyone may gather as many as he pleases by simply turning over Crabbe's pages.
In one sense, they are rather pleasant than otherwise. They are so characteristic and put forward
with such absolute simplicity that they have the same effect as a good old provincialism in
the mouth of a genuine countryman. It must, however, be admitted that Crabbe's careful study
of Pope had not initiated him in some of his master's secrets. The worsted stockings were uncommonly
thick. If Pope's brilliance of style savours too much of affectation, Crabbe never manages
to hit off an epigram in the whole of his poetry. The language seldom soars above the style
which would be intelligible to the merest clodhopper; and we can understand how, when in his
later years Crabbe was introduced to wits and men of the world, he generally held his peace,
or, at most, let fall some bit of dry quiet humour. At rare intervals he remembers that a poet
ought to indulge in a figure of speech, and laboriously compounds a simile which appears in
his poetry like a bit of gold lace on a farmer's homespun coat. He confessed as much in answer
to a shrewd criticism of Jeffrey's, saying that he generally thought of such illustrations
and inserted them after he had finished his tale. Here is one of these deliberately-concocted
ornaments, intended to explain the remark that the difference between the character of two
brothers came out when they were living together quietly:--

    As various colours in a painted ball,
    While it has rest are seen distinctly all;
    Till, whirl'd around by some exterior force,
    They all are blended in the rapid course;
    So in repose and not by passion swayed
    We saw the difference by their habits made;
    But, tried by strong emotions, they became
    Filled with one love, and were in heart the same.

The conceit is ingenious enough in one sense, but painfully ingenious. It requires some thought
to catch the likeness suggested, and then it turns out to be purely superficial. The resemblance
of such a writer to Pope obviously does not go deep. Crabbe imitates Pope because everybody
imitated him at that day. He adopted Pope's metre because it had come to be almost the only
recognised means of poetical expression. He stuck to it after his contemporaries had introduced
new versification, partly because he was old-fashioned to the backbone and partly because he
had none of those lofty inspirations which naturally generate new forms of melody. He seldom
trusts himself to be lyrical, and when he does his versification is nearly as monotonous as
it is in his narrative poetry. We must not expect to soar with Crabbe into any of the loftier
regions; to see the world 'apparelled in celestial light,' or to descry

    Such forms as glitter in the muses' ray,
    With orient hues, unborrowed of the sun.

We shall find no vehement outbursts of passion, breaking loose from the fetters of sacred convention.
Crabbe is perfectly content with the British Constitution, with the Thirty-nine Articles, and
all respectabilities in Church and State, and therefore he is quite content also with the good
old jogtrot of the recognised metres; his language, halting invariably, and for the most part
clumsy enough, is sufficiently differentiated from prose by the mould into which it is run,
and he never wants to kick over the traces with his more excitable contemporaries.

                The good old rule
    Sufficeth him, the simple plan

that each verse should consist of ten syllables, with an occasional Alexandrine to accommodate
a refractory epithet, and should rhyme peaceably with its neighbour.

From all which it may be too harshly inferred that Crabbe is merely a writer in rhyming prose,
and deserving of no attention from the more enlightened adherents of a later school. The inference,
I say, would be hasty, for it is impossible to read Crabbe patiently without receiving a very
distinct and original impression. If some pedants of æsthetic philosophy should declare that
we ought not to be impressed because Crabbe breaks all their rules, we can only reply they
are mistaking their trade. The true business of the critic is to discover from observation
what are the conditions under which a book appeals to our sympathies, and, if he finds an apparent
exception to his rules, to admit that he has made an oversight, and not to condemn the facts
which persist in contradicting his theories. It may, indeed, be freely granted that Crabbe
has suffered seriously by his slovenly methods and his insensibility to the more exquisite
and ethereal forms of poetical excellence. But however he may be classified, he possesses the
essential mark of genius, namely, that his pictures, however coarse the workmanship, stamp
themselves on our minds indelibly and instantaneously. His pathos is here and there clumsy,
but it goes straight to the mark. His characteristic qualities were first distinctly shown
in the 'Village,' which was partly composed under Burke's eye, and was more or less touched
by Johnson. It was, indeed, a work after Johnson's own heart, intended to be a pendant, or
perhaps a corrective, to Goldsmith's 'Deserted Village.' It is meant to give the bare blank
facts of rural life, stripped of all sentimental gloss. To read the two is something like hearing
a speech from an optimist landlord and then listening to the comments of Mr. Arch. Goldsmith,
indeed, was far too exquisite an artist to indulge in mere conventionalities about agricultural
bliss. If his 'Auburn' is rather idealised, the most prosaic of critics cannot object to the
glow thrown by the memory of the poet over the scene of now ruined happiness, and, moreover,
Goldsmith's delicate humour guards him instinctively from laying on his rose-colour too thickly.
Crabbe, however, will have nothing to do with rose-colour, thick or thin. There is one explicit
reference in the poem to his predecessor's work, and it is significant. Everybody remembers,
or ought to remember, Goldsmith's charming pastor, to whom it can only be objected that he
has not the fear of political economists before his eyes. This is Crabbe's retort after describing
a dying pauper in need of spiritual consolation:--

    And does not he, the pious man, appear,
    He, 'passing rich with forty pounds a year?'
    Ah! no; a shepherd of a different stock,
    And far unlike him, feeds this little flock:
    A jovial youth, who thinks his Sunday's task
    As much as God or man can fairly ask;
    The rest he gives to loves and labours light,
    To fields the morning, and to feasts the night.
    None better skilled the noisy pack to guide,
    To urge their chase, to cheer them, or to chide;
    A sportsman keen, he shoots through half the day,
    And, skilled at whist, devotes the night to play.

This fox-hunting parson (of whom Cowper has described a duplicate) lets the pauper die as he
pleases; and afterwards allows him to be buried without attending, performing the funerals,
it seems, in a lump upon Sundays. Crabbe admits in a note that such negligence was uncommon,
but adds that it is not unknown. The flock is, on the whole, worthy of the shepherd. The old
village sports have died out in favour of smuggling and wrecking. The poor are not, as rich
men fancy, healthy and well fed. Their work makes them premature victims to ague and rheumatism;
their food is

    Homely, not wholesome, plain, not plenteous, such
    As you who praise would never deign to touch.

The ultimate fate of the worn-out labourer is the poorhouse, described in lines of which it
is enough to say that Scott and Wordsworth learnt them by heart, and the melancholy deathbed
already noticed. Are we reading a poem or a Blue Book done into rhyme? may possibly be the
question of some readers. The answer should perhaps be that a good many Blue Books contain
an essence which only requires to be properly extracted and refined to become genuine poetry.
If Crabbe's verses retain rather too much of the earthly elements, he is capable of transmuting
his minerals into genuine gold, as well as of simply collecting them. Nothing, for example,
is more characteristic than the mode in which the occasional descriptions of nature are harmoniously
blended with the human life in his poetry. Crabbe is an ardent lover of a certain type of scenery,
to which justice has not often been done. We are told how, after a long absence from Suffolk,
he rode sixty miles from his house to have a dip in the sea. Some of his poems appear to be
positively impregnated with a briny, or rather perhaps a tarry, odour. The sea which he loved
was by no means a Byronic sea. It has no grandeur of storm, and still less has it the Mediterranean
blue. It is the sluggish muddy element which washes the flat shores of his beloved Suffolk.
He likes even the shelving beach, with fishermen's boats and decaying nets and remnants of
stale fish. He loves the dreary estuary, where the slow tide sways backwards and forwards,
and whence

    High o'er the restless deep, above the reach
    Of gunner's hope, vast flocks of wildfowl stretch.

The coming generation of poets took to the mountains; but Crabbe remained faithful to the dismal
and yet, in his hands, the impressive scenery of his native salt-marshes. His method of description
suits the country. His verses never become melodramatic, nor does he ever seem to invest nature
with the mystic life of Wordsworth's poetry. He gives the plain prosaic facts which impress
us because they are in such perfect harmony with the sentiment. Here, for example, is a fragment
from the 'Village,' which is simply a description of the neighbourhood of Aldborough:--

    Lo! where the heath, with withering brake grown o'er,
    Lends the light turf that warms the neighbouring poor;
    From thence a length of burning sand appears,
    Where the thin harvest waves its withered ears;
    Rank weeds, that every art and care defy,
    Reign o'er the land, and rob the blighted rye;
    There thistles stretch their prickly arms afar,
    And to the ragged infant threaten war;
    There poppies nodding, mock the hope of toil;
    There the blue bugloss paints the sterile soil;
    Hardy and high, above the slender sheaf,
    The slimy mallow waves her silky leaf;
    O'er the young shoot the charlock throws a shade,
    And clasping tares cling round the sickly blade.

The writer is too obviously a botanist; but the picture always remains with us as the only
conceivable background for the poverty-stricken population whom he is about to describe. The
actors in the 'Borough' are presented to us in a similar setting; and it may be well to put
a sea-piece beside this bit of barren common. Crabbe's range of descriptive power is pretty
well confined within the limits so defined. He is scarcely at home beyond the tide-marks:--

    Be it the summer noon; a sandy space
    The ebbing tide has left upon its place;
    Then just the hot and stony beach above,
    Light twinkling streams in bright confusion move;

           *       *       *       *       *

    There the broad bosom of the ocean keeps
    An equal motion; swelling as it sleeps,
    Then slowly sinking; curling to the strand,
    Faint lazy waves o'ercreep the ridgy sand,
    Or tap the tarry boat with gentle blow,
    And back return in silence, smooth and slow.
    Ships in the calm seem anchored: for they glide
    On the still sea, urged slowly by the tide:
    Art thou not present, this calm scene before
    Where all beside is pebbly length of shore,
    And far as eye can reach, it can discern no more?

I have omitted a couplet which verges on the scientific; for Crabbe is unpleasantly anxious
to leave nothing unexplained. The effect is, in its way, perfect. Anyone who pleases may compare
it with Wordsworth's calm in the verses upon Peele Castle, where the sentiment is given without
the minute statement of facts, and where, too, we have the inevitable quotation about the 'light
that never was on sea or land,' and is pretty nearly as rare in Crabbe's poetry. What he sees
we can all see, though not so intensely, and his art consists in selecting the precise elements
that tell most forcibly towards bringing us into the required frame of mind. To enjoy Crabbe
fully, we ought perhaps to be acclimatised on the coast of the Eastern Counties; we should
become sensitive to the plaintive music of the scenery, which is now generally drowned by the
discordant sounds of modern watering-places, and would seem insipid to a generation which values
excitement in scenery as in fiction. Readers, who measure the beauty of a district by its average
height above the sea-level, and who cannot appreciate the charm of a 'waste enormous marsh,'
may find Crabbe uncongenial.

The human character is determined, as Mr. Buckle and other philosophers have assured us, by
the climate and the soil. A little ingenuity, such as those philosophers display in accommodating
facts to theory, might discover a parallel between the type of Crabbe's personages and the
fauna and flora of his native district. Declining a task which might lead to fanciful conclusions,
I may assume that the East Anglian character is sufficiently familiar, whatever the causes
by which it has been determined. To define Crabbe's poetry we have simply to imagine ourselves
listening to the stories of his parishioners, told by a clergyman brought up amongst the lower
rank of the middle classes, scarcely elevated above their prejudices, and not willingly leaving
their circle of ideas. We must endow him with that simplicity of character which gives us frequent
cause to smile at its proprietor, but which does not disqualify him from seeing a great deal
further into his neighbours than they are apt to give him credit for doing. Such insight, in
fact, is due not to any great subtlety of intellect, but to the possession of deep feeling
and sympathy. Crabbe saw little more of Burke than would have been visible to an ordinary Suffolk
farmer. When transplanted to a ducal mansion, he only drew the pretty obvious inference, embodied
in a vigorous poem, that a patron is a very disagreeable and at times a very mischievous personage.
The joys and griefs which really interest him are of the very tangible and solid kind which
affect men and women to whom the struggle for existence is a stern reality. Here and there
his good-humoured but rather clumsy ridicule may strike some lady to whom some demon has whispered
'have a taste;' and who turns up her nose at the fat bacon on Mr. Tovell's table. He pities
her squeamishness, but thinks it rather unreasonable. He satirises too the heads of the rustic
aristocracy; the brutal squire who bullies his nephew the clergyman for preaching against his
vices, and corrupts the whole neighbourhood; or the speculative banker who cheats old maids
under pretence of looking after their investments. If the squire does not generally appear
in Crabbe in the familiar dramatic character of a rural Lovelace, it is chiefly because Crabbe
has no great belief in the general purity of the inferior ranks of rural life. But his most
powerful stories deal with the tragedies--only too life-like--of the shop and the farm. He
describes the temptations which lead the small tradesman to adulterate his goods, or the parish
clerk to embezzle the money subscribed in the village church, and the evil influence of dissenting
families in fostering a spiritual pride which leads to more unctuous hypocrisy; for, though
he says of the wicked squire that

    His worship ever was a Churchman true,
    And held in scorn the Methodistic crew,

the scorn is only objectionable to him in so far as it is a cynical cloak for scorn of good
morals. He tells how boys run away to sea, or join strolling players, and have in consequence
to beg their bread at the end of their days. The almshouse or the county gaol is the natural
end of his villains, and he paints to the life the evil courses which generally lead to such
a climax. Nobody describes better the process of going to the dogs. And most of all, he sympathises
with the village maiden who has listened too easily to the voice of the charmer, in the shape
of a gay sailor or a smart London footman, and has to reap the bitter consequences of her too
easy faith. Most of his stories might be paralleled by the experience of any country clergyman
who has entered into the life of his parishioners. They are as commonplace and as pathetic
as the things which are happening round us every day, and which fill a neglected paragraph
in a country newspaper. The treatment varies from the purely humorous to the most deep and
genuine pathos; though it never takes us into the regions of the loftier imagination.

The more humorous of these performances may be briefly dismissed. Crabbe possesses the faculty,
but not in any eminent degree; his hand is a little heavy, and one must remember that Mr. Tovell
and his like were of the race who require to have a joke driven into their heads with a sledge-hammer.
Once or twice we come upon a sketch which may help to explain Miss Austen's admiration. There
is an old maid devoted to Mira, and rejoicing in stuffed puppies and parrots, who might have
been ridiculed by Emma Woodhouse, and a parson who would have suited the Eltons admirably:--

    Fiddling and fishing were his arts; at times
    He altered sermons and he aimed at rhymes;
    And his fair friends, not yet intent on cards,
    Oft he amused with riddles and charades.

Such sketches are a pleasant relief to his more sombre portraiture; but it is in the tragic
elements that his true power comes out. The motives of his stories may be trivial, but never
the sentiment. The deep manly emotion makes us forget not only the frequent clumsiness of his
style but the pettiness of the incident, and what is more difficult, the rather bread-and-butter
tone of morality. If he is a little too fond of bringing his villains to the gallows, he is
preoccupied less by the external consequences than by the natural working of evil passions.
With him sin is not punished by being found out, but by disintegrating the character and blunting
the higher sensibilities. He shows--and the moral, if not new, is that which possesses the
really intellectual interest--how evil-doers are tortured by the cravings of desires that cannot
be satisfied, and the lacerations inflicted by ruined self-respect. And therefore there is
a truth in Crabbe's delineations which is quite independent of his more or less rigid administration
of poetical justice. His critics used to accuse him of having a low opinion of human nature.
It is quite true that he assigns to selfishness and brutal passion a very large part in carrying
on the machinery of the world. Some readers may infer that he was unlucky in his experience,
and others that he loved facts too unflinchingly. His stories sometimes remind one of Balzac's
in the descriptions of selfishness triumphant over virtue. One, for example, of his deeply
pathetic poems is called 'The Brothers;' and repeats the old contrast given in Fielding's Tom
Jones and Blifil. The shrewd sly hypocrite has received all manner of kindnesses from the generous
and simple sailor, and when, at last, the poor sailor is ruined in health and fortune, he comes
home expecting to be supported by the gratitude of the brother, who has by this time made money
and is living at his ease. Nothing can be more pathetic or more in the spirit of some of Balzac's
stories than the way in which the rich man receives his former benefactor; his faint recognition
of fraternal feelings gradually cools down under the influence of a selfish wife; till at last
the poor old sailor is driven from the parlour to the kitchen, and from the kitchen to the
loft, and finally deprived of his only comfort, his intercourse with a young nephew not yet
broken into hardness of heart, on the plea that the lad is not to be corrupted by the coarse
language of his poor old uncle. The rich brother suspects that the sailor has broken this rule,
and is reviling him for his ingratitude, when suddenly he discovers that he is abusing a corpse.
The old sailor's heart is broken at last; and his brother repents too late. He tries to comfort
his remorse by cross-examining the boy, who was the cause of the last quarrel:--

    'Did he not curse me, child?' 'He never cursed,
    But could not breathe, and said his heart would burst.'
    'And so will mine'----'But, father, you must pray;
    My uncle said it took his pains away.'

Praying, however, cannot bring back the dead; and the fratricide, for such he feels himself
to be, is a melancholy man to the end of his days. In Balzac's hands repentance would have
had no place, and selfishness have been finally triumphant and unabashed. We need not ask which
would be the most effective or the truest treatment; though I must put in a word for the superior
healthiness of Crabbe's mind. There is nothing morbid about him. Still it would be absurd to
push such a comparison far. Crabbe's portraits are only spirited vignettes compared with the
elaborate full-lengths drawn by the intense imagination of the French novelist; and Crabbe's
whole range of thought is incomparably narrower. The two writers have a real resemblance only
in so far as in each case a powerful accumulation of life-like details enables them to produce
a pathos, powerful by its vivid reality.

The singular power of Crabbe is in some sense more conspicuous in the stories where the incidents
are almost audaciously trifling. One of them begins with this not very impressive and very
ungrammatical couplet:--

    With our late Vicar, and his age the same,
    His clerk, hight Jachin, to his office came.

Jachin is a man of oppressive respectability; so oppressive, indeed, that some of the scamps
of the borough try to get him into scrapes by temptations of a very inartificial kind, which
he is strong enough to resist. At last, however, it occurs to Jachin that he can easily embezzle
part of the usual monthly offerings while saving his character in his own eyes by some obvious
sophistry. He is detected and dismissed, and dies after coming upon the parish. These materials
for a tragic poem are not very promising; and I do not mean to say that the sorrows of poor
Jachin affect us as deeply as those of Gretchen or Desdemona. The parish clerk is perhaps a
fit type of all that was least poetical in the old social order of the country, and virtue
which succumbs to the temptation of taking two shillings out of a plate scarcely wants a Mephistopheles
to overcome it. We may perhaps think that the apologetic note which the excellent Crabbe inserts
at the end of his poem, to the effect that he did not mean by it to represent mankind as 'puppets
of an overpowering destiny,' or 'to deny the doctrine of seducing spirits,' is a little superfluous.
The fact that a parish-clerk has taken to petty pilfering can scarcely justify those heterodox
conclusions. But when we have smiled at Crabbe's philosophy, we begin to wonder at the force
of his sentiment. A blighted human soul is a pathetic object, however paltry the temptation
to which it has succumbed. Jachin has the dignity of despair, though he is not quite a fallen
archangel; and Crabbe's favourite scenery harmonises with his agony.

    In each lone place, dejected and dismayed,
    Shrinking from view, his wasting form he laid,
    Or to the restless sea and roaring wind
    Gave the strong yearnings of a ruined mind;
    On the broad beach, the silent summer day,
    Stretched on some wreck, he wore his life away;
    Or where the river mingles with the sea,
    Or on the mud-bank by the elder tree,
    Or by the bounding marsh-dyke, there was he.

Nor would he have been a more pitiable object if he had betrayed a nation or sold his soul
for a Garter instead of the pillage of a subscription plate. Poor old Jachin's story may seem
to be borrowed from a commonplace tract; but the detected pilferer, though he has only lost
the respect of the parson, the overseer, and the beadle, touches us as deeply as the Byronic
hero who has fallen out with the whole system of the world.

If we refuse to sympathise with the pang due to so petty a catastrophe--though our sympathy
should surely be proportioned to the keenness of the suffering rather than the absolute height
of the fall--we may turn to tragedy of a deeper dye. Peter Grimes, as his name indicates, was
a ruffian from his infancy. He once knocked down his poor old father, who warned him of the
consequences of his brutality:--

    On an inn-settle, in his maudlin grief,
    This he revolved, and drank for his relief.

Adopting such a remedy, he sank from bad to worse, and gradually became a thief, a smuggler,
and a social outlaw. In those days, however, as is proved by the history of Mrs. Brownrigg,
parish authorities practised the 'boarding-out system' after a reckless fashion. Peter was
allowed to take two or three apprentices in succession, whom he bullied, starved, and maltreated,
and who finally died under suspicious circumstances. The last was found dead in Peter's fishing-boat
after a rough voyage: and though nothing could be proved, the Mayor told him that he should
have no more slaves to belabour. Peter, pursuing his trade in solitude, gradually became morbid
and depressed. The melancholy estuary became haunted by ghostly visions.

Peter grew more sullen, and the scenery became more weird and depressing. The few who watched
him remarked that there were three places where Peter seemed to be more than usually moved.
For a time he hurried past them, whistling as he rowed; but gradually he seemed to be fascinated.
The idle loungers in the summer saw a man and boat lingering in the tideway, apparently watching
the gliding waves without casting a net or looking at the wildfowl. At last his delirium becoming
stronger, he is carried to the poorhouse, and tells his story to the clergyman. Nobody has
painted with greater vigour that kind of externalised conscience which may still survive in
a brutalised mind. Peter Grimes, of course, sees his victims' spirits and hates them. He fancies
that his father torments him out of spite, characteristically forgetting that the ghost had
some excuse for his anger:--

    'Twas one hot noon, all silent, still, serene,
    No living being had I lately seen;
    I paddled up and down and dipped my net,
    But (such his pleasure) I could nothing get--
    A father's pleasure, when his toil was done,
    To plague and torture thus an only son!
    And so I sat and looked upon the stream,
    How it ran on, and felt as in a dream;
    But dream it was not; no!--I fixed my eyes
    On the mid stream and saw the spirits rise;
    I saw my father on the water stand,
    And hold a thin pale boy in either hand;
    And there they glided ghastly on the top
    Of the salt flood, and never touched a drop;
    I would have struck them, but they knew the intent,
    And smiled upon the oar, and down they went.

Remorse in Peter's mind takes the shape of bitter hatred for his victims; and with another
characteristic confusion, he partly attributes his sufferings to some evil influence intrinsic
in the locality:--

    There were three places, where they ever rose--
    The whole long river has not such as those--
    Places accursed, where, if a man remain,
    He'll see the things which strike him to the brain.

And then the malevolent ghosts forced poor Peter to lean on his oars, and showed him visions
of coming horrors. Grimes dies impenitent, and fancying that his tormentors are about to seize
him. Of all haunted men in fiction, it is not easy to think of a case where the horror is more
terribly realised. The blood-boulter'd Banquo tortured a noble victim, but scarcely tortured
him more effectually. Peter Grimes was doubtless a close relation of Peter Bell. Bell having
the advantage of Wordsworth's interpretation, leads us to many thoughts which lie altogether
beyond Crabbe's reach; but, looking simply at the sheer tragic force of the two characters,
Grimes is to Bell what brandy is to small beer. He would never have shown the white feather
like his successor, who,

    After ten months' melancholy,
    Became a good and honest man.

If, in some sense, Peter Grimes is the most effective of Crabbe's heroes, he would, if taken
alone, give a very distorted impression of the general spirit of the poetry. It is only at
intervals that he introduces us to downright criminals. There is, indeed, a description of
a convicted felon, which, according to Macaulay, has made 'many a rough and cynical reader
cry like a child,' and which, if space were unlimited, would make a striking pendant to the
agony of the burdened Grimes. But, as a rule, Crabbe can find motives enough for tenderness
in sufferings which have nothing to do with the criminal law, and of which the mere framework
of the story is often interesting enough. His peculiar power is best displayed in so presenting
to us the sorrows of commonplace characters as to make us feel that a shabby coat and a narrow
education, and the most unromantic of characters, need not cut off our sympathies with a fellow-creature;
and that the dullest tradesman who treads on our toes in an omnibus may want only a power of
articulate expression to bring before us some of the deepest of all problems. The parish clerk
and the grocer--or whatever may be the proverbial epitome of human dulness--may swell the chorus
of lamentation over the barrenness and the hardships and the wasted energies and the harsh
discords of life which is always 'steaming up' from the world, and to which it is one, though
perhaps not the highest, of the poet's functions to make us duly sensible. Crabbe, like all
realistic writers, must be studied at full length, and therefore quotations are necessarily
unjust. It will be sufficient if I refer--pretty much at random--to the short story of 'Phoebe
Dawson' in the 'Parish Register,' to the more elaborate stories of 'Edward Shore' and the 'Parting
Hour' in the 'Tales,' or to the story of 'Ruth' in the 'Tales of the Hall,' where again the
dreary pathos is strangely heightened by Crabbe's favourite seaport scenery, to prove that
he might be called as truly as Goldsmith affectuum potens, though scarcely lenis, dominator.

It is time, however, to conclude with a word or two as to Crabbe's peculiar place in the history
of English literature. I said that, unlike his contemporaries, Cowper and Burns, he adhered
rigidly to the form of the earlier eighteenth-century school, and partly for this reason excited
the wayward admiration of Byron, who always chose to abuse the bridge which carried him to
fame. But Crabbe's clumsiness of expression makes him a very inadequate successor of Pope or
of Goldsmith, and his claims are really founded on the qualities which led Byron to call him
'nature's sternest painter, yet her best.' On this side he is connected with some tendencies
of the school which supplanted his early models. So far as Wordsworth and his followers represented
the reaction from the artificial to a love of unsophisticated nature, Crabbe is entirely at
one with them. He did not share that unlucky taste for the namby-pamby by which Wordsworth
annoyed his contemporaries, and spoilt some of his earlier poems. Its place was filled in Crabbe's
mind by an even more unfortunate disposition for the simply humdrum and commonplace, which,
it must be confessed, makes it almost as hard to read a good many of his verses as to consume
large quantities of suet pudding, and has probably destroyed his popularity with the present
generation. Still, Crabbe's influence was powerful as against the old conventionality. He did
not, like his predecessors, write upon the topics which interested 'persons of quality,' and
never gives us the impression of having composed his rhymes in a full-bottomed wig or even
in a Grub Street garret. He has gone out into country fields and village lanes, and paints
directly from man and nature, with almost a cynical disregard of the accepted code of propriety.
But the points on which he parts company with his more distinguished contemporaries is equally
obvious. Mr. Stopford Brooke has lately been telling us with great eloquence what is the theology
which underlies the poetical tendencies of the last generation of poets. Of that creed, a sufficiently
vague one, it must be admitted, Crabbe was by no means an apostle. Rather one would say he
was as indifferent as a good old-fashioned clergyman could very well be to the existence of
any new order of ideas in the world. The infidels, whom he sometimes attacks, read Bolingbroke,
and Chubb, and Mandeville, and have only heard by report even of the existence of Voltaire.
The Dissenters, whom he so heartily detests, have listened to Whitefield and Wesley, or perhaps
to Huntington, S.S.--that is, as it may now be necessary to explain, Sinner Saved. Every newer
development of thought was still far away from the quiet pews of Aldborough, and the only form
of Church restoration of which he has heard is the objectionable practice of painting a new
wall to represent a growth of lichens. Crabbe appreciates the charm of the picturesque, but
has never yet heard of our elaborate methods of creating modern antiques. Lapped in such ignorance,
and with a mind little given to speculation, it is only in character that Crabbe should be
totally insensible to the various moods of thought represented by Wordsworth's pantheistic
conceptions of nature, or by Shelley's dreamy idealism, or Byron's fierce revolutionary impulses.
Still less, if possible, could he sympathise with that love of beauty, pure and simple, of
which Keats was the first prophet. He might, indeed, be briefly described by saying that he
is at the very opposite pole from Keats. The more bigoted admirers of Keats--for there are
bigots in matters of taste or poetry as well as in science or theology or politics--would refuse
the title of poet to Crabbe altogether on the strength of the absence of this element from
his verses. Like his most obvious parallels in painting, he is too fond of boors and pothouses
to be allowed the quality of artistic perception. I will not argue the point, which is, perhaps,
rather a question of classification than of intrinsic merit; but I will venture to suggest
a test which will, I think, give Crabbe a very firm, though, it may be, not a very lofty place.
Though I should be unwilling to be reckoned as one of Macaulay's 'rough and cynical readers,'
I admit that I can read the story of the convicted felon, or of Peter Grimes, without indulging
in downright blubbering. Most readers, I fear, can in these days get through pathetic poems
and novels without absolutely using their pocket-handkerchiefs. But though Crabbe may not prompt
such outward and visible signs of emotion, I think that he produces a more distinct tendency
to tears than almost any poet of his time. True, he does not appeal to emotions, accessible
only through the finer intellectual perceptions, or to the thoughts which 'lie too deep for
tears.' That prerogative belongs to men of more intense character, greater philosophical power,
and more delicate instincts. But the power of touching readers by downright pictures of homespun
griefs and sufferings is one which, to my mind, implies some poetical capacity, and which clearly
belongs to Crabbe.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] It seems, one is sorry to add, that Murray made a very bad bargain in this case.

WILLIAM HAZLITT

There are few great books or great men that do not sadden us by a sense of incompleteness.
The writer, we feel, is better than his work. His full power only reveals itself by flashes.
There are blemishes in his design, due to mere oversight or indolence; his energy has flagged,
or he has alloyed his pure gold to please the mob; or some burst of wayward passion has disturbed
the fair proportions of his work, and the man himself is a half-finished or half-ruined fragment.
The rough usage of the world leaves its mark on the spiritual constitution of even the strongest
and best amongst us; and perhaps the finest natures suffer more than others in virtue of their
finer sympathies. 'Hamlet' is a pretty good performance, if we make allowances; but what would
it have been if Shakespeare could have been at his highest level all through, and if every
element of strength in him had been purified from every weakness? What would it have been,
shall we say, if he could have had the advantage of reading a few modern lectures on æsthetics?
We may, perhaps, be content with Shakespeare as circumstances left him; but in reading our
modern poets, the sentiment of regret is stronger. If Byron had not been driven into his wild
revolt against the world; if Shelley had been judiciously treated from his youth; if Keats
had had healthier lungs; if Wordsworth had not grown rusty in his solitude; if Scott had not
been tempted into publisher's speculations; if Coleridge had never taken to opium--what great
poems might not have opened the new era of literature, where now we have but incomplete designs,
and listen to harmonies half destroyed by internal discord? The regret, however, is less when
a man has succeeded in uttering the thought that was in him, though it may never have found
a worthy expression. Wordsworth could have told us little more, though the 'Excursion' had
been as complete a work as 'Paradise Lost;' and if Scott might have written more 'Waverleys'
and 'Antiquaries' and 'Old Mortalities,' he could hardly have written better ones. But the
works of some other writers suggest possibilities which never even approached fulfilment. If
the opinion formed by his contemporaries of Coleridge be anywhere near the truth, we lost in
him a potential philosopher of a very high order, as we more clearly lost a poet of singular
fascination. Coleridge naturally suggests the name of De Quincey, whose works are as often
tantalising as satisfying. And to make, it is true, a considerable drop from the greatest of
these names, we often feel when we take up one of Hazlitt's glowing Essays, that here, too,
was a man who might have made a far more enduring mark as a writer of English prose. At their
best, his writings are admirable; they have the true stamp; the thought is masculine and the
expression masterly; phrases engrave themselves on the memory; and we catch glimpses of a genuine
thinker and no mere manufacturer of literary commonplace. On a more prolonged study, it is
true, we become conscious of many shortcomings, and the general effect is somehow rather cloying,
though hardly from an excess of sweetness. And yet he deserves the study both of the critic
and the student of character.

The story of Hazlitt's life has been told by his grandson; but there is a rather curious defect
of materials for so recent a biography. He kept, it seems, no letters,--a weakness, if it be
a weakness, for which one is rather apt to applaud him in these days: but, on the other hand,
nobody ever indulged more persistently in the habit of washing his dirty linen in public. Not
even his idol Rousseau could be more demonstrative of his feelings and recollections. His Essays
are autobiographical, sometimes even offensively; and after reading them we are even more familiar
than his contemporaries with many points of his character. He loved to pour himself out in
his Essays

                              as plain
    As downright Shippen or as old Montaigne.

He has laid bare for the most careless reader the main elements of his singular composition.
Like some others of his revolutionary friends, Godwin, for example, Leigh Hunt, and Tom Paine,
he represents the old dissenting spirit in a new incarnation. The grandfather a stern Calvinist,
the father a Unitarian, the son a freethinker; those were the gradations through which more
than one family passed during the closing years of the last century and the opening of this.
One generation still clung to the old Puritan traditions and Jonathan Edwards; the next followed
Priestley; and the third joined the little band of radicals who read Cobbett, scorned Southey
as a deserter, and refused to be frightened by the French Revolution. The outside crust of
opinion may be shed with little change to the inner man. Hazlitt was a dissenter to his backbone.
He was born to be in a minority; to be a living protest against the dominant creed and constitution.
He recognised and denounced, but he never shook off, the faults characteristic of small sects.
A want of wide intellectual culture, and a certain sourness of temper, cramped his powers and
sometimes marred his writing. But from his dissenting forefathers Hazlitt inherited something
better. Beside the huge tomes of controversial divinity on his father's shelves, the 'Patres
Poloni,' Pripscovius, Crellius and Cracovius, Lardner and Doddridge, and Baxter and Bates,
and Howe, were the legends of the Puritan hagiology. The old dissenters, he tells us, had Neale's
'History of the Puritans' by heart, and made their children read Calamy's account of the 2,000
ejected ministers along with the stories of Daniel in the Lion's Den and Meshach, Shadrach,
and Abednego. Sympathy for the persecuted, unbending resistance to the oppressor, was the creed
which had passed into their blood. 'This covenant they kept as the stars keep their courses;
this principle they stuck by, for want of knowing better, as it sticks by them to the last.
It grew with their growth, it does not wither in their decay.... It glimmers with the last
feeble eyesight, smiles in the faded cheek like infancy, and lights a path before them to the
grave. This'--for in Hazlitt lies a personal application in all his moralising--'This is better
than the whirligig life of a court poet'--such, for example, as Robert Southey.

But Hazlitt's descent was not pure. If we could trace back the line of his ancestry we should
expect to find that by some freak of fortune, one of the rigid old Puritans had married a descendant
of some great Flemish or Italian painter. Love of graceful forms and bright colouring and voluptuous
sensations had been transmitted to their descendants, though hitherto repressed by the stern
discipline of British nonconformity. As the discipline relaxed, the Hazlitts reverted to the
ancestral type. Hazlitt himself, his brother and his sister, were painters by instinct. The
brother became a painter of miniatures by profession; and Hazlitt to the end of his days revered
Titian almost as much as he revered his great idol Napoleon. An odd pair of idols, one thinks,
for a youth brought up upon Pripscovius and his brethren! A keen delight in all artistic and
natural beauty was an awkward endowment for a youth intended for the ministry. Keats was scarcely
more out of place in a surgery than Hazlitt would have been in a Unitarian pulpit of those
days, and yet from that pulpit, oddly enough, came the greatest impulse to Hazlitt. It came
from a man who, like Hazlitt himself, though in a higher degree than Hazlitt, combined the
artistic and the philosophic temperament. Coleridge, as Hazlitt somewhere says, threw a great
stone into the standing pool of contemporary thought; and it was in January 1798--one of the
many dates in his personal history to which he recurs with unceasing fondness--that Hazlitt
rose before daylight and walked ten miles in the mud to hear Coleridge preach. He has told,
in his graphic manner, how the voice of the preacher 'rose like a stream of rich distilled
perfumes;' how he launched into his subject, after giving out the text, 'like an eagle dallying
with the wind;' and how his young hearer seemed to be listening to the music of the spheres,
to see the union of poetry and philosophy; and behold truth and genius embracing under the
eye of religion. His description of the youthful Coleridge has a fit pendant in the wonderful
description of the full-blown philosopher in Carlyle's 'Life of Sterling;' where, indeed, one
or two touches are taken from Hazlitt's Essays. It is Hazlitt who remarked, even at this early
meeting, that the dreamy poet philosopher could never decide on which side of the footpath
he should walk; and Hazlitt, who struck out the epigram that Coleridge was an excellent talker
if allowed to start from no premisses and come to no conclusion. The glamour of Coleridge's
theosophy never seems to have fascinated Hazlitt's stubborn intellect. At this time, indeed,
Coleridge had not yet been inoculated with German mysticism. In after years, the disciple,
according to his custom, renounced his master and assailed him with half-regretful anger. But
the intercourse and kindly encouragement of so eminent a man seem to have roused Hazlitt's
ambition. His poetical and his speculative intellect were equally stirred. The youth was already
longing to write a philosophical treatise. The two elements of his nature thus roused to action
led him along a 'strange diagonal.' He would be at once a painter and a metaphysician. Some
eight years of artistic labour convinced him that he could not be a Titian or a Raphael, and
he declined to be a mere Hazlitt junior. His metaphysical studies, on the contrary, convinced
him that he might be a Hume or a Berkeley; but unluckily they convinced himself alone. The
tiny volume which contained their results was neglected by everybody but the author, who, to
the end of his days, loved it with the love of a mother for a deformed child. It is written,
to say the truth, in a painful and obscure style; it is the work of a man who has brooded over
his own thoughts in solitude till he cannot appreciate the need of a clear exposition. The
narrowness of his reading had left him in ignorance of the new aspects under which the eternal
problems were presenting themselves to the new generation; and a metaphysical discussion in
antiquated phraseology is as useless as a lady's dress in the last year's fashion. Hazlitt,
in spite of this double failure, does not seem to have been much disturbed by impecuniosity;
but the most determined Bohemian has to live. For some years he strayed about the purlieus
of literature, drudging, translating, and doing other cobbler's work. Two of his performances,
however, were characteristic; he wrote an attack upon Malthus, and he made an imprudent marriage.
Even Malthusians must admit that imprudent marriages may have some accidental good consequences.
When a man has fairly got his back to the wall, he is forced to fight; and Hazlitt, at the
age of thirty-four, with a wife and a son, at last discovered the great secret of the literary
profession, that a clever man can write when he has to write or starve. To compose had been
labour and grief to him, so long as he could potter round a thought indefinitely; but with
the printer's devil on one side and the demands of a family on the other, his ink began to
flow freely, and during the last fifteen or seventeen years of his life he became a voluminous
though fragmentary author. Several volumes of essays, lectures, and criticisms, besides his
more ambitious 'Life of Napoleon,' and a great deal of anonymous writing, attest his industry.
He died in 1830, at the age of fifty-two; leaving enough to show that he could have done more
and a good deal of a rare, if not of the highest kind of excellence.

Hazlitt, as I have said, is everywhere autobiographical. Besides that secret, that a man can
write if he must, he had discovered the further secret that the easiest of all topics is his
own feelings. It is an apparent paradox, though the explanation is not far to seek, that Hazlitt,
though shy with his friends, was the most unreserved of writers. Indeed he takes the public
into his confidence with a facility which we cannot easily forgive. Biographers of late have
been guilty of flagrant violations of the unwritten code which should protect the privacies
of social life from the intrusions of public curiosity. But the most unscrupulous of biographers
would hardly have dared to tear aside the veil so audaciously as Hazlitt, in one conspicuous
instance at least, chose to do for himself. His idol Rousseau had indeed gone further; but
when Rousseau told the story of his youth, it was at least seen through a long perspective
of years, and his own personality might seem to be scarcely interested. Hazlitt chose, in the
strange book called the 'New Pygmalion,' or 'Liber Amoris,' to invite the British public at
large to look on at a strange tragi-comedy, of which the last scene was scarcely finished.
Hazlitt had long been unhappy in his family life. His wife appears to have been a masculine
woman, with no talent for domesticity; completely indifferent to her husband's pursuits, and
inclined to despise him for so fruitless an employment of his energies. They had already separated,
it seems, when Hazlitt fell desperately in love with Miss Sarah Walker, the daughter of his
lodging-house keeper. The husband and wife agreed to obtain a divorce under the Scotch law,
after which they might follow their own paths, and Sarah Walker become the second Mrs. Hazlitt.
Some months had to be spent by Mr. and Mrs. Hazlitt in Edinburgh, with a view to this arrangement.
The lady's journal records her impressions; which, it would seem, strongly resembled those
of a tradesman getting rid of a rather flighty and imprudent partner in business. She is extremely
precise as to all pecuniary and legal details; she calls upon her husband now and then, takes
tea with him, makes an off-hand remark or two about some picture-gallery which he had been
visiting, and tells him that he has made a fool of himself, with the calmness of a lady dismissing
a troublesome servant, or a schoolmaster parting from an ill-behaved pupil. And meanwhile,
in queer contrast, Hazlitt was pouring out to his friends letters which seem to be throbbing
with unrestrainable passion. He is raving as Romeo at Mantua might have raved about Juliet.
To hear Miss Walker called his wife will be music to his ears, such as they never heard. But
it seems doubtful whether, after all, his Juliet will have him. He shrieks mere despair and
suicide. Nothing is left in the world to give him a drop of comfort. The breeze does not cool
him nor the blue sky delight him. He will never lie down at night nor rise up of a morning
in peace, nor even behold his little boy's face with pleasure, unless he is restored to her
favour. And Mrs. Hazlitt reports, after acknowledging the receipt of £10, that Mr. Hazlitt
was so much 'enamoured' of one of these letters that he pulled it out of his pocket twenty
times a day, wanted to read it to his companions, and ranted and gesticulated till people took
him for a madman. The 'Liber Amoris' is made out of these letters--more or less altered and
disguised, with some reports of conversations with the lovely Sarah. 'It was an explosion of
frenzy,' says De Quincey; his reckless mode of relieving his bosom of certain perilous stuff,
with little care whether it produced scorn or sympathy. A passion which urges its victim to
such improprieties should be, at least, deep and genuine. One would have liked him better if
he had not taken his frenzy to market. The 'Liber Amoris' tells us accordingly that the author,
Hazlitt's imaginary double, died abroad, 'of disappointment preying on a sickly frame and morbid
state of mind.' The hero, in short, breaks his heart when the lady marries somebody else. Hazlitt's
heart was more elastic. Miss Sarah Walker married, and Hazlitt next year married a widow lady
'of some property,' made a tour with her on the Continent, and then--quarrelled with her also.
It is not a pretty story. Hazlitt's biographer informs us, by way of excuse, that his grandfather
was 'physically incapable'--whatever that may mean--'of fixing his affection upon a single
object.' He 'comprehended,' indeed, 'the worth of constancy' and other virtues as well as most
men, and could have written about them better than most men; but somehow 'a sinister influence
or agency,' a periphrasis for a sensuous temperament, was perpetually present, which confined
his virtues to the sphere of theory. An apology sometimes is worse than a satire. The case,
however, seems to be sufficiently plain. We need not suspect that Hazlitt was consciously acting
a part and nursing his 'frenzy' because he thought that it would make a startling book. He
was an egotist and a man of impulse. His impressions were for the time overpowering; but they
were transient. His temper was often stronger than his passions. A gust of anger would make
him quarrel with his oldest friends. Every emotion justified itself for the time, because it
was his. He always did well, whether it pleased him for the moment to be angry, to be in love,
to be cynical, or to be furiously indignant. The end, therefore, of his life exhibits a series
of short impetuous fits of passionate endeavour, rather than devotion to a single overruling
purpose; and all his writings are brief outbursts of eloquent feeling, where neither the separate
fragments nor the works considered as a whole obey any law of logical development. And yet,
in some ways, Hazlitt boasted, and boasted plausibly enough, of his constancy. He has the same
ideas to the end of his life that he had at fourteen. He would, he remarks, be an excellent
man on a jury; he would say little, but would starve the eleven other obstinate fellows out.
Amongst politicians he was a faithful Abdiel, when all others had deserted the cause. He loved
the books of his boyhood, the fields where he had walked, the gardens where he had drunk tea,
and, to a rather provoking extent, the old quotations and old stories which he had used from
his first days of authorship. The explanation of the apparent paradox gives the clue to Hazlitt's
singular character.

What I have called Hazlitt's egotism is more euphemistically and perhaps more accurately described
by Talfourd,[3] 'an intense consciousness of his own individual being.' The word egotism in
our rough estimates of character is too easily confounded with selfishness. Hazlitt might have
been the person who, as one making a strange confession, assured a friend that he took a deep
interest in his own concerns. He was, one would say, decidedly unselfish, if by selfishness
is meant a disposition to feather one's own nest without regard for other people's wants. Still
less was he selfish in the sense of preferring solid bread and butter to the higher needs of
mind and spirit. His sentiments are always generous, and if scorn is too familiar a mood, it
is scorn of the base and servile. But his peculiarity is that these generous feelings are always
associated with some special case. He sees every abstract principle by the concrete instance.
He hates insolence in the abstract, but his hatred flames into passion when it is insolence
to Hazlitt. He resembles that good old lady who wrote on the margin of her 'Complete Duty of
Man' the name of that neighbour who most conspicuously sinned against the precept in the opposite
text. Tyranny with Hazlitt is named Pitt, party spite is Gifford, apostasy is Southey, and
fidelity may be called Cobbett or Godwin; though he finds names for the vices much more easily
than for the virtues. And thus, if he cannot be condemned for selfishness, one must be charitable
not to put down a good many of his offences to its sister jealousy. The personal and the public
sentiments are so invariably blended in his mind that neither he nor anybody else could have
analysed their composition. He was apt to be the more moody and irritable because his resentments
clothed themselves spontaneously in the language of some nobler emotion. If his friends are
cold, he bewails the fickleness of humanity; if they are successful, it is not envy that prompts
his irritation, but the rarity of the correspondence between merit and reward. Such a man is
more faithful to his dead than to his living friends. The dead cannot change; they always come
back to his memory in their old colours; their names recall the old tender emotion placed above
all change and chance. But who can tell that our dearest living friend may not come into awkward
collision with us before he has left the room? It is as well to be on our guard! It is curious
how the two feelings alternate in Hazlitt's mind in regard to the friends who are at once dead
and living; how fondly he dwells upon the Coleridge of Wem and Nether Stowey where he first
listened to the enchanter's voice, and with what bitterness, which is yet but soured affection,
he turns upon the Coleridge who defended war-taxes in the 'Friend.' He hacks and hews at Southey
through several furious Essays, and ends with a groan. 'We met him unexpectedly the other day
in St. Giles's,' he says, 'were sorry we had passed him without speaking to an old friend,
turned and looked after him for some time as to a tale of other days--sighing, as we walked
on, Alas, poor Southey!' He fancies himself to be in the mood of Brutus murdering Cæsar. It
is patriotism struggling with old associations of friendship; if there is any personal element
in the hostility, no one is less conscious of it than the possessor. To the whole Lake school
his attitude is always the same--justice done grudgingly in spite of anger, or satire tempered
by remorse. No one could say nastier things of that very different egotist, Wordsworth; nor
could anyone, outside the sacred clique, pay him heartier compliments. Nobody, indeed, can
dislike egotism like an egotist. 'Wordsworth,' says Hazlitt, 'sees nothing but himself and
the universe; he hates all greatness and all pretensions to it but his own.

Hazlitt, indeed, was incapable of the superlative self-esteem here attributed to Wordsworth.
His egotism is a curious variety of that Protean passion, compounded as skilfully as the melancholy
of Jaques. It is not the fascinating and humorous egotism of Lamb, who disarms us beforehand
by a smile at his own crotchets. Hazlitt is too serious to be playful. Nor is it like the amusing
egotism of Boswell, combined with a vanity which evades our contempt, because it asks so frankly
for sympathy. Hazlitt is too proud and too bitter. Neither is it the misanthropic egotism of
Byron, which, through all its affectation, implies a certain aristocratic contempt of the world
and its laws. Hazlitt has not the sweep and continuity of Byron's passion. His egotism--be
it said without offence--is dashed with something of the feeling common amongst his dissenting
friends. He feels the awkwardness which prevails amongst a clique branded by a certain social
stigma, and despises himself for his awkwardness. He resents neglect and scorns to ask for
patronage. His egotism is a touchy and wayward feeling which takes the mask of misanthropy.
He is always meditating upon his own qualities, but not in the spirit of the conceited man
who plumes himself upon his virtues, nor of the ascetic who broods over his vices. He prefers
the apparently self-contradictory attitude (but human nature is illogical) of meditating with
remorse upon his own virtues. What in others is complacency, becomes with him, ostensibly at
least, self-reproach. He affects--but it is hard to say where the affectation begins--to be
annoyed by the contemplation of his own merits. He is angry with the world for preferring commonplace
to genius, and rewarding stupidity by success; but in form at least, he mocks at his own folly
for expecting better things. If he is vain at bottom, his vanity shows itself indirectly by
depreciating his neighbours. He is too proud to dwell upon his own virtues, but he has been
convinced by impartial observation that the world at large is in a conspiracy against merit.
Thus he manages to transform his self-consciousness into the semblance of proud humility, and
extracts a bitter and rather morbid pleasure from dwelling upon his disappointments and failures.
Half-a-dozen of his best Essays give expression to this mood, which is rather bitter than querulous.
He enlarges cordially on the 'disadvantages of intellectual superiority.' An author--Hazlitt,
to wit--is not allowed to relax into dulness; if he is brilliant he is not understood, and
if he professes an interest in common things it is assumed that then he must be a fool. And
yet in the midst of these grumblings he is forced to admit a touch of weakness, and tells us
how it pleases him to hear a man ask in the Fives Court, 'Which is Mr. Hazlitt?' He, the most
idiosyncratic of men, and most proud of it at bottom, declares how 'he hates his style to be
known, as he hates all idiosyncrasy.' At the next moment he purrs with complacency at the recollection
of having been forced into an avowal of his authorship of an article in the 'Edinburgh Review.'
Most generally he eschews these naïve lapses into vanity. He dilates on the old text of the
'shyness of scholars.' The learned are out of place in competition with the world. They are
not and ought not to fancy themselves fitted for the vulgar arena. They can never enjoy their
old privileges. 'Fool that it (learning) was, ever to forego its privileges and loosen the
strong hold it had on opinion in bigotry and superstition!' The same tone of disgust pronounces
itself more cynically in an Essay 'on the pleasure of hating.' Hatred is, he admits, a poisonous
ingredient in all our passions, but it is that which gives reality to them. Patriotism means
hatred of the French, and virtue is a hatred of other people's faults to atone for our own
vices. All things turn to hatred. 'We hate old friends, we hate old books, we hate old opinions,
and at last we come to hate ourselves.' Summing up all his disappointments, the broken friendships,
and disappointed ambitions, and vanished illusions, he asks, in conclusion, whether he has
not come to hate and despise himself? 'Indeed, I do,' he answers, 'and chiefly for not having
hated and despised the world enough.'

This is an outbreak of temporary spleen. Nobody loved his old books and old opinions better.
Hazlitt is speaking in the character of Timon, which indeed fits him rather too easily. But
elsewhere the same strain of cynicism comes out in more natural and less extravagant form.
Take, for example, the Essay on the 'Conduct of Life.' It is a piece of bonâ fide advice addressed
to his boy at school, and gives in a sufficiently edifying form the commonplaces which elders
are accustomed to address to their juniors. Honesty, independence, diligence, and temperance
are commended in good set terms, though with an earnestness which, as is often the case with
Hazlitt, imparts some reality to outworn formulæ. When, however, he comes to the question of
marriage, the true man breaks out. Don't trust, he says, to fine sentiments: they will make
no more impression on these delicate creatures than on a piece of marble. Love in women is
vanity, interest, or fancy. Women care nothing about talents or virtue--about poets or philosophers
or politicians. They judge by the eye. 'No true woman ever regarded anything but her lover's
person and address.' The author has no chance; for he lives in a dream, he feels nothing spontaneously,
his metaphysical refinements are all thrown away. 'Look up, laugh loud, talk big, keep the
colour in your cheek and the fire in your eye; adorn your person; maintain your health, your
beauty, and your animal spirits; for if you once lapse into poetry and philosophy you will
want an eye to show you, a hand to guide you, a bosom to love--and will stagger into your grave
old before your time, unloved and unlovely.' 'A spider,' he adds, 'the meanest creature that
crawls or lives, has its mate or fellow, but a scholar has no mate or fellow.' Mrs. Hazlitt,
Miss Sarah Walker, and several other ladies, thought Hazlitt surly and cared nothing for his
treatise on human nature. Therefore (it is true Hazlittian logic) no woman cares for sentiment.
The sex which despised him must be despicable. Equally characteristic is his profound belief
that his failure in another line is owing to the malignity of the world at large. In one of
his most characteristic Essays he asks whether genius is conscious of its powers. He writes
what he declares to be a digression about his own experience, and we may believe as much as
we please of his assertion that he does not quote himself as an example of genius. He has spoken,
he declares, with freedom and power, and will not cease because he is abused for not being
a Government tool. He wrote a charming character of Congreve's Millamant, but it was unnoticed
because he was not a Government tool. Gifford would not relish his account of Dekkar's Orlando
Friscobaldo--because he was not a Government tool. He wrote admirable table-talks--for once,
as they are nearly finished, he will venture to praise himself. He could swear (were they not
his) that the thoughts in them were 'founded as the rock, free as the air, the hue like an
Italian picture.' But, had the style been like polished steel, as firm and as bright, it would
have availed him nothing, for he was not a Government tool. The world hated him, we see, for
his merits. It is a bad world, he says; but don't think that it is my vanity which has taken
offence, for I am remarkable for modesty, and therefore I know that my virtues are faults of
which I ought to be ashamed. Is this pride or vanity, or humility, or cynicism, or self-reproach
for wasted talents, or an intimate blending of passions for which there is no precise name?
Who can unravel the masks within masks of a cunning egotism?

To one virtue, however, that of political constancy, Hazlitt lays claim in the most emphatic
terms. If he quarrels with all his friends--'most of the friends I have seen have turned out
the bitterest enemies, or cold, uncomfortable acquaintance'--it is, of course, their fault.
A thoroughgoing egotist must think himself the centre of gravity of the world, and all change
of relations must mean that others have moved away from him. Politically, too, all who have
given up his opinions are deserters, and generally from the worst of motives. He accuses Burke
of turning against the Revolution from--of all motives in the world!--jealousy of Rousseau;
a theory still more impossible than Mr. Buckle's hypothesis of madness. Court favour supplies
in most cases a simpler explanation of the general demoralisation. Hazlitt could not give credit
to men like Southey and Coleridge for sincere alarm at the French Revolution. Such a sentiment
would be too unreasonable, for he had not been alarmed himself. His constancy, indeed, would
be admirable if it did not suggest doubts of his wisdom. A man whose opinions at fifty are
his opinions at fourteen has opinions of very little value. If his intellect has developed
properly, or if he has profited by experience, he will modify, though he need not retract,
his early views. To claim to have learnt nothing from 1792 to 1830 is almost to write yourself
down as hopelessly impenetrable. The explanation is, that what Hazlitt called his opinions
were really his feelings. He could argue very ingeniously, as appears from his remarks on Coleridge
and Malthus, but his logic was the slave, not the ruler, of his emotions. His politics were
simply the expression, in a generalised form, of his intense feeling of personality. They are
a projection upon the modern political world of that heroic spirit of individual self-respect
which animated his Puritan forefathers. One question, and only one question, he frequently
tells us, is of real importance. All the rest is mere verbiage. The single dogma worth attacking
or defending is the divine right of kings. Are men, in the old phrase, born saddled and bridled,
and other men ready booted and spurred, or are they not? That is the single shibboleth which
distinguishes true men from false. Others, he says, bowed their heads to the image of the beast.
'I spit upon it, and buffeted it, and pointed at it, and drew aside the veil that then half
concealed it.' This passionate denial of the absolute right of men over their fellows is but
vicarious pride, if you please to call it so, or a generous recognition of the dignity of human
nature translated into political terms. Hazlitt's character did not change, however much his
judgment of individuals might change; and therefore the principles which merely reflected his
character remained rooted and unshaken. And yet his politics changed curiously enough in another
sense. The abstract truth, in Hazlitt's mind, must always have a concrete symbol. He chose
to regard Napoleon as the antithesis to the divine right of kings. That was the vital formula
of Napoleon, his essence, and the true meaning of his policy. The one question in abstract
politics was typified for Hazlitt by the contrast between Napoleon and the Holy Alliance. To
prove that Napoleon could trample on human rights as roughly as any legitimate sovereign was
for him mere waste of time. Napoleon's tyranny meant a fair war against the evil principle.
Had Hazlitt lived in France, and come into collision with press laws, it is likely enough that
his sentiments would have changed. But Napoleon was far enough off to serve as a mere poetical
symbol; his memory had got itself entwined in those youthful associations on which Hazlitt
always dwelt so fondly; and, moreover, to defend 'Boney' was to quarrel with most of his countrymen,
and even of his own party. What more was wanted to make him one of Hazlitt's superstitions?
No more ardent devotee of the Napoleonic legend ever existed, and Hazlitt's last years were
employed in writing a book which is a political pamphlet as much as a history. He worships
the eldest Napoleon with the fervour of a corporal of the Old Guard, and denounces the great
conspiracy of kings and nobles with the energy of Cobbett; but he had none of the special knowledge
which alone could give permanent value to such a performance. He seems to have consulted only
the French authorities; and it is refreshing for once to find an Englishman telling the story
of Waterloo entirely from the French side, and speaking, for example, of left and right as
if he had been--as in imagination he was--by the side of Napoleon instead of Wellington. Even
M. Victor Hugo can see more merit in the English army and its commander. A radical, who takes
Napoleon for his polar star, must change some of his theories, though he disguises the change
from himself; but a change of a different kind came over Hazlitt as he grew older.

The enthusiasm of the Southeys and Wordsworths for the French Revolution changed--whatever
their motives--into enthusiasm for the established order. Hazlitt's enthusiasm remained, but
became the enthusiasm of regret instead of hope. As one by one the former zealots dropped off
he despised them as renegades, and clasped his old creed the more firmly to his bosom. But
the change did not draw him nearer to the few who remained faithful. They perversely loved
the wrong side of the right cause, or loved it for the wrong reason. He liked the Whigs no
better than the Tories; the 'Edinburgh' and the 'Quarterly' were opposition coaches, making
a great dust and spattering each other with mud, but travelling by the same road to the same
end. A Whig, he said, was a trimmer who dared neither to be a rogue nor an honest man, but
was 'a sort of whiffling, shuffling, cunning, silly, contemptible, unmeaning negation of the
two.' And the true genuine radical reformers? To them, as represented by the school of Bentham,
Hazlitt entertained an aversion quite as hearty as his aversion for Whigs and Tories. If, he
says, the Whigs are too finical to join heartily with the popular advocates, the Reformers
are too cold. They hated literature, poetry, and romance; nothing gives them pleasure that
does not give others pain; utilitarianism means prosaic, hard-hearted, narrow-minded dogmatism.
Indeed, his pet essay on the principles of human nature was simply an assault on what he took
to be their fundamental position. He fancied that the school of Bentham regarded man as a purely
selfish and calculating animal; and his whole philosophy was an attempt to prove the natural
disinterestedness of man, and to indicate for the imagination and the emotions their proper
place beside the calculating faculty. Few were those who did not come under one or other clause
of this sweeping denunciation. He assailed Shelley, who was neither Whig, Tory, nor Utilitarian,
so cuttingly as to provoke a dispute with Leigh Hunt, and had some of his sharp criticisms
for his friend Godwin. His general moral, indeed, is the old congenial one. The reformer is
as unfit for this world as the scholar. He is the only wise man, but, as things go, wisdom
is the worst of follies. The reformer, he says, is necessarily a marplot; he does not know
what he would be at; if he did, he does not much care for it; and, moreover, he is 'governed
habitually by a spirit of contradiction, and is always wise beyond what is practicable.' Upon
this text Hazlitt dilates with immense spirit, satirising the crotchety and impracticable race,
and contrasting them with the disciplined phalanx of Toryism, brilliantly and bitterly enough
to delight Gifford; and yet he is writing a preface to a volume of radical Essays. He is consoling
himself for being in a minority of one by proving that two virtuous men must always disagree.
Hazlitt is no genuine democrat. He hates 'both mobs,' or, in other words, the great mass of
the human race. He would sympathise with Coriolanus more easily than with the Tribunes. He
laughs at the perfectibility of the species, and holds that 'all things move, not in progress
but in a ceaseless round.' The glorious dream is fled:

    The radiance which was once so bright
    Is now for ever taken from our sight;

and his only consolation is to live over in memory the sanguine times of his youth, before
Napoleon had fallen and the Holy Alliance restored the divine right of kings; to cherish eternal
regret for the hopes that have departed, and hatred and scorn equally enduring for those who
blasted them. 'Give me back,' he exclaims, 'one single evening at Boxhill, after a stroll in
the deep empurpled woods, before Bonaparte was yet beaten, with "wine of Attic taste," when
wit, beauty, friendship presided at the board.' The personal blends with the political regret.

Hazlitt, the politician, was soured. He fed his morbid egotism by indignantly chewing the cud
of disappointment, and scornfully rejecting comfort. He quarrelled with his wife and with most
of his friends, even with the gentle Lamb, till Lamb regained his affections by the brief quarrel
with Southey. Certainly, he might call himself, with some plausibility, 'the king of good haters.'
But, after all, Hazlitt's cynicism is the souring of a generous nature; and when we turn from
the politician to the critic and the essayist, our admiration for his powers is less frequently
jarred by annoyance at their wayward misuse. His egotism--for he is still an egotist--here
takes a different shape. His criticism is not of the kind which is now most popular. He lived
before the days of philosophers who talk about the organism and its environment, and of the
connoisseurs who boast of an eclectic taste for all the delicate essences of art. He never
thought of showing that a great writer was only the product of his time, race, and climate;
and he had not learnt to use such terms of art as 'supreme,' 'gracious,' 'tender,' 'bitter,'
and 'subtle,' in which a good deal of criticism now consists. Lamb, says Hazlitt, tried old
authors 'on his palate as epicures taste olives;' and the delicacy of discrimination which
makes the process enjoyable is perhaps the highest qualification of a good critic. Hazlitt's
point of view was rather different, nor can we ascribe to him without qualification that exquisite
appreciation of purely literary charm which is so rare and so often affected. Nobody, indeed,
loved some authors more heartily or understood them better; his love is so hearty that he cannot
preserve the true critical attitude. Instead of trying them on his palate, he swallows them
greedily. His judgment of an author seems to depend upon two circumstances. He is determined
in great measure by his private associations, and in part by his sympathy for the character
of the writer. His interest in this last sense is, one may say, rather psychological than purely
critical. He thinks of an author not as the exponent of a particular vein of thought or emotion,
nor as an artistic performer on the instrument of language, but as a human being to be loved
or hated, or both, like Napoleon or Gifford or Southey.

Hazlitt's favourite authors were, for the most part, the friends of his youth. He had pored
over their pages till he knew them by heart; their phrases were as familiar to his lips as
texts of Scripture to preachers who know but one book; the places where he had read them became
sacred to him, and a glory of his early enthusiasm was still reflected from the old pages.
Rousseau was his beloved above all writers. They had a natural affinity. What Hazlitt says
of Rousseau may be partly applied to himself. Of Hazlitt it might be said almost as truly as
of Rousseau, that 'he had the most intense consciousness of his own existence. No object that
had once made an impression upon him was ever after effaced.' In Rousseau's 'Confessions' and
'Nouvelle Héloïse,' Hazlitt saw the reflections of his own passions. He spent, he declares,
two whole years in reading these two books; and they were the happiest years of his life. He
marks with a white stone the days on which he read particular passages. It was on April 10,
1798--as he tells us some twenty years later--that he sat down to a volume of the 'New Héloïse,'
at the inn at Llangollen, over a bottle of sherry and a cold chicken. He tells us which passage
he read and what was the view before his bodily eyes. His first reading of 'Paul and Virginia'
is associated with an inn at Bridgewater; and at another old-fashioned inn he tells how the
rustic fare and the quaint architecture gave additional piquancy to Congreve's wit. He remembers,
too, the spot at which he first read Mrs. Inchbald's 'Simple Story;' how he walked out to escape
from one of the tenderest parts, in order to return again with double relish.

'An old crazy hand-organ,' he adds, 'was playing "Robin Adair," a summer shower dropped manna
on my head, and slaked my feverish thirst of happiness.' He looks back to his first familiarity
with his favourites as an old man may think of his honeymoon. The memories of his own feelings,
of his author's poetry, and of the surrounding scenery, are inextricably fused together. The
sight of an old volume, he says, sometimes shakes twenty years off his life; he sees his old
friends alive again, the place where he read the book, the day when he got it, the feeling
of the air, the fields, the sky. To these old favourites he remained faithful, except that
he seems to have tired of the glitter of Junius. Burke's politics gave him some severe twinges.
He says, in one place, that he always tests the sense and candour of a Liberal by his willingness
to admit the greatness of Burke. He adds, as a note to the Essay in which this occurs, that
it was written in a 'fit of extravagant candour,' when he thought that he could be more than
just to an enemy without betraying a cause. He oscillates between these views as his humour
changes. He is absurdly unjust to Burke the politician; but he does not waver in his just recognition
of the marvellous power of the greatest--I should almost say the only great--political writer
in the language. The first time he read a passage from Burke, he said, This is true eloquence.
To another great master he yields with a reluctance which is an involuntary compliment. The
one author whom he admitted into his Pantheon after his youthful enthusiasm had cooled was
unluckily the most consistent of Tories. Who is there, he asks, that admires the author of
'Waverley' more than I do? Who is there that despises Sir Walter Scott more? The Scotch novels,
as they were then called, fairly overpowered him. The imaginative force, the geniality and
the wealth of picturesque incident of the greatest of novelists, disarmed his antipathy. It
is curious to see how he struggles with himself. He blesses and curses in a breath. He applies
to Scott Pope's description of Bacon, 'the greatest, wisest, meanest of mankind,' and asks--

    Who would not laugh if such a man there be?
    Who would not weep if "Waverley" were he? Scott, he says, is much such a writer as the Duke of
Wellington (the hated antithesis of Napoleon, whose 'foolish face' he
specially detests) is a general. The one gets 100,000 men together, and
'leaves it to them to fight out the battle, for if he meddled with it
he might spoil sport; the other gets an innumerable quantity of facts
together, and lets them tell their story as they may. The facts are
stubborn in the last instance as the men are in the first, and in
neither case is the broth spoiled by the cook.' Both heroes show modesty
and self-knowledge, but 'little boldness or inventiveness of genius.' On
the strength of this doctrine he even compares Scott disadvantageously
with Godwin and Mrs. Inchbald, who had, it seems, more invention though
fewer facts. Hazlitt was not bound to understand strategy, and devoutly
held that Wellington's armies succeeded because their general only
looked on. But he should have understood his own trade a little better.
Putting aside this grotesque theory, he feels Scott's greatness truly,
and admits it generously. He enjoys the broth, to use his own phrase,
though he is determined to believe that it somehow made itself.

Lamb said that Hazlitt was a greater authority when he praised than when he abused, a doctrine
which may be true of others than Hazlitt. The true distinction is rather that Hazlitt, though
always unsafe as a judge, is admirable as an advocate in his own cause, and poor when merely
speaking from his brief. Of Mrs. Inchbald I must say what Hazlitt shocked his audience by saying
of Hannah More; that she has written a good deal which I have not read, and I therefore cannot
deny that her novels might have been written by Venus; but I cannot admit that Wycherley's
brutal 'Plain-dealer' is as good as ten volumes of sermons. 'It is curious to see,' says Hazlitt,
rather naïvely, 'how the same subject is treated by two such different authors as Shakespeare
and Wycherley.' Macaulay's remark about the same coincidence is more to the point. 'Wycherley
borrows Viola,' says that vigorous moralist, 'and Viola forthwith becomes a pander of the basest
sort.' That is literally true. Indeed, Hazlitt's love for the dramatists of the Restoration
is something of a puzzle, except so far as it is explained by early associations. Even then
it is hard to explain the sympathy which Hazlitt, the lover of Rousseau and sentiment, feels
for Congreve, whose speciality it is that a touch of sentiment is as rare in his painfully-witty
dialogues as a drop of water in the desert. Perhaps a contempt for the prejudices of respectable
people gave zest to Hazlitt's enjoyment of a literature, representative of a social atmosphere,
most propitious to his best feelings. And yet, though I cannot take Hazlitt's judgment, I would
frankly admit that Hazlitt's enthusiasm brings out Congreve's real merits with a force of which
a calmer judge would be incapable. His warm praises of 'The Beggar's Opera,' his assault upon
Sidney's 'Arcadia,' his sarcasms against Tom Moore, are all excellent in their way, whether
we do or do not agree with his final result. Whenever Hazlitt writes from his own mind, in
short, he writes what is well worth reading. Hazlitt learnt something in his later years from
Lamb. He prefers, he says, those papers of Elia in which there is the least infusion of antiquated
language; and, in fact, Lamb never inoculated him with his taste for the old English literature.
Hazlitt gave a series of lectures upon the Elizabethan dramatists, and carelessly remarks some
time afterwards that he has only read about a quarter of Beaumont and Fletcher's plays, and
intends to read the rest when he has a chance. It is plain, indeed, that the lectures, though
written at times with great spirit, are the work of a man who has got them up for the occasion.
And in his more ambitious and successful essays upon Shakespeare the same want of reading appears
in another way. He is more familiar with Shakespeare's text than many better scholars. His
familiarity is proved by a habit of quotation of which it has been disputed whether it is a
merit or a defect. What phrenologists would call the adhesiveness of Hazlitt's mind, its extreme
retentiveness for any impression which has once been received, tempts him to a constant repetition
of familiar phrases and illustrations. He has, too, a trick of working in patches of his old
essays, which he expressly defends on the ground that a book which has not reached a second
edition may be considered by its author as manuscript. This self-plagiarism sometimes worries
us, as we are worried by a man whose conversation runs in ruts. But his quotations from other
authors, where used in moderation, often give a pleasant richness to his style. Shakespeare,
in particular, seems to be a storehouse into which he can always dip for an appropriate turn
of phrase, and his love of Shakespeare is of a characteristic kind. He has not counted syllables
nor weighed various readings. He does not throw a new light upon delicate indications of thought
and sentiment, nor philosophise after the manner of Coleridge and the Germans, nor regard Shakespeare
as the representative of his age according to the sweeping method of M. Taine. Neither does
he seem to love Shakespeare himself as he loves Rousseau or Richardson. He speaks contemptuously
of the Sonnets and Poems, and, though I respect his sincerity, I think that such a verdict
necessarily indicates indifference to the most Shakespearian parts of Shakespeare. The calm
assertion that the qualities of the Poems are the reverse of the qualities of the plays is
unworthy of Hazlitt's general acuteness. That which really attracts Hazlitt is sufficiently
indicated by the title of his book; he describes the characters of Shakespeare's plays. It
is Iago, and Timon, and Coriolanus, and Anthony, and Cleopatra, who really interest him. He
loves and hates them as if they were his own contemporaries; he gives the main outlines of
their character with a spirited touch. And yet one somehow feels that Hazlitt is not at his
best in Shakespearian criticism; his eulogies savour of commonplace, and are wanting in spontaneity.
There is not that warm glow of personal feeling which gives light and warmth to his style whenever
he touches upon his early favourites. Perhaps he is a little daunted by the greatness of his
task, and perhaps there is something in the Shakespearian width of sympathy and in the Shakespearian
humour which lies beyond Hazlitt's sphere. His criticism of Hamlet is feeble; he does not do
justice to Mercutio or to Jaques; but he sympathises more heartily with the tremendous passion
of Lear and Othello, and finds something congenial to his taste in Coriolanus and Timon of
Athens. It is characteristic, too, that he evidently understands Shakespeare better on the
stage than in the closet. When he can associate Iago and Shylock with the visible presence
of Kean, he can introduce that personal element which is so necessary to his best writing.

The best, indeed, of Hazlitt's criticisms--if the word may be so far extended--are his criticisms
of living men. The criticism of contemporary portraits called the 'Spirit of the Age' is one
of the first of those series which have now become popular, as it is certainly one of the very
best. The descriptions of Bentham, and Godwin, and Coleridge, and Horne Tooke are masterpieces
in their way. They are, of course, unfair; but that is part of their charm. One would no more
take for granted Hazlitt's valuation of Wordsworth than Timon's judgment of Alcibiades. Hazlitt
sees through coloured glasses, but his vision is not the less penetrating. The vulgar satirist
is such a one as Hazlitt somewhere mentioned who called Wordsworth a dunce. Hazlitt was quite
incapable of such a solecism. He knew, nobody better, that a telling caricature must be a good
likeness. If he darkens the shades, and here and there exaggerates an ungainly feature, we
still know that the shade exists and that the feature is not symmetrical. De Quincey reports
the saying of some admiring friend of Hazlitt, who confessed to a shudder whenever Hazlitt
used his habitual gesture of placing his hand within his waistcoat. The hand might emerge armed
with a dagger. Whenever, said the same friend (Heaven preserve us from our friends!), Hazlitt
had been distracted for a moment from the general conversation, he looked round with a mingled
air of suspicion and defiance, as though some objectionable phrase might have evaded his censure
in the interval. The traits recur to us when we read Hazlitt's descriptions of the men he had
known. We seem to see the dark sardonic man, watching the faces and gestures of his friends,
ready to take sudden offence at any affront to his cherished prejudices, and yet hampered by
a kind of nervous timidity which makes him unpleasantly conscious of his own awkwardness. He
remains silent, till somebody unwittingly contradicts his unspoken thoughts--the most irritating
kind of contradiction to some people!--and perhaps heaps indiscriminating praise on an old
friend, a term nearly synonymous with an old enemy. Then the dagger suddenly flashes out, and
Hazlitt strikes two or three rapid blows, aimed with unerring accuracy at the weak points of
the armour which he knows so well. And then, as he strikes, a relenting comes over him; he
remembers old days with a sudden gush of fondness, and puts in a touch of scorn for his allies
or himself. Coleridge may deserve a blow, but the applause of Coleridge's enemies awakes his
self-reproach. His invective turns into panegyric, and he warms for a time into hearty admiration,
which proves that his irritation arises from an excess, not from a defect, of sensibility;
but finding that he has gone a little too far, he lets his praise slide into equivocal description,
and, with some parting epigram, he relapses into silence. The portraits thus drawn are never
wanting in piquancy nor in fidelity. Brooding over his injuries and his desertions, Hazlitt
has pondered almost with the eagerness of a lover upon the qualities of his intimates. Suspicion,
unjust it may be, has given keenness to his investigation. He has interpreted in his own fashion
every mood and gesture. He has watched his friends as a courtier watches a royal favourite.
He has stored in his memory, as we fancy, the good retorts which his shyness or unreadiness
smothered at the propitious moment, and brings them out in the shape of a personal description.
When such a man sits at our tables, silent and apparently self-absorbed, and yet shrewd and
sensitive, we may well be afraid of the dagger, though it may not be drawn till after our death,
and may write memoirs instead of piercing flesh. And yet Hazlitt is no mean assassin of reputations;
nor is his enmity as a rule more than the seamy side of friendship. Gifford, indeed, and Croker,
'the talking potato,' are treated as outside the pale of human rights.

Excellent as Hazlitt can be as a dispenser of praise and blame, he seems to me to be at his
best in a different capacity. The first of his performances which attracted much attention
was the Round Table, designed by Leigh Hunt (who contributed a few papers), on the old 'Spectator'
model. In the essays afterwards collected in the volumes called 'Table Talk' and the 'Plain
Speaker,' he is still better, because more certain of his position. It would, indeed, be difficult
to name any writer, from the days of Addison to those of Lamb, who has equalled Hazlitt's best
performances of this kind. Addison is too unlike to justify a comparison; and, to say the truth,
though he has rather more in common with Lamb, the contrast is much more obvious than the resemblance.
Each wants the other's most characteristic vein; Hazlitt has hardly a touch of humour, and
Lamb is incapable of Hazlitt's caustic scorn for the world and himself. They have indeed in
common, besides certain superficial tastes, a love of pathetic brooding over the past. But
the sentiment exerted is radically different. Lamb forgets himself when brooding over an old
author or summing up the 'old familiar faces.' His melancholy and his mirth cast delightful
cross-lights upon the topics of which he converses, and we do not know, until we pause to reflect,
that it is not the intrinsic merit of the objects, but Lamb's own character, which has caused
our pleasure. They would be dull, that is, in other hands; but the feeling is embodied in the
object described, and not made itself the source of our interest. With Hazlitt, it is the opposite.
He is never more present than when he is dwelling upon the past. Even in criticising a book
or a man, his favourite mode is to tell us how he came to love or to hate him; and in the non-critical
Essays he is always appealing to us, directly or indirectly, for sympathy with his own personal
emotions. He tells us how passionately he is yearning for the days of his youth; he is trying
to escape from his pressing annoyances; wrapping himself in sacred associations against the
fret and worry of surrounding cares; repaying himself for the scorn of women or Quarterly Reviewers
by retreating into some imaginary hermitage; and it is the delight of dreaming upon which he
dwells more than upon the beauty of the visions revealed to his inward eye. The force with
which this sentiment is presented gives a curious fascination to some of his essays. Take,
for example, the essay in 'Table Talk,' 'On Living to One's self,'--an essay written, as he
is careful to tell us, on a mild January day in the country, whilst the fire is blazing on
the hearth and a partridge getting ready for his supper. There he expatiates in happy isolation
on the enjoyments of living as 'a silent spectator of the mighty scheme of things;' as being
in the world, and not of it; watching the clouds and the stars, poring over a book, or gazing
at a picture without a thought of becoming an author or an artist. He has drifted into a quiet
little backwater, and congratulates himself in all sincerity on his escape from the turbulent
stream outside. He drinks in the delight of rest at every pore; reduces himself for the time
to the state of a polyp drifting on the warm ocean stream, and becomes a voluptuous hermit.
He calls up the old days when he acted up to his principles, and found pleasure enough in endless
meditation and quiet observation of nature. This meditation on the phenomena of his own sensations
leads him often into interesting reflections of a psychological kind. He analyses his own feelings
with constant eagerness, as he analyses the character of his enemies. A good specimen is the
essay 'On Antiquity' in the 'Plain Speaker,' which begins with some striking remarks on the
apparently arbitrary mode in which some objects and periods seem older to us than others, in
defiance of chronology. The monuments of the Middle Ages seem more antique than the Greek statues
and temples with their immortal youth. 'It is not the full-grown, articulated, thoroughly accomplished
periods of the world that we regard with the pity or reverence due to age, so much as those
imperfect, unformed, uncertain periods which seem to totter on the verge of non-existence,
to shrink from the grasp of our feeble imagination, as they crawl out of, or retire into the
womb of time, of which our utmost assurance is to doubt whether they ever were or not.' And
then, as usual, he passes to his own experience, and meditates on the changed aspect of the
world in youth and maturer life. The petty, personal emotions pass away, whilst the grand and
ideal 'remains with us unimpaired in its lofty abstraction from age to age.' Therefore, though
the inference is not quite clear, he can never forget the first time he saw Mrs. Siddons act,
or the appearance of Burke's 'Letter to a Noble Lord.' And then, in a passage worthy of Sir
Thomas Browne, he describes the change produced as our minds are stereotyped, as our most striking
thoughts become truisms, and we lose the faculty of admiration. In our youth 'art woos us;
science tempts us with her intricate labyrinths; each step presents unlooked-for vistas, and
closes upon us our backward path. Our onward road is strange, obscure, and infinite. We are
bewildered in a shadow, lost in a dream. Our perceptions have the brightness and indistinctness
of a trance. Our continuity of consciousness is broken, crumbles, and falls to pieces. We go
on learning and forgetting every hour. Our feelings are chaotic, confused, strange to each
other and ourselves.' But in time we learn by rote the lessons which we had to spell out in
our youth. 'A very short period (from 15 to 25 or 30) includes the whole map and table of contents
of human life. From that time we may be said to live our lives over again, repeat ourselves--the
same thoughts return at stated intervals, like the tunes of a barrel-organ; and the volume
of the universe is no more than a form of words, a book of reference.'

From such musings Hazlitt can turn to describe any fresh impression which has interested him,
in spite of his occasional weariness, with a freshness and vivacity which proves that his eye
had not grown dim, nor his temperament incapable of enjoyment. He fell in love with Miss Sarah
Wilson at the tolerably ripe age of 43; and his desire to live in the past is not to be taken
more seriously than his contempt for his literary reputation. It lasts only till some vivid
sensation occurs in the present. In congenial company he could take a lively share in conversation,
as is proved not only by external evidence, but by his very amusing book of conversations with
Northcote--an old cynic out of whom it does not seem that anybody else could strike many sparks,--or
from the essay, partly historical, it is to be supposed, in which he records his celebrated
discussion with Lamb, on persons whom one would wish to have seen. But perhaps some of his
most characteristic performances in this line are those in which he anticipates the modern
taste for muscularity. His wayward disposition to depreciate ostensibly his own department
of action, leads him to write upon the 'disadvantages of intellectual superiority,' and to
maintain the thesis that the glory of the Indian jugglers is more desirable than that of a
statesman. And perhaps the same sentiment, mingled with sheer artistic love of the physically
beautiful, prompts his eloquence upon the game of fives--in which he praises the great player
Cavanagh as warmly, and describes his last moments as pathetically, as if he were talking of
Rousseau--and still more his immortal essay on the fight between the Gasman and Bill Neate.
Prize-fighting is fortunately fallen into hopeless decay, and we are pretty well ashamed of
the last flicker of enthusiasm created by Sayers and Heenan. We may therefore enjoy without
remorse the prose-poem in which Hazlitt kindles with genuine enthusiasm to describe the fearful
glories of the great battle. Even to one who hates the most brutalising of amusements, the
spirit of the writer is impressibly contagious. We condemn, but we applaud; we are half disposed
for the moment to talk the old twaddle about British pluck; and when Hazlitt's companion on
his way home pulls out of his pocket a volume of the 'Nouvelle Héloïse,' admit for a moment
that 'Love of the Fancy is,' as the historian assures us, 'compatible with a cultivation of
sentiment.' If Hazlitt had thrown as much into his description of the Battle of Waterloo, and
had taken the English side, he would have been a popular writer. But even Hazlitt cannot quite
embalm the memories of Cribb, Belcher, and Gully.

It is time, however, to stop. More might be said by a qualified writer of Hazlitt's merits
as a judge of pictures or of the stage. The same literary qualities mark all his writings.
De Quincey, of course, condemns Hazlitt, as he does Lamb, for a want of 'continuity.' 'No man
can be eloquent,' he says, 'whose thoughts are abrupt, insulated, capricious, and nonsequacious.'
But then De Quincey will hardly allow that any man is eloquent except Jeremy Taylor, Sir Thomas
Browne, and Thomas De Quincey. Hazlitt certainly does not belong to their school; nor, on the
other hand, has he the plain homespun force of Swift and Cobbett. And yet readers who do not
insist upon measuring all prose by the same standard, will probably agree that if Hazlitt is
not a great rhetorician, if he aims at no gorgeous effects of complex harmony, he has yet an
eloquence of his own. It is indeed an eloquence which does not imply quick sympathy with many
moods of feeling, or an intellectual vision at once penetrating and comprehensive. It is the
eloquence characteristic of a proud and sensitive nature, which expresses a very keen if narrow
range of feeling, and implies a powerful grasp of one, if only one side of the truth. Hazlitt
harps a good deal upon one string; but that string vibrates forcibly. His best passages are
generally an accumulation of short, pithy sentences, shaped in strong feeling, and coloured
by picturesque association; but repeating, rather than corroborating, each other. The last
blow goes home, but each falls on the same place. He varies the phrase more than the thought;
and sometimes he becomes obscure, because he is so absorbed in his own feelings that he forgets
the very existence of strangers who require explanation. Read through Hazlitt, and this monotony
becomes a little tiresome; but dip into him at intervals, and you will often be astonished
that so vigorous a writer has not left some more enduring monument of his remarkable powers.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] In the excellent Essay prefixed to 'Hazlitt's Literary Remains.'

DISRAELI'S NOVELS[4]

It is a commonplace with men of literary eminence to extol the man of deeds above the man of
words. Scott was half ashamed of scribbling novels whilst Wellington was winning battles; and,
if Carlyle be a true prophet, the most brilliant writer is scarcely worthy to unloose the shoe's
latchet of the silent heroes of action. Perhaps it is graceful in masters of the art to depreciate
their own peculiar function. People who have less personal interest in the matter need not
be so modest. I will confess, at any rate, to preferring the men who have sown some new seed
of thought above the heroes whose names mark epochs in history. I would rather make the nation's
ballads than give its laws, dictate principles than carry them into execution, and leaven a
country with new ideas than translate them into facts, inevitably mangling and distorting them
in the process. And therefore I would rather have written 'Hamlet' than defeated the Spanish
Armada; or 'Paradise Lost,' than have turned out the Long Parliament; or 'Gray's Elegy,' than
have stormed the heights of Abram; or the Waverley Novels, than have won Waterloo or even Trafalgar.
I would rather have been Voltaire or Goethe than Frederick or Napoleon; and I suspect that
when the poor historian of the nineteenth century begins his superhuman work, he will, as a
thorough philosopher, attribute more importance to two or three recent English writers than
to all the English statesmen who have been strutting and fretting their little hour at Westminster.
And therefore, too, I wish that Disraeli could have stuck to his novels instead of rising to
be Prime Minister of England. This opinion is, of course, entirely independent of any judgment
which may be passed upon Disraeli's political career. Granting that his cause has always been
the right one, granting that he has rendered it essential services, I should still wish that
his brilliant literary ability had been allowed to ripen undisturbed by all the worries and
distractions of parliamentary existence. Persons who think the creation of a majority in the
House of Commons a worthy reward for the labours of a lifetime will, of course, differ from
this conclusion. Disraeli, at any rate, ought to have agreed. No satirist has ever struck off
happier portraits of the ordinary British legislator, or been more alive to the stupefying
influences of a parliamentary career. We have gone through a peaceful revolution since Disraeli
first sketched Rigby and Taper and Tadpole from the life; but the influences which they embodied
are still as powerful, and a parliamentary atmosphere as little propitious to the pure intellect,
as ever. Coningsby, if he still survives, must have lost many illusions; he must have herded
with the Tapers and Tadpoles, and prompted Rigby to write slashing articles on his behalf in
the quarterlies. He must have felt that his intellect was cruelly wasted in talking claptrap
and platitude to suit the thick comprehensions of his party; and the huge dead weight of the
invincible impenetrability to ideas of ordinary mankind must have lain heavy upon his soul.
How many Tadpoles, one would like to know, still haunt the Carlton Club, or throng the ministerial
benches, and how many Rigbys have forced their way into the Cabinet? That is one of the state
secrets which will hardly be divulged by the only competent observer. But at any rate it is
sad that the critic, who applied the lash so skilfully, should have been so unequally yoked
with the objects of his contempt. Disraeli's talents for entertaining fiction may not indeed
have been altogether wasted in his official career; but he at least may pardon admirers of
his writing, who regret that he should have squandered powers of imagination, capable of true
creative work, upon that alternation of truckling and blustering which is called governing
the country.

The qualities which are of rather equivocal value in a minister of state may be admirable in
the domain of literature. It is hardly desirable that the followers of a political leader should
be haunted by an ever-recurring doubt as to whether his philosophical utterances express deep
convictions, or the extemporised combinations of a fertile fancy, and be uncertain whether
he is really putting their clumsy thoughts into clearer phrases, or foisting showy nonsense
upon them for his own purposes, or simply laughing at them in his sleeve. But, in a purely
literary sense, this ambiguous hovering between two meanings, this oscillation between the
ironical and the serious, is always amusing, and sometimes delightful. Some simple-minded people
are revolted, even in literature, by the ironical method; and tell the humorist, with an air
of moral disapproval, that they never know whether he is in jest or in earnest. To such matter-of-fact
persons Disraeli's novels must be a standing offence; for it is his most characteristic peculiarity
that the passage from one phase to the other is imperceptible. He has moments of obvious seriousness;
at frequent intervals comes a flash of downright sarcasm, as unmistakable in its meaning as
the cut of a whip across your face; and elsewhere we have passages which aim unmistakably,
and sometimes with unmistakable success, at rhetorical excellence. But, between the two, there
is a wide field where we may interpret his meaning as we please. The philosophical theory may
imply a genuine belief, or may be a mere bit of conventional filling in, or perhaps a parody
of his friends or himself. The gorgeous passages may be intentionally over-coloured, or may
really represent his most sincere taste. His homage may be genuine or a biting mockery. His
extravagances are kept precisely at such a pitch that it is equally fair to argue that a satirist
must have meant them to be absurd, or to argue only that he would have seen their absurdity
in anybody else. The unfortunate critic feels himself in a position analogous to that of the
suitors in the 'Merchant of Venice.' He may blunder grievously, whatever alternative he selects.
If he pronounces a passage to be pure gold, it may turn out to be merely the mask of a bitter
sneer; or he may declare it to be ingenious burlesque when put forward in the most serious
earnest; or may ridicule it as overstrained bombast, and find that it was never meant to be
anything else. It is wiser to admit that perhaps the author was not very clear himself, or
possibly enjoyed that ambiguous attitude which might be interpreted according to the taste
of his readers and the development of events. A man who deals in oracular utterances acquires
instinctively a mode of speech which may shift its colour with every change of light. The texture
of Disraeli's writings is so ingeniously shot with irony and serious sentiment that each tint
may predominate by turns. It is impossible to suppose that the weaver of so cunning a web should
never have intended the effects which he produces; but frequently, too, they must be the spontaneous
and partly unconscious results of a peculiar intellectual temperament. Delight in blending
the pathetic with the ludicrous is the characteristic of the true humorist. Disraeli is not
exactly a humorist, but something for which the rough nomenclature of critics has not yet provided
a distinctive name. His pathos is not sufficiently tender, nor his laughter quite genial enough.
The quality which results is homologous to, though not identical with, genuine humour: for
the smile we must substitute a sneer, and the element which enters into combination with the
satire is something more distantly allied to poetical unction than to glittering rhetoric.
The Disraelian irony thus compounded is hitherto a unique product of intellectual chemistry.

Most of Disraeli's novels are intended to set forth what, for want of a better name, must be
called a religious or political creed. To grasp its precise meaning, or to determine the precise
amount of earnestness with which it is set forth, is of course hopeless. Its essence is to
be mysterious, and half the preacher's delight is in tantalising his disciples. At moments
he cannot quite suppress the amusement with which he mocks their hopeless bewilderment. When
Coningsby is on the point of entering public life, he reads a speech of one of the initiated,
'denouncing the Venetian constitution, to the amazement of several thousand persons, apparently
not a little terrified by this unknown danger, now first introduced to their notice.' What
more amusing than suddenly to reveal to good easy citizens that what they took for wholesome
food is deadly poison, and to watch their hopeless incapacity to understand whether you are
really announcing a truth or launching an epigram!

Disraeli, undoubtedly, has certain fixed beliefs which underlie and which, indeed, explain
the superficial versatility of his teaching. Amongst the various doctrines with which he plays
more or less seriously, two at least are deeply rooted in his mind. He holds, with a fervour
in every way honourable, a belief in the marvellous endowments of his race, and connected with
this belief is an almost romantic admiration for every manifestation of intellectual power.
Vivian Grey, in a bit of characteristic bombast, describes himself as 'one who has worshipped
the empire of the intellect;' and his career is simply an attempt to act out the principle
that the world belongs of right to the cleverest. Of Sidonia, after every superlative in the
language has been lavished upon his marvellous acquirements, we are told that 'the only human
quality that interested him was intellect.' Intellect is equally, if not quite as exclusively,
interesting to the creator of Sidonia. He admires it in all its forms--in a Jesuit or a leader
of the International, in a charlatan or a statesman, or perhaps even more in one who combines
the two characters; but the most interesting of all objects to Disraeli, if one may judge from
his books, is a precocious youth, whose delight in the sudden consciousness of great abilities
has not yet been dashed by experience. In some other writers we may learn the age of the author
by the age of his hero. A novelist who adopts the common practice of painting from himself
naturally finds out the merits of middle age in his later works. But in every one of Disraeli's
works, from 'Vivian Grey' to 'Lothair,' the central figure is a youth, who is frequently a
statesman at school, and astonishes the world before he has reached his majority. The change
in the author's position is, indeed, equally marked in a different way. The youthful heroes
of Disraeli's early novels are creative; in his later they become chiefly receptive. Vivian
Grey and Contarini Fleming show their genius by insubordination; Coningsby and Tancred learn
wisdom by sitting at the feet of Sidonia; and Lothair reduces himself so completely to a mere
'passive bucket' to be pumped into by every variety of teacher, that he is unpleasantly like
a fool. Disraeli still loves ingenuous youth; but he has gained quite a new perception of the
value of docility. Here and there, of course, there is a gentle gibe at juvenile vanity. 'My
opinions are already formed on every subject,' says Lothair; 'that is, on every subject of
importance; and, what is more, they will never change.' But such vanity has nothing offensive.
The audacity with which a lad of twenty solves all the problems of the universe, excites in
Disraeli genuine and really generous sympathy. Sidonia converts the sentiment into a theory.
Experience, he says, is less than nothing to a creative mind. 'Almost everything that is great
has been done by youth.' The greatest captains, the greatest poets, artists, statesmen, and
religious reformers of the world, have done their best work by middle life. All theories upon
all subjects can be proved from history; and the great Sidonia is not to be pinned down by
too literal an interpretation. But at least he is expressing Disraeli's admiration for intellect
which has the fervour, rapidity, and reckless audacity of youth, which trusts its intuitions
instead of its calculations, and takes its crudest guesses for flashes of inspiration. The
exuberant buoyancy of his youthful heroes gives a certain contagious charm to Disraeli's pages,
which is attractive even when verging upon extravagance. Our popular novelists have learned
to associate high spirits with muscularity; their youthful heroes are either athletes destined
to put on flesh in later days, or premature prigs with serious convictions and a tendency to
sermons and blue-books. After a course of such books, Disraeli's genuine love of talent is
refreshing. He dwells fondly upon the effervescence of genius which drives men to kick over
the traces of respectability and strike out short cuts to fame. If at bottom his heroes are
rather eccentric than original, they have at least a righteous hatred of all bores and Philistines,
and despise orthodoxy, political economy, and sound information generally. They can provide
you with new theories of politics and history, as easily as Mercutio could pour out a string
of similes; and we have scarcely the heart to ask whether this vivacious ebullition implies
the process of fermentation by which a powerful mind clears its crude ideas, or only an imitation
of the process by which superlative cleverness apes true genius. Intellect, as it becomes sobered
by middle age and by scholastic training, is no longer so charming. When its guesses ossify
into fixed opinions, and its arrogance takes the airs of scientific dogmatism, it is always
a tiresome and may be a dangerous quality. Some indication of what Disraeli means by intellect
may be found in the preface to 'Lothair.' Speaking of the conflict between science and the
old religions, he says that it is a most flagrant fallacy to suppose that modern ages have
a monopoly of scientific discovery. The greatest discoveries are not those of modern ages.
'No one for a moment can pretend that printing is so great a discovery as writing, or algebra,
or language. What are the most brilliant of our chemical discoveries compared with the invention
of fire and the metals?' Hipparchus ranks with the Keplers and Newtons; and Copernicus was
but the champion of Pythagoras. To say nothing of the characteristic assumption that somebody
'discovered' language and fire in the same sense as modern chemists discovered spectrum analysis,
the argument is substantially that, because Hipparchus was as great a genius as Newton, the
views of the ancients upon religious or historical questions deserve just as much respect as
those of the moderns. In other words, the accumulated knowledge of ages has taught us nothing.
'What is conveniently called progress' is merely a polite name for change; and one clever man's
guess is as good as another, whatever the period at which he lived. This theory is the correlative
of Sidonia's assertion, that experience is useless to the man of genius. The experience of
the race is just as valueless. Modern criticism is nothing but an intellectual revolt of the
Teutonic races against the Semitic revelation, as the French revolution was a political revolt
of the Celtic races. The disturbance will pass away; and we shall find that Abraham and Moses
knew more about the universe than Hegel or Comte. The prophets of the sacred race were divinely
endowed with an esoteric knowledge concealed from the vulgar behind mystic symbols and ceremonies.
If the old oracles are dumb, some gleams of the same power still remain, and in the language
of mere mortals are called genius. We find it in perfection only amongst the Semites, whose
finer organisation, indicated by their musical supremacy, enables them to catch the still small
voice inaudible to our grosser ears. The Aryans, indeed, have some touches of a cognate power,
but it is dulled by a more sensuous temperament. They can enter the court of the Gentiles;
but their mortal vesture is too muddy for admission into the holy of holies. If ever they catch
a glimpse of the truth, it is in their brilliant youth, when, still uncorrupted by worldly
politics, they can induce some Sidonia partly to draw aside the veil.

The intellect, then, as Disraeli conceives it, is not the faculty denounced by theologians,
which delights in systematic logical inquiry, and hopes to attain truth by the unrestricted
conflict of innumerable minds. It is an abnormal power of piercing mysteries granted only to
a few distinguished seers. It does not lead to an earthly science, expressible in definite
formulas, and capable of being taught in Sunday schools. The knowledge cannot be fully communicated
to the profane, and is at most to be shadowed forth in dim oracular utterances. Disraeli's
instinctive affinity for some kind of mystic teaching is indicated by Vivian Grey's first request
to his father. 'I wish,' he exclaims, 'to make myself master of the latter Platonists. I want
Plotinus and Porphyry, and Iamblichus, and Syrianus, and Mosanius Tyrius, and Pericles, and
Hierocles, and Sallustius, and Damasenis!' But Vivian Grey, as we know, wanted also to conquer
the Marquis of Carabas; and the odd combination between a mystic philosopher and a mere political
charlatan displays Disraeli's peculiar irony. Intellect with him is a double-edged weapon:
it is at once the faculty which reads the dark riddle of the universe, and the faculty which
makes use of Tapers and Tadpoles. Our modern Daniel is also a shrewd electioneering agent.
Cynics, indeed, have learned in these later days to regard mystery as too often synonymous
with nonsense. The difficulty of interpreting esoteric doctrines to the vulgar generally consists
in this--that the doctrines are mere collections of big words which collapse, instead of becoming
lucid, when put into plain English. The mystagogue is but too closely allied to the charlatan.
He may be straining to utter some secret too deep for human utterance, or he is looking wise
to conceal absolute vacuity of thought. And at other times he must surely be laughing at the
youthful audacity which fancies that speculation is to be carried on by a series of sudden
inspirations, instead of laborious accumulation of rigorously-tested reasonings.

The three novels, 'Coningsby,' 'Sybil,' and 'Tancred,' published from 1844 to 1847, form, as
their author has told us, a trilogy intended to set forth his views of political, social, and
religious problems. Each of them exhibits, in one form or other, this peculiar train of thought.
'Coningsby,' if I am not mistaken, is by far the ablest, and probably owes its pre-eminence
to the simple fact that it deals with the topics in which its author felt the keenest interest.
The social speculations of 'Sybil' savour too much of the politician getting up a telling case;
and the religious speculations of 'Tancred' are pushed to the extreme verge of the grotesque.
But 'Coningsby' wants little but a greater absence of purpose to be a first-rate novel. If
Disraeli had confined himself to the merely artistic point of view, he might have drawn a picture
of political society worthy of comparison with 'Vanity Fair.' Lord Monmouth is evidently related
to the Marquis of Steyne; and Rigby is a masterpiece, though perhaps rather too suggestive
of a direct study from nature. Lord Monmouth is the ideal type of the 'Venetian' aristocracy;
and Rigby, like his historical namesake, of the corrupt wire-pullers who flourished under their
shade. The consistent Epicureanism of the noble, in whom a sense of duty is only represented
by a vague instinct that he ought to preserve his political influence as part of his personal
splendour, and as an insurance against possible incendiarism, is admirably contrasted by the
coarser selfishness of Rigby, who relieves his patron of all dirty work on consideration of
feathering his own nest, and fancying himself to be a statesman. The whole background, in short,
is painted with inimitable spirit and fidelity. The one decided failure amongst the subsidiary
characters is Lucian Grey, the professional parasite, who earns his dinners by his witty buffoonery.
Somehow, his fun is terribly dreary on paper; perhaps because, as a parasite, he is not allowed
to indulge in the cutting irony which animates all Disraeli's best sayings. The simple buffoonery
of exuberant animal spirits is not in Disraeli's line. When he can neither be bitter nor rhetorical,
he is apt to drop into mere mechanical flatness. But nobody has described more vigorously all
the meaner forms of selfishness, stupidity, and sycophancy engendered under 'that fatal drollery,'
as Tancred describes it, 'called a parliamentary government.' The pompous dulness which affects
philosophical gravity, the appetite for the mere dry husks and bran of musty constitutional
platitude which takes the airs of political wisdom, the pettifogging cunning which supposes
the gossips of lobbies and smoking-rooms to be the embodiment of statesmanship, the selfishness
which degrades political warfare into a branch of stock-jobbing, and takes a great principle
to be useful in suggesting electioneering cries, as Telford thought that navigable rivers were
created to feed canals,--these and other tendencies favoured by party government are hit off
to the life. 'The man they called Dizzy' can despise a miserable creature having the honour
to be as heartily as Carlyle himself, and, if his theories are serious, sometimes took our
blessed Constitution to be a mere shelter for such vermin as the Tapers and Tadpoles. Two centuries
of a parliamentary monarchy and a parliamentary Church, says Coningsby, have made government
detested, and religion disbelieved. 'Political compromises,' says the omniscient Sidonia, 'are
not to be tolerated except at periods of rude transition. An educated nation recoils from the
imperfect vicariat of what is called representative government. Your House of Commons, that
has absorbed all other powers in the State, will in all probability fall more rapidly than
it rose.' In short, the press will take its place. This is one of those impromptu theories
of history which are not to be taken too literally. Indeed, the satirical background is intended
to throw into clearer relief a band of men of genius to whom has been granted some insight
into the great political mystery. Who, then, are the true antithesis to the Tapers and Tadpoles?
Should we compare them with a Cromwell, who has a creed as well as a political platform; and
contrast 'our young Queen and our old institutions' with some new version of the old war cry,
'The sword of the Lord and of Gideon'? Or may we at least have a glimpse of a Chatham, wakening
the national spirit to sweep aside the Newcastles and Bubb Dodingtons of the present day? Or,
if Cromwells and Chathams be too old-fashioned, and translate the Semitic principle into a
narrow English Protestantism, may we not have some genuine revolutionary fanatic, a Cimourdain
or a Gauvain, to burn up all this dry chaff of mouldy politics with the fire of a genuine human
passion? Such a contrast, however effective, would have been a little awkward in the year 1844.
Young England had an ideal standard of its own, and Disraeli must be the high priest of its
peculiar hero-worship. Whether, in this case, political trammels injured his artistic sense,
or whether his peculiar artistic tendencies injured his political career, is a question rather
for the historian than the critic.

Certain it is, at any rate, that the cénacle of politicians, whose interests are to be thrown
in relief against this mass of grovelling corruption, forms but a feeble contrast, even in
the purely artistic sense. We have no right to doubt that Disraeli thought that Coningsby and
his friends represented the true solution of the difficulty; yet if anybody had wished to demonstrate
that a genuine belief might sometimes make a man more contemptible than hypocritical selfishness,
he could scarcely have defended the paradox more ingeniously. 'Unconscious cerebration' has
become a popular explanation of many phenomena; and it would hardly be fanciful to assume that
one lobe of Disraeli's brain is in the habit of secreting bitter satire unknown to himself,
and cunningly inserting it behind the thin veil of sentiment unconsciously elaborated by the
other. We are prepared, indeed, to accept the new doctrine, as cleverly as Balzac could have
inoculated us with a provisional belief in animal magnetism, to heighten our interest in a
thrilling story of wonder. We have judicious hints of esoteric political doctrine, which has
been partially understood by great men at various periods of our history. The whole theory
is carefully worked out in the opening pages of 'Sybil.' The most remarkable thing about our
popular history, so Disraeli tells us, is, that it is 'a complete mystification;' many of the
principal characters never appear, as, for example, Major Wildman, who was 'the soul of English
politics from 1640 to 1688.' It is not surprising, therefore, that two of our three chief statesmen
in later times should be systematically depreciated. The younger Pitt, indeed, has been extolled,
though on wrong grounds. But Bolingbroke and Shelburne, our two finest political geniuses,
are passed over with contempt by ordinary historians. A historian might amuse himself by tracing
the curious analogy between the most showy representatives of the old race of statesmen and
the modern successor who delights to sing his praises. The Patriot King is really to some extent
an anticipation of Disraeli's peculiar democratic Toryism. But the chief merit of Shelburne
would seem to be that the qualities which earned for him the nickname of Malagrida made him
convenient as a hypothetical depository of some esoteric scheme of politics. For the purposes
of fiction, at any rate, we may believe that English politics are a riddle of which only three
men have guessed the true solution since the 'financial' revolution of 1688. Pitt was only
sound so far as he was the pupil of Shelburne; but Bolingbroke, Shelburne, and Disraeli possessed
the true key, and fully understood, for example, that Charles I. was the 'holocaust of direct
taxation.' But frankly to expound this theory would be to destroy its charm, and to cast pearls
before political economists. And, therefore, its existence is dimly adumbrated rather than
its meaning revealed; and we have hints that there are wheels within wheels, and that in the
lowest deep of mystery there is a yet deeper mystery. Coningsby and his associates, the brilliant
Buckhurst and the rich Catholic country gentleman, Eustace Lyle, are but unripe neophytes,
feeling after the true doctrine, but not yet fully initiated. The superlative Sidonia, the
man who by thirty has exhausted all the sources of human knowledge, become master of the learning
of every nation, of all tongues, dead or living, and of every literature, western and oriental;
who has pursued all the speculations of science to their last term; who has lived in all orders
of society, and observed man in every phase of civilisation; who has a penetrative intellect
which enables him to follow as by intuition the most profound of all questions, and a power
of communicating with precision the most abstruse ideas; whose wealth would make Monte Cristo
seem a pauper; who is so far above his race that woman seems to him a toy, and man a machine,--this
thrice miraculous Sidonia, who can yet stoop from his elevation to win a steeplechase from
the Gentiles, or return their hospitality by an exquisite dinner, is the fitting depository
of the precious secret. No one can ever accuse Disraeli of a want of audacity. He does not,
like weaker men, shrink from introducing men of genius because he is afraid that he will not
be able to make them talk in character; and when, in 'Venetia,' he introduces Byron and Shelley,
he is kind enough to write poetry for them, which produces as great an effect as the original.

And now having a true prophet, having surrounded him with a band of disciples, so that the
transmitted rays of wisdom may be bearable to our mortal eyes, we expect some result worthy
of this startling machinery. Let the closed casket open, and the magic light stream forth to
dazzle the gazing world. We know, alas! too well that our expectation cannot be satisfied.
There is not any secret doctrine in politics. Bolingbroke may have been a very clever man,
but he could not see through a stone wall. The whole hypothesis is too extravagant to admit
of any downright prosaic interpretation. But something might surely be done for the imagination,
if not for the reason. Some mystic formula might be pronounced which might pass sufficiently
well for an oracle so long as we are in the charmed world of fiction. Let Sidonia only repeat
some magniloquent gnome from Greek, or Hebrew, or German philosophers, give us a scrap of Hegel,
or of the Talmud, and we will willingly take it to be the real thing for imaginative purposes,
as we allow ourselves to believe that some theatrical goblet really contains a fluid of magical
efficacy. Unluckily, however, and the misfortune illustrates the inconvenience of combining
politics with fiction, Disraeli had something to say, and still more unluckily that something
was a mere nothing. It was the creed of Young England; and even greater imaginative power might
have failed in the effort to instil the most temporary vitality into that flimsy collection
of sham beliefs. A mere sentimentalist might possibly have introduced it in such a way as to
impress us at least with his own sincerity. But how is such doctrine to be uttered by lips
which are, at the same time, pouring out the shrewdest of sarcasms against politicians who,
if more pachydermatous, were at least more manly? In a newfangled church, amidst incense and
genuflexions and ecclesiastical millinery, one may listen patiently to a ritualist sermon;
but no mortal skill could make ritualism sound plausible in regions to which the outer air
of common sense is fairly admitted. The only mode of escape is by slurring over the doctrine,
or by proclaiming it with an air of burlesque. Disraeli keeps most dexterously in the region
of the ambiguous. He does at last produce his political wares with a certain aplomb; but a
doubtful smile about his lips encourages some of the spectators to fancy that he estimates
their value pretty accurately. His last book of 'Coningsby' opens with a Christmas scene worthy
of an illustrated keepsake. We have buttery-hatches, and beef, and ale, and red cloaks, and
a lord of misrule, and a hobby-horse, and a boar's head with a canticle.

    Caput apri defero,
    Reddens laudes Domino,

sing the noble ladies, and we are left to wonder whether Disraeli blushed or sneered as he
wrote. Certainly we find it hard to recognise the minister who proposed to put down ritualism
by an Act of Parliament. He does his very best to be serious, and anticipates critics by a
passing blow at the utilitarians; but we have a shrewd suspicion that the blow is mere swagger,
to keep up his courage, or perhaps a covert hint that though he can at times fool his friends,
he is not a man to be trifled with by his enemies. What, we must ask, would Sidonia say to
this dreariest of all shams? When Coningsby meets Sidonia in the forest, and expresses a wish
to see Athens, the mysterious stranger replies, 'The age of ruins is past; have you seen Manchester?'
It would, indeed, be absurd to infer that Disraeli does not see the weak side of Manchester.
After dilating, in 'Tancred,' upon the vitality of Damascus, he observes, 'As yet the disciples
of progress have not been able exactly to match this instance; but it is said that they have
great faith in the future of Birkenhead.' Perhaps the true sentiment is that the Semitic races,
the unchanging depositaries of eternal principles, look with equal indifference upon the mushroom
growths of Aryan civilisation, whether an Athens or a Birkenhead be the product, but admit
that the living has so far an advantage over the dead. To find the moral of 'Coningsby' may
be impracticable and is at any rate irrelevant. The way to enjoy it is to look at the world
through the eyes of Sidonia. The world--at least the Gentile world--is a farce. Ninety-nine
men out of a hundred are fools. Some are prosy and reasoning fools, and make excellent butts
for stinging sarcasms; others are flighty and imaginative fools, and can best be ridiculed
by burlesquing their folly. As for the hundredth man--the youthful Coningsby or Tancred--his
enthusiasm is refreshing, and his talent undeniable; let us watch his game, applaud his talents,
and always remember that great talent is almost as necessary for consummate folly as for consummate
success. Adopting such maxims, we can enjoy 'Coningsby' throughout; for we need not care whether
we are laughing at the author or with him. We may heartily enjoy his admirable flashes of wit,
and, when he takes a serious tone, may oscillate agreeably between the beliefs that he is in
solemn earnest, or in his bitterest humour; only we must not quite forget that the farce has
a touch in it of tragedy, and that there is a real mystery somewhere. Satire, pure and simple,
becomes wearisome. If a latent sense of humour is necessary to prevent a serious man from becoming
a bore, it is still more true that some serious creed, however misty and indefinite, is required
to raise the mere mocker into a genuine satirist. That is the use of Sidonia. He is ostensibly
but a subordinate figure, and yet, if we struck him out, the whole composition would be thrown
out of harmony. Looking through his eyes, we can laugh, but we laugh with that sense of dignity
which arises out of the consciousness of a secret wisdom, shadowy and indefinite in the highest
degree, perilously apt to sound like nonsense if cramped by a definite utterance, but yet casting
over the whole picture a kind of magical colouring, which may be mere trickery or may be a
genuine illumination, but which, whilst we are not too exacting, brings out pleasant and perplexing
effects. The lights and shadows fluctuate, and solid forms melt provokingly into mist; but
we must learn to enjoy the uncertain twilight which prevails on the border-land between romance
and reality, if we would enjoy the ambiguities and the ironies and the mysteries of 'Coningsby.'

The other two parts of the trilogy show the same qualities, but in different proportions. 'Sybil'
is chiefly devoted to what its author calls 'an accurate and never-exaggerated picture of a
remarkable period in our social history.' We need not inquire into the accuracy. It is enough
to say that in this particular department Disraeli shows himself capable of rivalling in force
and vivacity the best of those novelists who have tried to turn blue-books upon the condition
of the people into sparkling fiction. If he is distinctly below the few novelists of truer
purpose who have put into an artistic shape a profound and first-hand impression of those social
conditions which statisticians try to tabulate in blue-books,--if he does not know Yorkshiremen
in the sense in which Miss Brontë knew them, and still less in the sense in which Scott knew
the Borderers--he can write a disguised pamphlet upon the effects of trades' unions in Sheffield
with a brilliancy which might excite the envy of Mr. Charles Reade. But in 'Tancred' we again
come upon the true vein of mystery in which is Disraeli's special idiosyncrasy; and the effect
is still more bewildering than in 'Coningsby.' Giving our hands to our singular guide, we are
to be led into the most secret place, and be initiated into the very heart of the mystery.
Tancred is Coningsby once more, but Coningsby no longer satisfied with the profound political
teaching of Bolingbroke, and eager to know the very last word of that riddle which, once solved,
all theological and social and political difficulties will become plain. He is exalted to the
pitch of enthusiasm at which even supernatural machinery may be introduced without a sense
of discord. And yet, intentionally or from the inevitable conditions of the scheme, the satire
deepens with the mystery; and the more solemn become the words and gestures of our high priest,
the more marked becomes his ambiguous air of irony. Good, innocent Tancred fancies that his
doubts may be solved by an English bishop; and Disraeli revels in the ludicrous picture of
a young man of genius taking a bishop seriously. Yet it must be admitted that Tancred's own
theory sounds to the vulgar Saxon even more nonsensical than the episcopal doctrine. His notion
is that 'inspiration is not only a divine but a local quality,' and that God can only speak
to man upon the soil of Palestine--a theory which has afterwards to be amended by the hypothesis,
that even in Palestine, God can only speak to a man of Semitic race. Lest we should fancy that
this belief contains an element of irony, it is approved by the great Sidonia; but even Sidonia
is not worthy of the deep mysteries before us. He intimates to Tancred that there is one from
whose lips even he himself has derived the sacred knowledge. The Spanish priest, Alonzo Lara,
Jewish by race, but, as a Catholic prelate, imbued with all the later learning--a member of
that Church which was founded by a Hebrew, and still retains some of the 'magnetic influence'--this
great man, in whom all influences thus centre, is the only worthy hierophant. And thus, after
a few irresistible blows at London society, we find ourselves fairly on the road to Palestine,
and listen for the great revelation. We scorn the remark of the simple Lord Milford, that there
is 'absolutely no sport of any kind' near Jerusalem; and follow Tancred where his ancestors
have gone before him. We bend in reverence before the empty tomb of the Divine Prince of the
house of David, and fall into ecstasies in the garden of Bethany. Solace comes, but no inspiration.
Though the marvellous Lara is briefly introduced, and though a beautiful young woman comes
straight out of the 'Arabian Nights,' and asks the insoluble question, What would have become
of the Atonement, if the Jews had not persuaded the Romans to crucify Jesus? we are still tantalised
by the promised revelation, which melts before us like a mirage. Once, indeed, on the sacred
mountain of Sinai, a vision greets the weary pilgrim, in which a guardian angel talks in the
best style of Sidonia or Disraeli. But we are constantly distracted by our guide's irresistible
propensity for a little political satire. A Syrian Vivian Grey is introduced to us, whose intrigues
are as audacious and futile as those of his English parallel, but whose office seems to be
the purely satirical one of interpreting Tancred's lofty dreams into political intrigues suited
to a shrewd but ignorant Oriental. Once we are convinced that the promise is to be fulfilled.
Tancred reaches the strange tribe of the Ansarey, shrouded in a more than Chinese seclusion.
Can they be the guardians of the 'Asian mystery'? To our amazement it turns out that they are
of the faith of Mr. Phoebus of 'Lothair.' They have preserved the old gods of paganism; and
their hopes, which surely cannot be those of Disraeli, are that the world will again fall prostrate
before Apollo (who has a striking likeness to Tancred) or Astarte. What does it all mean? or
does it all mean anything? The most solemn revelation has been given by that mysterious figure
which appeared in Sinai, in 'the semblance of one who, though not young, was still untouched
by time; a countenance like an Oriental night, dark yet lustrous, mystical yet clear. Thought,
rather than melancholy, spoke from the pensive passion of his eyes; while on his lofty forehead
glittered a star that threw a solemn radiance on the repose of his majestic forehead.' After
explaining that he was the Angel of Arabia, this person told Tancred to 'announce the sublime
and solacing doctrine of Theocratic Equality.' But when Tancred, after his startling adventures,
got back to Jerusalem, he found his anxious parents, the Duke and Duchess of Bellamont, accompanied
by the triumvirate of bear-leaders which their solicitude had appointed to look after him--Colonel
Brace, the Rev. Mr. Bernard, and Dr. Roby. And thus the novel ends like the address of Miss
Hominy. 'Out laughs the stern philosopher,' or, shall we say, the incarnation of commonplace,
'What, ho! arrest me that wandering agency; and so, the vision fadeth.' Theocratic equality
has not yet taken its place as an electioneering cry.

Has our guide been merely blowing bubbles for our infantile amusement? Surely he has been too
solemn. We could have sworn that some of the passages were written, if not with tears in his
eyes, at least with a genuine sensibility to the solemn and romantic elements of life. Or was
he carried away for a time into real mysticism for which he seeks to apologise by adopting
the tone of the man of the world? Surely his satire is too keen, even when it causes the collapse
of his own fancies. Even Coningsby and Lord Marney, the heroes of the former novels, appear
in 'Tancred' as shrewd politicians, and obviously Tancred will accept the family seat when
he gets back to his paternal mansion. We can only solve the problem, if we are prosaic enough
to insist upon a solution, by accepting the theory of a double consciousness, and resolving
to pray with the mystic, and sneer with the politician, as the fit takes us. It is an equal
proof of intellectual dulness to be dead to either aspect of things. Let us agree that a brief
sojourn in the world of fancy or in the world of blue-books is a qualification for a keener
enjoyment of the other, and not brutally attempt to sever them by fixed lines. Each is best
seen in the light reflected from the other, and we had best admit the fact without asking awkward
questions; but they are blended after a perfectly original fashion in the strange phantasmagoria
of 'Tancred.' Let the images of crusaders and modern sportsmen, Hebrew doctors and classical
artists, mediæval monks and Anglican bishops, perform their strange antics before us, and the
scenery shift from Manchester to Damascus, or Pall Mall to Bethany, in obedience to laws dictated
by the fancy instead of the reason; let each of the motley actors be alternately the sham and
the reality, and our moods shift as arbitrarily from grave to gay, from high-strung enthusiasm
to mocking cynicism, and we shall witness a performance which is always amusing and original,
and sometimes even poetical, and of which only the harshest realist will venture to whisper
that, after all, it is a mere mystification.

