This he turned over in his mind again and again with great satisfaction, fully persuaded that
he would shortly see its fulfillment; and as for Sancho, though, as has been said, he hated
being a governor, still he had a longing to be giving orders and finding himself obeyed once
more; this is the misfortune that being in authority, even in jest, brings with it.

To resume; that afternoon their host Don Antonio Moreno and his two friends, with Don Quixote
and Sancho, went to the galleys. The commandant had been already made aware of his good fortune
in seeing two such famous persons as Don Quixote and Sancho, and the instant they came to the
shore all the galleys struck their awnings and the clarions rang out. A skiff covered with
rich carpets and cushions of crimson velvet was immediately lowered into the water, and as
Don Quixote stepped on board of it, the leading galley fired her gangway gun, and the other
galleys did the same; and as he mounted the starboard ladder the whole crew saluted him (as
is the custom when a personage of distinction comes on board a galley) by exclaiming "Hu, hu,
hu," three times. The general, for so we shall call him, a Valencian gentleman of rank, gave
him his hand and embraced him, saying, "I shall mark this day with a white stone as one of
the happiest I can expect to enjoy in my lifetime, since I have seen Senor Don Quixote of La
Mancha, pattern and image wherein we see contained and condensed all that is worthy in knight-errantry."

Don Quixote delighted beyond measure with such a lordly reception, replied to him in words
no less courteous. All then proceeded to the poop, which was very handsomely decorated, and
seated themselves on the bulwark benches; the boatswain passed along the gangway and piped
all hands to strip, which they did in an instant. Sancho, seeing such a number of men stripped
to the skin, was taken aback, and still more when he saw them spread the awning so briskly
that it seemed to him as if all the devils were at work at it; but all this was cakes and fancy
bread to what I am going to tell now. Sancho was seated on the captain's stage, close to the
aftermost rower on the right-hand side. He, previously instructed in what he was to do, laid
hold of Sancho, hoisting him up in his arms, and the whole crew, who were standing ready, beginning
on the right, proceeded to pass him on, whirling him along from hand to hand and from bench
to bench with such rapidity that it took the sight out of poor Sancho's eyes, and he made quite
sure that the devils themselves were flying away with him; nor did they leave off with him
until they had sent him back along the left side and deposited him on the poop; and the poor
fellow was left bruised and breathless and all in a sweat, and unable to comprehend what it
was that had happened to him.

Don Quixote when he saw Sancho's flight without wings asked the general if this was a usual
ceremony with those who came on board the galleys for the first time; for, if so, as he had
no intention of adopting them as a profession, he had no mind to perform such feats of agility,
and if anyone offered to lay hold of him to whirl him about, he vowed to God he would kick
his soul out; and as he said this he stood up and clapped his hand upon his sword. At this
instant they struck the awning and lowered the yard with a prodigious rattle. Sancho thought
heaven was coming off its hinges and going to fall on his head, and full of terror he ducked
it and buried it between his knees; nor were Don Quixote's knees altogether under control,
for he too shook a little, squeezed his shoulders together and lost colour. The crew then hoisted
the yard with the same rapidity and clatter as when they lowered it, all the while keeping
silence as though they had neither voice nor breath. The boatswain gave the signal to weigh
anchor, and leaping upon the middle of the gangway began to lay on to the shoulders of the
crew with his courbash or whip, and to haul out gradually to sea.

When Sancho saw so many red feet (for such he took the oars to be) moving all together, he
said to himself, "It's these that are the real chanted things, and not the ones my master talks
of. What can those wretches have done to be so whipped; and how does that one man who goes
along there whistling dare to whip so many? I declare this is hell, or at least purgatory!"

Don Quixote, observing how attentively Sancho regarded what was going on, said to him, "Ah,
Sancho my friend, how quickly and cheaply might you finish off the disenchantment of Dulcinea,
if you would strip to the waist and take your place among those gentlemen! Amid the pain and
sufferings of so many you would not feel your own much; and moreover perhaps the sage Merlin
would allow each of these lashes, being laid on with a good hand, to count for ten of those
which you must give yourself at last."

The general was about to ask what these lashes were, and what was Dulcinea's disenchantment,
when a sailor exclaimed, "Monjui signals that there is an oared vessel off the coast to the west."

On hearing this the general sprang upon the gangway crying, "Now then, my sons, don't let her
give us the slip! It must be some Algerine corsair brigantine that the watchtower signals to
us." The three others immediately came alongside the chief galley to receive their orders.
The general ordered two to put out to sea while he with the other kept in shore, so that in
this way the vessel could not escape them. The crews plied the oars driving the galleys so
furiously that they seemed to fly. The two that had put out to sea, after a couple of miles
sighted a vessel which, so far as they could make out, they judged to be one of fourteen or
fifteen banks, and so she proved. As soon as the vessel discovered the galleys she went about
with the object and in the hope of making her escape by her speed; but the attempt failed,
for the chief galley was one of the fastest vessels afloat, and overhauled her so rapidly that
they on board the brigantine saw clearly there was no possibility of escaping, and the rais
therefore would have had them drop their oars and give themselves up so as not to provoke the
captain in command of our galleys to anger. But chance, directing things otherwise, so ordered
it that just as the chief galley came close enough for those on board the vessel to hear the
shouts from her calling on them to surrender, two Toraquis, that is to say two Turks, both
drunken, that with a dozen more were on board the brigantine, discharged their muskets, killing
two of the soldiers that lined the sides of our vessel. Seeing this the general swore he would
not leave one of those he found on board the vessel alive, but as he bore down furiously upon
her she slipped away from him underneath the oars. The galley shot a good way ahead; those
on board the vessel saw their case was desperate, and while the galley was coming about they
made sail, and by sailing and rowing once more tried to sheer off; but their activity did not
do them as much good as their rashness did them harm, for the galley coming up with them in
a little more than half a mile threw her oars over them and took the whole of them alive. The
other two galleys now joined company and all four returned with the prize to the beach, where
a vast multitude stood waiting for them, eager to see what they brought back. The general anchored
close in, and perceived that the viceroy of the city was on the shore. He ordered the skiff
to push off to fetch him, and the yard to be lowered for the purpose of hanging forthwith the
rais and the rest of the men taken on board the vessel, about six-and-thirty in number, all
smart fellows and most of them Turkish musketeers. He asked which was the rais of the brigantine,
and was answered in Spanish by one of the prisoners (who afterwards proved to be a Spanish
renegade), "This young man, senor that you see here is our rais," and he pointed to one of
the handsomest and most gallant-looking youths that could be imagined. He did not seem to be
twenty years of age.

"Tell me, dog," said the general, "what led thee to kill my soldiers, when thou sawest it was
impossible for thee to escape? Is this the usual American pace?"

"That is hardly my fault," I said. "We ran into a nasty bit of weather off Cape Race and lost
twelve hours."

"Still," she said, "under the circumstances you will admit that I
have the right to put a few questions.

Edith is all I have. She has naturally not told me everything, but
I gather you have spoken to her a good deal about yourself."

"Not more than three or four hours at a sitting," I replied.

"And you have never spoken to anyone else as you have to Edith?"

"I have."

"Oh," she said.

"I wish it had been otherwise," I pleaded; "but life is very complex
nowadays on both sides of the Atlantic.

Much that I have told Edith I have also revealed to the passport
clerk at Washington and the keeper of birth records in New York.

Something too I confided to the assistant-book-keeper in the War Zone Bureau at the Custom-House
in New York, to the cashier of the French consulate at home, and
to the gateman of Cunard Pier 54, at the foot of West Fourteenth Street.

I am sorry; I wish Edith had been the first to whom I gave up the inner secrets of my soul,
but the fact is that to some extent she was anticipated by your Military
Control-Officer at Liverpool."

"It might have been worse," she sighed.
"You have nice manners and a good face. At home I suppose you are
quite popular?"

"Up to the twenty-fifth of October I shouldn't have
said so," I replied. "But since then a great many people have taken
to me. Not quite like DORIS KEANE, you know, but still I have distributed
in a little more than a month no fewer than three dozen photographs
of myself two and a-half inches square.

What heart could be so hard as not to be softened by these words, at any rate so far as to
listen to what the unhappy youth had to say? The general bade him say what he pleased, but
not to expect pardon for his flagrant offence. With this permission the youth began in these words.

"Born of Morisco parents, I am of that nation, more unhappy than wise, upon which of late a
sea of woes has poured down. In the course of our misfortune I was carried to Barbary by two
uncles of mine, for it was in vain that I declared I was a Christian, as in fact I am, and
not a mere pretended one, or outwardly, but a true Catholic Christian. It availed me nothing
with those charged with our sad expatriation to protest this, nor would my uncles believe it;
on the contrary, they treated it as an untruth and a subterfuge set up to enable me to remain
behind in the land of my birth; and so, more by force than of my own will, they took me with
them. I had a Christian mother, and a father who was a man of sound sense and a Christian too;
I imbibed the Catholic faith with my mother's milk, I was well brought up, and neither in word
nor in deed did I, I think, show any sign of being a Morisco. To accompany these virtues, for
such I hold them, my beauty, if I possess any, grew with my growth; and great as was the seclusion
in which I lived it was not so great but that a young gentleman, Don Gaspar Gregorio by name,
eldest son of a gentleman who is lord of a village near ours, contrived to find opportunities
of seeing me. How he saw me, how we met, how his heart was lost to me, and mine not kept from
him, would take too long to tell, especially at a moment when I am in dread of the cruel cord
that threatens me interposing between tongue and throat; I will only say, therefore, that Don
Gregorio chose to accompany me in our banishment. He joined company with the Moriscoes who
were going forth from other villages, for he knew their language very well, and on the voyage
he struck up a friendship with my two uncles who were carrying me with them; for my father,
like a wise and far-sighted man, as soon as he heard the first edict for our expulsion, quitted
the village and departed in quest of some refuge for us abroad. He left hidden and buried,
at a spot of which I alone have knowledge, a large quantity of pearls and precious stones of
great value, together with a sum of money in gold cruzadoes and doubloons. He charged me on
no account to touch the treasure, if by any chance they expelled us before his return. I obeyed
him, and with my uncles, as I have said, and others of our kindred and neighbours, passed over
to Barbary, and the place where we took up our abode was Algiers, much the same as if we had
taken it up in hell itself. The king heard of my beauty, and report told him of my wealth,
which was in some degree fortunate for me. He summoned me before him, and asked me what part
of Spain I came from, and what money and jewels I had. I mentioned the place, and told him
the jewels and money were buried there; but that they might easily be recovered if I myself
went back for them. All this I told him, in dread lest my beauty and not his own covetousness
should influence him. While he was engaged in conversation with me, they brought him word that
in company with me was one of the handsomest and most graceful youths that could be imagined.
I knew at once that they were speaking of Don Gaspar Gregorio, whose comeliness surpasses the
most highly vaunted beauty. I was troubled when I thought of the danger he was in, for among
those barbarous Turks a fair youth is more esteemed than a woman, be she ever so beautiful.
The king immediately ordered him to be brought before him that he might see him, and asked
me if what they said about the youth was true. I then, almost as if inspired by heaven, told
him it was, but that I would have him to know it was not a man, but a woman like myself, and
I entreated him to allow me to go and dress her in the attire proper to her, so that her beauty
might be seen to perfection, and that she might present herself before him with less embarrassment.
He bade me go by all means, and said that the next day we should discuss the plan to be adopted
for my return to Spain to carry away the hidden treasure. I saw Don Gaspar, I told him the
danger he was in if he let it be seen he was a man, I dressed him as a Moorish woman, and that
same afternoon I brought him before the king, who was charmed when he saw him, and resolved
to keep the damsel and make a present of her to the Grand Signor; and to avoid the risk she
might run among the women of his seraglio, and distrustful of himself, he commanded her to
be placed in the house of some Moorish ladies of rank who would protect and attend to her;
and thither he was taken at once. What we both suffered (for I cannot deny that I love him)
may be left to the imagination of those who are separated if they love one another dearly.
The king then arranged that I should return to Spain in this brigantine, and that two Turks,
those who killed your soldiers, should accompany me. There also came with me this Spanish renegade"--and
here she pointed to him who had first spoken--"whom I know to be secretly a Christian, and
to be more desirous of being left in Spain than of returning to Barbary. The rest of the crew
of the brigantine are Moors and Turks, who merely serve as rowers. The two Turks, greedy and
insolent, instead of obeying the orders we had to land me and this renegade in Christian dress
(with which we came provided) on the first Spanish ground we came to, chose to run along the
coast and make some prize if they could, fearing that if they put us ashore first, we might,
in case of some accident befalling us, make it known that the brigantine was at sea, and thus,
if there happened to be any galleys on the coast, they might be taken. We sighted this shore
last night, and knowing nothing of these galleys, we were discovered, and the result was what
you have seen. To sum up, there is Don Gregorio in woman's dress, among women, in imminent
danger of his life; and here am I, with hands bound, in expectation, or rather in dread, of
losing my life, of which I am already weary. Here, sirs, ends my sad story, as true as it is
unhappy; all I ask of you is to allow me to die like a Christian, for, as I have already said,
I am not to be charged with the offence of which those of my nation are guilty;" and she stood
silent, her eyes filled with moving tears, accompanied by plenty from the bystanders. The viceroy,
touched with compassion, went up to her without speaking and untied the cord that bound the
hands of the Moorish girl.

But all the while the Morisco Christian was telling her strange story, an elderly pilgrim,
who had come on board of the galley at the same time as the viceroy, kept his eyes fixed upon
her; and the instant she ceased speaking he threw himself at her feet, and embracing them said
in a voice broken by sobs and sighs, "O Ana Felix, my unhappy daughter, I am thy father Ricote,
come back to look for thee, unable to live without thee, my soul that thou art!"

At these words of his, Sancho opened his eyes and raised his head, which he had been holding
down, brooding over his unlucky excursion; and looking at the pilgrim he recognised in him
that same Ricote he met the day he quitted his government, and felt satisfied that this was
his daughter. She being now unbound embraced her father, mingling her tears with his, while
he addressing the general and the viceroy said, "This, sirs, is my daughter, more unhappy in
her adventures than in her name. She is Ana Felix, surnamed Ricote, celebrated as much for
her own beauty as for my wealth. I quitted my native land in search of some shelter or refuge
for us abroad, and having found one in Germany I returned in this pilgrim's dress, in the company
of some other German pilgrims, to seek my daughter and take up a large quantity of treasure
I had left buried. My daughter I did not find, the treasure I found and have with me; and now,
in this strange roundabout way you have seen, I find the treasure that more than all makes
me rich, my beloved daughter. If our innocence and her tears and mine can with strict justice
open the door to clemency, extend it to us, for we never had any intention of injuring you,
nor do we sympathise with the aims of our people, who have been justly banished."

"I know Ricote well," said Sancho at this, "and I know too that what he says about Ana Felix
being his daughter is true; but as to those other particulars about going and coming, and having
good or bad intentions, I say nothing."

While all present stood amazed at this strange occurrence the general said, "At any rate your
tears will not allow me to keep my oath; live, fair Ana Felix, all the years that heaven has
allotted you; but these rash insolent fellows must pay the penalty of the crime they have committed;"
and with that he gave orders to have the two Turks who had killed his two soldiers hanged at
once at the yard-arm. The viceroy, however, begged him earnestly not to hang them, as their
behaviour savoured rather of madness than of bravado. The general yielded to the viceroy's
request, for revenge is not easily taken in cold blood. They then tried to devise some scheme
for rescuing Don Gaspar Gregorio from the danger in which he had been left. But it is my opinion
that design, which is the creative principle in both arts, came into existence at the time
of the origin of all things. When the Most High created the world and adorned the heavens with shining
lights, His perfect intellect passing through the limpid air and alighting on the solid earth,
formed man, thus disclosing the first form of sculpture and painting in the charming invention
of things. Who will deny that from this man, as from a living example, the ideas of statues and
sculpture, and the questions of pose and of outline, first took form; and from the first pictures,
whatever they may have been, arose the first ideas of grace, unity, and the discordant concords
made by the play of lights and shadows? Thus the first model from which the first image of
man arose was a lump of earth, and not without reason, for the Divine Architect of time and of
nature, being all perfection, wished to demonstrate, in the imperfection of His materials, what
could be done to improve them, just as good sculptors and painters are in the habit of doing,
when, by adding additional touches and removing blemishes, they bring their imperfect sketches
to such a state of completion and of perfection as they desire. God also endowed man with a bright
flesh colour, and the same shades may be drawn from the earth, which supplies materials to counterfeit
everything which occurs in painting.

Don Quixote told Don Antonio that the plan adopted for releasing Don Gregorio was not a good
one, for its risks were greater than its advantages, and that it would be better to land himself
with his arms and horse in Barbary; for he would carry him off in spite of the whole Moorish
host, as Don Gaiferos carried off his wife Melisendra.

"Remember, your worship," observed Sancho on hearing him say so, "Senor Don Gaiferos carried
off his wife from the mainland, and took her to France by land; but in this case, if by chance
we carry off Don Gregorio, we have no way of bringing him to Spain, for there's the sea between."

"There's a remedy for everything except death," said Don Quixote; "if they bring the vessel
close to the shore we shall be able to get on board though all the world strive to prevent us."

"Your worship hits it off mighty well and mighty easy," said Sancho; "but 'it's a long step
from saying to doing;' and I hold to the renegade, for he seems to me an honest good-hearted
fellow."

Don Antonio then said that if the renegade did not prove successful, the expedient of the great
Don Quixote's expedition to Barbary should be adopted. Two days afterwards the renegade put
to sea in a light vessel of six oars a-side manned by a stout crew, and two days later the
galleys made sail eastward, the general having begged the viceroy to let him know all about
the release of Don Gregorio and about Ana Felix, and the viceroy promised to do as he requested.

One morning as Don Quixote went out for a stroll along the beach, arrayed in full armour (for,
as he often said, that was "his only gear, his only rest the fray," and he never was without
it for a moment), he saw coming towards him a knight, also in full armour, with a shining moon
painted on his shield, who, on approaching sufficiently near to be heard, said in a loud voice,
addressing himself to Don Quixote, "Illustrious knight, and never sufficiently extolled Don
Quixote of La Mancha, I am the Knight of the White Moon, whose unheard-of achievements will
perhaps have recalled him to thy memory. I come to do battle with thee and prove the might
of thy arm, to the end that I make thee acknowledge and confess that my lady, let her be who
she may, is incomparably fairer than thy Dulcinea del Toboso. If thou dost acknowledge this
fairly and openly, thou shalt escape death and save me the trouble of inflicting it upon thee;
if thou fightest and I vanquish thee, I demand no other satisfaction than that, laying aside
arms and abstaining from going in quest of adventures, thou withdraw and betake thyself to
thine own village for the space of a year, and live there without putting hand to sword, in
peace and quiet and beneficial repose, the same being needful for the increase of thy substance
and the salvation of thy soul; and if thou dost vanquish me, my head shall be at thy disposal,
my arms and horse thy spoils, and the renown of my deeds transferred and added to thine. Consider
which will be thy best course, and give me thy answer speedily, for this day is all the time
I have for the despatch of this business."

Don Quixote was amazed and astonished, as well at the Knight of the White Moon's arrogance,
as at his reason for delivering the defiance, and with calm dignity he answered him, "Knight
of the White Moon, of whose achievements I have never heard until now, I will venture to swear
you have never seen the illustrious Dulcinea; for had you seen her I know you would have taken
care not to venture yourself upon this issue, because the sight would have removed all doubt
from your mind that there ever has been or can be a beauty to be compared with hers; and so,
not saying you lie, but merely that you are not correct in what you state, I accept your challenge,
with the conditions you have proposed, and at once, that the day you have fixed may not expire;
and from your conditions I except only that of the renown of your achievements being transferred
to me, for I know not of what sort they are nor what they may amount to; I am satisfied with
my own, such as they be. Take, therefore, the side of the field you choose, and I will do the
same; and to whom God shall give it may Saint Peter add his blessing."

The Knight of the White Moon had been seen from the city, and it was told the viceroy how he
was in conversation with Don Quixote. The viceroy, fancying it must be some fresh adventure
got up by Don Antonio Moreno or some other gentleman of the city, hurried out at once to the
beach accompanied by Don Antonio and several other gentlemen, just as Don Quixote was wheeling
Rocinante round in order to take up the necessary distance. The viceroy upon this, seeing that
the pair of them were evidently preparing to come to the charge, put himself between them,
asking them what it was that led them to engage in combat all of a sudden in this way. The
Knight of the White Moon replied that it was a question of precedence of beauty; and briefly
told him what he had said to Don Quixote, and how the conditions of the defiance agreed upon
on both sides had been accepted. The viceroy went over to Don Antonio, and asked in a low voice
did he know who the Knight of the White Moon was, or was it some joke they were playing on
Don Quixote. Don Antonio replied that he neither knew who he was nor whether the defiance was
in joke or in earnest. This answer left the viceroy in a state of perplexity, not knowing whether
he ought to let the combat go on or not; but unable to persuade himself that it was anything
but a joke he fell back, saying, "If there be no other way out of it, gallant knights, except
to confess or die, and Don Quixote is inflexible, and your worship of the White Moon still
more so, in God's hand be it, and fall on."

He of the White Moon thanked the viceroy in courteous and well-chosen words for the permission
he gave them, and so did Don Quixote, who then, commending himself with all his heart to heaven
and to his Dulcinea, as was his custom on the eve of any combat that awaited him, proceeded
to take a little more distance, as he saw his antagonist was doing the same; then, without
blast of trumpet or other warlike instrument to give them the signal to charge, both at the
same instant wheeled their horses; and he of the White Moon, being the swifter, met Don Quixote
after having traversed two-thirds of the course, and there encountered him with such violence
that, without touching him with his lance (for he held it high, to all appearance purposely),
he hurled Don Quixote and Rocinante to the earth, a perilous fall. He sprang upon him at once,
and placing the lance over his visor said to him, "You are vanquished, sir knight, nay dead
unless you admit the conditions of our defiance."

Don Quixote, bruised and stupefied, without raising his visor said in a weak feeble voice as
if he were speaking out of a tomb, "Dulcinea del Toboso is the fairest woman in the world,
and I the most unfortunate knight on earth; it is not fitting that this truth should suffer
by my feebleness; drive your lance home, sir knight, and take my life, since you have taken
away my honour."

"That will I not, in sooth," said he of the White Moon; "live the fame of the lady Dulcinea's
beauty undimmed as ever; all I require is that the great Don Quixote retire to his own home
for a year, or for so long a time as shall by me be enjoined upon him, as we agreed before
engaging in this combat."

The viceroy, Don Antonio, and several others who were present heard all this, and heard too
how Don Quixote replied that so long as nothing in prejudice of Dulcinea was demanded of him,
he would observe all the rest like a true and loyal knight. The engagement given, he of the
White Moon wheeled about, and making obeisance to the viceroy with a movement of the head,
rode away into the city at a half gallop. The viceroy bade Don Antonio hasten after him, and
by some means or other find out who he was. They raised Don Quixote up and uncovered his face,
and found him pale and bathed with sweat.

Rocinante from the mere hard measure he had received lay unable to stir for the present. Sancho,
wholly dejected and woebegone, knew not what to say or do. He fancied that all was a dream,
that the whole business was a piece of enchantment. Here was his master defeated, and bound
not to take up arms for a year. He saw the light of the glory of his achievements obscured;
the hopes of the promises lately made him swept away like smoke before the wind; Rocinante,
he feared, was crippled for life, and his master's bones out of joint; for if he were only
shaken out of his madness it would be no small luck. In the end they carried him into the city
in a hand-chair which the viceroy sent for, and thither the viceroy himself returned, cager
to ascertain who this Knight of the White Moon was who had left Don Quixote in such a sad plight.
Don Antonio, eager to make his acquaintance, entered also; a squire came out to meet him and
remove his armour, and he shut himself into a lower room, still attended by Don Antonio, whose
bread would not bake until he had found out who he was. He of the White Moon, seeing then that
the gentleman would not leave him, said, "I know very well, senor, what you have come for;
it is to find out who I am; and as there is no reason why I should conceal it from you, while
my servant here is taking off my armour I will tell you the true state of the case, without
leaving out anything. You must know, senor, that I am called the bachelor Samson Carrasco.
I am of the same village as Don Quixote of La Mancha, whose craze and folly make all of us
who know him feel pity for him, and I am one of those who have felt it most; and persuaded
that his chance of recovery lay in quiet and keeping at home and in his own house, I hit upon
a device for keeping him there. Three months ago, therefore, I went out to meet him as a knight-errant,
under the assumed name of the Knight of the Mirrors, intending to engage him in combat and
overcome him without hurting him, making it the condition of our combat that the vanquished
should be at the disposal of the victor. What I meant to demand of him (for I regarded him
as vanquished already) was that he should return to his own village, and not leave it for a
whole year, by which time he might be cured. But fate ordered it otherwise, for he vanquished
me and unhorsed me, and so my plan failed. He went his way, and I came back conquered, covered
with shame, and sorely bruised by my fall, which was a particularly dangerous one. But this
did not quench my desire to meet him again and overcome him, as you have seen to-day. And as
he is so scrupulous in his observance of the laws of knight-errantry, he will, no doubt, in
order to keep his word, obey the injunction I have laid upon him. This, senor, is how the matter
stands, and I have nothing more to tell you. I implore of you not to betray me, or tell Don
Quixote who I am; so that my honest endeavours may be successful, and that a man of excellent
wits--were he only rid of the fooleries of chivalry--may get them back again."

"O senor," said Don Antonio, "may God forgive you the wrong you have done the whole world in
trying to bring the most amusing madman in it back to his senses. Do you not see, senor, that
the gain by Don Quixote's sanity can never equal the enjoyment his crazes give? But my belief
is that all the senor bachelor's pains will be of no avail to bring a man so hopelessly cracked
to his senses again; and if it were not uncharitable, I would say may Don Quixote never be
cured, for by his recovery we lose not only his own drolleries, but his squire Sancho Panza's
too, any one of which is enough to turn melancholy itself into merriment. However, I'll hold
my peace and say nothing to him, and we'll see whether I am right in my suspicion that Senor
Carrasco's efforts will be fruitless."

The bachelor replied that at all events the affair promised well, and he hoped for a happy
result from it; and putting his services at Don Antonio's commands he took his leave of him;
and having had his armour packed at once upon a mule, he rode away from the city the same day
on the horse he rode to battle, and returned to his own country without meeting any adventure
calling for record in this veracious history.

Don Antonio reported to the viceroy what Carrasco told him, and the viceroy was not very well
pleased to hear it, for with Don Quixote's retirement there was an end to the amusement of
all who knew anything of his mad doings.

Six days did Don Quixote keep his bed, dejected, melancholy, moody and out of sorts, brooding
over the unhappy event of his defeat. Sancho strove to comfort him, and among other things
he said to him, "Hold up your head, senor, and be of good cheer if you can, and give thanks
to heaven that if you have had a tumble to the ground you have not come off with a broken rib;
and, as you know that 'where they give they take,' and that 'there are not always fletches
where there are pegs,' a fig for the doctor, for there's no need of him to cure this ailment.
Let us go home, and give over going about in search of adventures in strange lands and places;
rightly looked at, it is I that am the greater loser, though it is your worship that has had
the worse usage. With the government I gave up all wish to be a governor again, but I did not
give up all longing to be a count; and that will never come to pass if your worship gives up
becoming a king by renouncing the calling of chivalry; and so my hopes are going to turn into
smoke."

"Peace, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou seest my suspension and retirement is not to exceed
a year; I shall soon return to my honoured calling, and I shall not be at a loss for a kingdom
to win and a county to bestow on thee."

"May God hear it and sin be deaf," said Sancho; "I have always heard say that 'a good hope
is better than a bad holding."

As they were talking Don Antonio came in looking extremely pleased and exclaiming, "Reward
me for my good news, Senor Don Quixote! "Waiting outside now. Took up a fare in Whitehall, opposite
the Admiralty, and drove him to Charterhouse Street; got down just by the Meat Market. That's
all the man seems to know."

Plummer questioned the cabman, and found that as a matter of fact that was all he did know. So, telling
him to wait to take us our little journey, we returned and reported his information to Hewitt.

"Just
as I expected," he said, quietly. "He stopped the cab a bit short of his destination, of course,--just
as you will, no doubt. There's not a great deal in the evidence, but it confirms my idea."

II

We
followed Mayes's example by stopping the cab in Charterhouse Street,
and walking the short remaining distance to Barbican.

Norbury Row was an obscure street behind it, at the corner of which stood "The Compasses,"
the public-house which Plummer had mentioned. We did not venture to show ourselves in Norbury
Row, but hastened into the nearest door of "The Compasses," which chanced to be that of the
private bar.

A stout, red-faced, slow-moving man with one eye and a black patch, stood behind the bar. Plummer
lifted his finger and pointed quickly toward the bar-parlour; and at the signal the one-eyed
man turned with great deliberation and pulled a catch which released the door of that apartment,
close at our elbows. We stepped quickly within, and presently the one-eyed man came rolling
in by the other door.

"Well, good art'noon, Mr. Plummer, sir," he said, with a long intonation and a wheeze. "Good art'noon,
sir. You've bin a stranger lately."

"Good afternoon, Mr. Moon," Plummer answered, briskly. "We've come for a little information,
my friend and I, which I'm sure you'll give us if you can."

"All the years I've been knowed to the police," answered Mr. Moon, slower and wheezier as he
went on, "I've allus give 'em all the information I could, an' that's a fact. Ain't it, Mr.
Plummer?"

"Yes, of course, and we don't forget it. What we want now----"

"Allus tell 'em what--ever I knows," rumbled Mr. Moon, turning to me, "allus; an' glad to do
it, too. 'Cause why? Ain't they the police? Very well then, I tells 'em. Allus tells 'em!"

Plummer waited patiently while Mr. Moon stared solemnly at me after
this speech. Then, when the patch slowly turned in my direction and
the eye in his, he resumed, "We want to know if you know anything
about No. 8 Norbury Row?"

"Number eight," Mr. Moon mused, gazing
abstractedly out of the window; "num--ber eight. Ground-floor, Stevens,
packing-case maker; first-floor, Hutt, agent in fancy-goods; second-floor,
dunno. Name o' Richardson, bookbinder, on the door, but that's bin
there five or six year now, and it ain't the same tenant. Richardson's
dead, an' this one don't bind no books as I can see. I don't even
remember seein' him very often. Tallish, darkish sort o' gent he is,
and don't seem to have many visitors. Well, then there's the top-floor--but
I s'pose it's the same tenant. Richardson used to have it for his
workshop. That's all."

"Have you got a window we can watch it from?"

Mr.
Moon turned ponderously round and without a word led the way to the
first floor, puffing enormously on the stairs.

"You can see it from
the club-room," he said at length, "but this 'ere little place is
better." Don Antonio offered to arrange the matter at the capital, whither he was compelled to
go on some other business, hinting that many a difficult affair was settled there with the
help of favour and bribes.

"Nay," said Ricote, who was present during the conversation, "it will not do to rely upon favour
or bribes, because with the great Don Bernardino de Velasco, Conde de Salazar, to whom his
Majesty has entrusted our expulsion, neither entreaties nor promises, bribes nor appeals to
compassion, are of any use; for though it is true he mingles mercy with justice, still, seeing
that the whole body of our nation is tainted and corrupt, he applies to it the cautery that
burns rather than the salve that soothes; and thus, by prudence, sagacity, care and the fear
he inspires, he has borne on his mighty shoulders the weight of this great policy and carried
it into effect, all our schemes and plots, importunities and wiles, being ineffectual to blind
his Argus eyes, ever on the watch lest one of us should remain behind in concealment, and like
a hidden root come in course of time to sprout and bear poisonous fruit in Spain, now cleansed,
and relieved of the fear in which our vast numbers kept it. Heroic resolve of the great Philip
the Third, and unparalleled wisdom to have entrusted it to the said Don Bernardino de Velasco!"

"At any rate," said Don Antonio, "when I am there I will make all possible efforts, and let
heaven do as pleases it best; Don Gregorio will come with me to relieve the anxiety which his
parents must be suffering on account of his absence; Ana Felix will remain in my house with
my wife, or in a monastery; and I know the viceroy will be glad that the worthy Ricote should
stay with him until we see what terms I can make."

The viceroy agreed to all that was proposed; but Don Gregorio on learning what had passed declared
he could not and would not on any account leave Ana Felix; however, as it was his purpose to
go and see his parents and devise some way of returning for her, he fell in with the proposed
arrangement. Ana Felix remained with Don Antonio's wife, and Ricote in the viceroy's house.

The day for Don Antonio's departure came; and two days later that for Don Quixote's and Sancho's,
for Don Quixote's fall did not suffer him to take the road sooner. There were tears and sighs,
swoonings and sobs, at the parting between Don Gregorio and Ana Felix. Ricote offered Don Gregorio
a thousand crowns if he would have them, but he would not take any save five which Don Antonio
lent him and he promised to repay at the capital. So the two of them took their departure,
and Don Quixote and Sancho afterwards, as has been already said, Don Quixote without his armour
and in travelling gear, and Sancho on foot, Dapple being loaded with the armour.

CHAPTER LXVI.

WHICH TREATS OF WHAT HE WHO READS WILL SEE, OR WHAT HE WHO HAS IT READ TO HIM WILL HEAR

As he left Barcelona, Don Quixote turned gaze upon the spot where he had fallen. "Here Troy
was," said he; "here my ill-luck, not my cowardice, robbed me of all the glory I had won; here
Fortune made me the victim of her caprices; here the lustre of my achievements was dimmed;
here, in a word, fell my happiness never to rise again."

"Senor," said Sancho on hearing this, "it is the part of brave hearts to be patient in adversity
just as much as to be glad in prosperity; I judge by myself, for, if when I was a governor
I was glad, now that I am a squire and on foot I am not sad; and I have heard say that she
whom commonly they call Fortune is a drunken whimsical jade, and, what is more, blind, and
therefore neither sees what she does, nor knows whom she casts down or whom she sets up."

"Thou art a great philosopher, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "thou speakest very sensibly; I know
not who taught thee. But I can tell thee there is no such thing as Fortune in the world, nor
does anything which takes place there, be it good or bad, come about by chance, but by the
special preordination of heaven; and hence the common saying that 'each of us is the maker
of his own Fortune.' I have been that of mine; but not with the proper amount of prudence,
and my self-confidence has therefore made me pay dearly; for I ought to have reflected that
Rocinante's feeble strength could not resist the mighty bulk of the Knight of the White Moon's
horse. In a word, I ventured it, I did my best, I was overthrown, but though I lost my honour
I did not lose nor can I lose the virtue of keeping my word. When I was a knight-errant, daring
and valiant, I supported my achievements by hand and deed, and now that I am a humble squire
I will support my words by keeping the promise I have given. Forward then, Sancho my friend,
let us go to keep the year of the novitiate in our own country, and in that seclusion we shall
pick up fresh strength to return to the by me never-forgotten calling of arms."

"Senor," returned Sancho, "travelling on foot is not such a pleasant thing that it makes me
feel disposed or tempted to make long marches. Let us leave this armour hung up on some tree,
instead of some one that has been hanged; and then with me on Dapple's back and my feet off
the ground we will arrange the stages as your worship pleases to measure them out; but to suppose
that I am going to travel on foot, and make long ones, is to suppose nonsense."

"Thou sayest well, Sancho," said Don Quixote; "let my armour be hung up for a trophy, and under
it or round it we will carve on the trees what was inscribed on the trophy of Roland's armour--

These let none move Who dareth not his might with Roland prove."

"That's the very thing," said Sancho; "and if it was not that we should feel the want of Rocinante
on the road, it would be as well to leave him hung up too."

"And yet, I had rather not have either him or the armour hung up," said Don Quixote, "that
it may not be said, 'for good service a bad return.'"

"Your worship is right," said Sancho; "for, as sensible people hold, 'the fault of the ass
must not be laid on the pack-saddle;' and, as in this affair the fault is your worship's, punish
yourself and don't let your anger break out against the already battered and bloody armour,
or the meekness of Rocinante, or the tenderness of my feet, trying to make them travel more
than is reasonable."

In converse of this sort the whole of that day went by, as did the four succeeding ones, without
anything occurring to interrupt their journey, but on the fifth as they entered a village they
found a great number of people at the door of an inn enjoying themselves, as it was a holiday.
Upon Don Quixote's approach a peasant called out, "One of these two gentlemen who come here,
and who don't know the parties, will tell us what we ought to do about our wager."

"That I will, certainly," said Don Quixote, "and according to the rights of the case, if I
can manage to understand it."

"Well, here it is, worthy sir," said the peasant; "a man of this village who is so fat that
he weighs twenty stone challenged another, a neighbour of his, who does not weigh more than
nine, to run a race. The agreement was that they were to run a distance of a hundred paces
with equal weights; and when the challenger was asked how the weights were to be equalised
he said that the other, as he weighed nine stone, should put eleven in iron on his back, and
that in this way the twenty stone of the thin man would equal the twenty stone of the fat one."

"Not at all," exclaimed Sancho at once, before Don Quixote could answer; "it's for me, that
only a few days ago left off being a governor and a judge, as all the world knows, to settle
these doubtful questions and give an opinion in disputes of all sorts."

"Answer in God's name, Sancho my friend," said Don Quixote, "for I am not fit to give crumbs
to a cat, my wits are so confused and upset."

With this permission Sancho said to the peasants who stood clustered round him, waiting with
open mouths for the decision to come from his, "Brothers, what the fat man requires is not
in reason, nor has it a shadow of justice in it; because, if it be true, as they say, that
the challenged may choose the weapons, the other has no right to choose such as will prevent
and keep him from winning. My decision, therefore, is that the fat challenger prune, peel,
thin, trim and correct himself, and take eleven stone of his flesh off his body, here or there,
as he pleases, and as suits him best; and being in this way reduced to nine stone weight, he
will make himself equal and even with nine stone of his opponent, and they will be able to
run on equal terms."

"By all that's good," said one of the peasants as he heard Sancho's decision, "but the gentleman
has spoken like a saint, and given judgment like a canon! But I'll be bound the fat man won't
part with an ounce of his flesh, not to say eleven stone."

"The best plan will be for them not to run," said another, "so that neither the thin man break
down under the weight, nor the fat one strip himself of his flesh; let half the wager be spent
in wine, and let's take these gentlemen to the tavern where there's the best, and 'over me
be the cloak when it rains."

"I thank you, sirs," said Don Quixote; "but I cannot stop for an instant, for sad thoughts
and unhappy circumstances force me to seem discourteous and to travel apace;" and spurring
Rocinante he pushed on, leaving them wondering at what they had seen and heard, at his own
strange figure and at the shrewdness of his servant, for such they took Sancho to be; and another
of them observed, "If the servant is so clever, what must the master be? The fingers he did
not dare to touch lifted the sick man's hand to her cheek and held it there while she smiled down
at him, her eyes softening with a light that stirred the lover's soul. The mystery of this
feminine complexity awed him.

That night master and man passed out in the fields in the open air, and the next day as they
were pursuing their journey they saw coming towards them a man on foot with alforjas at the
neck and a javelin or spiked staff in his hand, the very cut of a foot courier; who, as soon
as he came close to Don Quixote, increased his pace and half running came up to him, and embracing
his right thigh, for he could reach no higher, exclaimed with evident pleasure, "O Senor Don
Quixote of La Mancha, what happiness it will be to the heart of my lord the duke when he knows
your worship is coming back to his castle, for he is still there with my lady the duchess!"

"I do not recognise you, friend," said Don Quixote, "nor do I know who you are, unless you
tell me."

"I am Tosilos, my lord the duke's lacquey, Senor Don Quixote," replied the courier; "he who
refused to fight your worship about marrying the daughter of Dona Rodriguez." 

It was, perhaps, from these statues that the Chaldeans learned to make the images of their gods.
It is recorded in Genesis how 150 years later, when Rachel was fleeing from Mesopotamia with
her husband Jacob, she stole the idols of her father Laban.

"Nonsense, good sir!" said the messenger; "there was no enchantment or transformation at all;
I entered the lists just as much lacquey Tosilos as I came out of them lacquey Tosilos. I thought
to marry without fighting, for the girl had taken my fancy; but my scheme had a very different
result, for as soon as your worship had left the castle my lord the duke had a hundred strokes
of the stick given me for having acted contrary to the orders he gave me before engaging in
the combat; and the end of the whole affair is that the girl has become a nun, and Dona Rodriguez
has gone back to Castile, and I am now on my way to Barcelona with a packet of letters for
the viceroy which my master is sending him. If your worship would like a drop, sound though
warm, I have a gourd here full of the best, and some scraps of Tronchon cheese that will serve
as a provocative and wakener of your thirst if so be it is asleep."

"I take the offer," said Sancho; "no more compliments about it; pour out, good Tosilos, in
spite of all the enchanters in the Indies."

"Thou art indeed the greatest glutton in the world, Sancho," said Don Quixote, "and the greatest
booby on earth, not to be able to see that this courier is enchanted and this Tosilos a sham
one; stop with him and take thy fill; I will go on slowly and wait for thee to come up with me."

The lacquey laughed, unsheathed his gourd, unwalletted his scraps, and taking out a small loaf
of bread he and Sancho seated themselves on the green grass, and in peace and good fellowship
finished off the contents of the alforjas down to the bottom, so resolutely that they licked
the wrapper of the letters, merely because it smelt of cheese.

Said Tosilos to Sancho, "Beyond a doubt, Sancho my friend, this master of thine ought to be
a madman."

"Ought!" said Sancho; "he owes no man anything; he pays for everything, particularly when the
coin is madness. Once there the first stage of the journey would be over. When they started from
Independence the Platte had shone to the eyes of their imaginations as a threadlike streak almost
as far away as California. Now they would soon be there.

Tosilos begged him to explain what had happened him, but Sancho replied that it would not be
good manners to leave his master waiting for him; and that some other day if they met there
would be time enough for that; and then getting up, after shaking his doublet and brushing
the crumbs out of his beard, he drove Dapple on before him, and bidding adieu to Tosilos left
him and rejoined his master, who was waiting for him under the shade of a tree.

