D.W.]

THE TRAIL OF THE SWORD

By Gilbert Parker

EPOCH THE THIRD

XIII.    "AS WATER UNTO WINE" XIV.      IN WHICH THE HUNTERS ARE OUT XV.       IN THE MATTER
OF BUCKLAW XVI.      IN THE TREASURE HOUSE XVII.     THE GIFT OF A CAPTIVE XVIII.    MAIDEN NO MORE

CHAPTER XIII

"AS WATER UNTO WINE"

Three months afterwards George Gering was joyfully preparing to take two voyages.  Perhaps,
indeed, his keen taste for the one had much to do with his eagerness for the other--though
most men find getting gold as cheerful as getting married.  He had received a promise of marriage
from Jessica, and he was also soon to start with William Phips for the Spaniards' country.
His return to New York with the news of the capture of the Hudson's Bay posts brought consternation.
There was no angrier man in all America than Colonel Richard Nicholls; there was perhaps no
girl in all the world more agitated than Jessica, then a guest at Government House.  Her father
was there also, cheerfully awaiting her marriage with Gering, whom, since he had lost most
traces of Puritanism, he liked.  He had long suspected the girl's interest in Iberville; if
he had known that two letters from him--unanswered--had been treasured, read, and re-read,
he would have been anxious.  That his daughter should marry a Frenchman--a filibustering seigneur,
a Catholic, the enemy of the British colonies, whose fellow-countrymen incited the Indians
to harass and to massacre--was not to be borne.

Besides, the Honourable Hogarth Leveret, whose fame in the colony was now often in peril because
of his Cavalier propensities, and whose losses had aged him, could not bear that he should
sink and carry his daughter with him.  Jessica was the apple of his eye; for her he would have
borne all, sorts of trials; but he could not bear to see her called on to bear them. Like most
people out of the heyday of their own youth, he imagined the way a maid's fancy ought to go.

If he had known how much his daughter's promise to marry Gering would cost her, he would not
have had it.  But indeed she did not herself guess it.  She had, with the dreamy pleasure of
a young girl, dwelt upon an event which might well hold her delighted memory: distance, difference
of race, language, and life, all surrounded Iberville with an engaging fascination.  Besides,
what woman could forget a man who gave her escape from a fate such as Bucklaw had prepared
for her?  But she saw the hopelessness of the thing, everything was steadily acting in Gering's
favour, and her father's trouble decided her at last.

When Gering arrived at New York and told his story--to his credit with no dispraise of Iberville,
rather as a soldier--she felt a pang greater than she ever had known.  Like a good British
maid, she was angry at the defeat of the British, she was indignant at her lover's failure
and proud of his brave escape, and she would have herself believe that she was angry at Iberville.
But it was no use; she was ill-content while her father and others called him buccaneer and
filibuster, and she joyed that old William Drayton, who had ever spoken well of the young Frenchman,
laughed at their insults, saying that he was as brave, comely, and fine- tempered a lad as
he had ever met, and that the capture of the forts was genius: "Genius and pith, upon my soul!"
he said stoutly; "and if he comes this way he shall have a right hearty welcome, though he
come to fight."

In the first excitement of Gering's return, sorry for his sufferings and for his injured ambition,
she had suddenly put her hands in his and had given her word to marry him.

She was young, and a young girl does not always know which it is that moves her: the melancholy
of the impossible, from which she sinks in a kind of peaceful despair upon the possible, or
the flush of a deep desire; she acts in an atmosphere of the emotions, and cannot therefore
be sure of herself.  But when it was done there came reaction to Jessica. In the solitude of
her own room--the room above the hallway, from which she had gone to be captured by Bucklaw--she
had misgivings.  If she had been asked whether she loved Iberville, she might have answered
no.  But he was a possible lover; and every woman weighs the possible lover against the accepted
one--often, at first, to fluttering apprehensions. In this brief reaction many a woman's heart
has been caught away.

A few days after Gering's arrival he was obliged to push on to Boston, there to meet Phips.
He hoped that Mr. Leveret and Jessica would accompany him, but Governor Nicholls would not
hear of it just yet. Truth is, wherever the girl went she was light and cheerfulness, although
her ways were quiet and her sprightliness was mostly in her looks.  She was impulsive, but
impulse was ruled by a reserve at once delicate and unembarrassed.  She was as much beloved
in the town of New York as in Boston.

Two days after Gering left she was wandering in the garden, when the governor joined her.

"Well, well, my pretty councillor," he said--"an hour to cheer an old man's leisure?"

"As many as you please," she answered daintily, putting her hand within his arm.  "I am so
very cheerful I need to shower the surplus."  There was a smile at her lips, but her eyes were
misty.  Large, brilliant, gentle, they had now also a bewildered look, which even the rough
old soldier saw.  He did not understand, but he drew the hand further within his arm and held
it, there, and for the instant he knew not what to say. The girl did not speak; she only kept
looking at him with a kind of inward smiling.  Presently, as if he had suddenly lighted upon
a piece of news for the difficulty, he said: "Radisson has come."

"Radisson!" she cried.

"Yes.  You know 'twas he that helped George to escape?"

"Indeed, no!" she answered.  "Mr. Gering did not tell me."  She was perplexed, annoyed, yet
she knew not why.

Gering had not brought Radisson into New York had indeed forbidden him to come there, or to
Boston, until word was given him; for while he felt bound to let the scoundrel go with him
to the Spaniards' country, it was not to be forgotten that the fellow had been with Bucklaw.
But Radisson had no scruples when Gering was gone, though the proscription had never been withdrawn.

"We will have to give him freedom, councillor, eh?  even though we proclaimed him, you remember."
He laughed, and added: "You would demand that, yea or nay.

"Why should I?" she asked.

"Now, give me wisdom all ye saints!  Why--why?

"Faith, he helped your lover from the clutches of the French coxcomb."

"Indeed," she answered, "such a villain helps but for absurd benefits. Mr. Gering might have
stayed with Monsieur Iberville in honour and safety at least.  And why a coxcomb?  You thought
different once; and you cannot doubt his bravery.  Enemy of our country though he be, I am
surely bound to speak him well--he saved my life."

Anxious to please her, he answered: "Wise as ever, councillor.  What an old bear am I:  When
I called him coxcomb, 'twas as an Englishman hating a Frenchman, who gave our tongues to gall--a
handful of posts gone, a ship passed to the spoiler, the governor of the company a prisoner,
and our young commander's reputation at some trial!  My temper was pardonable, eh, mistress?"

The girl smiled, and added: "There was good reason why Mr. Gering brought not Radisson here,
and I should beware that man.  A traitor is ever a traitor.  He is French, too, and as a good
Englishman you should hate all Frenchmen, should you not?"

"Merciless witch!  Where got you that wit?  If I must, I kneel;" and he groaned in mock despair.
"And if Monsieur Iberville should come knocking at our door you would have me welcome him lovingly?"

"Surely; there is peace, is there not?  Has not the king, because of his love for Louis commanded
all goodwill between us and Canada?"

The governor laughed bitterly.  "Much pity that he has! how can we live at peace with buccaneers?"
Their talk was interrupted here; but a few days later, in the same garden, Morris came to them.
"A ship enters harbour," he said, "and its commander sends this letter."

An instant after the governor turned a troubled face on the girl and said: "Your counsel of
the other day is put to rapid test, Jessica. This comes from monsieur, who would pay his respects
to me."

He handed the note to her.  It said that Iberville had brought prisoners whom he was willing
to exchange for French prisoners in the governor's hands.

Entering New York harbour with a single vessel showed in a strong light Iberville's bold, almost
reckless, courage.  The humour of it was not lost on Jessica, though she turned pale, and the
paper fluttered in her fingers.

"What will you do?" she said.

"I will treat him as well as he will let me, sweetheart."  Two hours afterwards, Iberville
came up the street with Sainte-Helene, De Casson, and Perrot,--De Troyes had gone to Quebec,--courteously
accompanied by Morris and an officer of the New York Militia.  There was no enmity shown the
Frenchmen, for many remembered what had once made Iberville popular in New York.  Indeed, Iberville,
whose memory was of the best, now and again accosted some English or Dutch resident, whose
face he recalled.

The governor was not at first cordial; but Iberville's cheerful soldierliness, his courtier
spirit, and his treatment of the English prisoners, soon placed him on a footing near as friendly
as that of years before.  The governor praised his growing reputation, and at last asked him
to dine, saying that Mistress Leveret would no doubt be glad to meet her rescuer again.

"Still, I doubt not," said the governor, "there will be embarrassment, for the lady can scarce
forget that you had her lover prisoner.  But these things are to be endured.  Besides, you
and Mr. Gering seem as easily enemies as other men are friends."

Iberville was amazed.  So, Jessica and Gering were affianced.  And the buckle she had sent
him he wore now in the folds of his lace!  How could he know what comes from a woman's wavering
sympathies, what from her inborn coquetry, and what from love itself?  He was merely a man
with much to learn.

He accepted dinner and said: "As for Monsieur Gering, your excellency, we are as easily enemies
as he and Radisson are comrades-in-arms."

"Which is harshly put, monsieur.  When a man is breaking prison he chooses any tool.  You put
a slight upon an honest gentleman."

"I fear that neither Mr. Gering nor myself is too generous with each other, your excellency,"
answered Iberville lightly.

This frankness was pleasing, and soon the governor took Iberville into the drawing-room, where
Jessica was.  She was standing by the great fireplace, and she did not move at first, but looked
at Iberville in some thing of her old simple way.  Then she offered him her hand with a quiet
smile.

"I fear you are not glad to see me," he said, with a smile.  "You cannot have had good reports
of me--no?"

"Yes, I am glad," she answered gently.  "You know, monsieur, mine is a constant debt.  You
do not come to me, I take it, as the conqueror of Englishmen."

"I come to you," he answered, "as Pierre le Moyne of Iberville, who had once the honour to
do you slight service.  I have never tried to forget that, because by it I hoped I might be
remembered--an accident of price to me."

She bowed and at first did not speak; then Morris came to say that some one awaited the governor,
and the two were left alone.

"I have not forgotten," she began softly, breaking a silence.

"You will think me bold, but I believe you will never forget," was his meaning reply.

"Yes, you are bold," she replied, with the demure smile which had charmed him long ago.  Suddenly
she looked up at him anxiously, and, "Why did you go to Hudson's Bay?" she asked.

"I would have gone ten times as far for the same cause," he answered, and he looked boldly,
earnestly, into her eyes.

She turned her head away.  "You have all your old recklessness," she answered.  Then her eyes
softened, and, "All your old courage," she added.

"I have all my old motive."

"What is-your motive?"

Does a woman ever know how much such speeches cost?  Did Jessica quite know when she asked
the question, what her own motive was; how much it had of delicate malice--unless there was
behind it a simple sincerity? She was inviting sorrow.  A man like Iberville was not to be
counted lightly; for every word he sowed, he would reap a harvest of some kind.

He came close to her, and looked as though he would read her through and through.  "Can you
ask that question?" he said most seriously.  "If you ask it because from your soul you wish
to know, good!  But if you ask it as a woman who would read a man's heart, and then--"

"Oh, hush!--hush!" she whispered.  Her face became pale, and her eyes had a painful brightness.
"You must not answer.  I had no right to ask. Oh, monsieur!" she added, "I would have you always
for my friend if I could, though you are the enemy of my country and of the man--I am to marry."

"I am for my king," he replied; "and I am enemy of him who stands between you and me. He named
Pedro de Arana, a native of Cordova, as captain of one ship,--a very honorable and prudent man,
whom I knew very well, brother of the mother of Don Ferdinand Columbus,[321-2]
the second son of the Admiral, and cousin of that Arana who remained
in the fortress with the 38 men whom the Admiral on his return found
dead.

The other captain of the second ship was called Alonso Sanchez de
Carvajal, governor of the city of Baçea, an honorable gentleman.

The third captain for the remaining ship was Juan Antonio Columbo,[321-3] a Genoese, a relation
of the Admiral, a very capable and prudent man and one of authority, with whom I had frequent conversation.

He
gave them suitable instructions, in which instructions he ordered
that, one week one captain, and another week another, each by turns
should be captain-general of all the ships, as regarded the navigation
and the placing of the night lantern, which is a lighted lantern placed
in the stern of the ship in order that the other ships may know and
follow where the captain guides.

He ordered them to go to the west, quarter south-west,[321-4] for 850 leagues and told them
that then they would arrive at the island of Dominica.

From Dominica they should go west-north-west and they would then reach the island of Sant Juan,[321-5]
and it would be the southern part of it, because that was the direct way to go to the New
Isabella,[321-6] which now is Santo Domingo.

Having passed the island of Sant Juan, they should leave the island of Mona to the north and from
there they should make for the point of this Española,[322-1] which
he called Sant Raphael, which now is the Cabo del Engaño, from there
to Saona, which he says makes a good harbor between it and this Española.

Seven leagues farther there is another island, which is called Santa Catherina, and from there
to the New Isabella, which is the port of Santo Domingo, the distance is 25 leagues. And he
told the captains that wherever they should arrive and land they
should purchase all that they needed by barter and that for the little
they might give the Indians, although they might be the canibales,[322-2]
who are said to eat human flesh, they would obtain what they wished
and the Indians would give them all that they had; and if they should
undertake to procure things by force, the Indians would conceal themselves
and remain hostile.

  This told her that when he returned from a certain cruise
he would visit her again, for he was such an enemy to her country that he was keen to win what
did it most honour.  Gering had pressed for a marriage before he sailed for the Spaniards'
country, but she had said no, and when he urged it she had shown a sudden coldness.  Therefore,
bidding her good-bye, he had sailed away with Phips, accompanied, much against his will, by
Radisson. Bucklaw was not with them.  He had set sail from England in a trading schooner, and
was to join Phips at Port de la Planta.  Gering did not know that Bucklaw had share in the
expedition, nor did Bucklaw guess the like of Gering.

Within two weeks of the time that Phips in his Bridgwater Merchant, manned by a full crew,
twenty fighting men, and twelve guns, with Gering in command of the Swallow, a smaller ship,
got away to the south, Iberville also sailed in the same direction.  He had found awaiting
him, on his return to Quebec, a priest bearing messages and a chart from another priest who
had died in the Spaniards' country.

CHAPTER XIV

IN WHICH THE HUNTERS ARE OUT

Iberville had a good ship.  The Maid of Provence carried a handful of guns and a small but
carefully chosen crew, together with Sainte-Helene, Perrot, and the lad Maurice Joval, who
had conceived for Iberville friendship nigh to adoration.  Those were days when the young were
encouraged to adventure, and Iberville had no compunction in giving the boy this further taste
of daring.

Iberville, thorough sailor as he was, had chosen for his captain one who had sailed the Spanish
Main.  He had commanded on merchant-ships which had been suddenly turned into men-of-war, and
was suited to the present enterprise: taciturn, harsh of voice, singularly impatient, but a
perfect seaman and as brave as could be.  He had come to Quebec late the previous autumn with
the remnants of a ship which, rotten when she left the port of Havre, had sprung a leak in
mid-ocean, had met a storm, lost her mainmast, and by the time she reached the St. Lawrence
had scarce a stick standing.  She was still at Quebec, tied up in the bay of St. Charles, from
which she would probably go out no more.  Her captain--Jean Berigord --had chafed on the bit
in the little Hotel Colbert, making himself more feared than liked, till one day he was taken
to Iberville by Perrot.

A bargain was soon struck.  The nature of the expedition was not known in Quebec, for the sailors
were not engaged till the eve of starting, and Perrot's men were ready at his bidding without
why or wherefore.  Indeed, when the Maid of Provence left the island of Orleans, her nose seawards,
one fine July morning, the only persons in Quebec that knew her destination were the priest
who had brought Iberville the chart of the river, with its accurate location of the sunken
galleon, Iberville's brothers, and Count Frontenac himself--returned again as governor.

"See, Monsieur Iberville," said the governor, as, with a fine show of compliment, in full martial
dress, with his officers in gold lace, perukes, powder, swords, and ribbons, he bade Iberville
good-bye--"See, my dear captain, that you find the treasure, or make these greedy English pay
dear for it.  They have a long start, but that is nothing, with a ship under you that can show
its heels to any craft.  I care not so much about the treasure, but I pray you humble those
dull Puritans, who turn buccaneers in the name of the Lord."

Iberville made a gallant reply, and, with Sainte-Helene, received a hearty farewell from the
old soldier, who, now over seventy years of age, was as full of spirit as when he distinguished
himself at Arras fifty years before.  In Iberville he saw his own youth renewed, and foretold
the high part he would yet play in the fortunes of New France.  Iberville had got to the door
and was bowing himself out when, with a quick gesture, Frontenac stopped him, stepped quickly
forward, and clasping his shoulders kissed him on each cheek, and said in a deep, kind voice:
"I know, mon enfant, what lies behind this.  A man pays the price one time or another: he draws
his sword for his mistress and his king; both forget, but one's country remains--remains."

Iberville said nothing, but with an admiring glance into the aged, iron face, stooped and kissed
Frontenac's hand and withdrew silently. Frontenac, proud, impatient, tyrannical, was the one
man in New France who had a powerful idea of the future of the country, and who loved her and
his king by the law of a loyal nature.  Like Wolsey, he had found his king ungrateful, and
had stood almost alone in Canada among his enemies, as at Versailles among his traducers--imperious,
unyielding, and yet forgiving.  Married, too, at an early age, his young wife, caring little
for the duties of maternity and more eager to serve her own ambitions than his, left him that
she might share the fortunes of Mademoiselle de Montpensier.

Iberville had mastered the chart before he sailed, and when they were well on their way he
disclosed to the captain the object of their voyage. Berigord listened to all he had to say,
and at first did no more than blow tobacco smoke hard before him.  "Let me see the chart,"
he said at last, and, scrutinising it carefully, added: "Yes, yes, 'tis right enough.  I've
been in the port and up the river.  But neither we nor the Eng lish'll get a handful of gold
or silver thereabouts.  'Tis throwing good money after none at all."

"The money is mine, my captain," said Iberville good-humouredly.  "There will be sport, and
I ask but that you give me every chance you can."

"Look then, monsieur," replied the smileless man, "I'll run your ship for all she holds from
here to hell, if you twist your finger.  She's as good a craft as ever I spoke, and I'll swear
her for any weather.  The fighting and the gold as you and the devil agree!"

Iberville wished nothing better--a captain concerned only with his own duties.  Berigord gathered
the crew and the divers on deck, and in half a dozen words told them the object of the expedition,
and was followed by Iberville.  Some of the men had been with him to Hudson's Bay, and they
wished nothing better than fighting the English, and all were keen with the lust of gold even
though it were for another.  As it was, Iberville promised them all a share of what was got.

On the twentieth day after leaving Quebec they sighted islands, and simultaneously they saw
five ships bearing away towards them.  Iberville was apprehensive that a fleet of the kind
could only be hostile, for merchant-ships would hardly sail together so, and it was not possible
that they were French.  There remained the probability that they were Spanish or English ships.
He had no intention of running away, but at the same time he had no wish to fight before he
reached Port de la Planta and had had his hour with Gering and Phips and the lost treasure.
Besides, five ships was a large undertaking, which only a madman would willingly engage.  However,
he kept steadily on his course.  But there was one chance of avoiding a battle without running
away--the glass had been falling all night and morning.  Berigord, when questioned, grimly
replied that there was to be trouble, but whether with the fleet or the elements was not clear,
and Iberville did not ask.

He got his reply effectively and duly however.  A wind suddenly sprang up from the north-west,
followed by a breaking cross sea.  It as suddenly swelled to a hurricane, so that if Berigord
had not been fortunate as to his crew, and had not been so fine a sailor, the Maid of Provence
might have fared badly, for he kept all sail on as long as he dare, and took it in none too
soon.  But so thoroughly did he know the craft and trust his men that she did what he wanted;
and though she was tossed and hammered by the sea till it seemed that she must, with every
next wave, go down, she rode into safety at last, five hundred miles out of their course.

The storm had saved them from the hostile fleet, which had fared ill. They were first scattered,
then two of them went down, another was so disabled that she had to be turned back to the port
they had left, and the remaining two were separated, so that their only course was to return
to port also.  As the storm came up they had got within fighting distance of the Maid of Provence,
and had opened ineffectual fire, which she-- occupied with the impact of the storm--did not
return.  Escaped the dangers of the storm, she sheered into her course again, and ran away
to the south-west, until Hispaniola came in sight.

CHAPTER XV

IN THE MATTER OF BUCKLAW

The Bridgwater Merchant and the Swallow made the voyage down with no set- backs, having fair
weather and a sweet wind on their quarter all the way, to the wild corner of an island, where
a great mountain stands sentinel and a bay washes upon a curving shore and up the.  River de
la Planta. There were no vessels in the harbour and there was only a small settlement on the
shore, and as they came to anchor well away from the gridiron of reefs known as the Boilers,
the prospect was handsome: the long wash of the waves, the curling, white of the breakers,
and the rainbow-coloured water.  The shore was luxuriant, and the sun shone intemperately on
the sea and the land, covering all with a fine beautiful haze, like the most exquisite powder
sifted through the air.  All on board the Bridgwater Merchant and the Swallow were in hearty
spirits. There had been some sickness, but the general health of the expedition was excellent.

It was not till the day they started from Boston that Phips told Gering he expected to meet
some one at the port who had gone to prepare the way, to warn them by fires in case of danger,
and to allay any opposition among the natives--if there were any.  But he had not told him
who the herald was.

Truth is, Phips was anxious that Gering should have no chance of objecting to the scoundrel
who had, years before, tried to kidnap his now affianced wife--who had escaped a deserved death
on the gallows.  It was a rude age, and men of Phips's quality, with no particular niceness
as to women, or horror as to mutiny when it was twenty years old, compromised with their conscience
for expediency and gain.  Moreover, in his humorous way, Bucklaw, during his connection with
Phips in England, had made himself agreeable and resourceful.  Phips himself had sprung from
the lower orders,--the son of a small farmer,--and even in future days when he rose to a high
position in the colonies, gaining knighthood and other honours, he had the manners and speech
of "a man of the people."  Bucklaw understood men: he knew that his only game was that of bluntness.
This was why he boarded Phips in Cheapside without subterfuge or disguise.

Nor had Phips told Bucklaw of Gering's coming; so that when the Bridgwater Merchant and the
Swallow entered Port de la Planta, Bucklaw himself, as he bore out in a small sail-boat, did
not guess that he was likely to meet a desperate enemy.  He had waited patiently, and had reckoned
almost to a day when Phips would arrive.  He was alongside before Phips had called anchor.
His cheerful countenance came up between the frowning guns, his hook-hand ran over the rail,
and in a moment he was on deck facing--Radisson.

He was unprepared for the meeting, but he had taken too many chances in his lifetime to show
astonishment.  He and Radisson had fought and parted; they had been in ugly business together,
and they were likely to be, now that they had met, in ugly business again.

Bucklaw's tiger ran up to stroke his chin with the old grotesque gesture. "Ha!" he said saucily,
"cats and devils have nine lives."

There was the same sparkle in the eye as of old, the same buoyant voice. For himself, he had
no particular quarrel with Radisson; the more so because he saw a hang-dog sulkiness in Radisson's
eye.  It was ever his cue when others were angered to be cool.  The worst of his crimes had
been performed with an air of humorous cynicism.  He could have great admiration for an enemy
such as Iberville; and he was not a man to fight needlessly.  He had a firm belief that he
had been intended for a high position--a great admiral, or general, or a notable buccaneer.

Before Radisson had a chance to reply came Phips, who could not help but show satisfaction
at Bucklaw's presence; and in a moment they were on their way together to the cabin, followed
by the eyes of the enraged Radisson.  Phips disliked Radisson; the sinister Frenchman, with
his evil history, was impossible to the open, bluff captain.  He had been placed upon Phips's
vessel because he knew the entrance to the harbour; but try as he would for a kind of comradeship,
he failed: he had an ugly vanity and a bad heart.  There was only one decent thing which still
clung to him in rags and tatters--the fact that he was a Frenchman.  He had made himself hated
on the ship--having none of the cunning tact of Bucklaw. As Phips and Bucklaw went below, a
sudden devilry entered into him.  He was ripe for quarrel, eager for battle.  His two black
eyes were like burning beads, his jaws twitched.  If Bucklaw had but met him without this rough,
bloodless irony, he might have thrown himself with ardour into the work of the expedition;
but he stood alone, and hatred and war rioted in him.

Below in the cabin Phips and Bucklaw were deep in the chart of the harbour and the river. 
The plan of action was decided upon.  A canoe was to be built out of a cotton-tree large enough
to carry eight or ten oars. This and the tender, with men and divers, were to go in search
of the wreck under the command of Bucklaw and the captain of the Swallow, whose name Phips
did not mention.  Phips himself was to remain on the Bridgwater Merchant, the Swallow lying
near with a goodly number of men to meet any possible attack from the sea.  When all was planned,
Phips told Bucklaw who was the commander of the Swallow.  For a moment the fellow's coolness
was shaken; the sparkle died out of his eye and he shot up a furtive look at Phips, but he
caught a grim smile on the face of the sturdy sailor.  He knew at once there was no treachery
meant, and he guessed that Phips expected no crisis.  It was ever his way to act with promptness,
being never so resourceful as when his position was most critical: he was in the power of Gering
and Phips, and he knew it, but he knew also that his game must be a bold one.

"By-gones are by-gones, captain," he said; "and what's done can't be helped, and as it was
no harm came anyhow."

"By-gones are by-gones," replied the other, "and let's hope that Mr. Gering will say so too."

"Haven't you told him, sir?"

"Never a word--but I'll send for him now, and bygones let it be."

Bucklaw nodded, and drummed the table with his tiger.  He guessed why Phips had not told Gering,
and he foresaw trouble.  He trusted, however, to the time that had passed since the kidnapping,
and on Gering's hunger for treasure.  Phips had compromised, and why not he?  But if Gering
was bent on trouble, why, there was the last resource of the peace-lover.  He tapped the rapier
at his side.  He ever held that he was peaceful, and it is recorded that at the death of an
agitated victim, he begged him to "sit still and not fidget."

He laid no plans as to what he should do when Gering came.  Like the true gamester, he waited
to see how he should be placed; then he could draw upon his resources.  He was puzzled about
Radisson, but Radisson could wait; he was so much the superior of the coarser villain that
he gave him little thought.  As he waited he thought more about the treasure at hand than of
either--or all--his enemies.

He did not stir, but kept drumming till he knew that Gering was aboard, and heard his footsteps,
with the captain's, coming.  He showed no excitement, though he knew a crisis was at hand.
A cool, healthy sweat stood out on his forehead, cheeks and lips, and his blue eyes sparkled
clearly and coldly.  He rose as the two men appeared.

Phips had not even told his lieutenant.  But Gering knew Bucklaw at the first glance, and his
eyes flashed and a hand went to his sword.

"Captain Phips," he said angrily, "you know who this man is?"

"He is the guide to our treasure-house, Mr. Gering."

"His name is Bucklaw--a mutineer condemned to death, the villain who tried to kidnap Mistress
Leveret."

It was Bucklaw that replied.  "Right--right you are, Mr. Gering.  I'm Bucklaw, mutineer, or
what else you please.  But that's ancient--ancient. I'm sinner no more.  You and Monsieur Iberville
saved the maid I meant no harm to her; 'twas but for ransom.  I am atoning now--to make your
fortune, give you glory.  Shall by-gones be by-gones, Mr. Gering?  What say you?"

Bucklaw stood still at the head of the table.  But he was very watchful. What the end might
have been it is hard to tell, but a thing occurred which took the affair out of Gering's hands.

A shadow darkened the companion-way, and Radisson came quickly down.  His face was sinister,
and his jaws worked like an animal's.  Coming to the table he stood between Gering and Bucklaw,
and looked from one to the other.  Bucklaw was cool, Gering very quiet, and he misinterpreted.

"You are great friends, eh, all together?" he said viciously.  "All together you will get the
gold.  It is no matter what one English do, the other absolve for gold.  A buccaneer, a stealer
of women--no, it is no matter!  All English--all together!  But I am French--I am the dirt--
I am for the scuppers.  Bah!  I will have the same as Bucklaw--you see?"

"You will have the irons, fellow!" Phips roared.

A knife flashed in the air, and Bucklaw's pistol was out at the same instant.  The knife caught
Bucklaw in the throat and he staggered against the table like a stuck pig, the bullet hit Radisson
in the chest and he fell back against the wall, his pistol dropping from his hand.  Bucklaw,
bleeding heavily, lurched forwards, pulled himself together, and, stooping, emptied his pistol
into the moaning Radisson.  Then he sank on his knees, snatched the other's pistol, and fired
again into Radisson's belly; after which with a last effort he plunged his own dagger into
the throat of the dying man, and, with his fingers still on the handle, fell with a gurgling
laugh across the Frenchman's body.

Radisson recovered for an instant.  He gave a hollow cry, drew the knife from his own throat
and, with a wild, shambling motion, struck at the motionless Bucklaw, pinning an arm to the
ground.  Then he muttered an oath and fell back dead.

The tournament of blood was over.  So swift had it been there was no chance to interfere. 
Besides, Gering was not inclined to save the life of either; while Phips, who now knew the
chart, as he thought, as well as Bucklaw, was not concerned, though he liked the mutineer.

For a moment they both looked at the shambles without speaking.  Sailors for whom Phips had
whistled crowded the cabin.

"A damned bad start, Mr. Gering," Phips said, as he moved towards the bodies.

"For them, yes; but they might have given us a bad ending."

"For the Frenchman, he's got less than was brewing for him, but Bucklaw was a humorous dog."

As he said this he stooped to Bucklaw and turned him over, calling to the sailors to clean
the red trough and bring the dead men on deck, but presently he cried: "By the devil's tail,
the fellow lives!  Here, a hand quick, you lubbers, and fetch the surgeon."

Bucklaw was not dead.  He had got two ugly wounds and was bleeding heavily, but his heart still
beat.  Radisson's body was carried on deck, and within half an hour was dropped into the deep.
The surgeon, however, would not permit Bucklaw to be removed until he had been cared for, and
so Phips and Gering went on deck and made preparations for the treasure- hunt.  A canoe was
hollowed out by a dozen men in a few hours, the tender was got ready, the men and divers told
off, and Gering took command of the searching-party, while Phips remained on the ship.

They soon had everything ready for a start in the morning.  Word was brought that Bucklaw still
lived, but was in a high fever, and that the chances were all against him; and Phips sent cordials
and wines from his own stores, and asked that news be brought to him of any change.

Early in the morning Gering, after having received instructions from Phips, so far as he knew
(for Bucklaw had not told all that was necessary), departed for the river.  The canoe and tender
went up the stream a distance, and began to work down from the farthest point indicated in
the chart.  Gering continued in the river nearly all day, and at night camped on the shore.
The second day brought no better luck, nor yet the third the divers had seen no vestige of
a wreck, nor any sign of treasure--nothing except four skeletons in a heap, tied together with
a chain, where the water was deepest.  These were the dead priests, for whom Bucklaw could
account.  The water was calm, the tide rising and falling gently, and when they arrived among
what was called the Shallows, they could see plainly to the bottom.  They passed over the Boilers,
a reef of shoals, and here they searched diligently, but to no purpose; the divers went down
frequently, but could find nothing.  The handful of natives in the port came out and looked
on apathetically; one or two Spaniards also came, but they shrugged their shoulders and pitied
the foolish adventurers.  Gering had the power of inspiring his men, and Phips was a martinet
and was therefore obeyed; but the lifeless days and unrewarded labour worked on the men, and
at last the divers shirked their task.

Meanwhile, Bucklaw was fighting hard for life.

As time passed, the flush of expectancy waned; the heat was great, the waiting seemed endless.
Adventure was needed for the spirits of the men, and of this now there was nothing.  Morning
after morning the sun rose in a moist, heavy atmosphere; day after day went in a quest which
became dreary, and night after night settled upon discontent.  Then came threats.  But this
was chiefly upon the Bridgwater Merchant.  Phips had picked up his sailors in English ports,
and nearly all of them were brutal adventurers.  They were men used to desperate enterprises,
and they had flocked to him because they smelled excitement and booty. Of ordinary merchant
seamen there were only a few.  When the Duke of Albemarle had come aboard at Plymouth before
they set sail, he had shrugged his shoulders at the motley crew. The author of the Historie remarks:
"This variation no one had ever observed up to this time," p. 62. "Columbus had crossed the
point of no variation, which was then near the meridian of Flores, in the Azores, and found
the variation no longer easterly, but more than a point westerly. His explanation that the
pole-star, by means of which the change was detected, was not itself stationary, is very plausible.
For the pole-star really does describe a circle round the pole of the earth, equal in diameter
to about six times that of the sun; but this is not equal to the change observed in the direction
of the needle." (Markham.)

[96-1] Garjao. This word is not in the Spanish dictionaries that I have consulted. The translator
has followed the French translators MM. Chalumeau de Verneuil and de la Roquette who accepted
the opinion of the naturalist Cuvier that the Garjao was the hirondelle de mer, the Sterna maxima
or royal tern.

[96-2] Rabo de junco, literally, reedtail, is the tropic bird or Phaethon. The name "boatswain-bird"
is applied to some other kinds of birds, besides the tropic bird. Cf. Alfred Newton, Dictionary
of Birds (London, 1896). Ferdinand Columbus says: rabo di giunco, "a bird so called because
it has a long feather in its tail," p. 63.

[96-3] This remark is, of course, not true of the tropic bird or rabo de junco, as was abundantly
proved on this voyage.

[97-1] See p. 96, note 2.

[98-1] Alcatraz. The rendering "booby" follows Cuvier's note to the French translation. The
"booby" is the "booby gannet."

The Spanish dictionaries give pelican as the meaning of Alcatraz. The gannets and the pelicans
were formerly classed together. The word Alcatraz was taken over into English and corrupted
to Albatros.

Alfred Newton, Dictionary of Birds (London, 1896), art. "Albatros."

[98-2] More exactly, "He sailed this day toward the West a quarter
northwest and half the division [i.e., west by north and west by one
eighth northwest] because of the veering winds and calm that prevailed."

[100-1]
The abridger of the original journal missed the point here and his
epitome is unintelligible. Las Casas says in his Historia, I. 275:
"The Admiral says in this place that the adverseness of the winds
and the high sea were very necessary to him since they freed the crew
of their erroneous idea that there would be no favorable sea and winds
for their return and thereby they received some relief of mind or
were not in so great despair, yet even then some objected, saying
that that wind would not last, up to the Sunday following, when they
had nothing to answer when they saw the sea so high. By which means,
Cristóbal Colon says here, God dealt with him and with them as he
dealt with Moses and the Jews when he drew them from Egypt showing
signs to favor and aid him and to their confusion."

"That's it, you filthy rogues!" he roared.  "Me to turn pirate, eh? You'd set to weaving ropes
for the necks of every one of us--blood of my soul!"

He seemed not to know that cutlasses were threatening him, not to be aware that the man at
his feet, clutching his weapon, was mad with rage.

"Now look," he said, in a big loud voice, "I know that treasure is here, and I know we'll find
it; if not now, when we get Bucklaw on his feet."

"Ay! Bucklaw!  Bucklaw!" ran through the throng.

"Well, then, Bucklaw, as you say!  Now here's what I'll do, scoundrels though you be.  Let
me hear no more of this foolery.  Stick to me till the treasure's found--for God take my soul
if I leave this bay till I have found it!--and you shall have good share of booty."

He had grasped the situation with such courage that the mutineers hesitated.  He saw his advantage
and followed it up, asking for three of their number to confer with him as to a bond upon his
proposal.  After a time the mutineers consented, the bond was agreed to, and the search went on.

CHAPTER XVI

IN THE TREASURE HOUSE

The canoes and tender kept husking up and down among the Shallows, finding nothing.  At last
one morning they pushed out from the side of the Bridgwater Merchant, more limp than ever.

The song had its way with them and they joined in and lay to their oars with almost too much
goodwill.  Gering, his arms upon the side of the canoe, was looking into the water idly.  It
was clear far down, and presently he saw what seemed a feather growing out of the side of a
rock. It struck him as strange, and he gave word to back water. The admiral added the bonnet[243-1]
to the mainsail. The sea was still very high, although it had gone down slightly. They steered
E.N.E., and went four miles an hour, which made 13 leagues during the eleven hours of the night.
After sunrise they sighted land.  But soon he came up rapidly, and was quickly inside
the boat, to tell Gering that he had seen several great guns.  At this the crew peered over
the boat-side eagerly.  Gering's heart beat hard.  He knew what it was to rouse wild hope and
then to see despair follow, but he kept an outward calm and told the diver to go down again.
Time seemed to stretch to hours before they saw the man returning with something in his arm.
He handed up his prize, and behold it was a pig of silver!

The treasure was found; and there went up a great cheer.  All was activity, for, apart from
the delight of discovery, Phips had promised a share to every man.  The place was instantly
buoyed, and they hastened back to the port with the grateful tidings to Phips.  With his glass
he saw them coming and by their hard rowing he guessed that they had news. When they came within
hail they cheered, and when they saw the silver the air rang with shouts.

As Gering stepped on board with the silver Captain Phips ran forwards, clasped it in both hands,
and cried: "We are all made, thanks be to God!"

Then all hands were ordered on board, and because the treasure lay in a safe anchorage they
got the ships away towards it.

Bucklaw, in the surgeon's cabin, was called out of delirium by the noise. He was worn almost
to a skeleton, his eyes were big and staring, his face had the paleness of death.  The return
to consciousness was sudden-- perhaps nothing else could have called him back.  He wriggled
out of bed and, supporting himself against the wall, made his way to the door, and crawled
away, mumbling to himself as he went.

A few minutes afterwards Phips and Gering were talking in the cabin. Phips was weighing the
silver up and down in his hands.

"At least three hundred good guineas here!" he said.  There was a shuffling behind them, and,
as Phips turned, a figure lunged on him, clutched and hugged the silver.  It was Bucklaw.

"Mine! mine!" he called in a hoarse voice, with great gluttonous eyes. "All mine!" he cried
again.  Then he gasped and came to the ground in a heap, with the silver hugged in his arms.
All at once he caught at his throat; the bandage of his wound fell away and there was a rush
of blood over the silver.  With a wild laugh he plunged face forward on the metal --and the
blood of the dead Bucklaw consecrated the first-fruits of the treasure.

As the vessel rode up the harbour the body was dropped into the deep.

"Worse men--worse men, sir, bide with the king," said Phips to Gering. "A merry villain, that
Bucklaw."  The ship came to anchor at the buoys, and no time was lost.  Divers were sent down,
and by great good luck found the room where the bullion was stored.  The number of divers was
increased, and the work of raising the bullion went on all that day. There is nothing like
the lust for gold in the hearts of men.  From stem to stern of the Bridgwater Merchant and
the Swallow, this wild will had its way.  Work went on until the last moment of sun.  That
night talk was long and sleep short, and work was on again at sunrise.  In three days they
took up thirty-two tons of bullion.  In the afternoon of the third day the store-room was cleared,
and then they searched the hold.  Here they found, cunningly distributed among the ballast,
a great many bags of pieces-of-eight.  These, having lain in the water so long, were crusted
with a strong substance, which they had to break with iron bars.  It was reserved for Phips
himself to make the grand discovery.  He donned a diving-suit and went below to the sunken
galleon.  Silver and gold had been found, but he was sure there were other treasures.  After
much searching he found, in a secret place of the captain's cabin, a chest which, on being
raised and broken open, was found stocked with pearls, diamonds, and other precious stones.

And now the work was complete, and on board the Bridgwater Merchant was treasure to the sum
of three hundred thousand pounds, and more.  Joyfully did Phips raise anchor.  But first he
sent to the handful of people in the port a liberal gift of money and wine and provisions from
the ship's stores.  With a favourable breeze he got away agreeably, and was clear of the harbour
and cleaving northwards before sunset--the Swallow leading the treasure-ship like a pilot.
All was joy and hilarity; but there remained one small danger yet: they had raised their treasure
unmolested, but could they bring it to Boston and on to England?  Phips would have asked that
question very seriously indeed had he known that the Maid of Provence was bowling out of the
nor'-east towards the port which he had just left.

The Maid of Provence had had a perilous travel.  Escaping the English war-ships, she fell in
with a pirate craft.  She closed with it, plugged it with cannon-shot, and drew off, then took
the wind on her beam and came drifting down on her, boarded her and, after a swift and desperate
fight, killed every pirate-rogue save one--the captain--whom for reasons they made a prisoner.
Then they sank the rover, and got away to Port de la Planta as fast as they were able.  But
by reason of the storm and the fighting, and drifting out of their course, they had lost ten
days; and thus it was they reached the harbour a few hours after the Bridgwater Merchant and
the Swallow had left.

They waited till morning and sailed cautiously in to face disappointment. They quickly learned
the truth from the natives.  There was but one thing to do and Iberville lost no time.  A few
hours to get fresh water and fruit and to make some repairs, for the pirate had not been idle
in the fight--and then Berigord gave the nose of the good little craft to the sea, and drove
her on with an honest wind, like a hound upon the scent. Iberville was vexed, but not unduly;
he had the temper of a warrior who is both artist and gamester.  As he said to Perrot: "Well,
Nick, they've saved us the trouble of lifting the treasure; we'll see now who shall beach it."

He guessed that the English ships would sail to Boston for better arming ere they ventured
to the English Channel.  He knew the chances were against him, but it was his cue to keep heart
in his followers.  For days they sailed without seeing a single ship; then three showed upon
the horizon and faded away.  They kept on, passing Florida and Carolina, hoping to reach Boston
before the treasure-ships, and to rob them at their own door.  Their chances were fair, for
the Maid of Provence had proved swift, good-tempered, and a sweet sailer in bad waters.

Iberville had reckoned well.  One evening, after a sail northwards as fine as the voyage down
was dirty, they came up gently within forty miles of Boston, and then, because there was nothing
else to do, went idling up and down all night, keeping watch.  The next morning there was a
mist in the air, which might become fog.  Iberville had dreaded this; but he was to have his
chance, for even when Berigord's face lowered most the look- out from the shrouds called down
that he sighted two ships.  They were making for the coast.  All sail was put on, they got
away to meet the newcomers, and they were not long in finding these to be their quarry.

Phips did not think that any ship would venture against them so near Boston, and could not
believe the Maid of Provence an enemy.  He thought her an English ship eager to welcome them,
but presently he saw the white ensign of France at the mizzen, and a round shot rattled through
the rigging of the Bridgwater Merchant.

But he was two to one, and the game seemed with him.  No time was wasted. Phips's ships came
to and stood alongside, and the gunners got to work. The Bridgwater Merchant was high in the
water, and her shot at first did little damage to the Maid of Provence, which, having the advantage
of the wind, came nearer and nearer.  The Swallow, with her twenty-odd guns, did better work,
and carried away the foremast of the enemy, killing several men.  But Iberville came on slowly,
and, anxious to dispose of the Swallow first, gave her broadsides between wind and water, so
that soon her decks were spotted with dying men, her bulwarks broken in, and her mainmast gone.
The cannonade was heard in Boston, from which, a few hours later, two merchantmen set out for
the scene of action, each carrying good guns.

But the wind suddenly sank, and as the Maid of Provence, eager to close with the Bridgwater
Merchant, edged slowly down, a fog came between, and the firing ceased on both sides.  Iberville
let his ship drift on her path, intent on a hand-to-hand fight aboard the Bridgwater Merchant;
the grappling-irons were ready, and as they drifted there was silence.

Every eye was strained.  Suddenly a shape sprang out of the grey mist, and the Maid of Provence
struck.  There was a crash of timbers as the bows of the Swallow--it was she--were stove in,
and then a wild cry. Instantly she began to sink.  The grappling-irons remained motionless
on the Maid of Provence.  Iberville heard a commanding voice, a cheer, and saw a dozen figures
jump from the shattered bow towards the bow of his own ship intent on fighting, but all fell
short save one.  It was a great leap, but the Englishman made it, catching the chains, and
scrambling on deck.  A cheer greeted him-the Frenchmen could not but admire so brave a feat.
The Englishman took no notice, but instantly turned to see his own ship lurch forwards and,
without a sound from her decks, sink gently down to her grave.  He stood looking at the place
where she had been, but there was only mist.  He shook his head and a sob rattled in his throat;
his brave, taciturn crew had gone down without a cry.  He turned and faced his enemies.  They
had crowded forwards--Iberville, Sainte-Helene, Perrot, Maurice Joval, and the staring sailors.
He choked down his emotion and faced them all like an animal at bay as Iberville stepped forwards.
Without a word Gering pointed to the empty scabbard at his side.

"No, pardon me," said Iberville drily, "not as our prisoner, monsieur. You have us at advantage;
you will remain our guest."

"I want no quarter," said Gering proudly and a little sullenly.

"There can be no question of quarter, monsieur.  You are only one against us all.  You cannot
fight; you saved your life by boarding us. Hospitality is sacred; you may not be a prisoner
of war, for there is no war between our countries."

"You came upon a private quarrel?" asked Gering.

"Truly; and for the treasure--fair bone of fight between us."

There was a pause, in which Gering stood half turned from them, listening.  But the Bridgwater
Merchant had drifted away in the mist. Presently he turned again to Iberville with a smile
defiant and triumphant.  Iberville understood, but showed nothing of what he felt, and he asked
Sainte-Helene to show Gering to the cabin.

When the fog cleared away there was no sign of the Bridgwater Merchant and Iberville, sure
that she had made the port of Boston, and knowing that there must be English vessels searching
for him, bore away to Quebec with Gering on board.

He parted from his rival the day they arrived--Perrot was to escort him a distance on his way
to Boston.  Gering thanked him for his courtesy.

"Indeed, then," said Iberville, "this is a debt--if you choose to call it so--for which I would
have no thanks--no.  For it would please me better to render accounts all at once some day,
and get return in different form, monsieur."

"Monsieur," said Gering, a little grandly, "you have come to me three times; next time I will
come to you."

"I trust that you will keep your word," answered Iberville, smiling.

That day Iberville, protesting helplessly, was ordered away to France on a man-of-war, which
had rocked in the harbour of Quebec for a month awaiting his return.  Even Frontenac himself
could not help him, for the order had come from the French minister.

CHAPTER XVII

THE GIFT OF A CAPTIVE

Fortune had not been kind to Iberville, but still he kept a stoical cheerfulness.  With the
pride of a man who feels that he has impressed a woman, and knowing the strength of his purpose,
he believed that Jessica should yet be his.  Meanwhile matters should not lie still.  In those
days men made love by proxy, and Iberville turned to De Casson and Perrot.

The night before he started for France they sat together in a little house flanking the Chateau
St. Louis.  Iberville had been speaking.

"I know the strength of your feelings, Iberville," said De Casson, "but is it wise, and is
it right?" Iberville made an airy motion with his hand.  "My dear abbe, there is but one thing
worth living for, and that is to follow your convictions.  See: I have known you since you
took me from my mother's last farewell.  I have believed in you, cared for you, trusted you;
we have been good comrades.  Come, now, tell me: what would you think if my mind drifted! 
No, no, no! to stand by one's own heart is the gift of an honest man--I am a sad rogue, abbe,
as you know, but I swear I would sooner let slip the friendship of King Louis himself than
the hand of a good comrade.  Well, my sword is for my king.  I must obey him, I must leave
my comrades behind, but I shall not forget, and they must not forget."  At this he got to his
feet, came over, laid a hand on the abbe's shoulder, and his voice softened: "Abbe, the woman
shall be mine."

"If God wills so, Iberville."  "He will, He will."

"Well," said Perrot, with a little laugh; "I think God will be good to a Frenchman when an
Englishman is his foe."

"But the girl is English--and a heretic," urged the abbe helplessly.

Perrot laughed again.  "That will make Him sorry for her."

Meanwhile Iberville had turned to the table, and was now reading a letter.  A pleased look
came on his face, and he nodded in satisfaction. At last he folded it up with a smile and sealed
it.  "Well," he said, "the English is not good, for I have seen my Shakespeare little this
time back, but it will do--it must do.  In such things rhetoric is nothing. You will take it,
Perrot he said, holding up the letter.

Perrot reached out for it.

"And there is something more."  Iberville drew from his finger a costly ring.  It had come
from the hand of a Spanish noble, whose place he had taken in Spain years before.  He had prevented
his men from despoiling the castle, and had been bidden to take what he would, and had chosen
only this.

"Tell her," he said, "that it was the gift of a captive to me, and that it is the gift of a
captive to her.  For, upon my soul, I am prisoner to none other in God's world."

Perrot weighed the ring up and down in his hand.  "Bien," he said, "monsieur, it is a fine
speech, but I do not understand.  A prisoner, eh? I remember when you were a prisoner with
me upon the Ottawa.  Only a boy --only a boy, but, holy Mother, that was different!  I will
tell her how you never gave up; how you went on the hunt after Grey Diver, the Iroquois.  Through
the woods, silent--silent for days and days, Indians all round us.  Death in the brush, death
in the tree-top, death from the river-bank.  I said to you, Give up; but you kept on.  Then
there were days when there was no sleep--no rest--we were like ghosts.  Sometimes we come to
a settler's cabin and see it all smoking; sometimes to a fort and find only a heap of bones--and
other things!  But you would not give up; you kept on.  What for?  That Indian chief killed
your best friend. Well, that was for hate; you keep on and on and on for hate--and you had
your way with Grey Diver; I heard your axe crash in his skull.  All for hate!  And what will
you do for love?--I will ask her what will you do for love.  Ah, you are a great man--but yes!
I will tell her so."

"Tell her what you please, Perrot."

Iberville hummed an air as at some goodly prospect.  Yet when he turned to the others again
there grew a quick mist in his eyes.  It was not so much the thought of the woman as of the
men.  There came to him with sudden force how these two comrades had been ever ready to sacrifice
themselves for him, and he ready to accept the sacrifice.  He was not ashamed of the mist,
but he wondered that the thing had come to him all at once.  He grasped the hands of both,
shook them heartily, then dashed his fingers across his eyes, and with the instinct of every
imperfect man,--that touch of the aboriginal in all of us, who must have a sign for an emotion,
he went to a cabinet and out came a bottle of wine.

An hour after, Perrot left him at the ship's side.

They were both cheerful.  "Two years, Perrot; two years!" he said.

"Ah, mon grand capitaine!"

Iberville turned away, then came back again.  "You will start at once?"

"At once; and the abbe shall write."

Upon the lofty bank of the St. Lawrence, at the Sault au Matelot, a tall figure clad in a cassock
stood and watched the river below.  On the high cliff of Point Levis lights were showing, and
fires burning as far off as the island of Orleans.  And in that sweet curve of shore, from
the St. Charles to Beauport, thousands of stars seemed shining.  Nearer still, from the heights,
there was the same strange scintillation; the great promontory had a coronet of stars.  In
the lower town there was like illumination, and out upon the river trailed long processions
of light. It was the feast of good Sainte Anne de Beaupre.  All day long had there been masses
and processions on land.  Hundreds of Jesuits, with thousands of the populace, had filed behind
the cross and the host.  And now there was a candle in every window.  Indians, half-breeds,
coureurs du bois, native Canadians, seigneurs, and noblesse, were joining in the function.
But De Casson's eyes were not for these.  He was watching the lights of a ship that slowly
made its way down the river among the canoes, and his eyes never left it till it had passed
beyond the island of Orleans and was lost in the night.

"Mon cher!" he said, "mon enfant!  She is not for him; she should not be.  As a priest it were
my duty to see that he should not marry her. As a man" he sighed--"as a man I would give my
life for him."

He lifted his hand and made the sign of the cross towards that spot on the horizon whither
Iberville had gone.

"He will be a great man some day," he added to himself--"a great man. There will be empires
here, and when histories are written Pierre's shall be a name beside Frontenac's and La Salle's."

All the human affection of the good abbe's life centred upon Iberville. Giant in stature, so
ascetic and refined was his mind, his life, that he had the intuition of a woman and, what
was more, little of the bigotry of his brethren.  As he turned from the heights, made his way
along the cliff and down Mountain Street, his thoughts were still upon the same subject.  He
suddenly paused.

"He will marry the sword," he said, "and not the woman."

How far he was right we may judge if we enter the house of Governor Nicholls at New York one
month later.

CHAPTER XVIII

MAIDEN NO MORE

It was late mid-summer, and just such an evening as had seen the attempted capture of Jessica
Leveret years before.  She sat at a window, looking out upon the garden and the river.  The
room was at the top of the house. It means "forked tail." The modern English equivalent is "frigate
bird." It is "the Fregata aquila of most ornithologists, the Frégate of French and the Rabihorcado
of Spanish mariners." Newton, Dictionary of Birds, art. "Frigate-Bird." Newton says that the
name "man-of-war bird" has generally passed out of use in books.

[103-2] Rather, the Guards, the name given to the two brightest stars in the constellation of
the Little Bear. The literal translation is: "the Guards, when night comes on, are near the
arm on the side to the west, and when dawn breaks they are on the line under the arm to the northeast,"
etc. What Columbus meant I cannot explain. Neither Navarrete nor the French translators offer
any suggestions.

[105-1] Las Casas, I. 282, adds to the foregoing under date of October
3: "He says here that it would not have been good sense to beat about
and in that way to be delayed in search of them [i.e., the islands]
since he had favorable weather and his chief intention was to go in
search of the Indies by way of the west, and this was what he proposed
to the King and Queen, and they had sent him for that purpose.

Because he would not turn back to beat up and down to find the islands which the pilots believed
to be there, particularly Martin Alonzo by the chart which, as was said, Cristóbal Colon had
sent to his caravel for him to see, and it was their opinion that
he ought to turn, they began to stir up a mutiny, and the disagreement
would have gone farther if God had not stretched out his arm as he
was wont, showing immediately new signs of their being near land since
now neither soft words nor entreaties nor prudent reasoning of Cristóbal
Colon availed to quiet them and to persuade them to persevere."

Ferdinand Columbus says simply, "For this reason the crew began to be mutinous, persevering in their
complaints and plots," p. 71. See page 108, note 1.

[106-1] Á la cuarta del Oueste, á la parte del Sudueste, at the quarter
from the west toward the southwest, i.e., west by south.

[106-2] Las Casas, in the Historia de las Indias, I. 283, writes, "That night Martin Alonso said that
it would be well to sail west by south for the island of Cipango which the map that Cristóbal Colon
showed him represented." Cf. page 101, note 2.

[107-1] Las Casas remarks, I. 285, "If he had kept up the direct westerly course and the impatience
of the Castilians had not hindered him, there is no doubt that he would have struck the main land
of Florida and from there to New Spain, although the difficulties
would have been unparalleled and the losses unbearable that they would
have met with, and it would have been a divine miracle if he had ever
returned to Castile."

  After a word of greeting she offered
him a chair, and came again to the window.

Presently she looked up and said very simply: "I am going to be married. You have known me
ever since I was born: do you think I will make a good wife?"

"With prayer and chastening of the spirit, my daughter," he said.

"But suppose that at the altar I remembered another man?"

"A sin, my child, for which should be due sorrow."  The girl smiled sadly.  She felt poignantly
how little he could help her.

"And if the man were a Catholic and a Frenchman?" she said.

"A papist and a Frenchman!" he cried, lifting up his hands. "My daughter, you ever were too
playful.  You speak of things impossible. I pray you listen."  Jessica raised her hand as if
to stop him and to speak herself, but she let him go on.  With the least encouragement she
might have told him all.  She had had her moment of weakness, but now it was past.  There are
times when every woman feels she must have a confidant, or her heart will burst--have counsel
or she will die. Such a time had come to Jessica.  But she now learned, as we all must learn,
that we live our dark hour alone.

She listened as in a dream to the kindly bigot.  When he had finished, she knelt and received
his blessing.  All the time she wore that strange, quiet smile.  Soon afterwards he left her.

She went again to the window.  "A papist and a Frenchman--unpardonable sin!" she said into
the distance.  "Jessica, what a sinner art thou!"

Presently there was a tap, the door opened, and George Gering entered. She turned to receive
him, but there was no great lighting of the face. He came quickly to her, and ran his arm round
her waist.  A great kindness looked out of her eyes.  Somehow she felt herself superior to
him--her love was less and her nature deeper.  He pressed her fingers to his lips.  "Of what
were you thinking, Jessica?" he asked.

"Of what a sinner I am," she answered, with a sad kind of humour.

"What a villain must I be, then!" he responded.  "Well, yes," she said musingly; "I think you
are something of a villain, George."

"Well, well, you shall cure me of all mine iniquities," he said.  "There will be a lifetime
for it.  Come, let us to the garden."

"Wait," she said.  "I told you that I was a sinner, George; I want to tell you how."

"Tell me nothing; let us both go and repent," he rejoined, laughing, and he hurried her away. Afterwards
there is no need to fear the greatest storm in the world.

From this port a very beautiful cultivated valley is in sight, descending from the S.E., surrounded
by such lofty mountains that they appear to reach the sky, and covered with green trees.
  He asked a hurried question or two and then edged away.
Soon he made a stand under the trees, and, viewing the scene, nodded his head and said: "The
abbe was right."

It was Perrot.  A few hours afterwards the crowd had gone and the governor's garden was empty.
Perrot still kept his watch under the tree, though why he could hardly say--his errand was
useless now.  But he had the gift of waiting.  At last he saw a figure issue from a door and
go down into the garden.  He remembered the secret gate.  He made a detour, reached it, and
entered.  Jessica was walking up and down in the pines. In an hour or so she was to leave for
England.  Her husband had gone to the ship to do some needful things, and she had stolen out
for a moment's quiet.  When Perrot faced her, she gave a little cry and started back. The lord had on
a shirt and a pair of gloves, given to him by the Admiral, and he
was more delighted with the gloves than with anything else.

In his manner of eating, both as regards the high-bred air and the
peculiar cleanliness he clearly showed his nobility.



"A message and a gift from Monsieur Iberville."  He drew the letter and the ring from his pocket
and held them out, repeating Iberville's message.  There was a troubled look in her eyes and
she was trembling a little now, but she spoke clearly.

"Monsieur," she said, "you will tell Monsieur Iberville that I may not; I am married."

"So, madame," he said.  "But I still must give my message."  When he had done so he said: "Will
you take the letter?"  He held it out.

There was a moment's doubt and then she took it, but she did not speak.

"Shall I carry no message, madame?"

She hesitated.  Then, at last: "Say that I wish him good fortune--with all my heart."

"Good fortune--ah, madame!" he answered, in a meaning tone.

"Say that I pray God may bless him, and make him a friend of my country," she added in a low,
almost broken voice, and she held out her hand to him.

The gallant woodsman pressed it to his lips.  "I am sorry, madame," he replied, with an admiring
look.

She shook her head sadly.  "Adieu, monsieur!" she said steadily and very kindly.

A moment after he was gone.  She looked at the missive steadfastly for a moment, then thrust
it into the folds of her dress and, very pale, walked quietly to the house, where, inside her
own room, she lighted a candle. She turned the letter over in her hand once or twice, and her
fingers hung at the seal.  But all at once she raised it to her lips, and then with a grave,
firm look, held it in the flame and saw it pass in smoke. It was the last effort for victory.

