In Search of El Dorado, by Harry Collingwood.

Rather strangely the book starts off with an incident very closely resembling the loss of the
"Titanic", which had occurred a few years before the publication of this book.  This episode,
the sinking due to collision with ice of the "Everest", is well told, and must indeed give
a good picture of what had happened with the "Titanic".

As a result of this our two heroes find themselves on an ice floe, from which they are rescued,
and become great friends.  They decide to go together to South America, to see what adventures
befall them.  Several interesting episodes are described, but eventually they find themselves
outside what appears to be a city of gold, but down in a former crater with no apparent means
of access.  Eventually they do find the way down, and to their surprise, Earle, the American,
who was wearing an amulet he had found earlier in the trip, was treated with great reverence
as a God.  All this is exceptionally well-told, and you will certainly enjoy the book.

IN SEARCH OF EL DORADO, BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.

CHAPTER ONE.

ICE!

The Everest, newly launched, the biggest and fastest boat in the Trans-Atlantic services, was
on her maiden voyage to New York.  The fortunes of that voyage concern our story simply from
the fact that it brought our two adventurers together and helped to show the manly stuff of
which they were made.  Thereafter the sea was not for them, but the far-off swamps and forests
of the mighty Amazon Valley, where most amazing adventures befel them.  On the Everest Dick
Cavendish was fifth officer.

The run from Liverpool to Queenstown was made under easy steam in order that the ship might
arrive off the Irish port at a reasonable hour in the morning; but no sooner were the Irish
passengers and the supplementary mails shipped than the word went quietly round among the officers
that the "Old Man" was bent upon breaking the best previous record for the run across the herring
pond and setting up a new one unassailable by any other craft than the Everest herself.  And
certainly when, as the liner passed Daunt Rock lightship shortly after nine o'clock on the
Sunday morning following her departure from Liverpool, and the moment was carefully noted by
chronometer, the omens were all most favourable for the weather was fine, though cold, with
a light northerly wind and smooth water, and with her turbines running at top speed the chief
engineer reported that the hands in the stokeholds were keeping a full head of steam without
difficulty.  At noon the patent log showed that the Everest was within a fraction of eighty
miles from the lightship; and Captain Prowse already began to picture himself as holding the
blue ribbon of the Atlantic.

And so things continued without a hitch or break of any description until half the journey
across the Atlantic had been accomplished; the weather remained fine, with light winds, no
sea, and very little swell to speak of, while the ship ran as smoothly and steadily as though
she were travelling on land-locked waters instead of in mid-Atlantic.

Meanwhile she kept in almost hourly touch with other ships going east or west, reporting her
position and progress and asking from time to time for the latest news; but it was not until
Tuesday afternoon, about three o'clock, local time, that she got any intelligence of the slightest
moment, this being a message from the homeward bound liner Bolivia, to the following effect--

"Warning!  S.S. Bolivia, New York--Liverpool, Latitude 45 degrees, 7 minutes North, Longitude
37 degrees, 57 minutes West.  Just cleared large area consisting of detached masses of field
ice with several bergs, through which we have been working for the last three hours. Very dangerous.
Advise ships approaching it to observe utmost caution, particularly at night time."

This message was duly handed to Captain Prowse in his own cabin by the wireless operator, who
waited while the skipper read it, to see whether the latter desired to address any inquiry
to the Bolivia.  But after cogitating over it for two or three minutes, the skipper crumpled
up the paper and thrust it into his pocket, saying--

"All right, `Sparks', that'll do.  And--look here, youngster--just keep this message strictly
to yourself, d'ye see?  Don't say a word to anybody about it.  I'll see that all necessary
precautions are taken; but I don't want the news of there being ice ahead to be talked about;
it'll only make the passengers unnecessarily nervous and uneasy; and I don't want that.  Besides,
it will be easy enough to alter the course a few degrees south if it should be found desirable.
You understand me?"

"Perfectly, sir," answered `Sparks,' lingering for a moment at the cabin door.  "Anything else,
sir?"

"No," answered the skipper, "nothing more at present, thank you.  But keep your ears open for
any further messages."

The operator saluted and vanished; whereupon the skipper produced the chart of the North Atlantic,
by the aid of which he was navigating the ship, spread it open upon the table, and studied
it intently.  A pencil mark consisting of a number of straight lines--the junction of each
of which with the next was indicated by a dot surrounded by a small circle, against which was
a note indicating the date, hour and moment of the ship's arrival at each particular spot--showed
the track of the ship across the ocean from her point of departure abreast of Daunt Rock, and
a thinner, lighter pencil line extending on to New York marked the still untravelled portion
of the route.  Taking a pencil, parallel ruler and pair of dividers in his hand, Captain Prowse
proceeded carefully to jot down the position of the Bolivia, as indicated by her message; having
done which he gave vent to a sigh of relief; for he saw that the course which he was pursuing
would take the Everest some sixty miles to the north of that point.

"Thank God! that's all right," he murmured.  "There's nothing to fear. That patch of drift
ice is not in the least likely to extend as far north as our track.  Besides, with the precautions
that we are observing--taking the sea temperature every half-hour, and so on--and the maintenance
of a good look-out, we are perfectly safe.  I suppose I ought to tell Brown" (the chief officer)
"about this message; but I won't--no; I'll keep it to myself, for the chap's as nervous as
a cat, and would want to slow down as soon as the dusk comes.  And I don't want that; I mean
to make this a record passage, and don't intend to be frightened into losing several precious
hours merely because a ship sixty miles to the south'ard of my track reports a little floating
ice. No; I'll just issue instructions that everybody is to be on the alert and keep a specially
sharp look-out, and let it go at that."

Having come to which conclusion, Captain Prowse left his cabin and joined the officer of the
watch on the bridge.

"By Jove!  What glorious weather we are having," he remarked genially, as the officer came
to his side.  "I cannot remember such a spell of it as we have had ever since leaving Queenstown.
What's she doing, Mr Dacre?"

"Twenty-six point six, sir, at the last reading of the log, about half an hour ago," answered
the second officer; "and she hasn't slackened down any.  At this rate we ought to be berthed
in New York by noon the day after to-morrow, with a record passage to our credit."

"Ay," agreed the skipper, "that's what I am hoping for in a quiet way. It will be a feather
in our caps if we can pull the thing off--and please the owners, too.  Have you seen any sign
of ice yet?"

"Not yet, sir," answered Dacre, "though I suppose we may expect to see some at almost any moment,
now.  But the temperature of the water remains quite steady.  It is only half a degree colder
than it was this time yesterday, and that is no more than one would reasonably expect about here."

"Quite so," assented the skipper.  "Well, let the temperature continue to be taken every half-hour
regularly, and keep the look-outs on the alert.  We don't want any accidents--or even any narrow
escapes, on our first trip.  The officers of the fleet have a reputation for carefulness, and
we must live up to it.  Let me know at once if any ice is sighted."

"Certainly, sir," replied the second officer, as the skipper turned away and retired to his cabin.

At half-past nine o'clock that night the ship's band was playing in the grand lounge, and most
of the first-class passengers who were not in the smoke-room were promenading or sitting about
in that spacious and handsome apartment, listening to the music, or chatting together in couples
or little groups.  The smoke-room, too, was pretty well occupied, a few of the men reading
while the rest were either seated at the tables, playing poker, or standing round watching
the play.

At the same hour a little party of the ship's officers who were off duty, of whom Dick Cavendish
was one, were gathered in the ward-room, engaged in the conduct of an informal smoking-concert,
and Dick was standing at the piano warbling "Dear Heart" to the doctor's accompaniment--it
is no longer the fashion for sailors to sing sea-songs--when the proceedings were abruptly
interrupted by a jolt--it was scarcely severe enough to merit the term "shock"--instantly followed
by a perceptible lifting of the ship's bows and a slight list of her to starboard, while to
her smooth, steady, gliding progress succeeded a rapid succession of jerks, accompanied by
a sound of rending, distinctly audible in the ward-room in the dead silence that suddenly fell
upon the party.  Then the bows of the ship were felt to dip and her stern to rise, while her
speed slackened so abruptly that those who were standing only retained their footing with difficulty;
a final jar, succeeded by a crash, came, and the ship once more settled to her bearings, floating
smoothly and tranquilly as before.

By this time the occupants of the ward-room were all upon their feet, staring at one another,
speechless, with horrified eyes.  But as the stern of the ship settled and she again came to
her bearings, Mr Brown, the chief officer, who was one of the party, exclaimed:

"Ice--by the Living Jingo!--and we've hit it!  More than that she's torn the bottom off herself,
unless I'm very greatly mistaken; and in another minute there'll be the deuce and all to pay--a
panic, as likely as not. To your stations, gentlemen, and remember--the first thing to be done
is to keep the boat deck clear.  Come on!"  And he led the way up the companion-ladder to the deck.

As Dick emerged into the open air, the first thing of which he became conscious was a distinctly
keener edge of chill in the atmosphere; next, that the ship's engines had stopped; and third,
that the second-class passengers were swarming out of their quarters like angry bees, each
demanding of the other to be told what had happened.  They were evidently heading with one
accord for the promenade deck, doubtless en route for the boat deck; and Dick only reached
the foot of the ladder in the nick of time to meet the rush of the foremost.

"Hillo!" he cried, good-humouredly, planting himself square in front of the ladder.  "Whither
away, good people?  No, no; that is the first-class quarters; you know that you have no right
on the promenade deck.  Keep to your own part of the ship, please."

The crowd checked at the cool authoritativeness of Dick's tones; but a big, burly man elbowed
his way through the crush until he came face to face with the young officer.

"Out of the way, youngster," he shouted.  "Who are you, to talk of `right' at a time like this?
The ship is on the rocks and sinking, and--"

"Oh, my dear good man," interrupted Dick, wearily.  "You make me tired. Why do you start talking
about things of which you know nothing, and try to frighten your fellow passengers?  You are
the sort of chap who yells blue murder if the lights in a picture theatre go out before you
think they ought, and starts a panic in which a lot of women and children get badly hurt. 
Rocks!  Why, we're hundreds of miles from the nearest land. And as to the ship sinking, don't
you know that she's unsinkable--that she can't sink?  The fact is that we've hit a bit of ice
in the darkness, and all the bumping that you felt was just the ice being broken up by the
ship as she ran past it.  Now, take my advice, all of you; go back to your cabins and turn
in, or some of you will be catching bad colds.  Where are the parents of those children in
night-dresses? Whoever they are, they ought to be ashamed of themselves for bringing the poor
little kiddies into the cold in that rig!  Take 'em below and put 'em to bed again, there's
good people.  And go to bed yourselves; it's the most comfortable place in the ship on a night
like this.  I wish I had the chance to go there."

Dick's one idea in talking had been to subdue the tendency towards panic which he had observed
in the crowd before him, and to a certain extent he had succeeded.  That is to say, the parents
of the children in nightgowns had sheepishly herded their flock back into the deck-house, while
a few of the other passengers had followed them.  But the majority still lingered, waiting
perhaps to hear further particulars.  And these the big, burly man--who, from his somewhat
"loud" costume, might be taken for a pugilist or a doubtful frequenter of race courses--seemed
determined to have.  Dick's sarcasm had produced no more effect upon him than rain does upon
a duck, and he still stood staring aggressively at the young officer.

"That's all very well," he declared truculently; "but if there's no danger, what are all them
sailors so busy about the boats up there for?"

The boat deck was by this time a scene of feverish but orderly activity, every available seaman
being mustered there, busily engaged, under the supervision of the chief and second officers,
on the task of stripping the boats of their canvas, casting them loose, hoisting them out of
their chocks, and swinging them outboard ready for lowering.

"Why, you chump," answered Dick, "they are doing that for the express purpose of reassuring
people like yourself, who always go badly scared if they get half a chance.  Besides, it is
one of the standing orders of the ship, and gives the men a bit of exercise in handling the
boats. They will hang there for a bit, and then they will be swung inboard and stowed again.
Now,--please go back to your cabins, all of you, and make yourselves comfortable.  Or, if you
don't care to do that--if you are determined to hang about out here on deck in the cold, at
least go and put some warm clothes on.  For I tell you candidly that it may be an hour or more
before those boats are swung in and stowed."

"All right!" returned Dick's opponent, "I'll stay where I am until that's done, and chance
it.  I'd rather have a cold than be drowned in my cabin, like a rat in a trap."

"Very well," retorted Dick.  "Do as you please, by all means.  It's your look-out, not mine.
Only you are setting a very bad example to the others.  And by this time to-morrow you will
all be sorry that you did not take my advice."

Meanwhile, from where Dick stood, at the foot of the ladder leading to the promenade deck,
he could hear the purser up there suavely assuring a crowd of first-class passengers that there
was not the slightest occasion for alarm, that the boats were merely being swung out as a precautionary
measure always adopted in such cases, and that if they would kindly retire to the dining-saloon
they would find a hot supper awaiting them which he had taken it upon himself to order, just
to fortify his charges against any possible ill effects from the cold to which they were so
foolishly exposing themselves.  And while he spoke, the purser was busily but very politely
shepherding the promenade deck crowd toward the doorway giving access to the dining-saloon.

But above the suavely jocular accents of the purser's voice Dick's quick ears caught other
and more sinister sounds, to wit, the persistent crackling of the ship's wireless installation,
and he very shrewdly suspected that that meant something much more serious and important than
"Sparks" swapping good-nights with some other operator--that, in short, it meant nothing less
than that most urgent of all wireless calls, the S.O.S. of a ship in dire distress summoning
other ships to her aid. Further than that, although the work of preparing the boats for lowering
was proceeding in a perfectly quiet and orderly manner, Dick was conscious, even above the
roar of escaping steam, of a strenuous haste in the movements of the men engaged upon the task,
as well as of a certain note of sharpness and urgency in the tones of the officers who were
supervising the work, all of which combined to impress upon the young officer the conviction
that matters were taking a distinctly serious turn for the Everest.

In the brief interval during which the above impressions were printing themselves upon Dick's
consciousness, a few of the people confronting him had turned, and, in a half-hearted, hesitant
way, were drifting back toward the entrance of the deck-house, although the greater part of
them seemed disposed to follow the burly man's example and remain where they were until authoritatively
assured that all was well with the ship.  It was during this momentary lull that a brass-buttoned
steward came nimbly down the ladder before which Cavendish was standing, and said to him:

"Purser's compliments, sir, and would you be so good as to tell the second-class passengers
that, on account of their bein' disturbed by the ship hittin' a lump of ice, and turnin' out
in the cold, tea, coffee, and hot soup is bein' served in the dinin'-room to warm 'em up a
bit before they goes to their beds."

"Right-o!" answered Dick.  "I will inform them at once.  Ladies and gentlemen," he continued,
"lest you should not all have heard the message which the steward has just delivered, let me
repeat it.  It is a message from the purser to the effect that since so many of you have unfortunately
been scared out of your warm cabins by the collision of the ship with a small piece of ice,
tea, coffee, and hot soup are now being served in the dining-room to those who care to have
something to warm them before turning in.  If you take my advice, you will lose no time in
going below to get it, because only a limited quantity will be served, and those who get below
first will have the best chance. Good-night, all of you.  Turn in as soon as you have had your
hot drink, and get a good night's rest."

And therewith the young man turned and with much deliberation ascended the ladder, his intention
in so doing being to convey the impression that the scare was over and the entire incident ended.

The ruse was brilliantly successful, for the moment at least, for when, upon reaching the head
of the ladder, he turned to see what was happening on the deck which he had just left, he saw
that the whole crowd of second-class passengers was in full retreat, with the burly man elbowing
his way through it, that he might secure his full share of whatever might happen to be going
in the dining-room.

Pausing for a moment to watch the gradual disappearance of the people through the deck-house
door, Dick waited until the last of them had vanished, and then darted along the now deserted
promenade deck and up the ladder to the boat deck, where he found himself in the midst of a
scene of the most strenuous activity; the men still feverishly working at the task of clearing
and swinging out the boats, the officers supervising and assisting in the work, as though every
second of time were more precious than gold, stewards hurrying up from below with provisions
with which to stock the boats, and the captain on the bridge overlooking all, the whole deck
brilliantly illuminated by every available electric lamp, while overhead the steam still roared
out of the pipes, and the crackle of the wireless obtruded itself insistently through all other
sounds.

Cavendish knew that Mr Brown, the chief officer, was up here somewhere, and he presently found
him and briefly reported what had happened down on the main deck.

"Good!" returned Brown.  "But go back and guard the head of the ladder leading from the main
to the promenade deck.  We're holed in nearly every compartment, and the leaks are gaining
upon us in spite of the steam pumps.  The ship's doomed--that's the long and the short of it;
nothing can save her; and as soon as all the boats are ready there will be a call for the women
and children.  Your duty then will be to see that no men from the second-class are allowed
to slip past you until all women and children have been safely got off.  Likely enough some
of the men may try to rush you.  Got a revolver?"

"I have a pair down in my cabin, but--"

"Good!" interrupted Brown.  "Don't waste time going down to fetch them. Collar a steward and
tell him to get them for you.  Now, off you go. Those people down below may take the alarm
again at any moment.  One word more.  When all the women and children are up, don't let any
men pass you until you get word from me.  Now--scoot!"

Dick "scooted," dispatching a steward for his revolvers on the way, not that he had the slightest
intention of using them; but he knew how efficacious a revolver--even though empty--is in stopping
a rush, and he decided that it would be a good thing to have them.  A minute later--his visit
to the boat deck having occupied some ten minutes--he reached his post at the head of the ladder
which he was to guard--just in time.  For as he posted himself, the head of the burly man swung
into view, wagging from side to side as its owner climbed the ladder, with quite a little crowd
behind him, while others were streaming out on deck.

"What! my friend, you here again?" exclaimed Dick as he planted himself at the head of the
ladder, with a hand grasping the rail on either side of him, thus converting himself into a
human closed gate.  "Have you come to tell me that there were not enough hot drinks to go round
and that you didn't get your fair share?  No you don't"--as the man strove to dislodge Cavendish
from his position--"your place is down there on the main deck, as I've told you before--ah!
would you?  Then take that, as a little lesson that when you're aboard ship you must behave
yourself and obey orders!"

"That" was a blow straight between the eyes, administered to the burly man, who now seemed
determined to fight his way up to the boat deck at all costs.  The fellow went reeling back
under the impact of the blow, and would undoubtedly have fallen some ten feet to the deck below
had he not been caught and supported by the people beneath him on the ladder. These instantly
raised a loud clamour, in which the words "Shame! shame!" were distinctly audible, while some
of the women began to cry and manifest a disposition to become hysterical.  Then another big
man suddenly started to elbow his way through the crowd now thickly grouped about the foot
of the ladder which Dick was guarding, shouting, as he came--

"Here, let me get at him.  Officer or no officer, I'll soon shift him!"

"Yes, yes; that's right, governor," shouted others, also pressing forward.  "Let's get him
out of the way.  What right has he got to keep us down here while the ship's sinking?  Our
lives are just as good as other people's, and we've a right to save 'em if we can."

Dick saw that a crisis was imminent and that unless he acted with decision the people on the
deck below would very quickly get out of hand. Above are two windows with a niche between, and over all
is a parapet of modern work. Flat buttresses flank the entire composition on either side. The
wooden gates were added by Bishop Lyhart (1446-72).

Returning to the Erpingham gate, and entering the Close through it, immediately on our left we come
to the #Chapel of St. John the Evangelist# (converted by Edward VI., and still used as a school),
founded by Bishop Salmon (1299-1325).

This building replaced an older structure, used as a charnel, and provision was made for this
need in the new edifice; the vaults under the chapel were used for the same purpose. The porch
is a later building added by Lyhart (1446-72).

#The West Front of the Cathedral# has probably received worse treatment
than any other portion of the building, and stands now as the most
unsatisfactory part of the whole.

The design consists in its width of three compartments, with two separating and two flanking
turrets. The centre compartment is of the width of the nave, and those on either side the width
of the aisles. In the centre comes the main doorway, flanked on either side with niches, and
over these, filling the entire breadth, the great nine-light west window, with the Norman turrets
carried up to the base of the gable. The compartments on either side are finished off by horizontal
mouldings taken across somewhat below the level of the springing
of the archivolt of the main window, and have flanking turrets covered
with plain pinnacles.

The large west window is disproportionate, and even the assurance cheerfully given by most
authorities, that it resembles the window of Westminster Hall, fails to prove that it is of suitable
size here. It may be as well to note in order the various changes which have affected the west
front.

Mr B.W. Spaull, in Dean Goulburn's work on the Cathedral, made reference to the discovery of
an alteration to the main entrance which must have been prior to
that now existing.

It consisted of a small parvise or room added above at some time subsequent to the original foundation.
As the details are not now apparent, it is best to refer readers
to the work named for fuller information.

The addition, however, of later Perpendicular triforium windows to the nave superimposed over the
original Norman lights, which were blocked up, may have affected the west front. This can best
be seen by viewing, for instance, the south side of the nave. The Norman roofs sloped down
to the original triforium windows, but after the later addition were made almost flat, and
must have necessitated some mask wall in the west front.

In Britton's "History of Norwich" is a drawing which is reproduced at p. 15. It will be seen
that the turrets at each side of the west window are shown finished with stone cupolas, the
tops of which were level with the apex of the gable. The two outside flanking turrets are
shown finished by circular drums above the parapet, and covered with leaden cupolas; these,
with the Perpendicular battlements, were probably added as the mask before referred to, and
necessitated by the imposition of an additional storey at the triforium
level.

Certainly the west front, as shown then, was better far than now. However, in 1875, "restoration"
set in, and these cupolas were removed, and stone "pepper-box" pinnacles
imposed on the turrets in their stead.

The gable was restored, and the character of the work wholly destroyed, crocketted where before
plain, and the niche added in the place of the small light over the vault shown in Britton's plate. In
the side compartments the Perpendicular battlementing was removed and the round cannon ball
holes gratuitously inserted.

The two pinnacles at the sides of the west window have since been removed.

The earlier change in the central compartment of the front from Norman to Perpendicular was effected
by the additions of the door and window still remaining. Bishop Alnwyck, who was translated
to Lincoln in 1436, added the doorway during his episcopate, and it was probably built right
over and covering the original Norman door and arcading. He also left provision in his will
for the west window, and this was added by Bishop Lyhart (1446-72), to throw additional light
on to the vaulting and sculptures of the nave; from the inside it will be seen that it completely
fills the width of the nave, and follows the line of the vault up.

The north side of the cathedral lies within the gardens of the bishop's palace, which can be entered
from the interior of the cathedral, through a small door in the north aisle of the presbytery;
the eastern end of the cathedral also lies within a private garden, but permission to enter it
can usually be obtained.

#Exterior of Nave.#--Those portions of the precincts near the western end of the cathedral
are known as the Upper Close; and, walking round the exterior of the cloisters, we come to
the Lower Close.

The nave on the south side can be seen well either from the upper or lower Close, and can be better
examined in detail from the interior of the cloisters. Its elevation consists of fourteen
bays divided by flat Norman buttresses. In height it is composed of what, at first sight, appears
a bewildering confusion of arches, arcades, and windows.

Over the aisle windows, hidden by the north walk of cloisters, comes a Norman wall arcading; and
over this the Norman triforium windows blocked up, and again, above the later Perpendicular
triforium, superimposed on the old, and finished with a battlemented parapet. Behind this
come the triforium roof, and then beyond the original Norman clerestory, each bay with a triple
arch formation, the centre arch pierced for a window. And then above all, the lead roof over
nave vault.

The radical changes that have taken place since the nave was built by Bishop Eborard (1121-45)
consist of the insertion in the aisles of later "Decorated" traceried windows in place of the
original Norman ones, and of the superimposition, before referred to, at triforium level of
a whole range of "Perpendicular" windows over the old Norman work, which were blocked up at this
period. The pristine aspect, then, of this elevation of the nave would have shown a sloping
roof over the aisles where now the later addition occurs.

The battlementing, too, over the clerestory to the nave is later work, to correspond with
battlementing over the triforium windows. It will be noticed that the two bays next the transept
in the triforium are higher than the others, in order to throw additional light into the choir.

Also
on this same south side, in the seventh and eighth bays from the west end, two very late windows occur,
inserted in the Norman arcading under the original triforium windows; these were inserted by
Bishop Nykke to light the chapel he built in two bays of the south aisle of the nave.

The curious raking of the lead rolls to the nave roof is noticeable; the mediæval builders did this
with a view of counteracting the "crawl" of the lead.

Lead, under the variations of temperature of the atmosphere, expands and contracts considerably; and
from its own weight, and the steepness of the roofs, the contraction takes place in a downward
direction, and starts the joints, letting in the weather. This raking of the vertical rolls was
a device whereby the old builders in some measure got over their difficulty by inducing a fixed
expansion and contraction.

#The South Transept# projects boldly forward from under the tower; without aisles, its ridge
and parapet correspond in height to those of the nave; this narrowness,
with the tower and spire showing over behind, gives it an appearance
of height, as approached from the lower close.

This effect of height is emphasised by the partition of the design in its width, by flat Norman
buttresses, with shafts in the angles, and by the flat faces of the flanking turrets. The work,
however, is without interest, from the fact that, though the ensemble in some measure has been
retained, the whole of the exterior face of the stonework was re-cased by Salvin, 1830-40, during
which period various restorations were effected. Before these alterations, the Norman flanking turrets
finished with a "Perpendicular" battlementing, enriched with shields
and quatrefoils, and with crocketted pinnacles set at the four angles;
this battlementing was removed, and the present uninteresting pepper-boxes
took their place.

No doubt they have it in their favour that they may be more like the original Norman terminations
than were those they replaced, which were, however, real "Perpendicular," and these are only
sham Norman. Originally, from the eastward side of the south transept, projected a semi-circular
chapel, shown on plan by dotted lines, and corresponding to that still remaining on the north
side of the cathedral. It was part of the original plan, and though we believe no record exists of
its destruction, it can safely be premised that its fate came about through the cultus of the
saint to whom it was dedicated declining, and consequent neglect
and ruin following made its destruction cheaper than its reparation.

It was replaced by a sacristy in the fifteenth century, the lines of roof to which can still
be seen over on the stonework. This later sacristy was destroyed by the fire of 1509, that burned
as well the wooden roofs of the transepts, and necessitated the stone vaults added by Bishop
Nykke.

#The Diocesan Registry Offices# now occupy the space on which once stood the Norman chapel,
and later the Sacristy.

The building projecting eastward, south of this space, and marked A on plan, was once a chapel, said
by Blomefield to have been dedicated to St. Edmund. It is now used as the #Dean's Vestry# in the
lower storey, and as the #Chapter Clerk's Office# in the upper.

At the same time that the later restorations were effected to the south transept, the groined
#Slype# and singing-school above it were destroyed, and the present door in the south transept
from the lower close was opened. A pre-restoration view is published of the east end of the
cathedral, showing the slype, in Britton's "Norwich." The visitor should also bear in mind that this
space immediately in front of the south transept was originally occupied by the #Chapter-House#,
situated as shown by dotted lines on plan, and separated from the cathedral by the slype. The
entrance arches to the chapter-house from the east walk of the cloisters still remain and fix
definitely its position; it projected eastward about eighty feet.

#The Tower and Spire# mark the crossing of the choir and transepts, the tower only being Norman,
and square on plan, with flat Norman buttresses, covered with vertical shafts on the face of each.
These buttresses start from the level of the parapets to Nave, Transept, and Presbytery, and
rise right up until, well over the parapet of the tower, they are finished by crocketted pinnacles.
Between these buttresses are horizontal bands of design: the lowest, a Norman arcade of nine arches,
three of which are pierced as windows; then, above this, a smaller
wall arcade with interlaced arches; and then, above again, the principal
feature, an arcading of nine arches, three pierced for windows, and
the others filled with wall tracery of diamonds and circles; then,
between this last and the battlemented parapet, occur five vertical
panels, each comprising two circles, the upper pierced for a window.

Above, soaring upward, rises the later crocketted spire. Herbert, the founder, provided the foundations
of tower, and probably carried up the walls to the level of the nave
roof; the rest of the tower was finished during the reign of Henry
I., and is a beautiful specimen of the work of that time; but here
again our sentiment and sympathy experience a shock when we learn
that the stonework was almost entirely refaced in 1856.

The tower was crowned by a wooden spire from 1297; this was blown down in 1361, and probably brought
away in its fall some part of the Norman turrets of the tower. It fell eastward, damaging the
presbytery so badly that the clerestory had to be rebuilt. The wooden spire was reconstructed
probably at the same time, though no record exists of such work, and the present Early Perpendicular
turrets were added. The spire, we know, was again overtaken by misfortune in 1463, when it
was struck by lightning, and again falling eastward, went through the presbytery roof. The
present spire was then constructed in stone by Bishop Lyhart (1446-72), and was finished by his
successor, Bishop Goldwell (1472-99), who added the battlements.

It will hardly be necessary to enlarge on the beauty of this spire
of Norwich, as the dominant feature, seen from the south-east, rising
above the curved sweep of the apse, and strongly buttressed by the
south transept, it stands up, clearly defined against the western
sky, and points upward, significant and symbolical at once of the
ends and aspirations of the church below.

#The Eastern Arm of Cathedral or Presbytery# takes its history from the tower. Here, as in the
nave, there are the original triforium windows blocked up, and a range of Perpendicular work
superimposed on the old. Above and beyond this, supported between each bay by flying buttresses,
comes the transitional Decorated to Perpendicular clerestory, considerably higher than the original
Norman clerestory remaining to the nave. At the base of each flying buttress are figures of
saints. The roof and Norman clerestory were damaged by the falling tower in 1361, but were
rebuilt by Bishop Percy, 1355-69. This work is transitional Decorated to Perpendicular. The presbytery
was then re-roofed with a framed timber construction, which was consumed by the falling of
the burning spire, struck by lightning in 1463. The present stone
vault was added in its place by Bishop Goldwell, 1472-99.

This necessitated the addition as well of flying buttresses to take the thrust of the vault.

The
battlementing to the presbytery also was added at the same time as the flying buttresses.

It will also be noted that here, as in the nave, an addition was made in the way of a range
of later "Perpendicular" windows superimposed over the original Norman triforium, which was
blocked up.

#The Chapel of St. Mary-the-Less#, marked B on plan, projects southward from the presbytery, and dates
from the fourteenth century.

Between this and the circular Norman chapel of St. Luke, was Bishop Wakeryng's chapel. It has
long since disappeared, but the doorway of Perpendicular design remained until about 1841,
when it was removed and the compartment Normanised--a piece of wanton vandalism and the destruction
of an historical link.

The circular Norman chapels, of which two remain, are very interesting.

In the original plan of the founder there were three; but the easternmost was superseded by
Early English structure, which in its turn was demolished.

#The Chapel of Saint Luke#, marked C on plan, flanking the south side of the apse, was much
restored in the sixties; in Britton's "Norwich," published in 1816, late "Decorated" windows are
shown; these were replaced by modern Norman. Its form is peculiar;
on plan, that of two circles interpenetrating.

On elevation, in the lower stage, are the modern Norman windows, with shafts in jambs, over
which occur two tiers of arcading, in the higher of which window openings are pierced. The
position of the Norman Lady Chapel is shown by dotted lines, as well as the rectangular shape
of the Early English chapel built by Walter de Suffield (1245-57) about 1250. The line of the
roof of the later chapel can still be seen plainly traced on the stonework over the arches which once
gave entrance to it. This later chapel was destroyed by Dean Gardiner in Queen Elizabeth's reign.
The foundations of both chapels have been laid open quite recently but a few feet under the level
of the garden.

#The Jesus Chapel#, marked D on plan, on the north side of the apse, retains the early "Perpendicular"
windows inserted in the Norman work; its other characteristics are as those described to St.
Luke's Chapel in the south.

On the north side of the presbytery, and to the west of the Jesus Chapel, were other chapels,
shown on the plan by dotted lines; the positions of their roofs are clearly marked yet on the
stonework. One must have been the #Reliquary Chapel#; the bridge chapel in the north aisle
of presbytery formed its ante-chapel.

#The North Transept#, and generally the north side of the cathedral, are more conveniently examined
from the gardens of the bishop's palace, whence this portion of the exterior of the cathedral
can best be seen.

The details of the fabric on the north side are essentially the same as those described to the
south side of cathedral; though here the work has been less restored, and consequently is
of more interest to the student. The original Norman chapel, now used as a store-house, projects
eastward from the north transept; a corresponding feature occurred in the south transept, but has
long since vanished.

#The Bishop's Palace# stands to the north of the cathedral, and was formerly connected with it
by a vaulted passage, Herbert, the founder, built the first palace, of which portions are
incorporated in the present building. Bishop Salmon (1299-1325) in 1318, according to the patent
rolls of the twelfth year of the reign of Edward II., obtained licence
to buy a piece of land 47 perches 4 feet in length, and 23 perches
12 feet in breadth, to enlarge and rebuild thereon the palace of Herbert.

He also built a chapel, and the great hall, measuring 120 feet from north to south, and 60 feet wide,
with kitchen, buttery, and offices at the west end. The grand ruin somewhat to the east of
the palace now is supposed to have formed part of the entrance to this hall. It was, however,
too large to keep up, and so was leased by Bishop Nykke, just before his death in 1535 to the
mayor, sheriff, and citizens, so that the Guild of S. George might hold their annual feast there.
Later on it became a meeting-house. The present private chapel of the bishop was built by Bishop
Reynolds in 1662 across part of the south end.

To the north of the nave of the cathedral, and on the west side of the palace, was an open area
called the green-yard, and in Sir Thomas Browne's "Works," vol. iv. p. 27 (London, 1835) is
an account of the combination sermons which were preached here in
the summer prior to the Reformation.

"Before the late times the combination sermons were preached, in the summer time, at the Cross
in the Green Yard where there was a good accommodation for the auditors. The mayor, aldermen,
with their wives and officers, had a well-contrived place built against the wall of the Bishop's
palace, covered with lead, so that they were not offended by rain. Upon the north side of the
church, places were built gallery wise, one above another, where the dean, prebends and their
wives, gentlemen, and the better sort, very well heard the sermon: the rest either stood or
sat in the green, upon long forms provided for them, paying a penny or half-penny a-piece, as
they did at S. Paul's Cross in London. The Bishop and chancellor heard the sermons at the
windows of the Bishop's palace: the pulpit had a large covering of
lead over it, and a cross upon it; and there were eight or ten stairs
of stone about it, upon which the hospital boys and others stood.

The preacher had his face to the south, and there was a painted board of a foot and a half broad
and about a yard and a half long hanging over his head, before, upon which were painted the
names of the benefactors towards the Combination Sermon which he particularly commemorated in
his prayer...."

On the north side of the cathedral, in the seventh compartment of the aisle from the west end,
the walled-up entrance to the green-yard is to be noticed.

There is no doubt that this space was originally the cemetery of the monks, and Harrod quotes from the
Chronicle of John de Whethamsted to that effect.

A stone coffin lid found here in 1848 goes to confirm this.

CHAPTER III

THE INTERIOR

Norwich Cathedral is justly celebrated for the beauty of its interior. Entering from the upper
close by the north aisle door, and then taking a position immediately under the great west window,
facing east, there is before one the long perspective of the Norman nave, the choir and presbytery,
while overhead comes the later vault, telling richly by contrast
with the severe plainness of the earlier work below.

The extreme length of the cathedral is about 407 feet. The nave, always long in Norman churches,
is here over 200 feet from the west door to the choir screen. Although some critics object to
the position of the organ on this same screen, there can be no doubt that, not only is it a most
admirable position for the instrument acoustically, but also that its presence here does not detract
from the general effect of the interior.

From the west end of the nave, as a dark silhouette against the eastern apsidal windows, or
as an object in the middle distance, it helps the spectator to realise the length of the cathedral.
A certain sense of mystery and something undiscerned adds to the
charm of an interior, and the organ here helps, with the screen, to
enshrine the eastern arm and most sacred portion of the building,
and interrupts the vista for the sake of which disastrous sacrifices
have been made in many of our cathedral churches.

#The Nave# consists of seven double bays; in all, fourteen compartments from the west end to
the tower crossing.

It will be noticed that, in the plan (page 113), a square of the nave, occupying longitudinally the
space of two bays of the aisles, is indicated by the dotted lines; also a main pier is marked as
Y and a subsidiary pier as z.

The main piers, as at Y, are large rectangular masses, having on the nave side a flat buttress-like
piece added, with shafts in the angles, and bearing on the face the two vaulting shafts. On
the aisle side are two shafts to each transverse arch; and on the
two lateral faces are triple shafts to the arcade arches, with four
angle shafts at each corner of the main pier, taking the outer rings
to same.

The plan is the same at the triforium level. The smaller or subsidiary piers (as at X) have
single vaulting shafts on the nave face, double ones to the aisle, and under the arcade arches
convex faces, with four angle shafts, as in main piers. The plan
of these piers determines the elevation. The nave arcade arches, ornamented
with the billet, and triforium with a chevron or zig-zag, are almost
equal in size, and over these lower stages comes the typical triple
Norman clerestory with walk; the whole covered in by the fine lierne
vault.

The vault has thirteen complete bays and two semi-bays, one
at either end. The junctions between this later vault and the Norman
work can be seen. The main piers had the original double shafts cut
off at the level of the top of the triforium arches, the later single
shaft being brought down and joined by a peculiar branch-like connection.
The original shafts to the subsidiary piers, which it is probable
took only a minor part in carrying the flat Norman wooden roof, were
finished by a cap at the impost level of the triforium, and the later
shaft was brought down and finished by the rebus of Bishop Lyhart,
the constructor of the vault. This rebus should be noticed; it is
a pun in stone, with its hart lying in water. It will also be noticed
that the outer arches of the triforium are not concentric with the
sub-arches.

The bases of the shafts have been Perpendicularised,
probably when the vault was added, and the Norman character of the
lateral shafts spoilt by scraping.

The building of the nave is usually
attributed to Bishop Eborard (1121-45), but some eminent archæologists
believe that the whole cathedral, nave and all, was built by Herbert,
1091-1119, the first bishop and founder.

The billet enrichment on
the main arches, and the chevron or zig-zag on those of the triforium,
have been looked upon as indicating that this part of the building--the
five western bays of nave--is later than the presbytery, the arches
there lacking this ornament.  There is yourself, for instance--"

"Nix!  I guess not!" interrupted the American.  "Of course, I know what you mean," he continued,
in a low tone; "the ship can't last much longer, and a good few of us are in for a cold swim;
but I guess I'll take my chance with the rest of the bathers."

The launching and the dispatch of the collapsibles was now proceeding with frantic haste, for
it was no longer possible to conceal the fact that the ship's minutes were numbered, while
there were still over a thousand people aboard.  But the discipline was perfect, the work was
going forward smoothly and with no more bustle than if the passengers were being landed upon
a wharf; and if it had not been for the horribly nervous condition of the foreigners all might
have been well.  But they were in just that state of "nerves" when, as the American had suggested,
the smallest scare would act upon them as a spark upon gunpowder; and the scare presently came,
in the form of a small explosion--which might have been nothing more than the accidental discharge
of a revolver somewhere down in the depths of the ship.  Whatever it may have been, it was
enough to turn the scale--to upset the state of delicate, unstable equilibrium prevailing,
and after a momentary glance around them, the foreigners, nearly three-hundred in number, set
up a yell of terror and hurled themselves in a body upon those who were at work upon the boats.

In a flash, Dick, the American, and half a dozen more were swept out through the temporary
gangway by the maddened crowd, and, before they fully realised what was happening, found themselves
floundering in the water alongside, while others came hurtling down on all sides.  Luckily
for himself, Dick went down straight--and consequently somewhat deep, and before his descent
was checked his presence of mind returned.  He pictured to himself exactly what was happening
above him, and struck out powerfully under water, so as to escape the shower of falling bodies
when he should reach the surface.

The water was bitterly cold, but Dick kept under as long as he could, swimming straight away
from the ship; and when at length he rose he saw with satisfaction that he was some ten yards
distant from her, and well clear of the struggling mass of men alongside, who were being added
to by dozens, even as he watched.

The next moment another head broke water alongside him, and as it did so a voice which Dick
instantly recognised ejaculated, amidst a fusillade of coughs and splutterings--

"B-r-r-ur!  It's colder'n charity!  Darn those Dagos, anyway!  It was cold enough up there
on the hurricane deck, but here--ugh!"

"You are right," returned Dick.  "It is cold, and no mistake.  I hope those fellows didn't
hurt you in their mad rush."

"Nary a hurt," replied Dick's companion.  "So it's you, young man, is it?  Good!  Say! although
it is so tarnation cold down here, I guess we're better off than the people up there on deck.
For now we'll have a chance to get clear of the ship before she sinks, if we hustle a bit.
See that star over there?  I guess we'd better make a bee line for it and swim for all we're
worth; then, if we're lucky we may escape being dragged down in the vortex; and perhaps we
may find a boat to hang on to until something comes along and picks us up."

Dick agreeing, the pair struck out strongly in the direction of the star.  But, as they swam,
their ears were assailed by a veritable pandemonium of sound aboard the sinking steamer--shouts,
yells, screams, and a regular fusillade of pistol shots, bearing eloquent evidence of the terrible
scenes that were enacting aboard her.

As the two swimmers proceeded the mingled sounds aboard the Everest seemed to swell rather
than diminish, to such an extent indeed that presently the American turned to Dick and gasped,
through chattering teeth--

"S-s-say! s-s-seems to m-me that there's a r-reg-ular pitched b-a-attle going on aboard there--ugh!
G-g-guess w-we're b-b-better off here th-th-than there--eh?"

"R-r-rather!" stammered Dick back, but he was suffering so intensely from the icy nip of the
water that he felt no disposition to talk, and simply pushed ahead for all he was worth, hoping
that by dint of violent exertion he might be able to conquer the numbing sensation that was
gradually clogging his movements.

For another ten minutes the pair pressed forward side by side.  Then suddenly Dick's companion
ceased his exertions, and, with a groan, turned over on his back.  He managed to stammer a
question whether there were any boats at hand; and upon Dick replying in the negative the American
gasped:

"Then I'm d-d-done.  C-cramp all over.  C-can't s-swim 'nother s-stroke. G-good-bye!"

"Good-bye be hanged!" shouted Dick, stirred to new life by his companion's extremity.  "Just
y-you lie as y-you are--I'll l-l-look after you."

And flinging himself on his back, Cavendish gripped the other man firmly by the collar, and,
kicking out vigorously, towed him along.  Some five minutes later the youngster became conscious
of a sudden and very decided fall in the temperature of the water, and looking about in search
of the cause, found himself within a few yards of a large cake of field ice.  There, at all
events, was a refuge of a sort--something that would serve the purpose of a raft, and with
a few vigorous strokes he was alongside it.  It was a great slab of field ice, its flat upper
surface not more than six inches above water; and after a tremendous struggle Dick not only
got upon the slab himself but also contrived to drag his companion up also.  Their combined
weight seemed to have very little effect upon the stability of the mass, merely depressing
the adjacent edge perhaps a couple of inches; and, this fact ascertained, Dick lost no time,
but set to work upon the body of the insensible American, pounding, rubbing, and rolling it
with such vigour that not only did he at length feel the chill departing from his own limbs
but also felt his companion stir and heard him groan.

"Feel better?" demanded Dick.  Then, without waiting for a reply, he added: "If you can only
manage to get to your feet and walk about a bit, we'll soon restore our circulation.  Let me
give you a lift."

"Wait," gasped the American.  "Breast pocket--br-r-randy flask.  Take nip and give me one."

The brandy flask was found, and after applying it to the lips of its owner, Dick took a mouthful
himself before replacing the top.  The effect of the spirit upon their chilled bodies was almost
miraculous, a wave of warmth surged through them, and presently the American was on his feet,
and, with Dick's arm linked in his, was staggering to and fro upon the surface of the ice.
As the stiffness and cramp worked out of their limbs they were able to increase their pace,
until within a few minutes they were trotting to and fro across the mass and feeling almost
warm once more.

Meanwhile, although the sounds of conflict and confusion aboard the Everest still floated to
the pair, horribly suggesting the awful scenes that were being enacted on her deck, the ship
herself had settled so deeply in the water that only the lights in the cabins of the promenade
deck and the clusters illuminating the boat deck now marked her whereabouts, and it soon became
apparent that the end was very near. As a matter of fact it was even nearer than the occupants
of the floe imagined, for as with one accord they paused to glance at the ship in response
to an exceptionally strident outburst of sound, they beheld the line of lights suddenly incline
from the horizontal, saw the slope grow steadily steeper, and then, as the great mass of the
vessel's stern hove up, an indistinct blur of deeper blackness on the darkness of the night,
the line of lights slid forward and vanished one after another until all had disappeared, while
at the same moment a heartrending wail from hundreds of throats pealed out across the water,
punctuated by a crackling volley of pistol shots.

"Gone!" ejaculated Dick's companion--and the ejaculation was almost a groan.  "The unsinkable
Everest, that triumph of human ingenuity which was finally to insure travellers against every
peril of the sea, is gone, sent to the bottom by a chunk of ice so small that, we may assume,
the look-outs never saw it until it was too late.  And with her she has taken, I suppose, the
best part of a thousand people--of whom you and I, my friend, might have been two, if those
tarnation cowardly Dagos had not knocked us overboard, for which I am obliged to them, although
I wasn't by a long chalk, a quarter of an hour ago.  Now I guess we're just as well off here
as those people are in the boats; better, maybe, for we can at least move about and keep ourselves
warm here, whereas-- say!  What's that?  See, over there!  Isn't it a rocket?"

As Dick looked in the direction toward which his companion pointed, he caught a momentary glimpse
of a sudden faint irradiation in the sky, followed by the appearance of a minute cluster of
tiny falling stars.

"Yes," he replied, "that's a rocket all right; and it means that the Bolivia or one of the
other ships is coming up, and is firing rockets to let us know that help is at hand.  But whatever
she is, she is a long way off yet, and probably will not arrive for the next half-hour at least.
So let me recommend another sprint or two across the ice just to keep the blood moving in our
veins."

"Correct again," returned the American, as they started off at a brisk walk.  "But--say!" he
continued, turning to Dick and extending his hand, "we've been so darned busy getting ourselves
warm that I haven't yet found time to thank you for saving my life.  But I'll do it now--"

"Saving your life?" ejaculated Dick.  "I don't think I understand."

"Oh yes, I guess you do," answered the American.  "Or, if you don't, I calculate I can easily
enlighten you.  You saved my life, young man, when you took me in tow out there and navigated
me to this desirable ice floe, and don't you forget it.  You may bet your bottom dollar that
I shall not, and there's my hand upon it, stranger.  Now, let me introduce myself.  I know
who you are all right; you're Mr Cavendish, late fifth officer of the unsinkable steamship
Everest, very recently gone to the bottom.  Isn't that right?"

Dick acknowledged the truth of his companion's statement, whereupon the latter resumed.

"Very good," he said.  "Now, I suppose you've never heard of Wilfrid Earle, of New York, the
man who undertook to hunt his way from Cairo to the Cape--"

"Oh! but of course I have," interrupted Dick.  "I've read about you in the papers--and, come
to think of it, I've seen your photograph also in the papers.  Somehow your face seemed familiar
when I noticed you a while ago on the boat deck--"

"Sure!" cut in the other.  "That's me--Wilfrid Earle, the eccentric New Yorker, all right,
all right.  Only arrived home from Cape Town little more than a fortnight ago, with a whole
caravan load of skins, horns, tusks, and so on; and now I guess they're about half a mile down,
in the hull of the Everest.  Gee!  Guess you're thinking me a heartless brute for talking so
lightly about the awful thing that's just happened; but, man, I've got to do it--or else go
clean crazy with thinking about it. Or, better still, not think about it at all, since thinking
about it won't mend matters the least little bit.  Say! what are all those little lights dotted
about over there?"

"Oh!" answered Dick, "they are the lights of the Everest's boats. Each boat was provided with
a lantern, in order that they might keep together, and be the more easily found when the rescuing
ships come up."

"Ah!" returned Earle.  "A very excellent arrangement.  But say! what about us?  We have no
lantern.  How are we going to make our whereabouts known?  Those boats are a good mile away, and--"

"I don't think we need worry very greatly about that," answered Dick. "Naturally, the Bolivia--or
whatever the coming craft may be--will pick up the people in the boats directly she arrives;
but she'll lower her own boats, too, and send them away to search the sea in the immediate
neighbourhood for people who may be floating about in lifebuoys or cork jackets.  There must
be quite a number of them at no great distance from us--though how long they are likely to
survive, drifting about in the ice-cold water, I should not like to say.  But I think we may
take it for granted that, once they have arrived, the rescuing ships will not quit the scene
of the disaster until they have made quite sure that they have got all the survivors.  They
will wait about until daylight comes, without a shadow of doubt."

"Good! it is comforting to hear you say that," returned Earle.  "You see, I don't know much
about the sea and sailor ways, and it occurred to me that those rescuing ships might take it
for granted that when they had recovered the people from the boats, they would have done all
that was possible--and quit.  Gee! but it's cold here on this ice.  Lucky that there's no wind,
or we should be frozen stiff in half an hour. We'll have another nip of brandy each; it'll
do us both good.  Lucky thing, too, that I had the sense to fill the flask and slip it into
my pocket when I knew what had happened to the ship.  I sort of foresaw some such experience
as this, and concluded that a drop of brandy might be a good thing to have about one's person."

They had their nip and felt all the better for it; but it was necessary for them to keep moving
briskly in order to combat the numbing chill of their wet clothes, and they resumed their pacing
to and fro across their narrow block of ice.

For a time their conversation was of a desultory and fragmentary character, for they were both
intently watching the progress of the approaching steamer, which continued to send up rockets
until the glow of the flames from her funnels became clearly visible.  Then the display of
rockets suddenly ceased, no doubt because--as Dick surmised--the lights of the boats had been
sighted by the eager look-outs aboard her. Then her mast-head light came into view, followed,
a little later, by her port and starboard side lights; and at length the dark, scarcely discernible
blotch that represented her hull lengthened out suddenly, revealing a long triple tier of brightly
gleaming ports; and a few seconds later the roar of steam escaping as her engines stopped,
reached the two watchers on the ice.

"Hurrah!" shouted Dick, "she is among the boats at last and doubtless picking them up.  Now
we must keep our ears open listening for the sound of oars, or hailing, for I'll bet that the
skipper will have had his boats swung out ready for lowering, and their crews standing by,
long ago."

But nearly half an hour elapsed before the welcome sound of oars working in rowlocks faintly
reached their ears, followed quickly by the shrill note of an officer's whistle.

"At last!" breathed Dick, in tones of profound relief.  "Now is our chance, Mr Earle.  We will
shout together: `Boat ahoy!'  Take the time from me.  Now--one, two, three, Boat ahoy-y-oy!"

The long drawn out "ahoy" had scarcely died on their lips before it was answered by an equally
long blast from the whistle, to which they responded by repeating the hail at brief intervals,
each answering blast of the whistle telling them that the boat was drawing nearer, until at
length the faint loom of the boat showed in the darkness, and a lantern was suddenly held high
above a man's head.  Then they heard a voice exclaim:

"There they are, sir--two of 'em--on that block of ice!"  And a minute later they were being
carefully helped into the stern sheets of the boat, which was already floating deep with a
load of motionless forms enwrapped in cork jackets.  Whether they were living or dead it was
impossible just then to say.

"Any more on the ice?" demanded the officer in charge of the boat. Then, following Dick's reply
in the negative, he continued: "Right! shove off, bow! pull port!  Give way all!  Now it's
us for the ship. Put your backs into it, lads.  A minute or two may make all the difference
between life and death for some of these poor chaps that we've fished up.  Here, have a sip
of brandy, you two.  You must be frozen pretty nearly stiff."

"No brandy, thanks--unless my friend here--Mr Cavendish, fifth officer of the Everest--would
care to have another nip.  But we've already had some--filled a flask and slipped it into my
pocket when I realised that the ship was going to sink--and I guess it saved our lives."

Upon Dick also declining "another nip" the officer in charge held out his hand.

"Glad to make your acquaintance, Mr Cavendish, and to have picked you up.  My name is Urquhart--`chief'
of the Bolivia.  By the way, since we got your S.O.S. and learned particulars of the smash-up,
we've all been wondering how the mischief you managed to pile up your ship on a berg, after
our warning of this afternoon.  Was it thick at the time, or--how was it?"

"Your warning!" exclaimed Dick.  "Did you warn us, then?  If so, it is the first that I've
heard of it."

"Oh! we warned you all right," answered Urquhart, "and got your acceptance of the message."

"The dickens!" ejaculated Dick.  "That's very queer.  Nobody said a word to me of any warning
having been received.  Yet--no, I cannot understand it.  Mr Brown, our `chief,' you know, and
some seven or eight more were down in the ward-room when we hit the berg, and he seemed as
much astonished as any of us.  If he had heard anything about it, I think he would certainly
have passed the word round, but--he didn't."

"Ah!" remarked the Bolivia's chief, with deep meaning.  "Were you by any chance trying to break
the record?"

"Well," answered Dick, "I believe the skipper had some such idea in his mind.  You see we've
had the most perfect weather all the way; little or no wind, and water like glass; the ship
reeling off her twenty-six-and-a-half knots as steadily as clockwork, and everything going
beautifully.  I certainly did get a hint that Captain Prowse would like to set up a new record--"

"Exactly!" concurred Urquhart, dryly.  "That, to my mind, explains everything.  Your skipper
got our warning--and simply suppressed it.  He was out after a new record, and was willing
to `take a chance,' as the Americans say.  And here is the result--a brand-new ship gone to
the bottom, and, I suppose, hundreds of lives lost.  How many did you muster, all told?"

"I couldn't say, exactly," answered Dick, "but probably not far short of three thousand."

"Yes; there you are!" commented Urquhart.  "Three thousand; and boats for only about half of
'em.  What became of your skipper?  Went down with his ship, I expect."

"I'm afraid so," answered Dick.  "In fact, I should not be very greatly surprised if it should
prove that I am the only surviving officer."

"That so?  And how did you manage to escape?" demanded Urquhart.

Whereupon Dick launched forth into the full story of the disaster.  But before he had nearly
finished, the boat arrived alongside the Bolivia, and her freight, whether living or dead,
was quickly passed up on deck to the waiting doctor, who quickly distributed the units here
and there about the ship, while the boat departed upon a further quest.

Dick and Earle, being both very little the worse for their adventure, were first taken below
and given a hot bath; then they were led to a vacant passenger cabin, packed in hot blankets,
and given a certain nauseous draught which quickly threw them into a profuse perspiration and
a deep sleep, from which they emerged, some hours later, not a penny the worse for their adventure.

CHAPTER THREE.

EARLE'S PROPOSITION TO DICK CAVENDISH.

It was the rays of the newly risen sun shining in through the open port that awakened Dick
Cavendish on the morning following his great adventure.  He was occupying the upper bunk in
the cabin, and the first sound to greet his ears was the deep, regular breathing of the still
sleeping Earle in the bunk beneath.  Dick, being a sailor, awoke with all his senses completely
about him; the occurrences of the previous night came back to his memory in a flash, and even
before he opened his eyes he was fully aware that he was in the top berth of one of the Bolivia's
cabins, and that it was the companion of his adventure who was in the bunk beneath him.

The next thing of which he was aware was the perfect stillness of the ship, the complete absence
of that peculiar tremor due to the throb of the engines and the beat of the propellers when
a ship is under way; and the thought that the Bolivia was still "standing by" caused him to
open his eyes, rise up in his bunk, and peer through the open port at his elbow.  The picture
which then presented itself to his gaze was that of a brilliant morning, with a sky of turquoise
blue faintly streaked here and there with the merest suggestion of a few mares' tails, a sea
of sapphire blue wrinkling and sparkling under the softest imaginable breathing of a westerly
air of wind, the horizon obscured by a thin veil of haze that seemed to be already melting
in the warmth of the sun, a great two-funnelled steamer lying motionless about a mile away,
with a film of smoke issuing from her funnels and "feathers" of steam trembling at the top
of her waste pipes, a whole flotilla of boats pulling slowly and apparently aimlessly hither
and thither, and a few masses of ice of varying dimensions, from small fragments of a square
foot in area to a great berg fully sixty feet high, thinly dotting the surface of the sea.

Presently there came to Dick's ear the sound of a quietly spoken order out on deck, followed
by a subdued stir, accompanied by certain sounds which the youngster's experience told him
was the prelude to the matutinal rite of scrubbing the decks, succeeded a few minutes later
by the gush and splash of water and the sound of scrubbing brushes vigorously applied.  Then
the cabin door opened, and a steward entered bearing on a tray two cups of steaming coffee
and a plate of buttered biscuits.

"Mornin', sir--mornin', gen'lemen both," remarked this functionary as a stir in the bottom
berth announced that his entry had awakened its occupant.  "Hope you've both slep' well and
ain't feelin' none the worse for last night's happenin's."

"Good morning, steward," answered Dick.  "Thank you.  Answering for myself, I slept like a
top, and am feeling A1 this morning.  I see that we have not moved during the night, and that
the boats are still out. What ship is that out there on our port beam?"

"That's the Platonic, sir.  Arrived 'bout three hours ago.  And the Cotopaxi--belongin' to
your own company--and the Nigerian, they're lyin' about half a mile off to starboard of us.
They comed up pretty near together, 'bout two hours ago, and all of 'em lowered their boats
straight away.  Don't know exactly what luck they've had.  They've picked up a good many, I
b'lieve, but I'm afraid very few of em'll be alive after floatin' about so many hours in the
cold.  Clothes genle'men?  Yes, certainly.  They're in the dryin' room.  I dessay they're quite
dry by this time.  I'll fetch 'em for ye in a brace of shakes."

"How are the others getting on, steward?" demanded Earle.  "You picked up everybody from the
boats, I suppose?  What with them and your regular passengers, the ship must be like a rabbit
warren!"

"So she is, sir," grinned the steward.  "They're scattered about all over her.  We make up
shake-downs for 'em wherever we could find a blessed inch of space.  They're in the smoke-room,
the ladies' boodwor, the lib'ry, the drorin'-room, dinin' saloon, the officers' quarters, and--why,
some of the men is even down in the stokeholds.  Oh yes, we took 'em all aboard, of course.
But I expect we shall thin 'em out a good bit presently.  Ye see they was all bound for Noo
York, and the Platonic and Nigerian are both goin' there, so I expect they'll take the bulk
of 'em between 'em.  And if there's any as wants to go back home, the Cotopaxi and us'll take
'em.  I haven't heard how they're feelin' after their spell in the boats, but I reckon they're
all right. That wasn't no very great hardship for 'em, exceptin' for the kiddies. They was
a bit frightened, naterally.  And now, if you'll excuse me, gen'lemen, I'll go and get your
clothes, for there'll be a lot to do presen'ly."

There was.  For after the entire area of the surrounding sea had been carefully swept by the
boats until it was ascertained that no more living or dead were to be found, there came the
task of providing breakfast for everybody, in itself a task of no small magnitude under the
circumstances.  And while the meal was in progress, the officers of the Bolivia were going
round among the rescued people, carefully noting the names of the survivors for transmission
to England and America by wireless.  Then followed the gruesome task of identifying such of
the dead as had been found; after which came the separation of those who wished to go on to
New York from those who wished to return to England, this in turn being followed by the trans-shipment
of the rescued in accordance with the arrangement come to by a council composed of the captains
of the rescuing ships.

As for Dick, it scarcely needed the interview which he had with Captain Wilson, of the Cotopaxi,
to decide him to return to England in that ship.  It was, indeed, the only thing for him to
do; he had no business in New York; while, on the other hand, there would, of course, be a
judicial inquiry into the circumstances connected with the loss of the Everest, at which his
presence, as the sole surviving officer of the ship, would be imperatively required.  He communicated
his decision to Earle immediately that the question was raised, and was surprised, and not
a little pleased, when the American announced his intention to also return to England.

"You see," the latter explained, "my only, or at least my principal, reason for going to New
York fizzled out when the Everest took my collection of hunting trophies with her to the bottom
of the Atlantic. If I went on to New York there would be nothing for me to do, while I have
a scheme in my head that can be worked out in Europe as well as, or better than, in New York.
Besides, to be quite frank with you, Cavendish, I've taken a very strong liking for you altogether,
apart from the fact that you saved my life, and I guess I don't want to lose sight of you.
And I'll tell you why.  If this scheme of mine--which I have had in my mind for a long time--should
eventuate, as I guess it will, I shall want you to take a hand in it.  You are exactly the
sort of young fellow that I have been looking for, and I guess I can make it quite worth your
while to chip in with me.  But I won't say any more about it just now--there will be plenty
of time to talk matters over later on.  Now let us go ahead and get aboard the Cotopaxi."

It was well on toward noon of that day before all the arrangements made were completed, and
the several ships proceeded towards their respective destinations.  But long before that the
wireless operators had been busily engaged in transmitting the intelligence of the disaster
to the two hemispheres; and by the time that the ships were dipping their ensigns to each other
in farewell the newsboys of Europe and America were charging through the streets of hundreds
of cities and towns, yelling in a dozen different languages, "Spechul edition!  Wreck of the
Everest!  Fearful loss of life!  Full partic'lars and list of the saved!  Spechul!"

It was not until the Fastnet lighthouse showed above the horizon on the Cotopaxi's port bow
that Earle reverted to the topic of his "scheme," although there had been ample opportunity
for him to do so during the eastward run, he having privately so arranged matters with the
purser that he and Cavendish were berthed in the same cabin during the voyage. But for reasons
best known to himself he had devoted the opportunity thus afforded him to elicit as much as
he possibly could of Dick's previous history; and Dick, open and candid as the day, and with
nothing to conceal, had told a great deal more than perhaps some people would have considered
quite prudent; so that when the Fastnet hove in sight, Earle knew practically all that there
was to know about Dick, including even the fact that the latter had a sister, who, Earle gathered,
from a number of cursory and incidental remarks, must be a girl very well worth knowing.

On this particular morning, however, when, after breakfast, the pair snugly ensconced themselves
in a couple of deck chairs on the boat deck, which just then happened to be clear of other
occupants than themselves, Earle suddenly broke ground with:

"Say!  Cavendish, have you ever heard of the city of Manoa?"

"The City of Manoa!" repeated Dick.  "Is she a steamer, or a sailing ship?  I know the City
of Paris, of course, and the--"

"No, no," interrupted Earle with a laugh.  "Can't you get ships out of your head anyway?  I'm
not talking now about a ship, but about a genuine sure-'nough city, the Golden City of Manoa,
to be precise.  Ever heard of it?"

"Can't say I have," returned Dick, "excepting, of course, the fabled city of that name, supposed
to be ruled over by a certain El Dorado, who was so enormously rich that he used to gild himself--"

"Exactly," agreed Earle.  "That's the guy.  And it is his city that I am trying to talk to
you about.  You--in common with almost everybody else--speak of it as the `fabled' city, because,
although it has been much talked about and eagerly sought, the fact that it was actually found
has never been conclusively demonstrated.  The story of its existence originated of course
with those old Spanish conquistadors who, under that king of freebooters, Pizarro, conquered
the Incas, and thereby amassed incalculable wealth.  You have, of course, heard the story of
his treacherous capture of the Inca Atahualpa, and of how the latter, having noticed the Spaniard's
greed of gold, offered to ransom himself by filling with gold to as high as a man could reach,
the room in which he was confined.  That offer it was that seems to have fully opened the eyes
of Pizarro and his followers to the enormous potential wealth of the country; and when, through
their treacherous murder of Atahualpa, they had to a considerable extent cut off from themselves
the supply of further enormous contributions, they naturally began to hunt about for the source
of the wealth that had already fallen into their hands.

"It was through the inquiries thus instituted that the story of El Dorado and his golden city
first came to their ears.  They were told that far away in the north there lived a people called
the Chibchas, a people as civilised as, and far more wealthy than, the Incas.  They were given
to understand that the Chibcha country abounded not only in gold but also in gems, especially
emeralds, and in illustration of the bounteousness of this wealth certain customs of the Chibchas
were described.  The particular custom which gave rise to the legend of El Dorado was that
which was observed on the occasion of the accession of a new monarch to the throne; and it
was carried out somewhat after this fashion:--

"The proceedings began with elaborate religious ceremonies, including a long and rigorous fast,
which was observed by the entire nation.  This period of penance over, the inhabitants proceeded
to the shores of Lake Guatabita, where, upon the day arranged for his coronation, the new ruler
was brought forth from his place of penance, and, escorted by the priests, was led down through
the assembled multitude to the margin of the lake, where the priests first smeared his body
from head to foot with a certain sticky kind of earth, powdered him all over with gold dust,
and then dressed him in his coronation robes, which were stiff with golden decorations and
gems.  This done, the new monarch entered a vessel loaded with costly ornaments of gold, emeralds,
and other precious stones, where he was received by the four most important caciques, who were
also clad in their most gorgeous dress, and the craft was forthwith rowed out toward the middle
of the lake.  Arrived here, the freight of gold and precious stones was solemnly thrown overboard
as an offering to the gods who were supposed to inhabit the depths of the lake, the people
ashore meanwhile celebrating the sacrifice by dancing to the accompaniment of musical instruments
until the monarch returned to the shore.

"Guatabita was a sacred lake, and was the recognised receptacle for votive offerings of enormous
value upon every possible occasion, and it must therefore at this day contain wealth beyond
the dreams of avarice, several attempts to secure which have already been made; and it was
on the shore of this lake that the golden city of Manoa was at first supposed to be situated.

"Of course, we know now that such was not the case, for the lake has been often visited, and
no traces of the city have been found; but Guatabita was the original objective of the seekers
of El Dorado.

"When at length it was conclusively demonstrated that Manoa was not situated upon the shore
of Lake Guatabita, its existence began to be doubted for a while; but the belief, and the desire
to discover it, were revived somewhere about the middle of the 16th century by a circumstantial
story related by one Martinez, a lieutenant of Diego de Ordaz, who declared that, having been
shipwrecked, he was taken inland to the city--which he called Omoa--and there entertained in
regal fashion by El Dorado himself.  So circumstantial and full of gorgeous detail was his
story, that his chief Ordaz himself undertook the quest; but the search resulted only in disappointment,
as did that of many others, including your own Sir Walter Raleigh.

"Now, the mistake made by all those people was, to my mind, that they did not look for Manoa
in the right place.  Their very eagerness misled them.  So hungry were they for wealth that
any old story was good enough to start them off upon a wild goose chase.  I am not hungry for
wealth; I have more of it than, with my moderate desires, I know what to do with.  I am not
a multi-millionaire, but I have quite enough to enable me to gratify all my cravings, of which
the predominant ones are exploration and hunting.  I also have a hankering to ferret out secrets;
and the secret, which has haunted me for years is that connected with the city of Manoa.  Did
or did it not exist?  That is what I want to find out.  For years I have been digging and delving
after every scrap of information that I could possibly get track of upon the subject; and you
would be surprised if you could see what a mass I have accumulated. But it was not until about
a fortnight ago that, in your British Museum, I unearthed a certain manuscript which furnished
me with the one definite and decisive clue I wanted.  I won't bore you with details, but will
just mention that with the help of this clue I have been able to worry out the situation of
the much sought city within a hundred miles or so; and I have come to the definite conclusion
that it lies within the territory of Peru, on the eastern slope of the Andes.  And, having
told you that much, I suppose you will not be greatly surprised to learn that I have determined
to seek for it; for by so doing I shall be able at one and the same time to gratify my state
for exploration and my love of hunting.

"You will remember, perhaps, that on the morning when we were picked up by the Bolivia, I told
you that I had a certain scheme in my head. Well, that's the scheme.  You will also probably
remember that I said, if the scheme should eventuate I should want you to take a hand in it.
The scheme is going to eventuate--I've taken time to think it over and make up my mind--and
the question now is: Will you take a hand in it? Stop a bit, I don't want you to answer off-hand.
Let me just tell you the nature of my proposition first.

"There will be plenty of danger attaching to the expedition, and that is one reason why I want
you to become a member of it, because I noted your behaviour aboard the Everest while she was
sinking.  I had my eye upon you for some time before you became aware of my existence, and
I could not avoid being impressed by the coolness and firmness which you displayed at a moment
when those two qualities were essential to prevent the breaking out of a desperate and disastrous
panic.  Then you saved my life; and I confess to being a bit superstitious on that point. 
I have the conviction that the individual who has saved one's life is a good friend to have,
and likely to bring one luck.  Finally, what I have seen of you since has caused me to conceive
a strong admiration of and liking for you--three good reasons, I think, for my desire that
you should become a member of my party.

"Now, as to the terms which I am prepared to offer you.  I shall, of course, defray all the
costs of the expedition, including outfit, so that you will not be put to a cent of expense.
And I will enter into a contract with you, engaging you for a definite period of three years,
even though the expedition should, not last for so long as that; while, should it last longer,
you will be paid full salary for the whole of the time.  And I will pay you at the rate of
one hundred and fifty dollars-- or thirty British pounds, if you prefer it--per month, arranging
with my bankers to pay in that sum every month for three years, to any bank in the United States
or England that you choose to name.  Now, my friend, what do you say?  Will you come?"

"Do you require an answer at once?" demanded Dick.

"No, I don't," answered Earle.  "Take time to think it over, if you like, between now and our
arrival at Liverpool."

"Yes," said Dick.  "I should like a few hours to consider the matter. For, you see, your proposal
has come upon me quite unexpectedly; and it involves a break of something like three years
in my career as a sailor, which may make it a bit difficult for me to take up the life again
just where I lay it down.  And, quite apart from that, there is the matter of the inquiry into
the loss of the Everest.  That may not come on for some time, and when it does it may be a
lengthy affair.  That would probably mean some months of delay; while, of course, you will
be anxious to start at once, now that you have made up your mind to go."

"No," answered Earle.  "I am in no hurry at all; on the contrary, two or three months of delay
would be welcome rather than otherwise to me, because it would afford me time to extend my
investigations a bit, with the possibility of securing further and still more definite clues."

"Then, in that case," said Dick, "I will give your proposal my most careful consideration,
and let you have a definite reply before we land."

And so the matter was left, for the moment.  But the proposal appealed very strongly to Dick
for a variety of reasons, the chief of which was that his acceptance of it would enable him
to provide for his sister Grace for at least three years.  The flavour of adventure attached
to the enterprise also powerfully appealed to him, for adventure was the very breath of life
to him; and as for the rest--well, like all adventurous spirits, he was disposed to let the
future take care of itself.  Therefore, he did not wait for the arrival of the Cotopaxi at
Liverpool, but, having thought the matter carefully over, informed Earle, on the evening of
the same day, that he gratefully and gladly accepted his proposal.

The following day saw the arrival of the Cotopaxi at Liverpool, and as, of course, it had been
known for several days beforehand that certain survivors from the Everest were on board her,
and as, thanks to frequent wireless communications with her, the time of her arrival was known
almost to a minute, and had been made public, the landing stage was packed with people when
the ship drew alongside, most of them, it is true, animated by nothing more than mere morbid
curiosity to gaze upon those who had recently passed through a very terrible experience, but
among them were a few who had come down to welcome back to life the relatives or friends who
had escaped.  And among these were Mr James McGregor, the manager of the Mount S.S. Company;
and with him, Grace Cavendish, the purpose of the latter being, of course, to welcome her brother,
while Mr Mcgregor's business was to see that Dick did not prematurely fall into the hands of
the reporters.  Dick and Earle, being both destitute of baggage, were among the first to cross
the gang plank, landing together; and thus it came about that Earle naturally saw Grace Cavendish,
and was introduced to her, with results that may hereafter be disclosed.  And it is significant
that whereas Earle's original intention had been to proceed direct to London he now somewhat
surprised Dick by informing him that he intended to take up his abode in the Adelphi Hotel,
Liverpool, for the present.

The events of the ensuing two months, during which period the judicial inquiry into the loss
of the Everest was prepared for and carried out, have very little to do with this story, and
they may, therefore, be dismissed in a few words.  It was, of course, only natural that Mr
McGregor, in his capacity of manager to the company owning the lost liner, should have frequent
and long interviews with Dick and Earle, for the purpose of eliciting information upon various
points connected with the disaster, as they were raised by the company's counsel, and those
interviews soon resulted in the development of a strong mutual friendship between the trio,
in consequence of which Dick and Earle became frequent visitors at the manager's house overlooking
Prince's Park.  And, quite as naturally, it soon came about that Dick informed Mr McGregor
of Earle's proposal, and invited the manager's opinion as to the effect which his acceptance
of it would have upon his future prospects.  The result was that, after the three had fully
talked the matter over together, the manager came to the conclusion that not only was the proposal
much too advantageous for Dick to refuse, but that his acceptance of it would not very materially
affect his maritime career, should he determine to resume it upon the termination of the adventure,
ending up with the assurance that Dick might always count upon his (the manager's) influence
and help.

For the rest, Dick arranged with Earle that the former's salary should be paid in monthly to
Grace's credit, in a Liverpool bank, so that his sister might be effectively protected against
any unforeseen reverse of fortune; while Grace made it clear that she was so happy in her present
position that she would continue in it so long as the Mcgregors had any need of her; thus,
when at length the inquiry was over and Dick was once more free, he was able to bid his sister
farewell with the pleasant consciousness that her future was as secure as human foresight could
make it.

The first week of August witnessed the arrival of Dick and Earle in New York, where the pair
took up their abode in the latter's comfortable home in Fifth Avenue during the progress of
their preparations for the great adventure.  The precise nature of these preparations need
not be revealed at this point of the story, since the details will appear as the narrative
proceeds; the only fact that need now be mentioned being that, after long and anxious consideration
of the question, Earle had finally determined that the starting point of the expedition should
be the junction of the river Tecuachy with the Javari, a tributary of the Amazon, to which
point he and Dick would proceed in the former's steam yacht Mohawk, a comfortable little craft
of two hundred and fifty tons register.  At this point, on the left, or northern, bank of the
tributary, stands, on Peruvian soil, a small town called Conceicao, and abreast of this town
the Mohawk came to an anchor about mid-afternoon of a certain day in the month of November,
not so very many years ago.

At the moment when the yacht came to an anchor, her deck was encumbered with two long canoe-shaped
craft, each measuring six feet beam by thirty feet in length.  They were practically flat-bottomed,
to ensure light draught, and were built in sections, to provide the maximum of portability,
which quality was further ensured by the fact that the material of which they were constructed
was an amalgam largely composed of aluminium.  They were completely decked from stem to stern
with a light covering of the same material, rendering them absolutely watertight; but by an
ingenious arrangement of wing nuts these decks could be removed in a few minutes; while, by
a similar arrangement, the hulls could almost as quickly be taken apart. 

At first surface bad, but gradually improving. We had two short spells and set up temporary
camp to feed ourselves and ponies at 3.20. Started again at 5 and marched till 7. In all covered
9 miles. Surface seemed to have improved during the last part of the march till just before camping
time, when Bowers, who was leading, plunged into soft snow. Several of the others following
close on his heels shared his fate, and soon three ponies were plunging and struggling in a
drift. Garrard's pony, which has very broad feet, found hard stuff beyond and then my pony
got round. Forde and Keohane led round on comparatively hard ground well to the right, and
the entangled ponies were unharnessed and led round from patch to patch till firmer ground was
reached. Then we camped and the remaining loads were brought in. Then came the triumph of the
snow-shoe again. We put a set on Bowers' big pony--at first he walked awkwardly (for a few minutes
only) then he settled down, was harnessed to his load, brought that in and another also--all
over places into which he had been plunging.

If we had more of these shoes we could certainly put them on seven out of eight of our ponies--and
after a little I think on the eighth, Oates' pony, as certainly the ponies so shod would draw their
loads over the soft snow patches without any difficulty. It is trying to feel that so great
a help to our work has been left behind at the station.

Impressions

It is pathetic to see the ponies floundering in the soft patches. The first sink is a shock to
them and seems to brace them to action. Thus they generally try to rush through when they feel themselves
sticking.

If the patch is small they land snorting and agitated on the harder surface with much effort. And
if the patch is extensive they plunge on gamely until exhausted. Most of them after a bit plunge
forward with both forefeet together, making a series of jumps and bringing the sledge behind
them with jerks. This is, of course, terribly tiring for them. Now and again they have to stop,
and it is horrid to see them half engulfed in the snow, panting and heaving from the strain. Now
and again one falls and lies trembling and temporarily exhausted. It must be terribly trying for
them, but it is wonderful to see how soon they recover their strength. The quiet, lazy ponies
have a much better time than the eager ones when such troubles arise.

The soft snow which gave the trouble is evidently in the hollow of one of the big waves that
continue through the pressure ridges at Cape Crozier towards the Bluff. There are probably more
of these waves, though we crossed several during the last part of the march--so far it seems
that the soft parts are in patches only and do not extend the whole length of the hollow. Our course
is to pick a way with the sure-footed beasts and keep the others back till the road has been
tested.

What extraordinary uncertainties this work exhibits! Every
day some new fact comes to light--some new obstacle which threatens
the gravest obstruction. I suppose this is the reason which makes
the game so well worth playing.

Impressions

The more I think of
our sledging outfit the more certain I am that we have arrived at
something near a perfect equipment for civilised man under such conditions.


By that time the fitting and equipment of the double canoe had been completed and she was ready
for an immediate start; as soon, therefore, as the new hands had been paid three months' wages
in advance, which they entrusted to the inspector to transmit to their relatives, and as soon
also as the inspector had been paid a certain sum as head money for his services in finding
the men, the whole party quitted the yacht and got under way, heading across the river for
the mouth of the Tecuachy, before entering which they saw the Mohawk heave up her anchor and
start upon her return journey to New York.

CHAPTER FOUR.

THE QUEST BEGINS.

The expedition consisted of fifteen persons all told, namely, Wilfrid Earle, the chief and
leader; Dick Cavendish, his lieutenant; Peter, Earle's negro cook and a chef of surpassing
skill, capable of concocting appetising dishes out of the most meagre and unpromising materials;
and the twelve recruits from Conceicao, one of whom, named Inaguy, at once the most masterful
and intelligent of them, Earle immediately appointed headman of the gang, with a small increase
of pay, at the same time making him responsible for the good behaviour of those under him.

There was a fresh easterly breeze blowing when the double canoe--or raft, as they agreed to
term her--cast off from alongside the Mohawk, and under its influence the craft, with one leeboard
down, slid across the Javari at a speed that was as surprising as it was gratifying.  And when
at length she slid in between the low, forest-clad banks of the Tecuachy, the breeze was still
fair for her, although the closer proximity of the shores to each other caused it to come at
times in baffling flaws.  Dick, as the sailor of the party, was naturally in command, and when
at length the sunlight vanished from the tree-tops on the eastern shore of the stream, giving
warning of the near approach of night, he ran the raft into a convenient bight on the lee shore--that
the mosquitoes might not come off to them against the wind during the night--and came to an
anchor in the midst of what seemed to be an unpeopled wilderness. 

I have felt sure he will find this too little.

The ponies are doing excellently. Their loads run up to 800 and 900 lbs. and they make very light
of them. Oates said he could have gone on for some time to-night.

Saturday, January 28.--Camp 2. The ponies went back for the last load at Camp 1, and I walked
south to find a way round the great pressure ridge. The sea ice south is covered with confused irregular
sastrugi well remembered from Discovery days. The pressure ridge is new. The broken ice of the ridge
ended east of the spot I approached and the pressure was seen only in a huge domed wave, the hollow
of which on my left was surrounded with a countless number of seals--these lay about sleeping
or apparently gambolling in the shallow water. I imagine the old ice in this hollow has gone well
under and that the seals have a pool above it which may be warmer on such a bright day.

It was evident that the ponies could be brought round by this route, and I returned to camp
to hear that one of the ponies (Keohane's) had gone lame. The Soldier took a gloomy view of
the situation, but he is not an optimist. It looks as though a tendon had been strained, but
it is not at all certain. Bowers' pony is also weak in the forelegs, but we knew this before: it
is only a question of how long he will last. The pity is that he is an excellently strong pony otherwise.
Atkinson has a bad heel and laid up all day--his pony was tied behind another sledge, and went
well, a very hopeful sign.

In the afternoon I led the ponies out 2 3/4 miles south to the crossing of the pressure ridge,
then east 1 1/4 till we struck the barrier edge and ascended it. Going about 1/2 mile in we dumped
the loads--the ponies sank deep just before the loads were dropped, but it looked as though the
softness was due to some rise in the surface.
We saw a dark object a quarter of a mile north as we reached the
Barrier. I walked over and found it to be the tops of two tents more
than half buried--Shackleton's tents we suppose. A moulting Emperor
penguin was sleeping between them. The canvas on one tent seemed intact,
but half stripped from the other.

The ponies pulled splendidly to-day,
as also the dogs, but we have decided to load both lightly from now
on, to march them easily, and to keep as much life as possible in
them. There is much to be learnt as to their powers of performance.

Keohane
says 'Come on, lad, you'll be getting to the Pole' by way of cheering
his animal--all the party is cheerful, there never were a better set
of people.

Immediately after coming to an anchor for the night Earle had drawn forth from among the many
bales and packages that were stowed on the deck of the raft a long bundle, which, upon being
cast loose, resolved itself into the constituents of a double-skinned tent, the inner skin
being made of loosely woven cotton canvas, while the outer skin--with six inches of air space
between it and the inner--was made of light but thoroughly waterproof material, warranted by
its maker to withstand even the assault of a tropical deluge.  This tent the two white men
quickly set up on the deck of the raft, between the two masts, when it was seen to be roomy
enough to accommodate two camp beds with a table of convenient size between them, high enough
for even Dick to stand upright in it, and with sufficient space between the table and the entrance
to accommodate two deck chairs.  When the beds were made up on the folding pallets, a lighted
hurricane lamp suspended from the ridge pole of the tent, and the table laid for dinner, the
interior presented an eminently cosy and comfortable appearance, and its two occupants sat
down to the meal provided for them by the inestimable Peter with excellent appetites.

But they did not linger long over the pleasures of the table, for there was still work to be
done before they could conscientiously seek the beds that wooed them, that work consisting
in the unpacking of their weapons and ammunition, and making the former ready for instant service.
This task they undertook immediately after dinner, sitting side by side just within the entrance
of the tent.

Earle had been, according to Dick's notion, lavishly extravagant in the provision of firearms
for the expedition, the total armoury amounting to no less than twenty-one weapons; namely,
three Westley-Richards five-shot .318 repeating rifles; three Remington U.M.C. five-shot 35
repeating rifles, firing soft-nosed bullets; two 12A Standard U.M.C. fifteen-shot .22 repeating
rifles--the last five being especially intended for big game and fighting; three Westley-Richards
double-barrel 12-gauge smooth-bores; two Smith hammerless 10-gauged ditto; two Remington U.M.C.
12-gauge six-shot repeating smooth-bores; and six Colt Government model seven-shot .45 calibre
automatic pistols.  But, as Earle explained, "when you go exploring and hunting, you need a
variety of weapons for different purposes; and there is also the contingency of possible loss
to be considered; moreover, in a fight, with tremendously heavy odds against you, a strong
battery of weapons rapidly used, will often put the enemy to flight before he has time to get
to close quarters."

The two friends were busily engaged in unpacking, setting up and loading their weapons, chatting
animatedly together meanwhile, and pausing from time to time to gaze contemplatively into the
velvet darkness which represented the forest-clad nearer bank of the river before them, when
suddenly Dick caught sight of what looked like two small greenish-yellow lamps close together
that had suddenly revealed themselves in the blackness.  They were quite motionless, and the
lad scarcely knew what to make of them.

"Look, Earle," he murmured.  "Do you see those two small lights over there?  What can they
be, I wonder?"

Earle, who was intent upon his work, looked up.

"Lights!" he exclaimed.  "Where?  Oh, yes, I see.  They are not lights, my unsophisticated
youth, they are the eyes of an animal--a carnivorous animal, I judge, by the look of them--which
has come down to the river to drink, and is doubtless wondering who and what the dickens we are."

He glanced eagerly about him for a moment, then pointed to one of the weapons which Dick had
already put together and loaded.

"Just hand me that Remington U.M.C. rifle, old chap--it is loaded, isn't it?  Good!  This will
be a capital chance to try it."

The eyes were still plainly visible, apparently staring steadily at the lamp-lit entrance of
the tent and the two figures seated therein. Without rising from his seat, Earle slowly lifted
the rifle to his shoulder, and the next instant the whip-like report of it rang out, to be
instantly succeeded by a tremendous outburst of every imaginable sound from the forest, amid
which the cries of countless startled birds and the sudden rush of their wings predominated.
But Dick had kept his gaze steadily riveted upon those two faintly shining orbs across there
in the blackness, and when the flash of the rifle lit up that blackness for the fraction of
a second he caught an instantaneous glimpse of a foreshortened tawny-hided black-spotted form,
with a rounded head and short ears, standing at the very edge of the water, staring steadfastly
toward the raft.  Then, as the vision vanished, a snarling sound, half roar, half shriek, met
his ears, followed by a few convulsive splashes-- then stillness.

"By Jove!  I believe you've hit him," he exclaimed, excitedly starting to his feet.  "It was
a leopard; I saw him by the flash of the rifle."

"No; not a leopard, my son," answered Earle.  "So far as I know, there are no leopards in America--except
in menageries.  But it may have been a panther or jaguar.  Let's get into the canoe and investigate.
We'll take the lantern with us, and the rifle, to guard against possible accidents."

Part of the equipment of the expedition consisted of a very handsome little fifteen-foot cedar-built
canoe, intended to be towed astern of the raft, and there it now floated, attached to the raft
by a slender painter.  Unhooking the hurricane lamp, Dick led the way aft, followed by Earle
with the rifle in his hands, and presently they had both taken their seats in the cockleshell
of a craft.  She was fitted with rowlocks for use, with a short pair of sculls for the especial
benefit of Dick, who knew nothing as yet of how to handle a paddle.  They were half way to
the shore when Earle, holding up the lantern on the end of a boathook, caught sight of the
motionless body of his victim lying half in and half out of the water.

"There he is, and stone dead, if I'm any judge!" he exclaimed.  And even as he spoke a great
black head appeared close to the body, the sound of snapping jaws was heard, and with a sudden
swirl of water both head and body disappeared in the black depths, to be seen no more.

"Con-found it!" exclaimed Earle, savagely.  "Now, if that isn't too bad! My first jaguar, too,
and a fine one at that; and a beastly 'gator has stolen him from almost under my nose.  Let
up, Dick--or, rather, turn back.  It's no good.  That darned 'gator has got my jaguar safe
down there in the mud, and we shall never see him again.  Well, never mind, I daresay we shall
get plenty of other chances.  But I'll watch out and not be caught napping next time."

What Earle said was true; the jaguar was gone beyond hope of recovery, and the only thing to
be done was to turn back.  Back they accordingly went, to resume their work of putting their
battery in order; nor did they cease their labours until every weapon had been unpacked, put
together, thoroughly cleaned, and loaded in readiness for any emergency. Then they retired
to their respective couches, and after Peter had carefully closed the mosquito curtains round
them and extinguished the hurricane lamp, proceeded to "woo the drowsy god."

But the novelty of their surroundings, the enervating heat, and the multitudinous sounds that
filled the night kept sleep at bay for several hours, and it was not until the cool air that
usually heralds morning in the tropics blew in upon them through the open flap of the tent
that they actually sank into a sound slumber, from which they were awakened only too soon by
Peter with their matutinal cup of chocolate.

"I suppose," mused Dick, as he stepped out of the tent, pyjama-clad, and gazed down into the
turbid waters of the river, "it would be hardly wise to indulge in a swim, though I feel that
it is just the one thing I need above all others to freshen me up."

"Swim!" retorted Earle, who stood beside him.  "My dear chap, I don't know the precise depth
of water just here, but I would be prepared to bet a substantial sum that if a man were foolish
enough to take a header off here, he would never come up again; for if he didn't stick in the
mud of the bottom, that alligator who stole my jaguar last night, or some of his relations,
would have him before he could come to the surface again.  No, no; no swimming for us at present,
my boy; we shall have to make out as best we can with our collapsible `tubs,' which I see Peter
has already filled for us, aft there.  There! what did I tell you? See that?  What sort of
a chance do you think you would have with a chap like that?"  And as he spoke he pointed to
a spot not half a dozen yards away, where the head of an alligator had suddenly broken water,
lazily swimming up against the current.  The ripples which marked the slight movements of the
brute's tail showed that he must have measured quite fifteen feet from end to end.

They bathed and breakfasted at leisure; and then, as there was no wind, and Earle did not wish
to impose upon his crew the labour of sweeping the raft up-stream against the current if it
could be avoided, the two white men took the canoe, a repeating rifle and a smooth-bore, and
went ashore, effecting a landing at the spot where the jaguar had been shot on the previous
night, and which they now saw had been formed into a tiny bit of beach through the breaking
down of the bank by the animals which evidently came to that particular spot to drink.  They
had no difficulty in finding the spoor of the lost jaguar, indeed it was the first thing to
attract their attention upon stepping ashore, and as Earle gazed down upon the deep indentations
in the plastic mud he execrated the thieving alligator afresh, for the prints were as big as
the palm of his hand, indicating that the beast must have been a particularly fine specimen.

At first they experienced very little difficulty in making their way through the dense undergrowth,
their plan being simply to follow the path beaten down by the animals; but after travelling
about a hundred yards this path became merged into a number of others, evidently not quite
so much used, and in these the going was much more difficult, the scrub not being so completely
beaten down.  So difficult of passage did they at length find it that they were seriously discussing
the advisability of giving up the attempt and turning back, when Earle, who was leading the
way, suddenly declared that he saw light ahead, and pushing resolutely on, the explorers presently
burst their way into a wide open space of some ten or twelve acres extent, in which, for some
unknown reason, no trees were growing, save a few scattered saplings, the tallest of which
was not more than nine or ten feet high.

As they emerged into the open the pair involuntarily came to a halt, entranced by the extraordinary
beauty of the scene that met their gaze. The open space, roughly circular in shape, was completely
hemmed in on every side by trees, some of which were of enormous size, while the tints of their
foliage varied through every shade of green, from that of the young bud to a depth of tone
that was nearly black.  Nor was green by any means the only tint displayed; for some of the
trees appeared to be clothed with flowers of vivid flaming scarlet, instead of leaves, while
the leaves of others, instead of being green, were of a deep, rich crimson hue, or a fine ruddy
bronze, like that of the copper beech. And, as though this were not in itself enough of beauty,
many of the more sombre foliaged trees were draped and festooned in riotous profusion with
parasitic creepers, the blooms upon which would have driven a painter to distraction, so rich
and varied were their tints, while the shapes of some of them were fantastic enough to suggest
that Dame Nature must have been under the influence of a nightmare when she formed them.  A
few of them were merely giant creepers, but Earle, who possessed more than a smattering knowledge
of botany, declared that most of them were orchids, several of which were new to him.  The
air of the place was heavy with mingled odours--one might almost have called them perfumes,
were it not for a certain smack of rankness and pungency in them--and alive with birds, varying
in size from that of a bumble bee up to that of a carrion crow, a few specimens of which could
be seen perched here and there on the topmost branches of the tallest trees. Several of the
birds were of the humming bird or sunbird species, and these, of course, gleamed and flashed
in the sunlight like winged jewels, while nearly all boasted plumage of pronouncedly vivid
colouring.

The two friends were still standing together on the spot where they had come to a halt when
first entering the clearing, and Earle was expatiating upon the beauty and rarity of some of
the orchids in their immediate neighbourhood, when they suddenly became aware of the presence
of a large deer on the opposite side of the clearing.  So silently had the creature come that
neither of those who now stood watching him had been aware of the moment of his coming, nor
could they discern the spot from which he had emerged.  The animal was standing as motionless
as a statue, with head erect, and he seemed to be sniffing the air, searching it for hostile
odours, so to speak.  He appeared to be quite unaware of their presence, a fact not very difficult
to account for, since the sun was shining strongly in his eyes, while the two friends were
not only standing in deep shadow, but also chanced to have come to a halt immediately behind
a thick bush, which effectually hid all but their heads from the deer.

Instinctively, Earle began slowly to lift his rifle, but only to lower it again, as he murmured
to Dick:

"Too far off--a good three-hundred yards if an inch.  We'll wait a bit. I believe he has not
yet seen us, and if so, he may come a bit nearer. I guess this is where he comes every day
to graze.  Ah!  I thought so"-- as the animal lowered his head and began to crop the rich grass.
"Crouch down and keep silent; with luck and patience we'll get him before long."

It was weary work, to Dick at least, crouching behind that bush, for the grass was long, and
full of ticks, ants and other minute pests, which lost no time in insinuating themselves between
his clothes and his skin, until the torment of his itching became almost unendurable.  But
Earle was, or seemed to be, inured to such trifling discomforts, and continued, motionless
as a graven image, to kneel on one knee behind the bush, intently watching through its interstices
the movements of the unsuspecting deer.  And those movements were exasperatingly deliberate,
for the grass was rich, luscious and abundant, enabling the animal to secure several mouthfuls
before it became necessary for it to move by so much as a step, while, further to tax the patience
of the watchers, the movements were vexatiously erratic, now here, now there, and as often
as not away from rather than toward the spot where the two men crouched behind the screen of shrub.

At length Earle's patience began to show signs of giving out.  He very cautiously altered his
position, changing from one knee to the other; a little later he knelt upon both knees, and
a little later he sat down. Finally, finding this attitude unfavourable for shooting, he again
got upon one knee.  By this time, however, the insect invaders of his person were making their
presence so distinctly felt that even his iron self-control was beginning to succumb to their
persistence, and at length he murmured to Dick:

"Guess I'll have to risk a long shot, after all.  At this rate it may be hours before the beast
will draw appreciably nearer, and meanwhile, at any moment something may happen to scare him
away."  And very slowly and carefully he proceeded to raise the rifle to his shoulder.

It was while he was doing this that the deer suddenly stopped feeding, and, with his head still
close to the ground, seemed gradually to stiffen until his whole body became rigid.

"What's the matter now?" grumbled Earle, becoming rigid in his turn. "Wonder whether he has
scented us.  But I guess not--at this distance. There is no wind, and--Gee! that explains it."
And he excitedly sprang to his feet, his example being instantly followed by Dick.

What had happened was this.  The deer had stood perfectly rigid for perhaps half a minute,
during which Earle had also suspended all movement, under the impression that the quarry had
caught a momentary glimpse of something suspicious behind the screening bush.  Then, while
the watchers waited tensely for the next development to occur, something--for the moment it
was impossible to say precisely what it was--had flashed into view from out of the long grass,
within a yard or so of where the deer stood, and the next second the unfortunate creature was
enveloped in the coils of a huge python.  As the watchers of the unexpected tragedy sprang
to their feet they distinctly heard the bones of the deer crack as the serpent constricted
its coils about its victim; and then Earle, with an ejaculation of anger, sprang out from behind
the bush, and, with Dick at his elbow, started at a run towards the spot as the deer sank with
a groan into the long grass.

A few seconds sufficed the pair to reach their goal, or at least near enough to it for them
to see that the unfortunate deer was not yet quite dead, for its hind legs, which were not
involved in the coils of the python, were kicking out feebly, while its eyes gazed up at them
pitifully with an expression that might easily have been interpreted into a prayer for deliverance
from its sufferings.  As for the python, it was already relaxing its awful grip upon the body
of its victim, and had thrown off one coil as the two friends came into view.  Earle, who seemed
to know something of the nature of the creature, warned Dick to stand back, as the reptile
was loosening itself in readiness to make a spring.  But he himself evidently had no fear of
the snake, for as it reared its great head and gave vent to an angry hiss, he threw up his
rifle, and, standing his ground, fired a shot that went crashing through its right eye and
out at the back of the skull.

The next instant Dick received a blow across the chest that not only knocked the breath out
of him, but sent him to the ground with a crash, while the threshing of the creature's body
upon the earth, as it writhed and twisted convulsively in its death agony, might have been
heard from one end of the glade to the other.  Earle dashed forward and quickly dragged Dick
out of the way before assisting the lad to regain his feet, and it was well that he did so,
for the next moment the monster was writhing and pounding upon the very spot from which Dick
had been dragged.  And it was quite upon the cards that, but for Earle's prompt action, the
young Englishman might have been enveloped by those writhing coils, and every bone in his body
broken.  As it was, no great harm was done; and as soon as Earle saw that his friend was safe,
and that in its struggles the python was moving steadily away from the spot, he sprang in,
and whipping out his big hunting knife, quickly drew it across the dying deer's throat, thus
terminating its sufferings.

"Poor brute!" he murmured, regarding the mangled body of the dead deer; "if I had but made
up my mind and pressed the trigger a few seconds earlier, you would have been spared a good
deal of terror and suffering. As it is--well, let us get back to the raft, Dick, and send a
couple of men to bring in the deer.  Its tongue and hind-quarters are untouched, and will afford
all hands a meal of fresh meat, if we can secure it before the vultures come along.  But we
shall have to hurry, for unless I am mistaken, there is the vanguard of their army already."
And he pointed upwards towards a few small dark dots in the sky that had suddenly and mysteriously
appeared.

They hastened back to the raft and hurriedly explained to Inaguy, the Indian headman, what
had happened, and what Earle wanted done; and a few minutes later two of the blacks sprang
into the canoe and paddled away to the shore, to return an hour later, with the head, hind-quarters,
and skin of the deer, but with the declaration that they had been wholly unable to find the
body of the python. 

We are lying very comfortably alongside a floe with open water to windward for 200 or 300 yards.
The sky has been clear most of the day, fragments of low stratus occasionally hurry across the sky
and a light cirrus is moving with some speed. Evidently it is blowing hard in the upper current.
The ice has closed--I trust it will open well when the wind lets up. There is a lot of open water
behind us.

The berg described this morning has been circling round us, passing within 800 yards; the
bearing and distance have altered so un-uniformly that it is evident that the differential
movement between the surface water and the berg-driving layers (from 100 to 200 metres down)
is very irregular. We had several hours on the floe practising ski running, and thus got some welcome
exercise. Coal is now the great anxiety--we are making terrible inroads on our supply--we have
come 240 miles since we first entered the pack streams.

The sounding to-day gave 1804 fathoms--the water bottle didn't work, but temperatures were got
at 1300 and bottom.

The temperature was down to 20° last night and kept 2 or 3 degrees below freezing all day.

The surface for ski-ing to-day was very good.

Wednesday, December 21.--The wind was still strong this morning, but had shifted to the south-west.
With an overcast sky it was very cold and raw. The sun is now peeping through, the wind lessening
and the weather conditions generally improving. During the night we had been drifting towards two
large bergs, and about breakfast time we were becoming uncomfortably
close to one of them--the big floes were binding down on one another,
but there seemed to be open water to the S.E., if we could work out
in that direction.

(Note.--All directions of wind are given 'true' in this book.)

Noon Position.--68° 25' S., 179° 11' W. Made good S. 26 E. 2.5'. Set of current N., 32 E. 9.4'.
Made good 24 hours--N. 40 E. 8'. We got the steam up and about 9 A.M. commenced to push through. Once
or twice we have spent nearly twenty minutes pushing through bad places, but it looks as though we
are getting to easier water. It's distressing to have the pack so tight, and the bergs make it
impossible to lie comfortably still for any length of time.

Ponting has made some beautiful photographs and Wilson some charming pictures of the pack and
bergs; certainly our voyage will be well illustrated. We find quite a lot of sketching talent.
Day, Taylor, Debenham, and Wright all contribute to the elaborate
record of the bergs and ice features met with.

5 P.M.--The wind has settled to a moderate gale from S.W. We went 2 1/2 miles this morning,
then became jammed again. The effort has taken us well clear of the threatening bergs. Some others
to leeward now are a long way off, but they are there and to leeward,
robbing our position of its full measure of security.

Oh! but it's mighty trying to be delayed and delayed like this, and coal going all the time--also
we are drifting N. and E.--the pack has carried us 9' N. and 6' E. It really is very distressing.
I don't like letting fires go out with these bergs about.

Wilson went over the floe to capture some penguins and lay flat on the surface. We saw the birds
run up to him, then turn within a few feet and rush away again. He says that they came towards
him when he was singing, and ran away again when he stopped. They were all one year birds, and
seemed exceptionally shy; they appear to be attracted to the ship by a fearful curiosity.7

A chain of bergs must form a great obstruction to a field of pack ice, largely preventing its
drift and forming lanes of open water. Taken in conjunction with the effect of bergs in forming
pressure ridges, it follows that bergs have a great influence on the movement as well as the
nature of pack.

Thursday, December 22.--Noon 68° 26' 2'' S., 197° 8' 5'' W. Sit. N. 5 E. 8.5'.--No change. The
wind still steady from the S.W., with a clear sky and even barometer. It looks as though it
might last any time. This is sheer bad luck. We have let the fires die out; there are bergs to
leeward and we must take our chance of clearing them--we cannot go on wasting coal.

There is not a vestige of swell, and with the wind in this direction there certainly ought to
be if the open water was reasonably close. No, it looks as though we'd struck a streak of real
bad luck; that fortune has determined to put every difficulty in our path. We have less than
300 tons of coal left in a ship that simply eats coal. It's alarming--and then there are the
ponies going steadily down hill in condition. The only encouragement is the persistence of open water to
the east and south-east to south; big lanes of open water can be seen in that position, but
we cannot get to them in this pressed up pack.

Atkinson has discovered a new tapeworm in the intestines of the Adélie penguin--a very tiny worm
one-eighth of an inch in length with a propeller-shaped head.

A crumb of comfort comes on finding that we have not drifted to the eastward appreciably.

Friday, December 23.--The wind fell light at about ten last night
and the ship swung round.

Sail was set on the fore, and she pushed a few hundred yards to the north, but soon became jammed
again. This brought us dead to windward of and close to a large berg with the wind steadily
increasing. Not a very pleasant position, but also not one that caused much alarm. We set all
sail, and with this help the ship slowly carried the pack round, pivoting on the berg until, as the
pressure relieved, she slid out into the open water close to the berg. Here it was possible to 'wear
ship,' and we saw a fair prospect of getting away to the east and
afterwards south.

Following the leads up we made excellent progress during the morning watch, and early in the
forenoon turned south, and then south-west.

We had made 8 1/2' S. 22 E. and about 5' S.S.W. by 1 P.M., and could see a long lead of water
to the south, cut off only by a broad strip of floe with many water holes in it: a composite floe. There
was just a chance of getting through, but we have stuck half-way, advance and retreat equally
impossible under sail alone. Steam has been ordered but will not be ready till near midnight. Shall
we be out of the pack by Christmas Eve?

The floes to-day have been larger but thin and very sodden. There are extensive water pools showing
in patches on the surface, and one notes some that run in line as though extending from cracks;
also here and there close water-free cracks can be seen. Such floes might well be termed 'composite'
floes, since they evidently consist of old floes which have been
frozen together--the junction being concealed by more recent snow
falls.

A month ago it would probably have been difficult to detect inequalities or differences in the
nature of the parts of the floes, but now the younger ice has become waterlogged and is melting
rapidly, hence the pools.

I am inclined to think that nearly all the large floes as well as many of the smaller ones are 'composite,'
and this would seem to show that the cementing of two floes does not necessarily mean a line of weakness,
provided the difference in the thickness of the cemented floes is not too great; of course,
young ice or even a single season's sea ice cannot become firmly
attached to the thick old bay floes, and hence one finds these isolated
even at this season of the year.

Very little can happen in the personal affairs of our company in this comparatively dull time, but
it is good to see the steady progress that proceeds unconsciously in cementing the happy relationship
that exists between the members of the party. Never could there have been a greater freedom from
quarrels and trouble of all sorts. I have not heard a harsh word or seen a black look. A spirit
of tolerance and good humour pervades the whole community, and it is glorious to realise that
men can live under conditions of hardship, monotony, and danger in such bountiful good comradeship.

Preparations
are now being made for Christmas festivities. It is curious to think that we have already passed
the longest day in the southern year.

Saw a whale this morning--estimated 25 to 30 feet.

Wilson thinks a new species. Find Adélie penguins in batches of twenty or so. Do not remember
having seen so many together in the pack.

After midnight, December 23.--Steam was reported ready at 11 P.M. After some pushing to and
fro we wriggled out of our ice prison and followed a lead to opener waters.

We have come into a region where the open water exceeds the ice; the former lies in great irregular
pools 3 or 4 miles or more across and connecting with many leads. The latter, and the fact is
puzzling, still contain floes of enormous dimensions; we have just passed one which is at
least 2 miles in diameter. In such a scattered sea we cannot go direct, but often have to make
longish detours; but on the whole in calm water and with a favouring wind we make good progress.
With the sea even as open as we find it here it is astonishing to find the floes so large, and
clearly there cannot be a southerly swell. The floes have water pools as described this afternoon,
and none average more than 2 feet in thickness. We have two or three bergs in sight.

Saturday, December 24, Christmas Eve.--69° 1' S., 178° 29' W. S. 22 E. 29'; C. Crozier 551'.
Alas! alas! at 7 A.M. this morning we were brought up with a solid sheet of pack extending
in all directions, save that from which we had come. I must honestly own that I turned in
at three thinking we had come to the end of our troubles; I had a suspicion of anxiety when I
thought of the size of the floes, but I didn't for a moment suspect we should get into thick pack
again behind those great sheets of open water.

All went well till four, when the white wall again appeared ahead--at five all leads ended and
we entered the pack; at seven we were close up to an immense composite
floe, about as big as any we've seen.

She wouldn't skirt the edge of this and she wouldn't go through it. There was nothing to do but
to stop and bank fires. How do we stand?--Any day or hour the floes may open up, leaving a
road to further open water to the south, but there is no guarantee that one would not be hung
up again and again in this manner as long as these great floes exist. In a fortnight's time the
floes will have crumbled somewhat, and in many places the ship will be able to penetrate them.

What
to do under these circumstances calls for the most difficult decision.

If one lets fires out it means a dead loss of over 2 tons, when the boiler has to be heated
again. But this 2 tons would only cover a day under banked fires, so that for anything longer
than twenty-four hours it is economy to put the fires out. At each stoppage one is called upon
to decide whether it is to be for more or less than twenty-four hours.

Last night we got some five or six hours of good going ahead--but it has to be remembered that this
costs 2 tons of coal in addition to that expended in doing the distance.

If one waits one probably drifts north--in all other respects conditions ought to be improving,
except that the southern edge of the pack will be steadly augmenting.

Rough Summary of Current in Pack

Dec. Current Wind

11-12 S. 48 E. 12'? N. by W. 3 to 5 13-14 N. 20 W. 2' N.W. by W. 0-2 14-15 N. 2 E. 5.2' S.W.
1-2 15-17 apparently little current variable light 20-21 N. 32 E. 9.4 N.W. to W.S.W. 4 to 6
21-22 N. 5 E. 8.5 West 4 to 5

The above seems to show that the drift is generally with the wind. We have had a predominance of
westerly winds in a region where a predominance of easterly might be expected.

Now that we have an easterly, what will be the result?

Sunday, December 25, Christmas Day.--Dead reckoning 69° 5' S., 178°
30' E. The night before last I had bright hopes that this Christmas
Day would see us in open water.

The scene is altogether too Christmassy. Ice surrounds us, low nimbus clouds intermittently discharging
light snow flakes obscure the sky, here and there small pools of open water throw shafts of black
shadow on to the cloud--this black predominates in the direction from whence we have come, elsewhere
the white haze of ice blink is pervading.

We are captured. We do practically nothing under sail to push through, and could do little under
steam, and at each step forward the possibility of advance seems to lessen.

The wind which has persisted from the west for so long fell light last night, and to-day comes
from the N.E. by N., a steady breeze from 2 to 3 in force. Since one must have hope, ours is
pinned to the possible effect of a continuance of easterly wind. Again the call is for patience and
again patience. Here at least we seem to enjoy full security. The ice is so thin that it could
not hurt by pressure--there are no bergs within reasonable distance--indeed the thinness of the
ice is one of the most tantalising conditions. In spite of the unpropitious prospect everyone
on board is cheerful and one foresees a merry dinner to-night.

The mess is gaily decorated with our various banners.

There was full attendance at the Service this morning and a lusty singing of hymns.

Should we now try to go east or west?

I have been trying to go west because the majority of tracks lie that side and no one has encountered
such hard conditions as ours--otherwise there is nothing to point to this direction, and all
through the last week the prospect to the west has seemed less promising than in other directions;
in spite of orders to steer to the S.W. when possible it has been impossible to push in that
direction.

An event of Christmas was the production of a family by Crean's rabbit.

She gave birth to 17, it is said, and Crean has given away 22!

I don't know what will become of the parent or family; at present they are warm and snug enough,
tucked away in the fodder under the forecastle.

Midnight.--To-night the air is thick with falling snow; the temperature 28°. It is cold and slushy
without.

A merry evening has just concluded. We had an excellent dinner: tomato soup, penguin breast
stewed as an entrée, roast beef, plum-pudding, and mince pies, asparagus,
champagne, port and liqueurs--a festive menu. Dinner began at 6 and
ended at 7. For five hours the company has been sitting round the
table singing lustily; we haven't much talent, but everyone has contributed
more or less, 'and the choruses are deafening. It is rather a surprising
circumstance that such an unmusical party should be so keen on singing.
On Xmas night it was kept up till 1 A.M., and no work is done without
a chanty. I don't know if you have ever heard sea chanties being sung.
The merchant sailors have quite a repertoire, and invariably call
on it when getting up anchor or hoisting sails. Often as not they
are sung in a flat and throaty style, but the effect when a number
of men break into the chorus is generally inspiriting.'

The men had
dinner at midday--much the same fare, but with beer and some whisky
to drink. They seem to have enjoyed themselves much. Evidently the
men's deck contains a very merry band.

There are three groups of
penguins roosting on the floes quite close to the ship. I made the
total number of birds 39. We could easily capture these birds, and
so it is evident that food can always be obtained in the pack.

To-night
I noticed a skua gull settle on an upturned block of ice at the edge
of the floe on which several penguins were preparing for rest. It
is a fact that the latter held a noisy confabulation with the skua
as subject--then they advanced as a body towards it; within a few
paces the foremost penguin halted and turned, and then the others
pushed him on towards the skua. One after another they jibbed at being
first to approach their enemy, and it was only with much chattering
and mutual support that they gradually edged towards him.

They couldn't
reach him as he was perched on a block, but when they got quite close
the skua, who up to that time had appeared quite unconcerned, flapped
away a few yards and settled close on the other side of the group
of penguins. The latter turned and repeated their former tactics until
the skua finally flapped away altogether. It really was extraordinarily
interesting to watch the timorous protesting movements of the penguins.
The frame of mind producing every action could be so easily imagined
and put into human sentiments.

On the other side of the ship part
of another group of penguins were quarrelling for the possession of
a small pressure block which offered only the most insecure foothold.
The scrambling antics to secure the point of vantage, the ousting
of the bird in possession, and the incontinent loss of balance and
position as each bird reached the summit of his ambition was almost
as entertaining as the episode of the skua. Truly these little creatures
afford much amusement.

Monday, December 26.--Obs. 69° 9' S., 178°
13' W. Made good 48 hours, S. 35 E. 10'.--The position to-night is
very cheerless. All hope that this easterly wind will open the pack
seems to have vanished. We are surrounded with compacted floes of
immense area. Openings appear between these floes and we slide crab-like
from one to another with long delays between. It is difficult to keep
hope alive. There are streaks of water sky over open leads to the
north, but everywhere to the south we have the uniform white sky.
The day has been overcast and the wind force 3 to 5 from the E.N.E.--snow
has fallen from time to time. There could scarcely be a more dreary
prospect for the eye to rest upon.

As I lay in my bunk last night
I seemed to note a measured crush on the brash ice, and to-day first
it was reported that the floes had become smaller, and then we seemed
to note a sort of measured send alongside the ship. There may be a
long low swell, but it is not helping us apparently; to-night the
floes around are indisputably as large as ever and I see little sign
of their breaking or becoming less tightly locked.

It is a very,
very trying time.

We have managed to make 2 or 3 miles in a S.W.
(?) direction under sail by alternately throwing her aback, then filling
sail and pressing through the narrow leads; probably this will scarcely
make up for our drift. It's all very disheartening. The bright side
is that everyone is prepared to exert himself to the utmost--however
poor the result of our labours may show.

Rennick got a sounding again
to-day, 1843 fathoms.

One is much struck by our inability to find
a cause for the periodic opening and closing of the floes. One wonders
whether there is a reason to be found in tidal movement.

From that moment the process of taming the beast synchronised with the progress of its recovery.
On the second day of the halt at the rest camp the interesting invalid was able to use his
feet and limp the few paces of distance from the camp to the rivulet as often as thirst demanded,
but after drinking, the creature always returned to his lair near the tent, where Earle took
care to feed him; and when, after a sojourn of five days on the spot, the camp was "broken"
and the march was resumed, "King Cole," as the American had named his new pet, fell in and
plodded along between the two white men as naturally as though he had been brought up with
them from cubhood.

Thus far, the party, greatly to their own surprise, had encountered no Indians, though they
had occasionally met with "signs," indicating that the country was not absolutely a desert.
But on the fifth day of their resumed march they unexpectedly came upon a small party in a
clearing, who incontinently fled upon their approach.  A halt was at once called, and the party
went temporarily into camp, while Earle, unpacking one of his bales, produced therefrom certain
small hand-mirrors, a string or two of vari-coloured beads, two gaudy-looking bandanna handkerchiefs,
and three cheap pocket-knives.  These treasures he entrusted to the care of Inaguy, the headman,
and furnishing him with an escort of two men, dispatched him in search of the elusive natives,
bidding him find them and by means of the gifts which he carried, open up peaceful communication
with them.  For up to this time the party had been wandering more or less at random, and their
leader was most anxious to get into touch with the inhabitants, so that he might question them
and perchance extract some information from them which might aid him in his quest.  Then, the
ambassador dispatched, the party sat down to await his return with such patience as they possessed.

It was not, however, until past noon on the following day that Inaguy returned to camp alone,
with a somewhat disquieting tale.  From this it appeared that, having got upon the retreating
Indians' trail, he and his companions had followed it up until close upon sunset, when, while
passing through a narrow opening between two high rocks, they had been suddenly set upon from
both front and rear, overpowered, and conveyed as captives to a certain spot, where they found
the tribe of which they were in search established as dwellers in numerous rock caves in the
side of a cliff.

Arrived here, they were at once taken into the presence of the chief and closely questioned
as to the why and the wherefore of their presence in that region, how many in number their
party were, and so on, the questioning and answering being conducted with considerable difficulty
owing to Inaguy's very imperfect knowledge of the language in which he was addressed.  It appeared
that the chief listened to Inaguy's explanation, such as it was, with a good deal of impatience
and suspicion, and finally terminated the interview by appropriating the gifts which the man
bore, and condemning him and his comrades to be sacrificed, on the following morning, to a
certain stone god, by way of propitiation, in the hope that the act might effect the cure of
certain persons belonging to the community who were then lying apparently at the point of death,
suffering from some mysterious sickness.  And so terrified had Inaguy been at the prospect
of a sacrificial death, with its accompanying tortures, that it had taken him the whole night
to think out an argument which might possibly save the lives of himself and his companions.

This argument he had advanced when, at sunrise, he and his two companions had been led forth
to die upon the altar before the great stone god; and it had consisted, first, in the narrative
of how the Great White Chief in command of his party had miraculously cured a black panther
which had been discovered in the last stage of dissolution, and subsequently tamed it, and
secondly, in the confident assertion that the man who could do this thing could likewise cure
the sick of the village, if he were approached in a becomingly humble spirit.  The humble spirit,
Inaguy regretfully reported, had proved conspicuous by its absence; but after much discussion
a bargain had been eventually struck whereby the two followers of Inaguy were to be retained
as hostages while the headman was to be released upon condition that he returned at once to
the Great White Chief, conveying a message that unless the latter and his party turned up at
the village before sunset, the hostages would be put to death.

It took Earle not a moment to decide what his action should be, when Inaguy brought his narrative
to a conclusion.  The men's lives must be saved at any cost; and since the village was situated
at a considerable distance from the camp, and it would mean quick marching for the party to
reach it within the stipulated time, the tent was immediately struck, and the march was at
once commenced.

They arrived at the village with only a few minutes to spare, so few indeed, that they found
the villagers already assembling in preparation for the sacrifice, while the sun's disc was
within less than half of its own apparent diameter from the summits of a range of hills that
bounded the horizon.

The first object to attract the visitors' attention was an enormous figure, some forty feet
high, bearing a rude resemblance to that of a seated man, which had evidently at some remote
period, been sculptured out of a solid block of black marble seemingly springing vertically
out of the ground.  There was nothing artistic in the conception or execution of the image,
which was a mere travesty of the human figure, every member being absurdly out of proportion,
while the only features upon the modelling of which any pains had been taken were those of
the face, the expression of which hideously suggested the extremes of mingled cunning and ferocity.
An altar of the same black marble, about three feet high and ten feet long, stood at the feet
of the figure, and this was already piled with wood in preparation for the anticipated sacrifice.

At the precise moment when the party came within sight of this extraordinary figure they also
became conscious of a peculiar taint in the air suggestive of mud and rotting vegetation; and
as Earle sniffed it he remarked:

"Umph!  Big swamp not far off, I guess, which, apart from anything else, is enough to account
for sickness in the village.  Swamp fever, most likely.  Say, Dick, that's an ugly-looking
guy, that idol, eh.  Won't these ginks get a startler when they hear him speak presently!"

"Speak?" repeated Dick.  "How do you mean?"

"You just wait and see, sonny," returned Earle.  "Oh, yes, he'll speak, you bet.  And what
he is going to say is--But here comes the chief and his principal headmen to meet us.  Now,
Inaguy, you be very careful in your interpretation of everything that passes, for a good deal
may depend upon it.  And let's hurry; I want to get up as close as possible to that idol before
the palaver begins."

The chief of the tribe was easily distinguishable from all the rest, from the fact that he
walked some half a dozen paces in front of the others, and also because of his garb, which
consisted of a gaudy head-dress of variously coloured feathers and an enormous jaguar's skin
thrown over his left shoulder, half of it covering the front of his body--and the other half
the rear, the two halves united at his right hip by knotting the skin of the left foreleg to
the left hinder one.  He was, like all the rest of his tribe, coal-black in colour, and, like
his followers, was armed with a sheaf of formidable-looking barbed spears, the heads of which
appeared to be made of bone or horn.  They seemed to be a fine race of men, standing nearly
six feet high, and their carriage was suggestive of great strength and agility, but they were
undeniably ugly and repulsive of feature, the expression being that of mingled cunning and
cruelty.  As they drew nearer, King Cole, the black panther, began to snarl and show his fangs
in an exceedingly hostile fashion, whereupon Dick hurriedly seized one of the tent ropes and
deftly looped it about the animal's neck in a standing bowline knot, at the same time soothing
him by word and touch.

The two parties met and came to a halt at a point some thirty feet from the altar; and as they
did so Earle waved his hand in greeting toward the figure, airily remarking as he did so:

"How do, old chap!  Glad to have the pleasure of seeing you at last."

To which, to the stupefaction of everybody, Dick included, the figure replied in a high, thin
voice:

"The pleasure is mine, oh wonderful medicine-man, who has come to heal my people.  Tell them
that ye are my particular friends, and that they must treat you and yours well during your
stay among them, upon pain of incurring my lasting anger."

"Got that, Inaguy?" asked Earle, turning to his headman, who seemed so paralysed with amazement
that he could scarcely reply in the affirmative.  "Good!  Then just translate to the chief
and his followers what I said, and what their god answered."

With chattering teeth and lips that quivered with terror to such an extent that he could scarcely
articulate, the thoroughly frightened Inaguy obeyed his master's order, and his astonishment
and terror were so obviously genuine that they only added to the already profound effect produced
upon the Indians by the seeming miracle of speech from their hitherto dumb god.  Had the chief
been a little less astonished than he was, it might have occurred to him to wonder why the
idol had chosen to express his will in a language that needed interpretation; but obviously
he was altogether too profoundly impressed by the marvellous happening for the smallest shred
of suspicion to enter his mind, and upon receiving the message he immediately wheeled round,
and prostrating himself with his face to the ground--an example instantly followed by those
about him--mumbled a long statement which, upon being translated by Inaguy, proved to be an
emphatic assurance that nothing whatever should be done that could provoke the god's displeasure.
This done, he rose to his feet and shouted an order for the immediate release of the hostages;
after which he turned to Earle and Dick and reverentially bade them welcome to the village,
at the same time requesting them to pitch their camp wherever they pleased.

Earle, having chosen a spot well out in the open, where anything in the nature of a sudden
surprise would be difficult--though he explained to Dick that, after what had happened, he
had little or no fear of anything of the kind--intimated to the chief his desire to see the
sick people at once, and went off with that individual, leaving Dick to supervise the arrangement
of the camp.

Meanwhile Dick, who was by no means a fool, had been thinking matters over, and had come to
the conclusion that he understood the apparent mystery of the idol's speech, and chuckled to
himself over Earle's cleverness, which had been so wonderful as to mystify even the young Englishman
for the moment.

By the time that Earle reached the camp, after paying his professional visit to the sick, the
camp was all in order, and supper was nearly ready.  Earle was in fine feather, for not only
had he discovered that the invalids were all down with swamp fever, which, severe as it was,
he was confident of his ability to cure, but upon questioning the chief with regard to the
great object of his quest, he had been informed that a tribe of Indians known as the Mangeromas,
occupying territory many days' march toward the south-west, were believed to possess some knowledge
of a wonderful people answering to the description which Earle had given, but that the Catus--the
tribe whose guests the party now were--had as little as possible to do with the Mangeromas,
since the latter were an exceedingly fierce, warlike and barbarous race, more than suspected
of cannibalism.  This unsavoury reputation, however, affected Earle not in the least, he was
out for adventure, and was determined to have it, moreover he wanted definite information concerning
El Dorado and the city of Manoa, and was prepared to take his chance, even among cannibals
in order to get it.

"Well," remarked Dick, "that's all right; where you go, I go with you, even if it should be
into a country where cannibals are as common as blackberries in August.  And I have no doubt
that, if need be, you can scare them as effectually as you did those niggers this evening.
And let me tell you, while I think of it, that you did it remarkably well. Why, you puzzled
even me for the moment."

"Did I, really?" demanded Earle, with every symptom of extreme gratification.  "I am glad of
that, for, to tell you the truth, I am a bit out of practice, and the idea did not occur to
me until Inaguy mentioned the idol this afternoon.  Then I thought that if, by means of ventriloquism,
I could make the idol speak, it would cause our friends here to sit up and take notice, as
it did.  Ventriloquism, Dick, is a very useful accomplishment for a man who goes much among
savages, as I have done, and it has got me out of an extremely tight corner more than once.
It always appealed to me powerfully, from the time when, as a boy of seven years old, I attended
a ventriloquial entertainment and heard the guy conversing with unseen people in mid-air, and
heard remarks addressed to him by obviously inanimate objects.  There seemed to me to be useful
possibilities in it, and I started trying to do it at once, finally taking lessons from a wonderfully
clever guy, who told me that my throat was specially well adapted for it.  Ah! here comes Peter
with supper, for which I'm glad, for I happen to be possessed of a ten dollar appetite to-night."

The meal over, Earle unpacked, his medicine chest and mixed a sufficient quantity of medicine
to serve his patients through the night, and took it up to the village, where he remained nearly
three hours ministering to the sick, and talking, through Inaguy, to Yahiti, the chief of the
Catus.  When at length he returned to the camp he was in the highest spirits, for the somewhat
incomprehensible reason that Yahiti had informed him that the country lying between the Catu
and the Mangeroma territories was extraordinarily difficult, and full of the most weird and
terrible perils.

On the following morning the two friends were astir with the dawn, Earle having expressed a
desire to inspect the great swamp in the neighbourhood, to which he attributed the epidemic
of fever from which the inhabitants of the village were suffering.  This swamp was situated
at the distance of about a mile south-east from the village, and was of such an extent that
whenever the wind blew from either the east or the south--these being the prevailing winds
there--the pestiferous odours arising from it were wafted directly toward the village; and
Earle's idea was to investigate, with the view of ascertaining whether anything could be done
to reclaim the swamp, failing which he proposed to recommend the Catus to abandon the place
and take up their abode elsewhere.

Upon reaching the swamp, it was found to lie in a shallow depression, roughly circular in shape
and some three miles in diameter, its deepest part--about eight feet--being nearest the village,
while at its upper extremity it was fed by a small stream of a capacity just about sufficient
to neutralise the constant process of evaporation without being enough to produce an overflow.
Further than that, it occupied such a position that a trench little more than a quarter of
a mile in length and averaging a depth of about nine feet was all that was needed to drain
the swamp by carrying off the water and discharging it into a valley some three-hundred feet deep.

An alternative scheme which Earle also investigated was the diversion of the stream which supplied
the swamp with water; and this was also found possible by cutting a trench about two hundred
yards long; but it was open to the objection that, in order to do it, the workers would be
obliged to walk a distance of nearly twelve miles daily to and from their work, and he doubted
whether the Catus were energetic enough to do it.

The task of convincing the Catus that they must do away with the swamp or abandon the village,
unless they were prepared continually to suffer from fever, was a long and troublesome one,
the Indians having a strong constitutional objection to anything in the nature of hard work;
but Earle succeeded at length, and actually got them started on the work of cutting the drainage
ditch, that scheme having been chosen as the one promising the quickest results and involving
the least labour.  By the time that this was done the invalids were all recovered from their
sickness; and ten days after their arrival at the Catu village the exploring party resumed
their march, to the loudly expressed regret of the inhabitants, who urgently pressed them to
remain, and would quite possibly have detained them by force, but for fear of exciting the
anger of the stone god.

The journey was resumed immediately after breakfast on a certain morning, and before the hour
for the first halt arrived the party began to realise the truth of Yahiti's story that the
route was full of difficulties, if not of dangers; for it lay over rugged country so thickly
bestrewn with enormous boulders that Earle likened the journey to the exploration of San Francisco
immediately after the earthquake. Of course, they went round the boulders when such a course
was possible, but it very frequently happened that long reefs of rock projected out of the
ground for miles on either hand, when, difficult though the task might be, it became easier
to climb up one side and down the other, than to pass round.  Two miles was the extent of their
journey over that kind of country which they were able to accomplish before sunset; and when
at length they camped they were little more than eight miles from the Catu village.

To travel over such country was wearisome in the extreme, but there was nothing for it but
to push on, or else make a detour of unknown extent; and this idea Earle would not entertain
for a moment.  On the following day, therefore, they resumed their journey, although with every
yard of advance the difficulties appeared to grow more formidable.

It was about mid-morning when they reached the base of a cliff some forty feet high that, being
practically vertical, seemed to bar their further progress, and after contemplating it for
several minutes, Earle decided to make the spot a halting place while he and Dick explored
the cliff in opposite directions in search of a practicable crossing. Accordingly, while the
natives were forming camp, the two white men, taking their rifles and a few cartridges, set
off along the foot of the cliffs, Earle proceeding in a north-westerly direction, while Dick
proceeded toward the south-east.

The rock of which the cliff was formed was, for some considerable distance in the direction
followed by Dick, quartzite; but at a point about a mile from the spot where he had parted
from Earle it changed to a black, bituminous limestone, studded here and there with ammonites.
Dick, who knew little or nothing about geology, merely noticed the change in the character
of the rock, and sauntered on, eagerly scanning its face, in the hope of finding a spot where
it might be scalable by men carrying moderately heavy burdens.  And at length he reached, as
he believed, such a spot, where the black rock seemed to have been riven by some mighty natural
convulsion, the rift forming a steep and exceedingly narrow gully leading to the summit.  Naturally,
he at once started to climb this gully, with the object of testing its practicability; and
he had traversed nearly two-thirds of its length when, as he scrambled up, his attention was
suddenly attracted to a sort of pocket in the rock, which had been laid open by a fall.  What
particularly attracted his attention toward this pocket was the fact that it contained a considerable
number of bright green crystals, which struck him as being peculiar not only from their rich
colour, but also from the fact that they were all of practically the same shape, namely hexagonal.
So greatly did he admire them that he put a couple of the largest in one of his pockets, intending
to show them to Earle and ask him whether perchance they were of any value.  Then he pushed
on again and soon reached the upper end of the gully, when he found himself, somewhat to his
amazement, on a vast tableland, stretching as far as could be seen, with what looked like a
big forest at a distance of some ten miles.

Having completed his survey, Dick descended the gully and returned to the camp, to find that
Earle was still absent; he therefore set out to seek him and report his success.  Some two
miles beyond the camp he met the American returning, considerably disgusted, he having failed
in his search, and at once Dick reported his triumph, incidentally producing the crystals and
asking if Earle happened to know what they were.

"Know what they are?" echoed Earle, after most carefully and interestedly examining the stones.
"Why, of course I do.  Don't you?"

"Haven't the least idea," answered Dick.  "But they struck me as being rather pretty, and I
thought I would take them back to my sister as souvenirs of my travels.  There are dozens more
where these came from."

"Are there?" caustically remarked Earle.  "Then, my dear Cavendish, permit me to congratulate
you; for these two crystals are remarkably fine emeralds; and the probability is that you have
accidentally stumbled upon an emerald mine rich enough to make the fortunes of a dozen men.
Let's get back to camp and move on to this gully of yours. We'll overhaul it at once, and if
it should prove--as I strongly suspect--to be a true emerald mine, we'll work it for a few
days and ascertain something like its probable worth."

"But," protested Dick, "I didn't know that emeralds were found in South America."

"What!" ejaculated Earle, in amazement.  "You ignorant sailorman!  Why, some of the most famous
emeralds in the world have been unearthed in this country.  The Spaniards, under Pizarro, took
enormous quantities of them from the Peruvians, but were never able to learn exactly where
they were obtained; and the only mine now known in South America is, I believe, situated near
Bogota.  But I have long been convinced that this is the country, par excellence, for emeralds--ay,
and possibly rubies and sapphires as well.  Come along, man; let's go and have a look at the
mine that's going to make a millionaire of you."

CHAPTER SIX.

EMERALDS--AND THE DEATH FLOWER.

The two friends reached their temporary camp in good time for the mid-day meal; they therefore
decided to have it before proceeding farther.  As soon as the meal was over the camp was struck,
and the entire party proceeded in the direction of the gully, or cleft, upon their arrival
at which preparations were at once made for a possible sojourn of a few days; and while those
preparations were being made, Earle and Dick, carrying a pickaxe and shovel, as well as their
rifles, started to climb the cleft, bent upon examining the spot where the emeralds had been
found, and, if possible, settling the question as to whether or not a mine had actually been
discovered.

Their open-air life, and the toil of their recent travels had put both young men into the pink
of condition; it was, therefore, not long before they reached the spot where Dick had made
his momentous find.  Arrived there, Earle's first act was to subject each of the crystals lying
in the exposed "pocket" to a careful examination.  There were fifty-four in all, of varying
sizes; and when Earle had pronounced each of them to be a genuine emerald--and most of them
of the first water, they were all deposited in a knapsack which they had taken with them for
the purpose. This done, the American seized a pickaxe and began to dig into the face of the
cliff, pausing at intervals to take a rest while Cavendish shovelled away the debris.  The
rock was not at all difficult to work, yielding readily to the blows of the pickaxe and coming
away in lumps the size of one's fist, or even bigger, consequently it was not very long before,
between them, they had excavated a cavity of considerable size.  But after nearly two hours
of strenuous toil without result, they retired from the hole for a time to rest, and were debating
the question whether or not it was worth while to pursue the investigation any further, Earle
being rather of opinion that Dick's find had been merely an isolated pocket, and that they
might seek for weeks or possibly months, without finding any more emeralds, when, without the
slightest warning, the hole in which they had been working suddenly caved in, laying bare a
new face, some nine or ten square yards in area.  And when at length the face had ceased to
crumble and the dust had subsided, the first thing to attract their attention was an emerald
nearly as big as a duck's egg projecting from the newly exposed rock.  This they carefully
dug out, afterwards proceeding to search among the fallen rock, in which they eventually found
two other very fine stones.

"There!" exclaimed Earle, with a sigh of satisfaction, when at length they had thoroughly examined
and cleared away the fallen rock.  "I guess we've done enough; for we've demonstrated that
this is a sure-'nough mine.  See that stuff round the place where we picked out the emerald?
That is calcite, and this rock is a black limestone; all the indications are, therefore, in
favour of this being a genuine emerald mine, which we can work, if we choose, on our return
journey.  Now, we'll just dig out that mass of calcite and carefully cover it up, so that in
the exceedingly unlikely event of any other prospector passing this way, there will be little
or nothing to attract his attention; and to-morrow, before we resume our march, we will determine
the exact position of this spot by astronomical observations and make a note of it in our diaries,
so that we can find the place again.  Meanwhile, we have not done at all badly this afternoon,
for I guess the contents of this knapsack are worth a good many thousand dollars."

It was nightfall by the time that the explorers got back to their camp, and they were bone-weary
from their extraordinary exertions; but they had, as recompense, the knowledge that they had
left their mine in such a condition that no mere casual visitor would be in the least likely
to suspect its existence.

Immediately after breakfast on the following morning the party struck camp and proceeded to
climb the cleft.  It cost the Indian carriers half an hour's severe toil to accomplish the
ascent, and when at length they reached the summit they were only too glad to lay down their
burdens and take a rest while the two leaders, with the assistance of their pocket sextants
and Earle's pocket chronometer, determined the position of the head of the gully.  This done,
and the calculations worked out and checked, the march was resumed; the outer edge of the forest
through which their route lay being reached shortly after noon.  And when at length they sat
down to their mid-day meal, all hands enjoyed an unusual luxury; for about an hour before pitching
camp, Dick, who chanced to be leading the way, saw and shot something as it attempted to make
off through the long grass, that something proving to be a strange creature partaking, in about
equal proportions, of the characteristics of a pig and a deer.  Dick, of course, not being
a naturalist, was unable to name the creature, and even Earle declared himself puzzled; but
whatever it may have been, its flesh proved to be exceptionally tender, juicy, and delicious,
and the Indians fairly gorged themselves with it.

The forest into which the party plunged when the march was resumed proved to be entirely different
in character from that which they had previously traversed.  To begin with, the trees were
all of new and strange species, mostly bearing foliage of dark and gloomy tints; they stood
much farther apart; the undergrowth was sparse, or absent altogether; and there were no orchids,
or long, trailing garlands of lovely parasitic growth which had rendered the forests already
traversed so strangely beautiful.  Another peculiarity of the forest was that scarcely a bird
was to be seen, excepting an occasional vulture or carrion crow perched upon some lightning-blasted
stump.  Moreover, there was a strange silence pervading the place, a silence that seemed almost
uncanny, as though insects as well as birds shunned the place. Altogether, the effect of the
silence, the sombre tints of the foliage, the absence of brilliant-hued blooms, and a certain
subtle something in the atmosphere, was distinctly depressing.  There was one redeeming feature
about it, however, which was that the sparseness of the underbush and the greater space between
the trunks of the trees rendered travelling comparatively easy, and the party made good progress.

As they plunged farther into the depths of the forest, however, they began to realise that
its gloomy aisles were by no means so devoid of life as they had at first imagined.  The first
intimation of this fact came to them in the form of a sudden yell from one of the Indian carriers,
who declared that he had been bitten on the leg by something; and upon investigation this proved
to be the case, for the calf of his bare leg showed two tiny punctures, not more than one-eighth
of an inch apart, the flesh around which, even as Earle and Dick examined the wounds, began
to swell and turn a curious blue tint, while the injured man rapidly lost the power of speech
and voluntary movements, though his body began to be shaken by violent tremors.

Earle now showed himself to be a man of prompt action.  Whipping his keen hunting knife out
of its sheath, he slashed open the flesh athwart the two punctures and then, kneeling down,
applied his lips to the wound and sucked it strongly until the blood began to come, at first
sluggishly and in coagulated clots, but eventually more freely.  It was noticeable, too, that
at first the blood was almost black in colour, but by dint of vigorous sucking it at length
came freely and changed to its normal colour.  Meanwhile, Dick, recalling conversations which
he had had with Earle, in which the latter had described certain rough and ready methods which
he had successfully adopted in treating venomous snake bites, opened a shot cartridge, extracted
the powder therefrom, and with it made a squib.  This he had ready long before Earle was prepared
to use it; but when at length the blood was flowing freely and naturally from the wound, they
laid the now comatose victim prone upon the ground, and, while Dick held the wounded limb in
position, Earl applied the squib to the wound and fired it.  The result was that the wound
was quickly and very effectively cauterised, apparently without inflicting the slightest suffering
upon the victim, who never moved a muscle while the squib spluttered and burned upon his raw
flesh.  Earle then quickly and deftly dressed the wound and bound it up, after which he proceeded
to revive his patient by moistening his lips with raw whiskey, with which he finally drenched
the man internally as soon as the unfortunate fellow was able to swallow.

But, of course, there was no more marching for the party that day, and preparations were at
once made for pitching the camp.  The first task was to beat the long, dry grass thoroughly,
in order to drive away the snake which had bitten the man, or any other snakes which might
be lurking therein.  But this procedure, while it may possibly have had the desired effect,
had also another, by no means desirable; for it was soon discovered that the threshing had
aroused the anger of a legion of enormous black ants--fierce, venomous creatures nearly an
inch long-- which came swarming by thousands up out of holes in the ground, and attacked the
intruders with indescribable ferocity.  The unfortunate semi-naked Indians instantly scattered
in ignominious flight, leaving the two white men to deal with the situation as best they could.
And although Earle and Dick were, of course, fully clothed, and their bodies were therefore
reasonably well protected, they were both severely bitten before, by setting fire to the grass
and allowing it to blaze for a few seconds before beating it out, they were able to put the
foe to flight. The burning of the grass, however, revealed the fact that the soil was everywhere
honeycombed with holes, into which the creatures had doubtless retreated, ready to sally forth
again upon the smallest provocation; therefore, in order to protect themselves from further
attack, they cut an immense quantity of grass, strewed it over the central portion of the already
burnt area, and burned it over again; after which, the ashes being first swept away with branches,
they ventured to go into camp, the Indians slinking back by twos and threes as soon as they
perceived that the risk of renewed hostilities was over. As for the two white men, although
they bathed their hurts with dilute ammonia as quickly as they could, they both suffered acutely,
to such an extent, indeed, that they were both in a high state of fever, bordering on delirium,
before midnight.  Earle, however, foreseeing what was impending, mixed for himself and Dick
a strong draught, which no doubt helped to avert even worse consequences, and by dawn of the
following morning the fever was conquered and the sufferers sank into a somewhat troubled sleep,
from which the faithful Peter would not permit them to be aroused upon any pretext whatsoever.
As for the bitten man, he suffered severely for several hours, the wounded limb swelling to
about three times its normal size, while acute pains shot through the whole of his tortured
body; but at length these gradually grew less, until he sank into a state of coma which eventually
became natural sleep, during which the swollen limb gradually resumed its normal dimensions.
When he at length awoke, beyond being troubled with a dazed feeling and, of course, a considerable
amount of pain arising from the cauterisation of the wound, he seemed to be little the worse
for his adventure; and when at length the party struck camp and resumed their march shortly
after mid-day, he was able to hobble along with the rest, although it was found necessary to
relieve him of all work during that day.

Such was the first adventure of the party in that terrible forest; but there were others still
worse to follow, as they soon found.  Nothing very particular, however, befell them on that
second day's march, for after their experiences of the previous day they were careful to conduct
their march with all due precaution, Inaguy leading the way and industriously beating the grass
before him with a long, slender switch, while Dick and Earle, following him on either flank,
did likewise.  And the wisdom of this method of procedure was manifested a dozen times or more
during the afternoon's march by sudden, quick scurrying sounds in the grass immediately ahead,
bearing witness to the fact that a lurking snake had been startled and was effecting a hasty
retreat.

When at length the time came to pitch camp for the night, the tactics of the previous day were
repeated, the grass being thoroughly burnt away over an area spacious enough to accommodate
the party.  And here again the wisdom of their action was made manifest; for when the ashes
were swept up for removal the shrivelled remains of several centipedes and scorpions--some
of them of quite unusual size--were found, which would doubtless have given trouble had not
the flames rendered them harmless.

It was well on toward mid-afternoon of their third day's march through the forest when the
explorers met with their next adventure.  The total absence of flowers in this forest has already
been remarked upon, but about the time named above it appeared as though this reproach was
no longer to apply.  For, after pressing through a part where both the timber and the undergrowth
had been found thicker than usual, the party entered a wide open glade of considerable extent
without a single tree in it.  To make up for the absence of trees, however, there were, dotted
about here and there in the midst of the long grass, several clumps of perfectly white flowers,
ten or a dozen flowers in each clump.  And as these clumps of flowers came into view, the whole
party halted involuntarily, struck with amazement; for the sight was, beyond all question,
the most wonderful that any of them had ever beheld.  The blooms, shaped somewhat like the
familiar Canterbury bell, were of absolutely gigantic proportions, some certainly not less
than six feet in height, exclusive of the short, thick stem, while many were even larger than
this.  Each clump was surrounded by a kind of spray of still more enormous leaves, each leaf
being about twelve feet long by some eight feet broad, lying almost flat upon the grass and
forming a complete barricade round the clump.  The air was charged with a peculiar but exceedingly
pleasant fragrance, which no doubt emanated from these wonderful botanical curiosities; and
after a short halt to take in the details of the extraordinary picture, Earle announced his
determination to halt for the remainder of the day in the glade, in order that he might examine
the flowers at leisure.  Accordingly, a wide, clear space in about the centre of the glade
was chosen, and preparations for pitching the camp were briskly proceeded with.

The discovery of these gigantic flowers threw Earle into a condition of quite pleasant excitement.
He was a man of method, and, as such, had naturally kept a diary of the proceedings of the
party from the moment of its departure from New York.  Hitherto, however, the diary had been
kept solely as a future aid to memory, and for his own individual purposes alone; but now the
discovery of what at the moment he believed to be an entirely new species of plant, suddenly
inspired him with the ambition to become enrolled in the ranks of those scientific explorers
who have become famous by virtue of the remarkable character of their discoveries, and it began
to dawn upon him that there were possibilities in this journey of his which might enable him
to become one of the immortals of scientific discovery.  So elated was he at the prospect that
he could not resist the temptation to communicate his hopes to Dick, who, somewhat matter-of-fact
individual though he was, nevertheless heartily sympathised with his friend's ambition, and
cheerfully undertook to assist in every way possible, if Earle would but indicate the direction
in which assistance might be valuable.

"I guess you can help me very shortly then," said Earle.  "First of all, I am going to take
a photograph from somewhere over there, showing a general view of this glade, with especial
reference to the arrangement and distribution of those clusters of gigantic flowers; and when
I have done that I propose to select the cluster containing the finest blooms, station myself
on one of the leaves--I guess they'll bear my weight easily enough--and stand upright against
a flower, so that my figure will serve as a sort of scale by which a correct idea of its size
may be conveyed.  And that is where you will come in.  I shall want you to take the photograph
of me as I stand there.  I will select the spot from which the photograph is to be taken, and
will focus the camera, stop down the lens to the extent required to get satisfactory definition,
and generally arrange the picture; and all that you will need to do will be to remove the cap
and give the proper exposure when I am ready.  The light is not too good, and I intend to use
the orange screen, so I guess the exposure will be rather a lengthy one, but I will determine
its correct duration by means of the exposure metre; so all that you will have to do will be
to remove the cap and carefully note the time.  See?"

"Certainly," replied Dick, "and you may depend upon me to carry out your instructions."

The camera--a compact quarter-plate instrument, adapted for use either in the hand or mounted
upon a tripod--was routed out, the fact that there were four unexposed films still in it ascertained,
and the pair went off together, intent upon taking the proposed photographs.

The determination of the precise position from which to take the first picture was a rather
lengthy process, for Earle had the eye of an artist and was anxious that the result should
be not only a photograph, but also a picture.  A suitable spot was, however, at length found,
and the photograph was taken, the correct exposure involving the uncapping of the lens for
no less than forty-five seconds.  Fortunately, there was no wind, consequently there was no
movement, and Earle was sanguine that he had secured a thoroughly satisfactory picture.

Then came the choice of the particular clump of blooms to be photographed at close quarters,
with Earle standing in the midst of them to show their enormous size.  This was an even more
lengthy process than the other; but at length everything was ready, and Earle, leaving Dick
standing by the camera, strode across the few yards of intervening space, and proceeded to
climb upon one of the monster leaves preparatory to posing himself.  He did this by pressing
the point of the leaf down to the ground and then stepping on it and walking up its centre,
intending to pose himself at the junction of the leaf with its massive stalk, in which position
he would be able to stand quite close to the enormous flower which was to be the principal
object in the proposed picture.

But when Earle had traversed a little more than half the length of the huge leaf, it suddenly
curled up and, to Dick's horror, completely enveloped the adventurous American's form, round
which it tightly enfolded itself, while a half-smothered cry for help issued from its folds.

Leaving the camera where it was, Dick rushed forward, drawing his heavy hunting knife from
its sheath as he did so, and dashing in, began to hack desperately at the stem of the leaf,
believing that if he could sever it from its parent plant, he would be able to deliver his
friend from its stifling embrace.  But he soon found that, stout as was the blade he was wielding,
and strong as was the arm that wielded it, he could do little or nothing against the marvellously
tough stem which he was attempting to sever.  It was as thick as his own leg and so hard and
slippery that the keen blade simply slithered along it instead of biting into it; and realising
his helplessness, he rushed out into the open, where he could be seen and heard from the camp,
and yelled to Inaguy and Peter to bring axes, and for the rest of the men to bring along machetes.

There was a note of urgency in Dick's stentorian tones which caused all hands instantly to
drop what they were doing and rush to his call; but it was nearly ten minutes before the stubborn
stalk yielded to the desperate onslaught made upon it; and when at length it drooped to the
ground and the party threw themselves upon it, it cost them another arduous five minutes to
slit the tough, leather-like fibre of the leaf apart and haul out the imprisoned and, by that
time, insensible body of their leader.

By Dick's direction they carried Earle's body to the camp, and, stripping it, laid it upon
one of the camp beds already arranged in the tent.  This done, Dick carefully examined the
inanimate form in search of wounds or other injuries, but found nothing.  The heart was beating
strongly and steadily, the pulse was firm, though a trifle rapid, and the breathing was somewhat
irregular; otherwise Earle's aspect was that of a man plunged in profound sleep.  So completely,
indeed, was this the case that after Dick had ineffectually striven by every means in his power
to arouse his friend, he was fain to leave him as he was, contenting himself by remaining by
the side of the bed, keeping his fingers on Earle's pulse so that he might at once become aware
of any fluctuations in its beat, and awaiting the moment when a change of some sort should occur.

Hour after hour dragged its slow length along and still the American lay plunged deep in that
strange slumber, the only changes in his condition being that from time to time his pulse and
his heart quickened their beats and his breath came more heavily, as though the sleeper laboured
under some strong excitement; until at length, about eleven o'clock, when the camp was wrapped
in silence and all its members, except Dick, fast asleep, Earle suddenly opened his eyes and
stared first at the lantern and then at Dick, with a puzzled and distinctly annoyed expression.
At length he exclaimed:

"Hello, Dick!  What the mischief are you sitting there for, looking as glum as an owl?  And
why on earth did you wake me?  Man alive, I--"

"I didn't wake you," answered Dick, "but, all the same, I am profoundly thankful to see you
awake once more, and apparently in the possession of all your senses.  Do you remember what
happened to you?"

"You bet I do!" answered Earle emphatically.  "Shall I ever forget it? Why, man, I've been
in Elysium.  I've been--oh! dash it all, there are no words to describe the delights of the
last few--Say! how long have I been asleep?"

Dick looked at his watch.  "Getting well on for eight hours," he answered.

"Eight hours!" reiterated Earle, in tones of intense disgust.  "Only eight hours, did you say?
Why, man alive, if what you say be true, in those measly eight hours I have lived years of
joy and delight unspeakable.  I have beheld scenes of unearthly indescribable beauty; I have
participated in pageants glorious and magnificent beyond conception; I have--oh! what's the
use?  If I were to talk from now until doomsday I couldn't even begin to convey to your gross
mind the most feeble and shadowy notion of the joys and delights which have been mine."

He spoke rapidly in tones of feverish excitement, and his eyes were almost as luminous as those
of King Cole, who sat up on his haunches, alert and quivering, on the other side of the pallet.

"Look here, old chap," said Dick anxiously, "easy on.  Don't get excited, whatever you do.
Your adventure of this afternoon has given you a rather bad shaking up.  You've had a pretty
severe shock, both mental and physical, if I'm any judge, and it looks to me very much as though
you are going to be ill.  Better let me mix you a soothing draught, hadn't you?  Just tell
me what ingredients to take, and how much of each, and I'll mix them in a brace of shakes--"

But by the time that Dick got thus far, Earle had begun to talk again, loudly and excitedly,
and was sitting up on the pallet, waving his arms wildly.  And when Dick attempted to force
him back into a reclining position the American suddenly developed a kind of frenzy, seizing
Cavendish by the throat and doing his utmost to throttle him, while King Cole, sorely puzzled
at such extraordinary behaviour on the part of his two especial friends, snarled angrily and
bolted out of the tent into the velvety star-lit darkness.

So violent did Earle become, and such extraordinary strength did he develop under the influence
of the delirium which had now seized him that Dick was compelled in self-defence to shout for
help; and presently Peter, Inaguy, and some three or four others came rushing in, and, under
the impression that the two leaders were fighting, separated them.  But a few hurried words
of explanation from Cavendish "put them wise" to the situation, and while by main force they
restrained Earle from rising and rushing naked into the night, Dick routed out the medicine
chest and, hurriedly consulting the pages of the accompanying book of instructions, prepared
a strong sleeping draught, which, among them, they compelled the now violently crazy patient
to swallow.

But it was nearly an hour before the potion became fully effective, and even then Earle's sleep
was fitful and disturbed, his semi-coherent mutterings showing that his mind was still unhinged.
To be brief, the outbreak of delirium was followed by a period of extreme weakness and profound
dejection, during which the patient lost all memory of his splendid dream, and, at least temporarily,
of several other things as well, so that nearly a fortnight elapsed before Earle was again
well enough for the party to resume their journey.

It was while Earle was still an invalid, and before their march was resumed, that on a certain
occasion, while Dick was sitting at his bedside, he besought the latter to tell him exactly
what had happened on the memorable afternoon which witnessed their arrival in the glade, he
apparently having forgotten everything about it.  With some reluctance, after much earnest
entreaty, Dick consented; and after he had related all, Earle became very thoughtful for some
time.  At length, however, he looked up and said:

"Yes; I am beginning to remember; it is all coming back to me--the occurrences of that afternoon,
I mean.  I suppose you haven't attempted to develop that negative giving the general view of
the glade, have you?"

"Not I," answered Dick, "I've had too many other things to think about. But I'll do so to-night,
if you like."

"I wish you would, old chap," said Earle.  "If my suspicion is correct, that negative should
be peculiarly interesting, and I should like it developed before we leave here, in order that
if it should be imperfect, we may take another, as well as a near view of one of the clumps
of blooms.  By the way, did you ever happen to have heard of the Death Flower?"

"N-o, I can't say that I have," answered Dick.  "Is there such a flower?"

"So it is said," responded Earle.  "I remember having read somewhere of such a flower, which,
it is asserted, blooms in a certain island in the Pacific.  The flower is said to be big enough
to allow a man to stand upright in it; but if anyone chances to be so ill-advised as to try
the experiment, the experimenter falls asleep, lulled to slumber by the peculiar fragrance
of the flower, and is at once favoured with the most glorious dreams, in the midst of which
the flower closes its petals and suffocates him.  Now, that was very much my own experience,
except that I was enveloped by the leaf instead of the flower; you dug me out instead of leaving
me to die; and my gorgeous dream came afterwards--at least, so I suppose--instead of while
I was enveloped.  It will be exceedingly interesting if it should prove that the flowers in
this glade are Death Flowers, for I believe it has hitherto been understood that they flourish
only in one spot in the world, namely, that small island in the Pacific, the name of which
I have for the moment forgotten."

Accordingly, as soon as it was dark that night, Dick lighted the ruby lamp and proceeded very
carefully to develop the precious negative, which proved to be absolutely flawless, to Earle's
great delight.  And on the following morning, at Earle's urgent request, Dick took out the
camera and photographed at close quarters the identical clump of flowers that had so nearly
proved fatal to his friend, taking care to include in the picture the severed stem and the
shredded leaf which had done the mischief.  And this negative also proved eminently satisfactory.

As they sat together, on that particular afternoon, examining the two negative films, Earle
suddenly looked up and remarked:

"That is three times that you have saved my life, Dick; and if I have not said anything about
it up to the present, you mustn't think that I am not profoundly grateful to you--"

"Oh, yes, of course, I know, old chap," interrupted Dick, who had an intense dislike to being
effusively thanked for any little service that it might be in his power to render a friend.
"Please oblige me by saying no more about it.  At the same time, let me remark that I have
not the slightest notion of what you are talking about.  How do you reason it out that I've
saved your life three times?  I only know of--"

"Three times, I said; and three times I mean," returned Earle.  "The first time was when the
Everest sank; the second time was when you got me out of the fatal embrace of that enveloping
leaf; and the third time was when you gave me that draught that sent me to sleep while I was
delirious.  For now that I am again in my right mind, and the danger is all over, I may as
well admit that, while the delirium held me, the paramount idea in my mind was to get away
from you, by hook or by crook, slip away to the flowers, and throw myself upon another leaf,
so that I might enjoy a repetition of those glorious dreams and sensations that I told you
of.  In which case, of course, I should have died.  So there you are."

"Thanks!" said Dick grimly.  "I'm glad you have told me, for I shall now know exactly what
to do, if anything similar should happen."

Earle's strength was slow to return to him, for there were two adverse influences with which
to contend, one being the depressing influence of the forest itself in the midst of which they
were encamped, while the other was the total absence of game, which necessitated their falling
back upon the stock of canned and preserved food provided for such an emergency, in order to
sustain the invalid and restore him to perfect health.  At length, however, Earle pronounced
himself so far convalescent as to be capable of resuming the march; and one morning the party
broke camp and continued their journey.  The length of the marches was of course greatly curtailed,
especially during the first two or three days, to fit them to the diminished powers of the
invalid, and at the expiration of that time the party were fortunate enough to pass into a
belt of forest of a totally different character, where game was again to be found, and from
that moment Earle's progress toward complete recovery was rapid.

CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE GREAT SWAMP AND ITS WEIRD DENIZENS.

It was on the eleventh day after the resumption of their march that, quite early in the afternoon,
they finally emerged from the forest and found themselves upon the edge of a swamp, which stretched
away ahead and on either side of them as far as the eye could reach, except that, in the extreme
distance, and in the direction in which they wished to travel, there was the suggestion of
firm and somewhat hilly ground which might be about thirty miles distant.

"Gee!" ejaculated Earle, as the party came to a halt by the margin of the morass-like expanse,
"this promises to be a corker, Dick.  Eh, what? Guess we'll have to go into camp for a bit,
and explore.  I don't at all like the notion of attempting to force our way across that swamp,
if there is a method of working round it--as of course there is if we are prepared to travel
far enough.  This reminds me of Florida, where I once spent a month shooting 'gators--and other
things.  I guess there'll be all the 'gators we want in there, to say nothing of snakes, mosquitos,
scorpions, centipedes, and other `varmint.'  No; I guess we'll go round, if we can; and if
we can't, we must make dugouts, and effect the crossing in them.  We'll never be able to do
it any other way."

It was indeed a formidable-looking barrier, this vast expanse of swamp, that stretched itself,
mile after mile, right athwart the party's course, and its aspect was as dreary and depressing
as one could well imagine.  All along its margin the soil was soft, boggy and treacherous,
to such an extent, indeed, that while making a preliminary investigation of the ground before
definitely deciding upon a location for the camp, Dick suddenly sank in to above his knees,
and only succeeded in extricating himself with the utmost difficulty, assisted though he was
by Earle and some half a dozen Indians, who formed themselves into a human chain and dragged
him out by main force.

The entire expanse of swamp appeared to be level, with the exception of a few very trifling
elevations here and there, and seemed to consist of boggy soil covered with a rank growth of
coarse grass, reeds, and stunted bush, sparsely dotted here and there with a few gnarled and
unwholesome-looking trees, the whole intersected by a labyrinth of canals filled with stagnant
water, which wound hither and thither in a most purposeless and bewildering fashion.  That
insect life abounded there was manifest at the most cursory glance, for great clouds of midges
or flies could be seen hovering in the air in every direction, while Earle's surmise as to
the presence of alligators was abundantly confirmed by the frequent roaring of the creatures.
The forest seemed to grow close up to the margin of the swamp everywhere, a mere narrow strip
of open ground some twenty to thirty yards wide, dividing the two.

A fairly satisfactory site for the camp having at length been found, Earle and Dick, armed
with rifle and automatic, and each accompanied by an Indian carrying a machete, set off in
opposite directions to explore the margin of the swamp, in the hope of discovering a spot from
which a promising start to cross might be made; while King Cole, quite unable to decide which
of his masters he would accompany, finally laid down with his head between his paws and whined
pitifully, refusing to be comforted by anybody.

Warned by his recent mishap, Dick was careful to give the treacherous margin of the swamp a
wide berth.  The route he was pursuing led about due south; and for nearly an hour he pursued
his way at a good brisk pace, uneventfully and without finding anything like that of which
he was in search.  Eventually, however, he arrived at a point where the edge of the forest
abruptly receded toward the east, leaving a wide expanse of bare soil, beyond which, at a distance
of a short quarter of a mile, the swamp again appeared, stretching away limitlessly toward
the south and east.  Apparently, the only thing to do was to follow the northerly margin of
solid ground, which seemed to trend away in a westerly direction, the direction namely in which
Earle wished to travel, and this Dick accordingly did.  He followed this course for about half
an hour, finding the tongue of firm ground which he was traversing vary in width, from time
to time, from several yards to, in places, merely enough for a man conveniently to walk upon,
while it twisted hither and thither in the most erratic fashion, although on the whole it continued
to push its way steadily westward toward the heart of the swamp.  Then, glancing at the declining
sun, he decided that he must retrace his steps if he desired to get back to camp before dark.

Thus far, the afternoon's journey had been wholly uneventful, excepting for the persistent
attacks of the myriads of mosquitoes and flies which swarmed in great clouds about the two
adventurers to such an extent that there were times when they were compelled to halt and beat
the pests off their bodies.  But now they had something else than flies and mosquitoes to think
about, for they had scarcely progressed a quarter of a mile on their return when, as they approached
a spot where the firm soil narrowed to a mere causeway, scarcely two feet in width, Dick, who
was leading, suddenly became aware of a strange and formidable-looking creature squatting at
the far extremity of the causeway, apparently awaiting their approach.

As his eyes fell upon it Cavendish came to a halt so suddenly that the Indian in his rear cannoned
into him, nearly knocking him into the black water alongside.

"Steady, Moquit!" exclaimed Dick, addressing his follower in the Indian tongue, in which he
was rapidly acquiring a considerable degree of proficiency.  "Look ahead, Moquit.  What is
that thing?  Have you ever seen anything like it before?"

"Never, master," answered Moquit, staring with bulging eyes at the apparition, which in its
turn was staring back at them.  "I like it not. Toqui preserve us!"--(Toqui was the name of
Moquit's most revered god)--"it looks like a slayer of men.  Had not master better destroy
it with his fire tube, lest it cross over and devour us?"

"I do not think we need greatly fear that," answered Dick, holding his rifle in readiness nevertheless.
"The causeway is too narrow for the brute to cross.  What, in the name of Fortune, can the
beast be?" he concluded in his own tongue.

He might well wonder; for never in his life before had he seen such a creature, either alive,
dead, or even in a picture.  And yet--stay!  As he looked at the thing more intently, there
seemed to gradually float into his memory a hazy sort of recollection that he had seen a picture
or representation of the creature which squatted there stolidly some thirty yards before him.

According to Cavendish's own subsequent description, which was confirmed in every particular
by Moquit, the general impression conveyed was that of a gigantic frog, as big as an ox, but
with several important modifications, one of which was that its capacious mouth was furnished
with a most formidable set of sharp, curved, dagger-like teeth, of which the observers gained
an excellent view, since the creature opened its mouth several times.  It was a quadruped;
that is to say, it was provided with four legs, but while its front legs were so short as to
be little more than rudimentary, its hind legs were as long and apparently as powerful, proportionately,
as those of a kangaroo.  And, like a kangaroo, it was provided with a long tail, as thick at
the root as its own body, tapering away to a blunt point.  Indeed, as Dick remarked, he could
scarcely describe the creature better than by likening it to what he conceived might be the
appearance of a cross between a frog and a kangaroo.  It had a pair of big, staring eyes, its
toes were armed with long, murderous-looking claws, and its brownish-yellow skin was mottled
all over with wart-like protuberances.

For fully five minutes, Dick supposes, he stood intently studying the peculiarities of the
extraordinary creature, animated much more by curiosity than by any sense of fear, for he had
somehow fully persuaded himself that the beast would not hazard the passage of that narrow
causeway, while in any case a shot or two from the U.M.C. Remington, which the young Englishman
carried, would of a surety put an end to the creature's career.  Then, as Dick still stood
watching and perhaps waiting for developments of some sort, the great brute suddenly rose upon
its hind legs and, uttering a curious squealing sound, launched itself into the air with a
terrific spring which Cavendish saw with consternation would bring the beast right upon him.
Quick and unexpected as was the action, however, it did not take Dick wholly by surprise; on
the contrary, as though by instinct, he threw up the muzzle of his rifle, pressed the trigger,
and heard the bullet thud as it struck the leaping body.  A loud, horrible scream escaped the
brute as the bullet smote it.  It writhed in mid-air, and that writhe caused it to fall into
the water instead of landing upon Dick's body, as it must otherwise have done.  It fell with
a terrific splash which drenched Dick and Moquit, and still writhing with pain, instantly turned,
with the evident intention of climbing out and attacking the two men.  But by this time Dick
had begun to realise the dangerous character of the creature, and, rapidly levelling his rifle
again, shot it through the head as it laid its two front paws upon the bank preparatory to
climbing out.  With a moaning gasp, the great body relaxed and slowly settled back into the
water, where it presently turned over on its back and floated, dead.  Less than a minute later,
while Dick and Moquit still stood staring in amazement at the weird creature, there came a
sudden, violent swirling in the black water, and the heads of some six or seven enormous alligators
appeared round the body.  The great jaws of the reptiles opened, and the carcass was violently
dragged hither and thither as the huge saurians tugged fiercely at it.  Dick did not wait to
see the issue of the struggle, but skipped nimbly across the causeway, with Moquit close upon
his heels, and made the best of his way back to camp, where he found Earle already anxiously
awaiting him.

"Well," demanded the American, as Cavendish came within hail, "have you met with any luck?
I was beginning to feel a bit uneasy about you, for we seem to have struck a rather dangerous
streak of country here."

"What!" exclaimed Dick.  "Have you, too, been meeting with adventures, then?"

"Of a sort, yes; though nothing worth speaking about," answered Earle. "Simply met the biggest
python I've ever seen; and as the beggar seemed in a quarrelsome humour and spoiling for a
fight, I shot him.  And you? I sort of gather from your last remark that you have met with
an adventure of some sort.  Is that so?"

"You bet!" answered Dick, who was almost unconsciously adopting many of Earle's expressive
idioms.  And he proceeded to relate in detail the occurrences of the afternoon.

"Gee!" exclaimed Earle, when his companion had finished.  "That sounds interesting.  I wonder
what the brute can have been."  (He was referring to the strange beast which Dick had shot).
"Do you think you could draw a picture of him?"

"Oh yes, after a fashion," answered Dick, who was really rather clever with his pencil and
brush in an amateurish fashion.  "He was something like this."  And, whipping out his pocket-book,
he rapidly produced a very spirited pencil sketch of the unknown creature.

"Gee!" repeated Earle, studying the sketch.  "Say, Dick, this is intensely interesting.  The
thing looks absolutely new to me.  And yet-- I don't quite know.  Seems to me that I've somewhere
seen something a bit like it before--"

"That's what I thought," said Dick; "though I'm quite prepared to swear that I never before
saw the actual thing itself.  I should have remembered it if I had."

"Y-e-s, I guess you would," returned Earle, still thoughtfully considering the sketch.  At
length he returned the book to Dick, remarking:

"Then you think there is just a possibility that we may be able to cross the swamp by way of
that tongue of firm ground that you explored this afternoon?  In that case, I guess we'll try
it.  We may succeed; and if we do, it will save us a long journey round; for I was unable to
find the northern end of the swamp this afternoon, although, before turning back I climbed
the highest tree in the neighbourhood and carefully searched the whole of the visible country
through my Goertz prismatics. We will try that tongue of land of yours to-morrow, Dick.  And
as for the flies and things, I guess we can beat them by enveloping our heads in gauze veils
and wearing gloves.  I brought some green gauze along expressly to meet such a contingency.
Learned the wrinkle in Africa, where the flies and mosquitoes used to drive me pretty nearly
crazy."

An hour after sunrise on the following morning found the expedition en route, and in due time
it reached the tongue of firm ground which Dick had discovered during the preceding afternoon.
Here the two leaders enveloped their heads, helmets and all, in capacious veils of green gauze
which Earle had produced during the preceding evening.

Earle was in exceptionally high spirits that morning.  The story of Dick's encounter with the
strange beast had intensely interested him, for he was by way of being a naturalist, as well
as a good many other things, and he was naturally eager to get a sight of another creature
of the same species.  Then a view at close quarters of the swamp added further to his excitement,
for even then, in the dazzling glare of the morning sun, there was a certain suggestion of
weirdness and uncanniness about the place that appealed very strongly to his imagination. 
To young, prosaic Dick Cavendish, a sailor pure and simple, whose only knowledge of science
was that connected with navigation, the swamp was just--well, a swamp, and nothing more; but,
to Earle's higher scientific intelligence it was an absorbingly interesting mystery.  For they
had scarcely penetrated it to the depth of a mile before the American began to be aware that
the character of his surroundings was undergoing a subtle change, the herbage underfoot, the
rushes that edged the lagoons and water channels, the plants that here and there in wide patches
hid the surface of the water, the ferns that decked the banks of the water-courses, were all
new and strange to him; and this, in conjunction with Dick's adventure here, less than twenty-four
hours ago, generated within him a thrilling conviction that he was on the brink of great and
important discoveries.

Presently Dick turned to him and said, pointing: "You see where the ground narrows away to
a mere ridge, ahead there?  It was just on this side of it that the queer beast was squatting
when I first caught sight of him."

"That so?" responded Earle, coming to a sudden standstill.  "Halt there, men; don't advance
another step until I tell you," he ordered, wheeling round and holding up his hand.

"Now then, Dick," he continued, "you and I will go forward, carefully examining the soil for
footprints.  Perhaps, if we are in luck, we may succeed in finding an impression, though I
am afraid the ground is rather too dry--stay, what is this?"

Stretching out his hand to stay Dick's incautious advance, Earle went down on one knee and
carefully examined a faint impression on the ground. 'Tis so long since I was there, and I am
so utterly a stranger to every thing that passes there, that I must talk vastly in the dark
to those I write: and having in a manner settled myself here, where there can be no news, I
am void of all matter for filling up a letter. As, by the absence of the Great Duke, Florence
is become in a manner a country town, YOU may imagine that we are
not without dem`el`es; but for a country town I believe there never
were a set of people so peaceable, and such strangers to scandal.

'Tis the family of love, where every body is paired, and go as constantly together as paroquets.
Here nobody hangs or drowns themselves; they are not ready to cut one another's throats about
elections or parties; don't think that wit consists in saying bold truths, or humour in getting
drunk. But I shall give you no more of their characters, because I am so unfortunate as to think that
their encomium consists in being the reverse of the English, who
in general are either mad, or enough to make other people so.

After telling you so fairly my sentiments, you may believe, my dear Harry, that I had rather see
you here than in England. 'Tis an evil wish for you, who should not be lost in so obscure a
place as this. I will not make you compliments, or else here is a charming opportunity for saying
what I think of you. As I am convinced you love me, and as I am conscious you have One strong
reason for it, I will own to you, that for my own peace you should wish me to remain here. I am
so well within and without, that you would scarce know me: I am younger than ever, think of nothing
but diverting myself, and live in a round of pleasures. We have operas, concerts, and balls,
mornings and evenings. I dare not tell you all One's idleness: you would look so grave and senatorial
at hearing that one rises at eleven in the morning, goes to the opera at nine at night, to supper
at one, and to bed at three! But literally here the evenings and nights are so charming and
so warm, one can't avoid 'em.

Did I tell you Lady Mary Wortley is here? She laughs at my Lady Walpole, scolds my Lady Pomfret,
and is laughed at by the whole town.

Her face swelled violently on one side with the remains of a-, partly covered with a plaster,
and partlv with white paint, which for cheapness she has bought so coarse, that you would not use
it to wash a chimney.-In three words I will give you her picture (212) as we drew it in the Sortes
Virgilianae- Insanam vatem aepicies.

I give you my honour, we did not choose it; but Mr. Gray, Mr. Cooke, (213) Sir Francis Dashwood,
(214) and I, and several others, drew it fairly amongst a thousand for different people, most
of which did not hit as you may imagine: those that did I will tell
you.

For our most religious and gracious- -Dii, talem terris avertite pestem.

For one that would be our most religious and gracious. Purpureus veluti cum flos succisus aratro
Languescit moriens, lassove papavera collo Demis`ere caput, pluvia cum fort`e gravantur.

For his son. Regis Romani: primus qui legibus urbem Fundabit, Curibus parvis et paupere terra, Missus
in imperium magnum.

For Sir Robert. Res dura et regni novitas me talia cogunt Moliri, et late fines custode tueri.

I will show you the rest when I see you.

(211) In a letter from Florence, written by Lady Mary to Mr. Wortley, on the 11th of August, she
says, "Lord and Lady Pomfret take pains to make the place agreeable to me, and I have been
visited by the greatest part of the people of quality." See the edition of her works, edited
by Lord Wharncliffe, vol. ii. p. 325.-E.

(212) The following favourable picture" of Lady Mary is by Spence, who met her at Rome, in the ensuing
January:-" She is one of the most shining characters in the world, but shines like a comet; she
is all irregularity, and always wandering; the most wise, most imprudent; loveliest, most disagreeable; best-natured,
cruellest woman in the world; 'all things by turns, and nothing long.'"-E.

(213) George Cooke, Esq. afterwards member for Tregony, and chief prothonotary in the Court of
Common Pleas. On Mr. Pitt's return to office in 1766 he was appointed joint paymaster-general,
and died in 1768. Here 'tis. Was ever such a lon@ letter? But 'tis nothing to what I shall have to say
to you.

(215) Though brave, skilful, and enterprising Sir John failed to acquire renown, in consequence
of mere accidents.

On the breaking out of the Spanish war, he was ordered to cruise in the Bay of Biscay; but, owing
to tempestuous weather, was compelled to put into port for the winter. E.

(216) Walpole calls the Hercules' Pillars an alehouse. Whatever it might have been at the period
he wrote, it is very certain that, after the peace of 1762, it was a respectable tavern, where
the Marquis of Granby, and other persons of rank, particularly military men, had frequent
dinner parties, which were then fashionable. It was also an inn of great repute among the west-country
gentlemen, coming to London for a few weeks, who thought themselves
fortunate if they could secure accommodations for their families at
the Hercules' Pillars.

The spot where it once stood, is now occupied by the noble mansion of the Duke of Wellington.-E.

(217)
Dr. Antonio Cocchi, a learned physician, resident at Florence, who published a collection of
Greek writers upon medicine. He figures conspicuously in Spence's Anecdotes.-E.

(218) Margaret Rolle, wife of Robert Walpole, eldest son of Sir Robert Walpole, created Lord
Walpole during the lifetime of his father.

(219) Giuseppe Tartini of Padua, whom Viotti pronounced the last great
improver of the practice of the violin.

Several of Tartini's compositions are particularized in that amusing little volume, "The Violin
and its Professors," by Mr. Dubourg, who has recorded in quaint verse
the well-known story of the "Devil's Sonata," a piece of diablerie,
the result of which is that to this day, Tartini's tale hath made
all fiddlers say, A hard sonata is the devil to play!-E.

166 Letter
28 To Richard West, Esq. >From Florence, Nov. 1740.

Child, I am going to let you see your shocking proceedings with us. On my conscience, I believe
'tis three months since you wrote to either Gray or me. If you had been ill, Ashton would have
said so; and if you had been dead the gazettes would have said it. If you had been angry,-but that's
impossible; how can one quarrel with folks three thousand miles off?

We are neither divines nor commentators, and consequently have not hated you on paper. 'Tis
to show that my charity for you cannot be interrupted at this distance
that I write to you, though I have nothing to say, for 'tis a bad
time for small news; and when emperors and czarinas are dying all
up and down Europe, one can't pretend to tell you of any thing that
happens within our sphere.

Not but that we have our accidents too. if you have had a great wind in England, we have had
a great water at Florence.

We have been trying to set out every day, and pop upon you (220)
* * * * * It is fortunate that we stayed, for I don't know what had
become of us!

Yesterday, with violent rains, there came flouncing down from the
mountains such a flood that it floated the whole city.

The jewellers on the Old Bridge removed their commodities, -and in two hours after the bridge
was cracked. The torrent broke down the quays and drowned several coach-horses, which are kept here
in stables under ground. We were moated into our house all day, which is near the Arno, and
had the miserable spectacles of the ruins that were washed along
with the hurricane.

There was a cart with two oxen not quite dead, and four men in it drowned: but what was ridiculous,
there came tiding along a fat haycock, with a hen and her eggs, and a cat. The torrent is
considerably abated; but we expect terrible news from the country, especially from Pisa, which
stands so much lower, and nearer the sea. There is a stone here, which, when the water overflows,
Pisa is entirely flooded. The water rose two ells yesterday above that stone. Judge!

For this last month we have passed our time but dully; all diversions silenced on the emperor's
death, (221) and everybody out of town. I have seen nothing but cards and dull pairs of cicisbeos.
I have literally seen so much love and pharaoh since being here,
that I believe I shall never love either again SO long as I live.

Then I am got in a horrid lazy way of a morning. I don't believe I should know seven o'clock in
the morning again if I was to see it. But I am returning to England, and shall grow very solemn and
wise! Are you wise'( Dear West, have pity on one who have done nothing of gravity for these two
years, and do laugh sometimes.

We do nothing else, and have contracted such formidable ideas of the good people of England that
we are already nourishing great black eyebrows and great black beards, and teasing our countenances
into wrinkles. Then for the common talk of the times, we are quite at a loss, and for the dress.
You would oblige us exceedingly by forwarding to us the votes of the houses, the king's speech,
and the magazines; or if you had any such thing as a little book called the Foreigner's Guide
through the city of London and the liberties of Westminster; or a letter to a Freeholder; or
the Political Companion: then 'twoulg be an infinite obligation if
you would neatly band-box up a baby dressed after the newest Temple
fashion now in use at both play-houses.

Alack-a-day! We shall just arrive in the tempest of elections!

As our departure depends entirely upon the weather, we cannot tell you to a day when we shall
say Dear West, how glad I am to see you! and all the many questions
and answers that we shall give and take.

Would the day were come! Do but figure to yourself the journey we are to pass through first!
But you can't conceive Alps, Apennines, Italian inns, and postchaises. I tremble at the thoughts.
They were just sufferable while new and unknown, and as we met them by the way in coming to
Florence, Rome, and Naples; but they are passed, and the mountains remain! Well, write to one
in the interim; direct to me addressed to Monsieur Selwyn, chez Monsieur.Ilexandre,
Rue St. Apolline, a Paris.

If Mr. Alexandre is not there, the street is, and I believe that will be sufficient. Adieu, my dear
child! Yours ever.

(220) A line of the manuscript is here torn away.

(221) Charles the Sixth, Emperor of Germany, upon whose death, on the 9th of October, his eldest
daughter, Maria-Theresa, in virtue of the Pragmatic Sanction, instantly
succeeded to the whole Austrian inheritance.-E.

168 Letter 29 To
The Rev. Joseph Spence.

(222) Florence, Feb. 21, 1741, N. S.

Sir, Not having time last post, I begged Mr. Mann to thank you for the obliging paragraph for me in
your letter to him. But as I desire a nearer correspondence with you than by third hands, I
assure you in my own proper person that I shall have great pleasure,
on our meeting in England, to renew an acquaintance that 'I began
with so much pleasure in Italy.

(223) I Will not reckon you among my modern friends, but in the first article of virtu: you have
given me so many new lights into a science that but a warmth and freedom that will flow from
my friendship, and which will not be contained within the circle of a severe awe. As I shall
always be attentive to give you any satisfaction that lies in my power, I take the first opportunity
of sending you two little poems, both by a hand that I know you esteem the most; if you have
not seen them, you will thank me for lilies of Mr. Pope: if you have, why I did not know it.

I don't know whether Lord Lincoln has received any orders to return home: I had a letter from one of
my brothers last post to tell me from Sir Robert that he would have me leave Italy as soon as
possible, lest I should be shut up unawares by the arrival of the
Spanish troops; and that I might pass some time in France if I had
amind.

I own I don't conceive how it is possible these troops should arrive without its being known
some time before. And as to the Great Duke's dominions, one can always be out of them in ten
hours or less. If Lord Lincoln has not received the same orders.. I shall believe what I now think,
that I am wanted for some other reason. I beg my kind love to Lord Lincoln, and that Mr. Spence
will believe me, his sincere humble servant HOR.

WALPOLE.

(222) The well-known friend of Pope and author of the Polymetis, who was then travelling on the
Continent with Henry, Earl of Lincoln, afterwards Duke of Newcastle. See ante p. 140, (Letter 14,
and footnote 175).-E.

(223) This acquaintance proved of infinite service to Walpole, shortly after the date of this letter,
when he was laid up with a quinsy at Reggio. Spence thus describes the circumstance: "About
three or four in the morning I was surprised with a message, saying that Mr. Walpole was very
much worse, and desired to see me; I went, and found him scarce able
to speak.

I soon learned from his servants that he had been all the while without a physician, and had
doctored himself; so I immediately sent for the best aid the place
would afford, and despatched a messenger to the minister at Florence,
desiring him to send my friend Dr. Cocchi.

In about twenty-four hours I had the satisfaction to find Mr. Walpole better: we left him in a fair
way of recovery, and we hope to see him next week at Venice. I had obtained leave of Lord Lincoln
to stay behind some days if he had been worse. You see what luck one has sometimes in going
out of one's way. If Lord Lincoln had not wandered to Reggio, Mr. Walpole (who is one of the
best-natured and most sensible young gentlemen England affords) would
have, in all probability, fallen a sacrifice to his disorder."-E.

169
Letter 30 To The Hon. H. S. Conway.

Florence, March 25th, 1741, N. S.

Dear Hal, You must judge by what you feel yourself of what I feel for Selwyn's recovery, with
the addition of what I have suffered from post to post. But as I find the whole town have had the
same sentiments about him, (though I am sure few so strong as myself,) I will not repeat what
you have heard so much. I shall write to him to-night, though he knows without my telling him how very
much I love him. To you, my dear Harry, I am infinitely obliged for the three successive letters
you wrote me about him, which gave me double pleasure, as they showed your attention for me at a
time that you know I must be so unhappy; and your friendship for him. Your account of Sir Robert's
victory (224) was so extremely well told, that I made Gray translate it into French, and have showed
it to all that could taste It, or were inquisitive on the occasion. I have received a print
by this post that diverts me extremely; 'the Motion.' (225) Tell me, dear, now, who made the
design, and who took the likenesses; they are admirable: the lines are as good as one sees on
such occasions. I wrote last post to Sir Robert, to wish him joy;
I hope he received my letter.

I was to have set out last Tuesday, but on Sunday came the news of the Queen of Hungary being brought
to bed of a son; (226) on which occasion here will be great triumphs, operas and masquerades, which
detain me for a short time.

I won't make you any excuse for sending you the follOWing lines; you
have prejudice enough for me to read with patience any Of My idlenesses.

(227)

My dear Harry, you enrage me with talking of another journey to Ireland; it will shock me if I don't
find you at my return: pray take care and be in England.

I wait with some patience to see Dr. Middleton's Tully, as I read the greatest part of it in manuscript;
though indeed 'tis rather a reason for my being impatient to read the rest. If Tully can receive
any additional honour, Dr. Middleton is most capable of conferring it. (228)

I receivc with great pleasure any remembrances of my lord and your sisters; I long to see all of
you.

Patapan is so handsome that he has been named the silver fleece; and there is a new order of
knighthood to be erected to his honour, in opposition to the golden. Precedents are searching,
and plans drawing up for that purpose. I hear that the natives pretend to be companions, upon the
authority of their dogskin waistcoats; but a council that has been held on purpose has declared
their pretensions impertinent. Patapan has lately taken wife unto him, as ugly as he is genteel,
but of a very great family, being the direct heiress of Canis Scaliger, Lord of Verona: which principality
we design to seize `a la Prussienne; that is, as soon as ever we shall have persuaded the republic
of Venice that we are the best friends they have in the world. Adieu, dear child! Yours ever.

P.
S. I left my subscriptions for Middleton's Tully with Mr. Selwyn; I won't trouble him, but
I wish you would take care and get the books, if Mr. S. has kept the list.

(224) On the event of Mr. Sandys' motion in the House of commons to remove Sir Robert Walpole
from the King's presence and councils for ever. [The motion was negatived by 290 against 106:
an unusual majority, which proceeded from the schism between the Tories and the Whigs, and
the secession of Shippen and his friends. The same motion was made by Lord-Carteret in the House
of Lords, and negatived by 108 against 59.-E.)

(225) The print alluded to exhibits an interesting view of Whitehall, the Treasury, and adjoining
buildings, as they stood at the time. The Earl of Chesterfield, as postilion of a coach which is
going full speed towards the Treasury, drives over all in his way. The Duke of Argyle is coachman,
flourishing a sword instead of a whip; while Doddington is represented as a spaniel, sitting between
his legs. Lord Carteret, perceiving the coach about to be overturned, is calling to the coachman,"Let
me get out!" Lord Cobbam, as the footman, is holding fast on by the straps; while Lord Lyttleton
is ambling by the side on a rosinante as thin as himself.

Smallbrook, Bishop of Lichfield, is bowing obsequiously as they pass;
while Sandys, letting fall the place-bill, exclaims, ,I thought what
would come of putting him on the box."

In the foreground is Pulteney, leading several figures by strings from their noses, and wheeling
a barrow filled with the Craftsman's Letters, Champion, State of
the Nation, and Common Sense, exclaiming, "Zounds, they are over!"

This caricature, and another, entitled " The Political Libertines, or Motion upon Motion,"
had been provoked by one put forth by Sir Robert Walpole's opponents,
entitled "The Grounds for the Motion;" and were followed up by another
from the supporters of Sandys' motion, entitled "The Motive or Reason
for his Triumph," which the caricaturist attributes entirely to bribery.-E.

(226)
Afterwards Joseph the Second, emperor of Germany.-E.

(227) Here follows
the Inscription for the neglected column in the place of St. Mark,
at Florence, afterwards printed in the Fugitive Pieces.

(228) Dr. Middleton's "History of the Life of Cicero" was published in the early part of this year,
by subscription, and dedicated to Pope's enemy, Lord Hervey. This
laboured encomium on his lordship obtained for the doctor a niche
in the Dunciad:-

Narcissus, praised with all a Parson's power, Look'd
a white lily sunk beneath a shower."-E.

170 Letter 31 To Richard
West, Esq. Reggio, May 1 1741, N. S.

"King--King Cole, come here, sir!  What's the matter with you, anyway?" called Earle.  And
the animal at once turned and crept cowering to the feet of the pair, his eyes glowing like
a pair of green lamps, and his lips drawn into a silent snarl.

That the weird cry was not repeated in no wise detracted from its startling character; but
although profound silence followed, it did not remain long unbroken, for a few minutes later
there came the sound as of great wings sweeping hither and thither.  And scarcely had this
sound died away when it was succeeded by others--low moans, sighs, whistlings, grunts, bellowings,
rustlings, splashings--some from a considerable distance, others apparently close at hand;
some obviously from the land to the rear of the party, and others quite as obviously from the
water in their front.  And, most disturbing consideration of all, every one of them was absolutely
unfamiliar, therefore in some vague, undefinable fashion, the more alarming.  This effect was
quickly made manifest by the agitated murmurings of the Indians, and the haste with which they
replenished the dying fire, heaping on fuel with such a lavish hand that, for the space of
a few yards all round the blaze, the light was almost as brilliant as that of day.

"Gee!" exclaimed Earle, as the weird sounds multiplied on all sides, "what would I not give
for a full moon and a clear sky, just now.  Bet your life, Dick, there are some very queer
scenes being enacted all round us at this moment, had we but light to reveal them.  I have
come to the conclusion that this swamp is unique in many respects.  By some freak of nature,
things here are entirely different from what they are elsewhere.  Even the vegetation is new
and strange to me; and I am convinced that it is also the home of many forms of animal life
unknown elsewhere.  The exasperating part of the whole thing is that most of the creatures
inhabiting it seem to be of nocturnal habit, hiding themselves during the day, and only emerging
into the open at night.  Just listen now to the hubbub of sound all about us.  Why, the place
must be fairly teeming with life!  And, by a perverse combination of circumstances, we can
see nothing of it--Ah! thank goodness, the lightning is becoming more vivid.  I would give
a good round sum for a real first-class thunderstorm; and, by ginks!  I believe we are going
to have it."

It seemed quite probable, for as though in response to Earle's ardently expressed desire, a
brilliant flash of sheet lightning flickered out of the now rapidly rising bank of cloud over
the distant hills, illumining the landscape for the fraction of a second, during which a momentary
glimpse was afforded of certain strange forms dotting the waters of the lagoon; but the illumination
was too brief to leave anything more than the most vague impression of those forms upon the
retina of the observers.  The glimpse, however, transient as it was, revealed enough to stimulate
their interest and curiosity to the highest pitch, and the two friends, with their rifles grasped
ready for instant action, sprang to their feet and stood eagerly awaiting further revelation
with the next flash of lightning, while the Indians, cowering round the roaring fire on the
summit of the knoll, were visibly suffering the extremity of terror.

Then, while the two friends stood together awaiting the coming of another lightning flash,
with King Cole quivering and shivering at their feet, a huge shape, elusively revealed in the
flickering firelight, slowly emerged from the intense darkness overshadowing the lagoon, ponderously
splashing through the shallows toward the beach--and toward the two white men, a pair of enormous
eyes, glistening in the uncertain light of the flames, being all that could be distinctly seen.
The thing--whatever it may have been--was not more than ten yards distant when first seen,
and there was a gleam of such deadly malignancy in those two glistening eyes, and a suggestion
of such implacable purpose in the ponderous movement of the imperfectly seen bulk, that Earle
and Dick, taken completely unawares by its sudden appearance, incontinently flung up their
rifles and fired, at the precise moment that King Cole, utterly demoralised by the weird apparition,
sprang to his feet and fled, snarling, to the rear.  The two rifles spoke as one, and instantly
following the whip-like reports, the double clap of the bullets was heard--not a dull sound
like that of a bullet striking yielding flesh, but a sharp crack, suggesting the impingement
of lead upon unyielding bone; there was a frightful bellowing roar, a terrific splash, the
spray of which flew over and far beyond the two white men, and the thing was gone.

"Well, `shiver my timbers!' as you sailors are supposed to remark," exclaimed Earle in tones
of ineffable disgust.  "If that doesn't beat the band!  Oh, Dick Cavendish--and Wilfrid Earle,
you--you twenty-volume unabridged fools, why on earth couldn't you have waited another two
or three seconds before shootin' and so have made sure of getting the brute?  Kick me, Dick,
and I'll kick you, for we both deserve it!  It was the chance of a lifetime, and we flung it
away by being over-eager. I'm ashamed of you, Dick--and a blamed sight more ashamed of myself;
for I am an old hand at this sort of thing, while you are comparatively fresh at it, and therefore
there is some sort of excuse for you, while there is none for me."

"But we hit him," remonstrated Dick.  "What more do you want?"

"Hit him!" retorted Earle, disgustedly.  "Of course we hit him; we couldn't help hitting him.
He was as big as a house!  But, my gentle boy, that wasn't enough.  We wanted to kill him,
so that we might have a chance to see what he looked like.  Hit him!  Yes; we hit him on his
skull, and the blows sounded as though his head was encased in five-inch Harveyized armour
plate!  If we had waited five seconds longer, we should have had a good view of him and been
able to shoot him through the heart--if he happens to possess such an organ."

"That's all very fine," retorted Dick.  "But I'll bet that if we had waited the extra five
seconds, you would still have aimed to hit him fair between the eyes--as I did."

"Well--yes, I guess I should," returned Earle, his vexation suddenly evaporating.  "As a matter
of fact, that is the precise spot I aimed at. And as you say that you did also, we will hope
that one at least of our bullets got home, and that to-morrow morning, we shall find him floating
dead out there in the offing waiting to be inspected.  Anyway, there is no sense in crying
over spilt milk; and who knows what chances may still be in store for us.  And now, Dick, while
your memory is still fresh, have the goodness to describe to me exactly the impression left
upon your mind by what you saw.  Gee! what a time the inhabitants of this swamp seem to be
having.  The row is growing worse than ever."

Dick dutifully responded to his friend's request, but alas! his description amounted to very
little more than the bald statement that the thing struck him as possessing a body about as
bulky as an elephant, standing upon disproportionately short legs; that the eyes were as big
round as dinner-plates; that they glared with a most unholy malevolence; and that they were
spaced about thirty inches apart.  These details, such as they were, corresponded with the
impression produced upon Earle, who forthwith proceeded to jot down the meagre facts in his
notebook by the light of the fire.

Meanwhile the "row," as Earle had observed, seemed to be growing worse than ever, and it was
presently added to by the low mutterings of distant thunder, the precursor of what threatened
to be a thunderstorm of unusual violence.  The flickering of sheet lightning became more frequent,
while occasional flashes of forked lightning emanating from a point low down upon the south-western
horizon, began to light up the surroundings for a fraction of a second with their transient
glare. Soon low moaning sounds became fitfully audible far aloft, and little scurrying gusts
of hot wind came sweeping across the lagoon, causing the fire on the knoll to roar and blaze
with sudden intensity, while the sparks flew far inland.

"Stand by the topsail halliards!" remarked Dick, with a grin.  "We are going to have it hot
and heavy in a minute or two, or I'm a Dutchman!" And the words were hardly out of his mouth
when, with a shrieking roar, the tempest swooped down upon them, and they abruptly sat down,
to avoid being swept off their feet, while the blazing embers of the fire, snatched up by the
wind, went whirling far and wide.  At the same instant a flash of blindingly vivid lightning
leapt from the zenith and seemed to strike the waters of the lagoon only a few yards away,
while simultaneously there came a crash of thunder that caused their ears to ring and tingle,
and effectually deafened them for several minutes. This was the outburst of the storm, which
thereafter raged with indescribable fury for a full hour, the lightning incessantly flashing
all round the little knoll with such dazzling brilliancy that the entire landscape, almost
to its uttermost confines, was nearly as fully revealed as at noonday, while the thunder crashed
and rattled and boomed with a nerve-shattering violence that effectually drowned all other
sounds.  And, to add still further to the weird impressiveness of the scene, the storm had
scarcely been raging ten minutes when the swamp was seen to be on fire in several places immediately
to leeward of the knoll, the dry herbage having been undoubtedly kindled by the flying embers
and sparks of the fire, which had been completely swept away by the wind.  For the first half-hour
of its duration the storm was a dry one, that is to say, it was unaccompanied by rain; and
while the tempest raged about them Dick and Earle lay prone, side by side, watching the marvellous
scene revealed by the incessant lightning flashes.  And Earle afterwards confided to Dick--and,
still later, to many others--that what he then beheld more than repaid him for all that the
entire journey cost him, not only in money, but also in toil and privation.  For although the
flickering of the lightning and its almost blinding vividness were by no means conducive to
accuracy of observation, he saw enough to fully confirm his previous conviction that the swamp
was the habitat of several forms of life hitherto unknown and unsuspected by naturalists. True,
most of the creatures seen were apparently amphibious, their forms only partially revealed
as they sported or fought in the waters of the lagoon; but transient glimpses were occasionally
caught of others roaming about the patches of dry ground; while all were too distant for the
watchers to obtain any very clear impression of their shapes and proportions.  Then the wind
and the lightning suddenly ceased, pitchy darkness fell upon the scene, and the rain descended
in such a deluge as is known only to those who have dwelt in the tropics, lasting until within
half-an-hour of sunrise.

The appearance of the sun was hailed with feelings of unqualified delight by the entire party,
for not only did the remaining clouds vanish with his uprising, but he brought what was, for
once, welcome warmth with him, to the relief of the drenched and thoroughly chilled occupants
of the camp, who had lain exposed for hours to the pitiless pelting of the rain--Dick and Earle
suffering equally with the rest, the wind having temporarily wrecked their tent.  They felt
that a hot breakfast would have been indescribably welcome that morning; but such a meal was
impossible, for the rain had saturated everything and rendered a fire out of the question;
they were consequently obliged to content themselves with cold viands, which they consumed
in haste, for they had the prospect of a busy day before them.

The problem which confronted them was, how were they to transport themselves and their belongings
across the lagoon?  For it was on the opposite side of it that their road lay, and if they
would proceed, only two alternatives seemed open to them; one to find some means by which they
could ferry themselves across, while the other was to pass round one or the other of the extremities
of the lagoon.  And this last meant the retracing of their steps for a considerable distance,
with the prospect of a long march to follow, the lagoon extending to right and left as far
as the eye could see.

It was at this crisis that Huanami, one of the bearers, a Peruvian half-breed, came to the
rescue with a suggestion.  During the march of the previous day, this man, it appeared, had
taken note of vast quantities of a particular kind of reed growing some three or four miles
back, upon the opposite side of a canal-like watercourse, along the margin of which the party
had been travelling, and he was of opinion that those reeds could be used in the construction
of excellent balsas, if they could only be got at.  And he believed that it would be possible
to get at them if the white lords would permit him and two or three of his comrades to go still
further back to a point where, on the near side of the canal, he had noted a sufficient growth
of reeds to construct a single balsa of a capacity which would enable him to float himself
across the canal to the opposite side, where the reeds were growing in profusion.  The suggestion
found immediate favour with the "white lords," for it appeared to indicate the shortest way
out of the difficulty; and orders were at once given to carry it into effect.

But Earle made one important modification in Huanami's proposal.  After the experiences of
the previous day--and, still more, of the past night--he was not at all disposed to permit
two or three unarmed men to retrace their steps, unaccompanied, with the possibility that they
might be set upon and destroyed by some unknown monster inhabitant of the swamp; he therefore
gave orders for the entire party to countermarch, and five minutes later they were under way.

Somewhere about an hour later they reached the spot where the rushes grew on the opposite side
of the canal; and it was at once apparent that there was a sufficiency to meet the requirements
of the party; while at a further distance of about a mile they came to a bed containing enough
rashes to construct a balsa capable of supporting a single man, or possibly two men.  Huanami
cut one of the rushes for Earle's inspection, and dividing it up into short lengths, showed
that it was a bamboo-like growth, hollow in structure and divided into a series of watertight
compartments by partitions occurring at every notch, rendering it exceedingly light and buoyant.
The average length of the rushes was about twelve feet, but by a kind of interlacing system
a raft, or balsa, of almost any required dimensions could be constructed.

No time was lost by the party in getting to work upon the first balsa, Huanami cutting great
quantities of long, tough bents and plaiting them up into a kind of rope, while the rest of
the Indians cut the reeds.  It was necessary for them to get into the water to do this; but
luckily, the reeds first attacked grew in shallow water, only up to the men's knees, and while
they all worked together, shouting and splashing vigorously the while, Dick and Earle, armed
with repeating rifles, mounted guard on the bank, holding themselves ready to open fire upon
any marauding alligator or other creature that might threaten to interrupt the work.  No interruption
occurred, however, and in less than an hour the reeds were all cut and the construction of
the first balsa was begun.  Huanami proved himself an adept in the art of balsa construction,
and when noon arrived, and with it the hour for the mid-day meal, the first balsa was complete
and ready for service, including a pair of paddles, also ingeniously made of reeds.

When at the conclusion of the meal the balsa came to be tried, it was found to possess buoyancy
enough to carry two men safely and comfortably; the return march along the bank to the spot
where the remainder of the fleet was to be built was therefore immediately commenced, the builder
and his load of impedimenta proceeding by water at the same time.  The balsa, it may here be
explained, was a very simple affair indeed, consisting merely of a flat bundle of reeds, firmly
bound together in such a way as to form a sort of raft.  The one already built was about ten
feet long and about five feet broad, by about a foot in depth; but while strong enough for
its purpose, it was, after all, very light, and quite capable of being capsized should an enterprising
alligator take it into his head to attack it; during the short march to the big reed bed, therefore,
Dick and Earle decided that the next balsa should be constructed of a capacity to accommodate
the entire party, and therefore be heavy and bulky enough to resist anything short of a concerted
attack by a herd of alligators.  The construction of such a craft was of course a somewhat
formidable undertaking, though the other Indians showed themselves apt pupils of Huanami, and
the task was only completed when the sun had already disappeared and darkness was closing down
upon the scene.

On the following morning the voyage across the lagoon was begun immediately after breakfast,
and accomplished not only without mishap but without adventure of any kind; for, strangely
enough, not one of the creatures which had been observed disporting themselves in the water
during the preceding night was now visible; indeed, so far as appearances went, there might
not even have been so much as a fish in the lagoon. Harrod advances a theory that he completely
finished the whole of the cathedral church, as well as the offices for the housing of the sixty
monks who were placed therein, in 1101.

He also built the episcopal palace on the north side of the cathedral,
of which some parts remain to this day incorporated with work of a
later period; he seems to have founded and built other churches in
Norwich and Yarmouth.

He died on the 22nd of July 1119, in the twenty-ninth year of his episcopate, and was buried before
the high altar in his own cathedral church.

Bishop Eborard, who succeeded in 1121, is credited with having finished the nave from the point
where Herbert had left it. The evidence which goes to support this theory is taken from the
Registrum Primum. "Moreover, the same Herbert completed the church of Norwich in his own time,
as I have learned from the account of old people, but have not found in writing, as far as
the altar of the Holy Cross, which is now called the altar of St. William. He also built all
the episcopal dwelling-house, except the great hall." The altar referred
to was on the north side of choir screen.

Herbert also provided the base for the tower only, probably up to
the roof level; the remainder, up to the parapet, was finished about
the time of Henry I., but at that earlier period it was without the
stone spire which now adds dignity to the cathedral from any point
of view.

The roofs at this time were generally of a flat wooden construction throughout (similar to that
of Peterborough Cathedral), and probably decorated with lozenges, flowers, and symbolical
devices. When recently, under Dean Lefroy, the whitewash and paint were cleaned off from the
stonework, many indications have been found of a most beautiful scheme of colour decoration.

Though we, in this part, are following up the history of the cathedral structure, yet it may be interesting
to note that it was during the episcopate of Bishop Eborard that the boy saint, St. William
of Norwich, was said to have been martyred. He was the son of country folk who gained a living
by agriculture. During his life he worked many miracles, and by his death gave Norwich a share
of his glory. It is related that he was tortured by the Jews, and on the spot where they were
discovered secretly burying him, in Thorpe Wood, a chapel was erected
called the Chapel of St. William in the Wood.

Very little now remains of this structure, but the site can still be traced. The altar before
referred to was set up to his memory in Norwich Cathedral, on the north side of the screen
leading into the ante-choir.

Bishop Eborard resigned the see, or was deposed in 1145, and retired to the abbey of Fontenay, Mont-Bard,
Côte d'Or, in the South of France. He had re-enforced a mandate of
Herbert's that the clergy of the diocese should contribute to the
fund in aid of the fabric.

During the episcopate of Eborard's successor,
Bishop William de Turbe, the cathedral appears neither to have gained
or suffered until, about 1169 or 1170, a fire broke out in the monastic
buildings; the fire-extinguishing appliances in those days, if indeed
there were any at all, could not prevent it spreading to the cathedral.
It is generally believed that the original Norman Lady Chapel was
also well destroyed.  He directed Earle's attention to them, and after an eager
search with his glasses, the American also caught sight of them, and agreed with Dick that
their movements were suspicious, and that it would be wise to be prepared for a sudden attack.
They loaded their repeating rifles, each stuck a pair of automatic pistols in his belt, and
when the march was resumed, went on ahead, accompanied by Inaguy, with the object of establishing
a parley with the strangers.

But when, some ten minutes later, they arrived at the outskirts of the forest, there was no
sign of them, and no response to Inaguy's repeated calls in several different Indian dialects.
It was not only a puzzling but also a disconcerting circumstance; for the failure of the strangers
to reply seemed to indicate a hostile disposition; and for the party to plunge into the depths
of the forest with a band of hostile Indians dogging their footsteps, or perhaps preparing
to ambush them, seemed to Earle the opposite of good generalship; after considering the matter,
therefore, it was decided to camp for the remainder of the day, at a sufficient distance from
the forest to render a surprise attack impossible, and there await developments.

This was done, and for about an hour after the camp was pitched, sentinels being posted about
halfway between it and the border of the forest to give timely notice of a threatened attack,
nothing happened.

Then one of the sentinels shouted that there were people moving among the trees, upon which
Dick and Earle, fully armed, moved out to reconnoitre, with King Cole as usual at their heels.

The sentinel was right, as the pair ascertained immediately that they brought their field-glasses
to bear upon the part of the forest indicated by the Indian.  The undergrowth, consisting mostly
of bushes and shrubs, was fairly dense, rendering it impossible to see beyond a yard or two
into the forest, but by diligent and patient search the two leaders were able to discern certain
dark objects, which they identified as heads, moving hither and thither, and pausing from time
to time to peer out at them through parted boughs.  Then suddenly a frightful roar was heard,
immediately taken up and answered by many others, the bushes swayed as heavy bodies irresistibly
forced a way through them, and some twenty monstrous figures bounded into the open and came
charging down upon the little group, emitting loud, savage roars as they came, with the foam
flying from their champing jaws. 

Eccles. tom ii. A.D. 1451, No. 13. The epistle of the Greeks with a Latin version, is extant in
the college library at Prague.]

"Sultan Murad, or Amurath, lived forty-nine, and reigned thirty years, six months, and eight days.
He was a just and valiant prince, of a great soul, patient of labors,
learned, merciful, religious, charitable; a lover and encourager of
the studious, and of all who excelled in any art or science; a good
emperor and a great general.

No man obtained more or greater victories than Amurath; Belgrade alone withstood his attacks.
[101] Under his reign, the soldier was ever victorious, the citizen rich and secure. If he subdued
any country, his first care was to build mosques and caravansaras, hospitals, and colleges. Every
year he gave a thousand pieces of gold to the sons of the Prophet; and sent two thousand five hundred
to the religious persons of Mecca, Medina, and Jerusalem." [11] This portrait is transcribed
from the historian of the Othman empire: but the applause of a servile and superstitious people
has been lavished on the worst of tyrants; and the virtues of a sultan are often the vices most
useful to himself, or most agreeable to his subjects. A nation ignorant of the equal benefits of liberty
and law, must be awed by the flashes of arbitrary power: the cruelty
of a despot will assume the character of justice; his profusion, of
liberality; his obstinacy, of firmness.

If the most reasonable excuse be rejected, few acts of obedience will be found impossible; and
guilt must tremble, where innocence cannot always be secure. The tranquillity of the people,
and the discipline of the troops, were best maintained by perpetual action in the field; war
was the trade of the Janizaries; and those who survived the peril,
and divided the spoil, applauded the generous ambition of their sovereign.

To propagate the true religion, was the duty of a faithful Mussulman: the unbelievers were his
enemies, and those of the Prophet; and, in the hands of the Turks,
the cimeter was the only instrument of conversion.

Under these circumstances, however, the justice and moderation of Amurath are attested by his
conduct, and acknowledged by the Christians themselves; who consider a prosperous reign and
a peaceful death as the reward of his singular merits.
  Dick, on the other hand,
very much less hardened than Earle for such a nerve-trying experience as this, grew a little
flurried, and caught his next mark in the shoulder, shattering the bone and goading the beast
to a condition of absolutely maniacal fury, but failing to stop him until he had sent a bullet
through the brute's lungs, when he halted, coughing up a torrent of blood.  And so matters
proceeded until the two men had emptied their Remingtons, the ten shots accounting for seven
dead and two put hors de combat.

There was no time to reload, for the monsters still continued the charge, apparently quite
unconscious of, or supremely indifferent to, what had happened to their companions; the two
men therefore dropped their empty rifles, and each whipped a seven-shot Colt automatic from
his belt, and continued his fusillade.  Those Colt pistols were formidable weapons, of .45
calibre, at close quarters quite as effective as the rifles; and before the beasts succeeded
in closing, all but four were down.

Of those four, King Cole tackled one, launching himself like an arrow at the creature's throat,
with a low snarl of concentrated rage, and sinking his fangs deeply in the muscular, hairy
neck, the claws of his two fore feet firmly gripping the huge shoulders of the beast while
the strong claws of his powerful hind feet tore open the abdomen and practically disembowelled
his adversary.  And as the pair went down, roaring, snarling, and fighting desperately, Earle
thrust the muzzle of his Colt into the yawning jaws of another and sent the heavy bullet crashing
upward through the brute's skull at the precise instant that the powerful jaws snapped like
a trap upon the barrel of the weapon.

Meanwhile, the remaining two hurled themselves upon Dick.  One of them he shot clean through
the heart as the brute sprang upon him, and although there can be no doubt that the creature
instantly died, the momentum of his spring was sufficient to dash the lad to the ground and
send his pistol flying.  And before he could regain his feet or draw his remaining pistol,
the last survivor was upon him, with a ponderous club upraised to dash out the youngster's
brains.  Like lightning the blow fell; but instinctively and without premeditation Dick just
managed to dodge it; and such was the force of the blow that the club snapped short off in
the brute's great hairy hand.  And now the knowledge of boxing that the young sailor had aforetime
somewhat painfully acquired, came to his aid, for as his ferocious antagonist crouched over
him, his great tusks bared and dripping foam, while the little eyes burnt red with deadly hate,
Dick threw his whole strength into a right-hander, which caught the beast fair and square on
the point of the chin with a crash that sent the head violently back and caused the vertebrae
of the neck to crack, following up the blow with a punch in the wind that fairly knocked the
beast out of time for the moment.  That moment proved sufficient to save Cavendish's life,
for it afforded him time to whip the remaining pistol from his belt and discharge it full in
the brute's face as it gathered itself together for what would in all probability have proved
a fatal leap, so far as Dick was concerned.

CHAPTER NINE.

THE SCULPTURED ROCKS.

"Bravo!  Dick, old chap," exclaimed Earle, turning to his friend, with one hand outstretched
in offered help while the other grasped a smoking pistol--"well fought!  Are you hurt at all?"

"N-o, I think not," replied Dick, a little doubtfully, as with the help of the other's proffered
hand he scrambled to his feet.  "That fellow, there"--pointing to the body of the ape that
had hurled him to the ground--"pretty nearly knocked the wind out of me, while the other did
his level best to dash my brains out, and I've barked my knuckles rather badly against his
chin; but otherwise I think I'm all right, thanks. And you?"

"I?" returned Earle.  "Oh, I'm as right as rain.  Say, Dick, that was something like a scrap
at the last.  What?  Guess if it hadn't been for old King Cole, we'd have been in rather a
tight place.  Look at the beggar.  Ugh! he is not pleasant to look at when he's real riled,
is he? He has brought off his kill all right, and I guess we'd better leave him to it a bit.
I believe I don't particularly want to interfere with him just now.  Let's draw off a bit and
have a look at one of those dead brutes out yonder.  I rather want to examine one; for I guess
this is an entirely new species of monkey."

"They look to me very much like gorillas," remarked Dick.

"They do," agreed Earle.  "But, all the same, they are not gorillas. There are no gorillas
on this continent, so far as is known.  The gorilla is, I believe, peculiar to Africa.  And
these creatures, though they certainly somewhat resemble gorillas in a general way, have certain
points of difference, the most important of which is the shape of the skull, while another
is their much greater bulk.  I have shot several gorillas; but I never saw one to come near
any of these brutes in point of size.  By the way, where is the one you stopped with a broken
leg? We may as well put him out of his misery."

The creature in question was nowhere to be seen; but they eventually got upon his trail and
followed him up to the border of the forest, into which he had evidently retreated; and they
came to the conclusion that, as he had contrived to get thus far, they would leave him alone
and give him a chance to recover.  Then they found one of the dead apes, and Earle subjected
the carcass to a long and exhaustive examination, making copious notes and discoursing learnedly
meanwhile, though it is to be feared that his remarks and explanations left Dick but little
the wiser. It was close upon sunset when at length they returned to the camp, where they were
shortly afterward joined by King Cole, once more calm and in his right mind.

They took the precaution to surround the camp with a circle of fires that night, to ward off
a possible attack, posting a sentinel at each fire for the double purpose of keeping it going
and maintaining a watch.

The belt of forest which the explorers entered on the following day proved to be of no very
great extent, the passage through it occupying but a day and a half.  Emerging from it, the
party crossed a splendid savannah, abounding in game, chiefly of the antelope variety, and
large birds somewhat resembling bustard, the tameness of which seemed to indicate that man
was practically unknown to them, while it enabled them to replenish their larder with the utmost
ease.  This savannah extended for a distance of about ten miles, and terminated among the foothills
of a range of mountains of very moderate height stretching right athwart the path of the explorers.
Among those foothills the party pitched their camp at the end of the day's journey.

The next day's march conducted them into country the character of which was different from
any hitherto traversed by them.  It was exceedingly rugged and broken, treeless, the soil covered
with a short, rich grass, which would have rendered it ideal as grazing country, dotted here
and there with small clumps of bush, some of which were fruit-bearing, while at frequent intervals
great outcrops of metamorphic rock were met with, which time and weather had in many cases
wrought into extraordinary shapes.

It was near noon when the party entered a narrow ravine bordered on either side by vertical
sandstone cliffs of about a hundred feet high, and here they came to a halt and pitched their
camp; for no sooner had they fairly entered the ravine than they found themselves confronted
by a splendid example of those extraordinary sculptured rocks which have excited the wonder
and admiration of the few travellers in South America who have been fortunate enough to find them.

In the present case the sculptured rock consisted of a stretch of sandstone cliff about two
hundred and fifty feet in length by about a hundred feet in height, practically vertical, the
entire surface of which was covered with panels presenting a series of pictures portraying
what appeared to be a genealogical record of certain customs and ceremonies, mostly of a religious
character, of some gone and forgotten race of people.  The work was executed in fairly high
relief, and the drawing of the figures, of which there were thousands on the entire sculptured
surface, evidenced artistic ability of a truly remarkable character, including a considerable
knowledge of perspective.  The panels portraying religious ceremonies indicated that the sun
and fire were, or symbolised, the principal deities worshipped; and there was abundant evidence
that human sacrifice was common.  All this was, of course, absorbingly interesting to Earle,
as was the light which the sculptures threw upon the personal appearance and costumes of the
people portrayed.  If the artist--or artists, for there must have been thousands of them to
have produced such a magnificent and colossal piece of work--could be believed, the departed
race boasted some exceptionally fine examples of male and female beauty, while the costumes
bore more than a casual resemblance to those pictured on the ancient monuments of Egypt.  Earle
announced with finality that he intended to remain in camp on the spot, not only until he had
minutely and exhaustively examined the sculptures, but also until he had photographed them
as a whole and some separately.  That probably meant at least a week's sojourn where they then
were.

The proposed arrangement suited Dick Cavendish admirably, for the prolonged halt appealed to
him as something very much in the nature of a holiday, especially when Earle declared that
he would need no assistance in his photographic operations, so that Dick would be free to amuse
himself in any way he pleased.  Dick was rapidly becoming as keen a naturalist, in a way, as
Earle; once or twice, during the morning's march, he had observed some particularly gorgeous
butterflies flitting about, and he promised himself that he would spend at least a portion
of his sojourn in the ravine in an endeavour to secure a few specimens. There was one duty,
however, which he at once recognised must fall upon him, which was the supply of the camp with
meat, and accordingly, upon the conclusion of the mid-day meal, when Earle started to get his
photographic gear ready for the campaign among the sculptures, Dick took his rifle and, accompanied
by two of the Indians, proceeded up the ravine in search of game.  The country rapidly became
wilder and more picturesque as they went, to such an extent indeed that Dick quickly made up
his mind to pay it another and more leisurely visit; and after about an hour's tramp, which
carried him into a labyrinth of rocks, he got a splendid shot at a creature strongly resembling
a bighorn, which he neatly bowled over and with it triumphantly returned to camp.

On the fourth morning of the party's sojourn in the ravine, Dick, accompanied as usual by two
Indians, set out, immediately after breakfast, in search of meat for the day.  Game was not
particularly plentiful in that region, but the lad preferred to take his chance of finding
something in his accustomed haunts, rather than tramp all the way back to the savannah, and
accordingly he proceeded, as usual, right up the ravine, until he arrived at a point where
a branch route led off toward the left.  Hitherto he had not tried his luck in that particular
direction, but he decided to do so now; and after about half an hour's tramp, upon surmounting
the crest of a ridge, he found himself looking down into a small circular basin, surrounded
by rocky cliffs, the bottom of which was a smooth, grassy plain, in which, as luck would have
it, several antelopes were grazing.  The nearest of these, a fine fat buck to all appearance,
was at least a thousand yards away, which was much too long a shot for Dick to risk; and he
therefore set out to stalk the animal, leaving the Indians where they were to follow as soon
as the buck should fall.

There were clumps of bush growing quite close up to the base of the encircling cliffs, offering
admirable cover for stalking, as well as a certain amount of shelter from the sun's scorching
rays, and of these Dick gladly availed himself, ultimately succeeding in bringing down the
buck with a three-hundred yard shot.  Then, while waiting for the Indians to come and break
up the quarry, the young man flung himself down in the shadow of a clump of bush to rest.

Stretched there at length in the cool, lush grass, with the great wall of sandstone cliff towering
before him, it gradually dawned upon Dick that the enormous mass of rock upon which he was
gazing must be that upon the opposite face of which were those wonderful sculptured pictures
which Earle was doubtless at that moment busily engaged in photographing, and the thought caused
him to regard the cliff with some interest.  There were no sculptures upon it, but as Dick
allowed his gaze to wander over the face of the cliff his quick eye detected a sort of crack
some twenty feet above the surface of the ground, out of which, as he lay regarding it, there
came fluttering one of those splendid butterflies, a specimen or two of which he was so eager
to obtain; and he at once made up his mind that as soon as the Indians had broken up the buck
and carried it away, he would explore that crack, which looked wide enough to allow him to
squeeze his body through, and access to which seemed possible by way of a number of narrow
ridges and projections in the face of the rock.  Accordingly, as soon as the Indians had done
their work and departed--Dick having informed them that he proposed to remain in the basin
for a while and examine it thoroughly--he slung his rifle over his shoulder and started to
climb the rock, reaching the crack with but little difficulty.

He found that the aperture was considerably larger than it had appeared to be when viewed from
below and squeezed through it with ease, to find himself in the mouth of what looked like a
cave, the dimensions of which, however, it was not possible to ascertain, for within a couple
of yards of the entrance he found himself in darkness.  But he saw enough to stimulate his
curiosity and determine him to see more; and with this object he descended to the plain and,
hunting about among the bushes, soon secured a sufficiency of dry twigs and branches to serve
as torches.  With these and a bit of dry moss he returned to the aperture in the face of the
cliff, where, before entering, he ignited the moss with the aid of a powerful burning-glass
which he habitually carried about in his pocket, and then, blowing the moss into flame, kindled
one of his torches.

At first sight the cave appeared to be of very circumscribed dimensions, being only just high
enough for Dick to stand upright in it, while he could touch both its sides at the same moment
with his outstretched hands.  But it extended back toward the heart of the cliff, and as the
lad cautiously groped his way inward the crack gradually widened until at length he found himself
traversing a spacious tunnel, piercing steadily deeper and deeper into the heart of the cliff.
Determined now to see the full extent of the cave, and beginning to wonder whether perchance
it pierced right through the rock, Dick pushed steadily on, oblivious of the fact that his
stock of torches was rapidly diminishing; and when at length this fact was forced upon his
attention by the necessity to kindle the last torch, it was far too late for him to think of
returning, and feeling by this time convinced that there must surely be another outlet at no
great distance, he set his teeth and pushed on, hoping to reach that other outlet before his
last torch should be consumed.  But the hope was vain, for in less than ten minutes Dick found
himself in profound darkness, with still no indication of any other outlet than that by which
he had entered.

Thus far the lad had gone without any difficulty; the tunnel-like passage which he had traversed
for a distance of, as he estimated, nearly a mile, had been without pitfalls or complications
of any kind, and he believed it would be possible for him to return by the way he had come
without difficulty, even in the dark.  He halted to consider the matter, debating within himself
whether he should risk everything by pushing on, or whether he should go groping his way back
over that long stretch of rough, rocky road in the darkness.  There could be no question as
to which was the more prudent of the two plans; but there was a vein of obstinacy in Cavendish's
character; he hated to confess himself beaten, and a light draught of warm air coming from
the direction toward which he had been heading decided him to take the more risky course of
pressing onward.

Accordingly, he resumed his course, holding his rifle horizontally before him to guard himself
against the chance of collision with unseen obstacles, while he carefully felt the ground before
him with one foot before throwing his weight upon it.  Proceeding thus cautiously, in about
a quarter of an hour he became aware of a faint glimmer of greenish light on the walls of the
tunnel on either hand, and a few minutes later emerged into what appeared to be a great chamber,
or cavern, the interior of which was just sufficiently illuminated by the light entering through
another tunnel on its opposite side, to reveal the fact that the vertical walls of the chamber
were, like the cliff which was occupying Earle's attention, covered with sculptures from the
floor upward as high as the light had power to reach. The grief of Phranza, carrying him among
the enemy, escapes from the precise image of his death; but we may, without flattery, apply these
noble lines of Dryden:-- As to Sebastian, let them search the field; And where they find a mountain
of the slain, Send one to climb, and looking down beneath, There they will find him at his manly
length, With his face up to heaven, in that red monument Which his good sword had digged.]

[Footnote 60: Spondanus, (A.D. 1453, No. 10,) who has hopes of his salvation, wishes to absolve this
demand from the guilt of suicide.]

[Footnote 61: Leonardus Chiensis very properly observes, that the Turks, had they known the
emperor, would have labored to save and secure a captive so acceptable to the sultan.]

[Footnote 62: Cantemir, p. 96. The Christian ships in the mouth of the harbor had flanked and
retarded this naval attack.]

[Footnote 63: Chalcondyles most absurdly supposes, that Constantinople
was sacked by the Asiatics in revenge for the ancient calamities of
Troy; and the grammarians of the xvth century are happy to melt down
the uncouth appellation of Turks into the more classical name of Teucri.]

The
tidings of misfortune fly with a rapid wing; yet such was the extent
of Constantinople, that the more distant quarters might prolong, some
moments, the happy ignorance of their ruin.

[64] But in the general consternation, in the feelings of selfish or social anxiety, in the tumult
and thunder of the assault, a sleepless night and morning [641] must have elapsed; nor can I believe
that many Grecian ladies were awakened by the Janizaries from a sound and tranquil slumber. On the
assurance of the public calamity, the houses and convents were instantly
deserted; and the trembling inhabitants flocked together in the streets,
like a herd of timid animals, as if accumulated weakness could be
productive of strength, or in the vain hope, that amid the crowd each
individual might be safe and invisible.

From every part of the capital, they flowed into the church of St. Sophia: in the space of
an hour, the sanctuary, the choir, the nave, the upper and lower galleries, were filled with
the multitudes of fathers and husbands, of women and children, of priests, monks, and religious
virgins: the doors were barred on the inside, and they sought protection from the sacred dome,
which they had so lately abhorred as a profane and polluted edifice. Their confidence was founded
on the prophecy of an enthusiast or impostor; that one day the Turks would enter Constantinople,
and pursue the Romans as far as the column of Constantine in the square before St. Sophia: but that this
would be the term of their calamities: that an angel would descend from heaven, with a sword
in his hand, and would deliver the empire, with that celestial weapon, to a poor man seated
at the foot of the column. "Take this sword," would he say, "and avenge the people of the Lord."
At these animating words, the Turks would instantly fly, and the victorious Romans would drive
them from the West, and from all Anatolia as far as the frontiers of Persia. It is on this occasion
that Ducas, with some fancy and much truth, upbraids the discord
and obstinacy of the Greeks.

"Had that angel appeared," exclaims the historian, "had he offered to exterminate your foes if you
would consent to the union of the church, even event then, in that fatal moment, you would
have rejected your safety, or have deceived your God." [65]

[Footnote 64: When Cyrus suppressed Babylon during the celebration of a festival, so vast was
the city, and so careless were the inhabitants, that much time elapsed before the distant quarters
knew that they were captives. Herodotus, (l. i. c. 191,) and Usher, (Annal. p. 78,) who has quoted
from the prophet Jeremiah a passage of similar import.]

[Footnote 641: This refers to an expression in Ducas, who, to heighten the effect of his description,
speaks of the "sweet morning sleep resting on the eyes of youths and maidens," p. 288. Edit.

While
they expected the descent of the tardy angel, the doors were broken with axes; and as the Turks
encountered no resistance, their bloodless hands were employed in selecting and securing the
multitude of their prisoners. Youth, beauty, and the appearance of wealth, attracted their choice;
and the right of property was decided among themselves by a prior
seizure, by personal strength, and by the authority of command.

In the space of an hour, the male captives were bound with cords, the females with their veils
and girdles. The senators were linked with their slaves; the prelates, with the porters of the
church; and young men of the plebeian class, with noble maids, whose faces had been invisible
to the sun and their nearest kindred. In this common captivity, the ranks of society were confounded;
the ties of nature were cut asunder; and the inexorable soldier was careless of the father's
groans, the tears of the mother, and the lamentations of the children. The loudest in their wailings
were the nuns, who were torn from the altar with naked bosoms, outstretched hands, and dishevelled
hair; and we should piously believe that few could be tempted to
prefer the vigils of the harem to those of the monastery.

Of these unfortunate Greeks, of these domestic animals, whole strings were rudely driven through
the streets; and as the conquerors were eager to return for more prey, their trembling pace
was quickened with menaces and blows. At the same hour, a similar rapine was exercised in all
the churches and monasteries, in all the palaces and habitations,
of the capital; nor could any place, however sacred or sequestered,
protect the persons or the property of the Greeks.

Above sixty thousand of this devoted people were transported from the city to the camp and fleet;
exchanged or sold according to the caprice or interest of their masters, and dispersed in remote
servitude through the provinces of the Ottoman empire. Among these we may notice some remarkable
characters. The historian Phranza, first chamberlain and principal secretary, was involved with
his family in the common lot. After suffering four months the hardships of slavery, he recovered
his freedom: in the ensuing winter he ventured to Adrianople, and ransomed his wife from the
mir bashi, or master of the horse; but his two children, in the flower of youth and beauty,
had been seized for the use of Mahomet himself. The daughter of Phranza died in the seraglio,
perhaps a virgin: his son, in the fifteenth year of his age, preferred death to infamy, and
was stabbed by the hand of the royal lover. [66] A deed thus inhuman cannot surely be expiated by
the taste and liberality with which he released a Grecian matron and her two daughters, on receiving
a Latin doe From ode from Philelphus, who had chosen a wife in that noble family. [67] The pride
or cruelty of Mahomet would have been most sensibly gratified by
the capture of a Roman legate; but the dexterity of Cardinal Isidore
eluded the search, and he escaped from Galata in a plebeian habit.

[68] The chain and entrance of the outward harbor was still occupied by the Italian ships of merchandise
and war. They had signalized their valor in the siege: they embraced the moment of retreat, while
the Turkish mariners were dissipated in the pillage of the city. When they hoisted sail, the
beach was covered with a suppliant and lamentable crowd; but the means of transportation were
scanty: the Venetians and Genoese selected their countrymen; and, notwithstanding the fairest promises
of the sultan, the inhabitants of Galata evacuated their houses, and embarked with their most
precious effects.

[Footnote 66: See Phranza, l. iii. c. 20, 21. His expressions are positive: Ameras suâ manû jugulavit....
volebat enim eo turpiter et nefarie abuti. Me miserum et infelicem! Yet he could only learn
from report the bloody or impure scenes that were acted in the dark recesses of the seraglio.]

[Footnote
67: See Tiraboschi (tom. vi. P. i. p. 290) and Lancelot, (Mém. de l'Académie des Inscriptions,
tom. x. p. 718.) I should be curious to learn how he could praise the public enemy, whom he
so often reviles as the most corrupt and inhuman of tyrants.]

[Footnote 68: The commentaries of Pius II. suppose that he craftily placed his cardinal's hat
on the head of a corpse which was cut off and exposed in triumph, while the legate himself was bought
and delivered as a captive of no value. The great Belgic Chronicle adorns his escape with new adventures,
which he suppressed (says Spondanus, A.D. 1453, No. 15) in his own letters, lest he should
lose the merit and reward of suffering for Christ. * Note: He was sold as a slave in Galata,
according to Von Hammer, p. 175. See the somewhat vague and declamatory letter of Cardinal Isidore,
in the appendix to Clarke's Travels, vol. ii. p. 653.--M.]

In the fall and the sack of great cities, an historian is condemned to repeat the tale of uniform
calamity: the same effects must be produced by the same passions;
and when those passions may be indulged without control, small, alas!
is the difference between civilized and savage man.

Amidst the vague exclamations of bigotry and hatred, the Turks are not accused of a wanton or
immoderate effusion of Christian blood: but according to their maxims, (the maxims of antiquity,)
the lives of the vanquished were forfeited; and the legitimate reward of the conqueror was derived
from the service, the sale, or the ransom, of his captives of both
sexes.

[69] The wealth of Constantinople had been granted by the sultan to his victorious troops;
and the rapine of an hour is more productive than the industry of years. But as no regular division
was attempted of the spoil, the respective shares were not determined by merit; and the rewards
of valor were stolen away by the followers of the camp, who had declined the toil and danger of
the battle. The narrative of their depredations could not afford either amusement or instruction:
the total amount, in the last poverty of the empire, has been valued at four millions of ducats;
[70] and of this sum a small part was the property of the Venetians, the Genoese, the Florentines, and
the merchants of Ancona.

Of these foreigners, the stock was improved in quick and perpetual circulation: but the riches
of the Greeks were displayed in the idle ostentation of palaces and wardrobes, or deeply buried in
treasures of ingots and old coin, lest it should be demanded at their hands for the defence of their
country. The profanation and plunder of the monasteries and churches excited the most tragic complaints.
The dome of St. Sophia itself, the earthly heaven, the second firmament, the vehicle of the cherubim,
the throne of the glory of God, [71] was despoiled of the oblation of ages; and the gold and silver,
the pearls and jewels, the vases and sacerdotal ornaments, were most wickedly converted to the service
of mankind. After the divine images had been stripped of all that could be valuable to a profane
eye, the canvas, or the wood, was torn, or broken, or burnt, or trod
under foot, or applied, in the stables or the kitchen, to the vilest
uses.

The example of sacrilege was imitated, however, from the Latin conquerors
of Constantinople; and the treatment which Christ, the Virgin, and
the saints, had sustained from the guilty Catholic, might be inflicted
by the zealous Mussulman on the monuments of idolatry.

Perhaps, instead of joining the public clamor, a philosopher will
observe, that in the decline of the arts the workmanship could not
be more valuable than the work, and that a fresh supply of visions
and miracles would speedily be renewed by the craft of the priests
and the credulity of the people.

He will more seriously deplore the loss of the Byzantine libraries, which were destroyed or
scattered in the general confusion: one hundred and twenty thousand manuscripts are said to have
disappeared; [72] ten volumes might be purchased for a single ducat; and the same ignominious
price, too high perhaps for a shelf of theology, included the whole works of Aristotle and
Homer, the noblest productions of the science and literature of ancient Greece. We may reflect
with pleasure that an inestimable portion of our classic treasures was safely deposited in Italy; and
that the mechanics of a German town had invented an art which derides the havoc of time and barbarism.

[Footnote
69: Busbequius expatiates with pleasure and applause on the rights of war, and the use of slavery,
among the ancients and the Turks, (de Legat. Turcicâ, epist. iii. p. 161.)]

[Footnote 70: This sum is specified in a marginal note of Leunclavius,
(Chalcondyles, l. viii. p. 211,) but in the distribution to Venice,
Genoa, Florence, and Ancona, of 50, 20, and 15,000 ducats, I suspect
that a figure has been dropped.

Even with the restitution, the foreign property would scarcely exceed one fourth.]

[Footnote 71: See the enthusiastic praises and lamentations of Phranza, (l. iii. c. 17.)]

[Footnote 72: See Ducas, (c. 43,) and an epistle, July 15th, 1453, from Laurus Quirinus to Pope
Nicholas V., (Hody de Græcis, p. 192, from a MS. in the Cotton library.)]

From the first hour [73] of the memorable twenty-ninth of May, disorder and rapine prevailed
in Constantinople, till the eighth hour of the same day; when the sultan himself passed in triumph
through the gate of St. Romanus. He was attended by his viziers, bashaws, and guards, each of whom
(says a Byzantine historian) was robust as Hercules, dexterous as
Apollo, and equal in battle to any ten of the race of ordinary mortals.

The conqueror [74] gazed with satisfaction and wonder on the strange, though splendid, appearance
of the domes and palaces, so dissimilar from the style of Oriental architecture. In the hippodrome,
or atmeidan, his eye was attracted by the twisted column of the three serpents; and, as a trial of
his strength, he shattered with his iron mace or battle-axe the under jaw of one of these monsters,
[75] which in the eyes of the Turks were the idols or talismans of the city. [751] At the principal
door of St. Sophia, he alighted from his horse, and entered the dome; and such was his jealous
regard for that monument of his glory, that on observing a zealous Mussulman in the act of breaking
the marble pavement, he admonished him with his cimeter, that, if the spoil and captives were granted
to the soldiers, the public and private buildings had been reserved for the prince. By his command
the metropolis of the Eastern church was transformed into a mosque: the rich and portable instruments
of superstition had been removed; the crosses were thrown down; and the walls, which were
covered with images and mosaics, were washed and purified, and restored
to a state of naked simplicity.

On the same day, or on the ensuing Friday, the muezin, or crier, ascended the most lofty turret,
and proclaimed the ezan, or public invitation in the name of God and his prophet; the imam preached;
and Mahomet and Second performed the namaz of prayer and thanksgiving
on the great altar, where the Christian mysteries had so lately been
celebrated before the last of the Cæsars.

[76] From St. Sophia he proceeded to the august, but desolate mansion
of a hundred successors of the great Constantine, but which in a few
hours had been stripped of the pomp of royalty.

A melancholy reflection on the vicissitudes of human greatness forced itself on his mind; and
he repeated an elegant distich of Persian poetry: "The spider has wove his web in the Imperial
palace; and the owl hath sung her watch-song on the towers of Afrasiab." [77]

[Footnote 73: The Julian Calendar, which reckons the days and hours from midnight, was used at
Constantinople. But Ducas seems to understand the natural hours from sunrise.]

[Footnote 74: See the Turkish Annals, p. 329, and the Pandects of
Leunclavius, p. 448.]

[Footnote 75: I have had occasion (vol. ii.
p. 100) to mention this curious relic of Grecian antiquity.]

[Footnote
751: Von Hammer passes over this circumstance, which is treated by
Dr. Clarke (Travels, vol. ii. p. 58, 4to. edit,) as a fiction of Thevenot.

Chishull states that the monument was broken by some attendants of the Polish ambassador.--M.]

[Footnote
76: We are obliged to Cantemir (p. 102) for the Turkish account of the conversion of St. Sophia,
so bitterly deplored by Phranza and Ducas.

It is amusing enough to observe, in what opposite lights the same object appears to a Mussulman
and a Christian eye.]

[Footnote 77: This distich, which Cantemir gives in the original, derives new beauties from
the application.

It was thus that Scipio repeated, in the sack of Carthage, the famous prophecy of Homer. The
same generous feeling carried the mind of the conqueror to the past or the future.]

Yet his mind was not satisfied, nor did the victory seem complete,
till he was informed of the fate of Constantine; whether he had escaped,
or been made prisoner, or had fallen in the battle.

Two Janizaries claimed the honor and reward of his death: the body, under a heap of slain,
was discovered by the golden eagles embroidered on his shoes; the Greeks acknowledged, with
tears, the head of their late emperor; and, after exposing the bloody trophy, [78] Mahomet
bestowed on his rival the honors of a decent funeral. After his decease, Lucas Notaras, great
duke, [79] and first minister of the empire, was the most important prisoner. When he offered
his person and his treasures at the foot of the throne, "And why,"
said the indignant sultan, "did you not employ these treasures in
the defence of your prince and country?"--"They were yours," answered
the slave; "God had reserved them for your hands."--"If he reserved
them for me," replied the despot, "how have you presumed to withhold
them so long by a fruitless and fatal resistance?"

The great duke alleged the obstinacy of the strangers, and some secret
encouragement from the Turkish vizier; and from this perilous interview
he was at length dismissed with the assurance of pardon and protection.

Mahomet condescended to visit his wife, a venerable princess oppressed with sickness and grief; and
his consolation for her misfortunes was in the most tender strain of humanity and filial reverence.
A similar clemency was extended to the principal officers of state, of whom several were ransomed
at his expense; and during some days he declared himself the friend
and father of the vanquished people.

But the scene was soon changed; and before his departure, the hippodrome
streamed with the blood of his noblest captives.

His perfidious cruelty is execrated by the Christians: they adorn with the colors of heroic
martyrdom the execution of the great duke and his two sons; and his death is ascribed to the
generous refusal of delivering his children to the tyrant's lust.
  That will was made on the day before we left New York, and by its provisions your
sister inherits everything that I possess."

"What is that you say?" demanded Dick, utterly bewildered.  "My sister-- Grace--inherits everything
you possess?"

"Guess that's what I said," replied Earle, composedly.

"But--but--" stammered Dick, "I can't understand it.  Why should you leave Grace all your property?"

"For two very excellent reasons," answered Earle, "the first of which I have already explained
to you, namely, that I love her--and mean to make her my wife, please God, if we should by
any chance get out of this fix. And the second is, that if we don't and I die, I have nobody
else to whom to leave my property.  You look astonished, Dick; and, come to think of it, I
suppose it is only natural.  For while you were kept busy, way back there in Liverpool, over
the inquiry into the loss of the Everest, I saw a good deal of your sister, with, I believe,
the full approval of your friends, McGregor and his wife.  I was attracted to Grace from the
very first, and the more I saw of her, the greater grew my admiration of her.  McGregor saw
what was happening, I guess, and at length he brought me to book upon the matter, pointing
out that my attentions to Grace were such as threatened ultimately to engage her affections.
I was glad that he did so, for it enabled me to come to a clear understanding with myself.
It enabled me to realise that your sister was the one woman in all the world for me; and the
upshot was that, after a very frank exchange of views, I was able to satisfy McGregor, and
ultimately to come to an understanding with Grace.  But, of course, she knows nothing about
my will, although I made up my mind what I would do immediately that she consented to wait
for me.  And the reason why I have not mentioned this matter to you before is that I preferred
we should, for a time at least, remain upon our original footing as simple comrades and co-adventurers.
But, say, Dick, now that I have told you, are you agreeable to accept me as your brother-in-law?"

"My dear chap," exclaimed Dick, grasping Earle's outstretched hand with a strength which made
the latter wince--"of course I am.  I have seen enough of you and your character to convince
me that you will be good to Grace--if we survive long enough to return to her.  And if she
loves you--and I know that she would never have encouraged you if she didn't-- why--that's
all that really matters.  But--poor girl, it will be worse than ever for her if we should both
be wiped out."

"It will," agreed Earle, gloomily.  There was silence in the hut for a few moments as the two
friends faced the doom that seemed to be impending; but neither of them was of a pessimistic
nature, and presently Earle turned to his companion and said:

"Look here, Dick, you and I have got to buck up, for Grace's sake as well as for our own. 
We are not going to take it for granted that we're down and out, just because we happen to
have fallen into the hands of a lot of savages.  We're not going to take, lying down, anything
and everything that they choose to hand out to us.  I guess I am going to have a chance to
make these ginks sit up and take notice before they have done with me, and you bet I mean to
do it.  Give me a quarter of an hour's talk with them, and I'll make them believe I'm the boss
medicine-man of South America.  If only we could get into touch with Inaguy and prompt him
what to say, I would soon make it all right.  But, anyway, I'm some conjurer as well as a ventriloquist,
and it will be strange if I can't get a chance to astonish them before the end comes."

The two friends continued to chat far into the night, discussing various schemes of escape;
but the difficulty in every case was their Indian servants, whom neither of them for a moment
dreamed of deserting; and at length, quite unable to hit upon any practicable plan, they composed
themselves to sleep in preparation for the possible ordeal of the morrow.

Nine days passed, however, and nothing happened, except that--as the prisoners discovered,
by peeping through a small chink in the wail of the hut, by way of beguiling the time--day
after day the town became more crowded with people, who seemed to be pouring into it from all
directions, as though mustering for some great event; while singing, hideous blasts from trumpets
made of burnt clay, and the pounding of drums made from hollowed sections of trees, created
a deafening din that lasted from early dawn until far into the night.  On the ninth day this
state of things reached its climax, for the din lasted all through the night without intermission,
raging with especial fury in the great square, in the centre of which an enormous fire was
kindled, round which multitudes of people, mostly naked, danced furiously, shouting and yelling
themselves hoarse, while the trumpeters and drummers seemed to vie with each other in the effort
to drown all other sounds.

"I guess," yelled Earle into Dick's ear, when the babel of sound was at its height--"this is
the eve of some great festival; and before twenty-four hours more have passed, you and I will
know our fate.  Now, there is just one thing that I want to say, Dick.  You and I have done
our level best to devise some scheme by which we might save the lives of not only ourselves,
but also of Inaguy and the rest of our followers; and we have failed.

"Now, if the worst should come to the worst, there will be no sense in throwing away our own
lives because we can't save those of the others-- that would be carrying sentiment to a perfectly
ridiculous extreme; therefore, in the last extremity, and if all other efforts should fail,
you and I must endeavour to break away, make a sudden dash for the hut where all our belongings
are stored, and get hold of a weapon or two. And if we should succeed in that, we must then
be guided by circumstances, fight our way out, if there is a ghost of a chance; and if not,
shoot ourselves rather than go tamely to the torture stake.  How does that strike you?"

"I'm with you," shouted Dick in reply.  "I shall watch for your signal, and act directly you
give the word."

"Good!" returned Earle.  And with a grip of the hand the two parted and made their way to opposite
corners of the hut where, seating themselves, each in his own way proceeded to prepare himself
for the anticipated tremendous ordeal of the morrow.

That ordeal seemed very near when, about an hour after dawn, the door of the hut in which Dick
and Earle were confined was flung open, and a gigantic Indian, fully armed, and arrayed in
a gorgeous mantle composed of the skins of brilliant plumaged birds, and with a narrow band
of gold around his head, clasped to which, one above either ear, was a great scarlet and black
wing, like that of a flamingo, beckoned the two prisoners forth.  Hitherto they had been treated
fairly well, having been supplied with three good meals per day; but no food was now offered
them, and both thought the omission tragically ominous.

With a quick grip of the hand, which each felt might be his farewell to the other, the two
stepped into the blazing sunlight, and, surrounded by a numerous guard, were led across the
square and halted before the altar, which stood at the foot of the idol.  But what a change
had taken place within the last hour.  The great square, as well as the streets leading to
it was, with the exception of a small space, packed with people, as were the roofs of the buildings
abutting on the square, yet the silence was so profound that, to use the hackneyed expression,
one might have heard a pin drop.  The small space left vacant consisted of an area some thirty
feet square, bounded on one side by the sacrificial altar, and on the other by the front row
of spectators, squatting on the ground, these evidently being, from the magnificence of their
feather robes and the splendour of their barbaric ornaments, chiefs, to the number of about
sixty, in the middle of whom sat an Indian who, by the superlative richness of his garb, the
two white men at once decided must be the paramount chief, or king.  The third side of this
small open space was occupied by a front row of fantastically garbed men who eventually proved
to be priests, behind whom stood a dense mass of ordinary spectators, while the fourth side
was bounded by a row of nine massive posts, or stakes, to which--ominous sight--were securely
bound Inaguy and the remaining eight of Earle's followers.

Arrived at a spot some five paces from the altar, the two white men were turned with their
backs to the altar and the idol, and their faces toward the long array of chiefs, and then
the armed guard stationed themselves to the right and left of the prisoners, while the silence
hovering over the scene seemed to become more intense than ever.

It was broken by Earle, who turned to Dick and murmured in a low voice:

"That scheme of mine for making a dash at the hut containing our weapons won't work, Dick.
We could never force our way through this crowd.  I must try another stunt."

"All right," murmured Dick in return.  "Go ahead.  But I'm afraid it's all up with us.  I don't
see how--"

"You wait," interrupted Earle, and fell silent again.

Meanwhile, all eyes were intently fixed upon the line of priests who, presently, at a signal
from him who seemed to be their chief, prostrated themselves with their faces to the earth,
and so remained.

For the space of some thirty seconds nothing happened.  Then that vast assemblage was suddenly
electrified by a loud voice, issuing apparently from the mouth of the idol, saying, in the
Indian language:

"Inaguy, son of Mali, and servant of my son Toqui, speak to this people and say that if they
dare to hurt so much as a hair of the heads of the white men, or of you and the others, those
white men's servants, I will visit them in my wrath and pour out upon them pestilence and famine,
drought and fire, until not one remains alive.  For the white man with black hair is a great
medicine-man, capable of working wonders; he has come into this land to do good to my people,
and it is my will that no harm shall come to him or his."

The incredible wonder of the thing, the marvel that their god, who had never before been known
to speak, should at this particular and solemn moment see fit to break his long silence, absolutely
paralysed the thousands who heard the voice.  They could do nothing but stare, open-mouthed,
at the gigantic figure, afraid almost to breathe, lest something frightful should happen to
them.  There were many present who comprehended the meaning of the words, although they were
spoken in a different tongue from that generally in use among them, and these began to question
themselves:

"Inaguy, son of Mali!  Who is he?  We know no priest of that name.  Is he one of us?  Why does
he not speak?"

Meanwhile Inaguy, who had once before witnessed such a phenomenon, was not altogether surprised
that a god should again intervene to save his master; and turning his face to the idol, he cried:

"Lord, first bid them to release me.  It is not meet that I, thy servant, should deliver thy
message, bound here to the torture stake."

"Nay, the man is right," murmured Jiravai, the king, who understood Inaguy's speech, and who
began to fear that he was like to get into very serious trouble if he was not exceedingly careful.
And, rising to his feet, he looked toward Inaguy and demanded:

"Art thou Inaguy, son of Mali?"

"Lord, it is even so," answered Inaguy.

"Then, release him," ordered the king.  Turning toward the idol and prostrating himself, he
continued:

"Great Anamac, god of the Mangeromas, forgive us, thy servants.  What we have done was in ignorance--"

"Tell him, Inaguy, that I am displeased with him and his people, for acting as he has done
without first consulting me, and that I refuse to listen to him or communicate with him, save
through thee," interrupted the idol sternly.

At the king's command a crowd of officious guards dashed forward, and with the hardened copper
blades of their spears quickly severed Inaguy's bonds, whereupon the latter strode forward
and, puffed up with pride at again being made the mouthpiece of a god, stood before the grovelling
figure of Jiravai, haughtily awaiting the moment when it should please his Majesty to rise
and receive Anamac's message.  And presently the king, realising perhaps that his grovelling
was not doing any good, rose to his feet, and the message was duly delivered.

"It is well," returned Jiravai.  "It must be as the Great Anamac pleases.  Yet, say to him,
good Inaguy, that if I have erred, it was through ignorance.  To-day is his festival, and when
the news was brought to me that two white men had been taken alive in my country, I rejoiced,
and bade them and their followers be brought hither; for I thought that to sacrifice them upon
the altar would be pleasing to him; while as for you and those with you, it was a great opportunity
for--But it is as our great Lord Anamac pleases.  And now, I would fain know what is his will
toward the white men and you, their followers."

Facing round, Inaguy shouted to the idol, repeating the words of the king's apology.  Whereupon
the idol graciously replied:

"It is well.  I know that the Mangeromas have erred through ignorance, therefore I forgive
them.  But it must never be permitted to happen again, for I do not forgive twice.  There must
be no more human sacrifices offered to me; nor must the Mangeromas ever again eat men; for
both are offences in my sight.  And touching these white men and their servants, it is my will
that the king and his people shall make them welcome in Mangeroma, treating them as honoured
guests and doing all things to help them; so shall the Mangeromas derive great profit and happiness
from their visit.  I have spoken."

This message Inaguy repeated in the tongue commonly used among the Mangeromas, shouting it
in tones which were distinctly audible all over the square, and for some distance beyond it.

"It is good," answered the king.  "Say to our Lord Anamac that his will shall be obeyed in
all things, and the white men, ay, and ye, too, his servants, are henceforth my brothers, the
sons of my father's house." Then, turning to the armed guards, he added, pointing to the eight
figures still bound to the stakes:

"Release those men and take them to my guest house until my white brother with the black hair
shall be pleased to express his wishes concerning them.  As for my brothers, the white men"--he
turned to the chiefs immediately about him--"make ye room for them that they may sit, the one
on my right hand and the other on my left."

These orders having been carried out, Jiravai appeared to be somewhat at a loss what to do
next.  For to-day was the annual festival of the Great God Anamac, and an elaborate programme
of proceedings had been prepared, the chief items of which had been the offering up of the
white men as a sacrifice to the god, and the torturing to death of the white men's followers,
to which festivity all the people of note throughout Mangeroma had been invited; and now, by
the omission of these two "star" turns, so to speak, the whole affair was likely to fall woefully
flat. In his perplexity, the king faced round toward the array of priests on the left side
of the open space and, addressing the chief of them, said:

"Since the offering of human sacrifices is displeasing to our Lord Anamac, say now, O Macoma,
in what other manner shall we fittingly and acceptably do honour to him on this day which is
especially dedicated to his service?"

But Macoma, the chief of the priests, was in no humour just then to help his illustrious master
out of a difficulty.  He was an exceedingly proud and haughty man, the greatest man in Mangeroma,
next to King Jiravai himself, and he felt slighted and humiliated to an intolerable extent
that, before all that vast assemblage, consisting of the pick of the Mangeroma nation, Anamac
should have absolutely ignored him, the chief priest, and have chosen instead to make his wishes
known by the mouth of an obscure stranger, coming from heaven only knew where.  Therefore,
in response to the king's question, he rose to his feet and said:

"Nay, Lord, ask me not, for I cannot answer thee.  Ask rather the man Inaguy, whom it has pleased
our Lord Anamac so signally to honour this day before thee and all the people.  Doubtless he
will be able to tell thee all that thou may'st desire to know."

And in high dudgeon Macoma resumed his seat.

The king frowned.  There was a hint of veiled insolence in Macoma's manner that at once set
his majesty's easily kindled anger aflame; and it was not the first time that the chief of
the priests had so offended, though never until now had the man dared to flout the supreme
ruler of the Mangeroma nation in public, much less in the presence of all Mangeroma's nobility.
The fellow threatened to get out of hand if he were not checked, and the present moment seemed
to offer an excellent opportunity not only to check Macoma's growing insubordination, but also
that of the priesthood in general, which had for some time past manifested a disposition to
claim for itself rights and privileges which Jiravai was by no means willing to concede.  Therefore
he said to Macoma:

"Thou can'st not answer me, Macoma?  Then will I act as seems good to myself.  A sacrifice
of some sort has always been offered to Anamac on this day, and he shall have one now.  And
what better sacrifice can we offer him than those who have devoted their lives to his service?
Therefore, stand forth, Macoma; we will offer thee and ten other priests, to be chosen by lot,
in the place of these strangers whom our Lord Anamac has forbidden us to sacrifice."

In a paroxysm of mingled anger and consternation Macoma sprang to his feet--as did all the
rest of the priests--and for several seconds the king and the chief priest faced each other,
the one smiling sardonically at the effect of the bomb which he had hurled into the enemy's
camp, while the other stood clenching and unclenching his hands as he racked his brain in the
effort to find an answer to what he had sense enough to understand was a personal challenge
on the part of the king, and a challenge, moreover, which, unless he could quickly find the
right answer to it, might very easily result in utter disaster to himself. For Jiravai, like
most savage kings, was an absolute monarch whom none might beard with impunity, and now, when
it seemed too late, the chief of the priests heartily execrated that sudden ebullition of ill-humour
which had in a moment brought him and ten of his following to the brink of the grave.  Then,
suddenly, in a flash of memory and inspiration, the right answer came to him and, lifting his
head, he said:

"Be it so, as my lord the king has said.  Let him sacrifice us to Anamac, if he will.  Doubtless,
the man Inaguy was speaking only idle words when he said that our Lord Anamac forbade human
sacrifice henceforth.  Sacrifice us then, O my Lord Jiravai; and let all Mangeroma see what
will happen, and whether any dependence is to be placed on the words of Inaguy."

The battle was won, and Macoma knew it.  So also did the king; for absolute monarch though
he was, there were certain things which he dared not do, and to go against the directly spoken
word of the god Anamac, and that, too, when the word was the first which the god had ever condescended
to utter--was one of them.  Therefore, making the best of what he now perceived to have been
a serious mistake, King Jiravai smiled across the open space at the now triumphant Macoma,
and said:

"It is well, Macoma, I did but try thee.  But now, perhaps, having had time to think, thou
may'st be able to say what sacrifice, other than human, we may acceptably offer to Anamac."

Macoma shook his head.  The king had given him, to say nothing of the other priests, a very
nasty five minutes, and even now, when the danger was past, his nerves were all a-quiver from
the shock of finding himself suddenly looking into the eyes of death; moreover he was a man
who did not easily forgive; he was unwilling to abate one jot of his triumph, therefore he
answered:

"Nay, Lord, I am still unable to answer thee, excepting in so far as this.  Let Inaguy be recalled,
and let him put thy question to our Lord Anamac, and if the god refuses to reply, then I say
let Inaguy be sacrificed as a deceiver."

"Thou hast answered well, Macoma," retorted the king.  "It shall be as thou sayest; and if
our lord replies through his mouth it shall be a sign that Anamac prefers Inaguy to thee, and
Inaguy shall be chief priest in thy stead."

Thus neatly did Jiravai turn the tables upon the man who, a moment before, had been congratulating
himself upon having got the best of the king in a public battle of wits.

Meanwhile, Dick and Earle had been interested watchers of the scene; and although the language
in which the king and the chief priest had been sparring was strange to them, they caught a
word here and there which sounded so nearly like words with the same meaning in the language
with which they were by this time becoming fairly conversant, that they were able to follow,
without very much difficulty the general trend of the conversation, including that portion
of it in which Macoma had ventured to cast a doubt upon Inaguy's bona fides.  And although
Earle had no great liking for the task of exercising his ventriloquial powers while seated
in such close proximity to the king, he felt that he must make the effort, and make it successfully,
too, if Inaguy's life was to be saved.  Therefore, when a few minutes later, Inaguy was led
forth, and the king put to him the question which Macoma had declared himself unable to answer,
and Inaguy had in turn passed it on to the idol, the latter was heard to reply, sharply:

"Let a young bull be found, without blemish, and let him be slain upon the altar and his carcass
be burned before me, and I shall be satisfied; for ye can offer me no more acceptable sacrifice
than this and your obedience to my commands.  It is enough.  I have spoken.  Henceforth, trouble
me not, for I will speak no more."

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A DEFINITE CLUE AT LAST.

This final communication from the god Anamac was received by the vast multitude with great
shouts of rejoicing, for it was accepted as putting an end finally and for ever to the practice
of offering annually human sacrifices to him.  And upon those occasions the choice of victims
was usually made jointly by the king and the chief priest; and the choice was always of so
capricious a character that, when invited to attend the festival, no man could ever know whether
he would survive to return from it.  Therefore the substitution of a single animal for several
human victims--seldom less in number than half a dozen--was regarded as a national boon; and
never, perhaps, was Anamac worshipped with more sincerity, or with more gratitude, than he
was upon the day when Dick Cavendish and Wilfrid Earle so narrowly escaped dying upon his altar.

The festivities not only lasted through the entire day, but were continued far into the night,
some fifty oxen being slaughtered and roasted to provide a feast for the numerous visitors
whom King Jiravai had invited to Yacoahite to participate in the great annual festival; and
when at length it was all over, and the guests had departed to their respective homes, everybody
agreed in the opinion that it had been the most joyous and successful festival within living
experience.  As for Dick and Earle, they were lodged in the king's own house, with Inaguy to
act as their interpreter--that astute individual having soon made up his mind that service
with the white men was safer, and likely to be more profitable in the end, than even the position
of chief of the Mangeroma priests.  And on the night of the festival, when the great square
of Yacoahite was given up to the populace, and all the great chiefs were being entertained
at a banquet given by the king, Earle, "the white man with the black hair," availed himself
of the opportunity to demonstrate his capabilities as a great medicine-man by performing a
few very clever conjuring tricks before the king and his guests, which the simple Mangeromas
regarded as absolute miracles.  It was a stroke of sound policy on Earle's part; for after
seeing him cause a pack of cards to vanish into thin air, extract coins--a few of which he
still had in his pocket--from the hair, ears and noses of great warriors, and perform sundry
other marvels, there was not a Mangeroma in all that great assemblage who did not regard the
American as something superhuman, or who would have ventured, even in the most secret recesses
of his soul, to meditate treachery to him or anybody connected with him.

Taken altogether, the day had been a rather trying one for both Dick and Earle, for, to start
with, neither of them had slept at all during the previous night, their minds having been in
a state of extreme tension with regard to the events of the coming hours; and when at length
the suspense was over and they knew that they had escaped a terrible fate by the bare skin
of their teeth, the reaction, combined with the necessity to preserve during several hours
a perfectly calm and unruffled demeanour in the presence of those about them, had told upon
both rather severely, and especially upon Earle, upon whose cleverness and readiness of resource
the safety of the entire party depended.  Therefore it was with a sense of profound relief
that the two friends at length found themselves alone together and free to throw off the strain
to which they had been obliged to subject themselves all day.

It was well past midnight when the king's banquet having come to an end, the two white men
were conducted with much deference and ceremony to an apartment in the king's house, in which,
to their great delight, they found the whole of their belongings, including their two camp
beds, which some thoughtful individual--who afterwards proved to have been Peter--had fixed
up and prepared for their occupation.  They lost no time in discarding their clothing and flinging
themselves upon their pallets, for both were feeling utterly exhausted; but before surrendering
themselves to sleep they exchanged a few remarks relative to the events of the past day.

"Yes," agreed Earle, in response to an observation of Dick's, "we have had an exceedingly narrow
escape, Dick, and don't you forget it, a more narrow escape, indeed, than you probably realise.
For example, do you know the name of this tribe of Indians?"

"Certainly," answered Dick.  "I heard the king call the idol, this morning, `Anamac, god of
the Mangeromas,' so I suppose these johnnies are the Mangeromas."

"Correct, my son; they are," returned Earle.  "Remember ever hearing anything about the Mangeromas?"

"Of course," returned Dick.  "They are the tribe with the bad name that those Catu Indians
told us about, and whom we have been looking for ever since, because they are supposed to know
something of the whereabouts of the city of Manoa.  Isn't that it?"

"That is it, Dick," assented Earle.  "And you knew it?  Well, you were so cool, so apparently
unconcerned, during the whole time that our fate was hanging in the balance, that I thought
you had missed the point of the king's remark."

"Not much," retorted Dick.  "But why shouldn't I keep cool?  What would have been the use of
getting excited and anxious?  That would only have given our show away and spoiled everything.
But, although I may not have shown it, I don't mind admitting now, old chap, that I was most
confoundedly anxious.  For I knew that if your ventriloquial trick had been discovered, it
would have been all up with us."

"You bet it would," agreed Earle.  "And that was just where our narrow escape came in; for
I was so nervous that, when the critical moment came, it was only by an almost superhuman effort
that I was able to control my voice.  However, here we are, still alive and well, thank God!
And--Dick--after all, I'm glad that you are with me.  A chap with a nerve like yours is worth
a whole regiment of soldiers.  Good-night!"

The two white men slept the sleep of exhaustion that night, to awake refreshed and re-invigorated
on the following morning, with scarcely a trace remaining of the stress and strain through
which they had passed on the preceding day.  Inaguy and Peter presented themselves at daylight
with the accustomed morning cup of chocolate; and the former, who was by this time well acquainted
with his master's habits, mentioned that he had learned by inquiry, that there was a stream
just outside the town in which the white lords might safely venture to bathe.  Whereupon the
pair sallied forth and enjoyed the now rare luxury of a swim, receiving, as they went and returned,
the respectful salutations of the populace. Upon their return they found an excellent breakfast
awaiting them, prepared by the indefatigable Peter from viands supplied by the king's especial
order.

Earle announced his intention of accepting the king's proffered hospitality and remaining several
days in Yacoahite, not only to afford his men time to recover from the hardships and sufferings
which they had experienced while filling the role of prisoners doomed to the sacrifice, but
also to enable him to prosecute the inquiries which he wished to make regarding the whereabouts
of the city of Manoa.  And he was not less anxious to stay than the king was to entertain him
and get the benefit of his advice and guidance upon several burning questions which had of
late been causing him uneasiness.  For now that the great god Anamac had made it clear that
the white strangers enjoyed his especial favour and protection, and were therefore not to be
molested, but, on the contrary, were to be treated with the utmost honour and distinction,
the astute Jiravai immediately arrived at the conclusion that they must certainly be something
more than mere ordinary men--as witness the marvels which Earle had performed during the progress
of the feast--and that consequently their advice and assistance must be of more than ordinary
value, and well worth securing.  Therefore the king took Earle and Dick unreservedly into his
confidence and, with the help of Inaguy as interpreter, fully laid before the pair a number
of exceedingly delicate and difficult problems which were just then confronting him.  And Earle,
being a born diplomatist, entered into the thing with keen zest, taking the problems one by
one and asking question after question until, as he put it, he had fairly "got the hang of
the thing," when, by a judicious admixture of his own diplomatic instinct with Dick's shrewd
common sense, it became not very difficult to find solutions of the several problems, which
not only effected a general clearing of the air, but also ultimately added considerable lustre
to Jiravai's name as that of a wise and powerful monarch.

The settlement of these matters of high and intricate policy took time; so that it was not
until some ten days after the festival of Anamac that Earle was able to introduce to the king's
notice the subject of Manoa, to ask what his majesty knew about it and its precise situation,
and to request his assistance to enable the expedition to find the place.

But no sooner was Earle's project mentioned than Jiravai began to throw cold water upon it.
First of all, he denied all knowledge whatsoever of any city named Manoa; and when Earle met
this denial with the admission that there might possibly be some mistake in the matter of the
name, explaining that it was not this that was of importance, but the fact that there was a
city distinguished by certain curious and remarkable characteristics that he was anxious to
find and visit, the king, while reluctantly admitting that he had certainly heard of such a
city, most earnestly besought Earle at once and for ever to abandon his intention of visiting
the place, since rumour had it that the inhabitants so strongly objected to the intrusion of
strangers among them that, of the few who had been known to force a way in, not one had ever
been known to come out again.  Jiravai asserted that he knew nothing whatever about the city,
beyond the above-named peculiarity, and the fact that its actual name was Ulua--bluntly adding
that he desired to know no more-- and he greatly doubted whether there was any Mangeroma now
living who possessed more information on the subject than himself; yet, if the white lords
very particularly desired it, he would cause immediate inquiries to be made.  To which statement
Earle replied that the white lords desired the information in question more than anything else,
except to find themselves within the walls of Ulua itself; and that the king could not more
conclusively demonstrate his friendship than by causing the most exhaustive inquiries to be
made forthwith.  And there the matter rested for nearly a fortnight, during which Earle and
Dick wandered about the district together, shooting, but finding very little game; for they
soon discovered that the Mangeroma country was pretty thickly inhabited, and that, between
hunting and the clearing of the land for cultivation, the game had been nearly all driven away
or exterminated.

At length, however, in response to the inquiries which the king caused to be made, an old man
was found who asserted that, many years ago, when he was but a lad, he had been lost while
engaged in a hunting expedition, and in his wanderings had actually seen, from the summit of
a high hill, a great city of palaces, which he believed could be none other than the legendary
city of Ulua, but that he had made no attempt to approach it, being afraid that, if he did
so, he would fall into the hands of the inhabitants, and never more see his kith and kin. 
Asked whether he believed it possible, after all those years, to find his way back to the spot
from which he had beheld the city, he replied in the affirmative, provided that he could be
carried thither and back again, but not otherwise, the way being altogether too long and rough
for his old limbs to traverse unaided.  Arrangements were accordingly made for the construction
of a litter for the accommodation of the old man, and on a certain morning the expedition set
out from Yacoahite, the party now consisting of thirty men all told, including the old man,
Busa, who was to serve as guide, his eight bearers, and ten additional bearers to assist in
the transport of the white men's baggage.

As Busa had warned them, the way proved both long and difficult, leading as it did up and down
wild ravines, along the dry and stony beds of mountain torrents, through rough and narrow passes,
and by the edge of dizzy precipices where a single false step would have meant a fall of hundreds
of feet through space; but after ten days of arduous travel the journey was accomplished without
accident, and without any very startling adventure, the party arriving, late in a certain afternoon
at a "divide," from which they looked down upon a vast basin containing a lake some thirty
miles long by twenty broad, on the northern shore of which stood a city which Busa had not
misrepresented when he spoke of it as a city of palaces.  For a city it certainly was, covering
an area of ground about four miles long by three broad, and many of its buildings seemed palatial,
if one might judge by their lofty white walls and glittering roofs, shining like gold in the
rays of the declining sun. Of course, it was not possible to judge very accurately the character
of the buildings, or to see much detail, for the city was some twenty miles distant from the
spot to which Busa had conducted the party, while the rarefaction of the atmosphere rendered
even the field-glasses of little use.  But that the city was actually there before their eyes
was indisputable, and it was a city consisting not of a mere agglomeration of mud huts with
thatched roofs, but of stately buildings of solid masonry, possessing such architectural adornments
as towers, pinnacles, and domes, evidencing on the part of the inhabitants a condition of high
civilisation and refinement.

From his knapsack Earle produced a folded map of the northern portion of South America which
he opened and spread out on a rock.  It was the most modern and up-to-date map that he had
been able to procure, and it was drawn to a scale large enough to show not only every town
of any importance but also innumerable villages, some of them so small that, as the party had
themselves proved, they contained less than a hundred inhabitants.  Yet on the part of the
map upon which Earle now placed his finger, and for hundreds of miles in every direction therefrom,
there was no indication of town or village, and only a mere suggestion of the mountain range
through which they had lately been travelling, while even the courses of rivers were merely
indicated by dotted lines; in short, the party were now, and had been for several weeks, in
a region which had not been explored.  But by means of astronomical observations made and worked
out by Dick, the track of the party had each day been plotted upon the map, and such details
as the forests they had passed through, the rivers they had crossed, the Indian villages they
had met with, the great swamp, and the mountain ranges, had all been carefully plotted.

"Now," remarked Earle, pointing to a pencil mark on the map, "that is where we were at noon
to-day, and we are somewhere about here now. There is no indication of a town or village of
any sort anywhere near, yet just about there"--laying his finger on another point of the map--"stands
yonder city on the shore of a lake, in a great basin surrounded on all sides by mountains,
of the existence of which this map affords no indication.  What do I deduce from that? you
will ask.  I will tell you, Dick.  I deduce from it that yonder city is the one which, though
our friend Jiravai says it is named Ulua, has been spoken of ever since the Spanish conquest,
and diligently sought, as the city of Manoa; and to us has fallen the honour and glory of having
actually found it!  Just think of the wonder of it, Dick.  For over three and a half centuries
the legend of the existence of that city has persisted, yet there is no absolutely authentic
account of it having ever been reached, although hundreds, possibly thousands--if one could
but know the whole truth--have most diligently and painfully sought it.  And at last its discovery
falls to the lot of two very undistinguished people, an Englishman and an American, as is quite
in accordance with the fitness of things.  Now let us make use of our remaining daylight to
get down to a lower level, for, with the setting of the sun, it will be bitterly cold up here,
and I have no fancy for spending the night in a temperature that will probably fall below freezing
point."

So saying, Earle folded up his map and, replacing it in his knapsack, gave the word for the
party to proceed, Dick and himself taking the lead.  Picking their way among towering rocks
and along narrow ledges, they travelled a distance of some three miles and effected a descent
of about two thousand feet before night overtook them, finally pitching their camp on a little
rocky plateau under the lee of an enormous vertical cliff, which effectually sheltered them
from the icy wind which sprang up and roared overhead with the force of a gale almost immediately
after sunset.

Notwithstanding the shelter afforded by the cliff, however, the cold was intense, and the party,
acclimatised by this time to the hot, humid atmosphere of the plains, suffered severely, the
more so that they were camped among bare rocks without a vestige of vegetation of any kind,
and were therefore without the materials for a fire; the return of daylight therefore found
them more than ready to resume the march, in the hope that before long they would reach a region
where fuel of some sort would allow them to kindle a fire and prepare a much-needed hot breakfast.

They reached such a spot after about an hour's march, camping in the shelter of a small clump
of stunted pines; and here, after breakfast, Busa approached the two white men with the request
that, having performed his task of guiding the party to a spot from which the "city of palaces,"
could be seen, he and his bearers might now be permitted to set out upon the return journey,
he and they being anxious to recross the divide during the hours of daylight, and so escape
the bitter cold from which they had suffered so severely during the preceding night. The request
seemed a reasonable one, for the old man's services were no longer needed; Earle therefore
liberally rewarded the old fellow and his eight bearers, and dismissed them with a message
of greeting and thanks to the king.

The two parties broke camp simultaneously, Busa and his bearers taking the back trail up the
path which they had all descended an hour earlier, while the others, under Earle's leadership,
proceeded down the mountain side at their best speed, being impatient to reach the fertile,
cultivated country bordering the lake below.

But the task was not by any means so easy as it had first appeared, for they had scarcely gone
a mile when they unexpectedly found themselves at the verge of a long line of precipitous cliffs
overlooking the great basin in which lay the lake and the city.  It was by no means a pleasant
situation in which they found themselves, for they were standing upon a steep slope, clad with
short, dry grass, almost as slippery as ice to walk upon, and this steep slope ended abruptly
in a precipice which Earle, going down upon his stomach and peering cautiously over the edge,
declared could be not less than six or seven thousand feet high.  So terrible was the shock
it gave him to find himself overhanging and gazing down into that dizzy void, that it induced
a violent attack of vertigo, causing him to scream out that he was falling, and to beg those
who were holding him to pull him back.  They, of course, did so at once; but several minutes
elapsed before the adventurous gazer sufficiently recovered his nerve to stand, and when he
did so he was bathed in a cold perspiration, while his teeth chattered to such an extent that
it was some time before he could distinctly articulate.

"Never had such a fearful shock in my life," he afterwards explained to Dick.  "Of course,
I knew that the valley was an enormous depth below us, but when I undertook to peer over the
edge of the cliff I did not for a moment anticipate that I was going to find myself hanging
over a sheer void, thousands of feet deep.  I expected to find below me a precipitous cliff
seamed and scarred with innumerable irregularities and projections, by means of which an ordinarily
active man might easily make his way down; but, man alive, this precipice is sheer, from top
to bottom like the wall of a house, without a single projection, so far as I could see, big
enough for a fly to settle upon.  It was awful to find myself lying there, with my heels higher
than my head, gazing down into that dizzy hollow, at the bottom of which tall trees looked
no higher than pins, and to feel that if I dared to move a muscle I should inevitably go sliding
over, head first!"

"Ay," assented Dick.  "I think I know the kind of feeling.  I experienced something very like
it myself the first time I climbed to the height of the royal yard.  The hull of the ship below
me looked so small, and so utterly inadequate to sustain the substantial spars about me, that,
quite unconsciously, I found myself moving with the utmost precaution, lest my additional weight
should capsize the ship."

"Yes," assented Earle.  "I guess that was something like what I felt, except that, in my case,
I was convinced I should never be able to get back to safety.  Nevertheless, here I am, safe
and sound.  And now the question arises: How are we going to get down into that valley?  So
far as I can see the cliffs are everywhere vertical, like this one; yet there must be a way
down somewhere; else how did the inhabitants of the city get there?"

"Oh yes, of course there is a way down, somewhere," agreed Dick.  "We'd better camp, hadn't
we, and pursue our usual tactics, you going one way, and I the other, exploring?"

"Yes," assented Earle.  "But we won't camp just here, thank you.  I should be afraid that some
of us would go sliding over that cliff edge before we knew it.  We will go along yonder, to
the eastward, a bit. The ground looks less steep in that direction, and probably we shall find
a suitable camping place before long."

They did, about a mile and a half to the eastward; and the camp having been pitched, Earle
accompanied by Inaguy, set off in one direction, while Dick, accompanied by another Indian,
named Moquit, went in the other, in search of a practicable route down to the plain and the
shore of the lake, the two white men taking their rifles, as usual, and each carrying a pair
of powerful binoculars slung over his shoulder.

The way taken by Dick led him back along the edge of the cliff by the route which they had
traversed shortly before; and having reached the spot where Earle had taken his thrilling peep
down into the abyss, the young man continued on, eventually entering a fir wood, through which
he passed, bagging two brace of a species of pheasant as he went.  Emerging from the wood,
which was about a mile long, he found himself approaching a spot where the cliff seemed to
dip somewhat, and halting for a moment to reconnoitre the prospect through his field-glasses,
he became aware of the fact that work in the valley had begun for the day; for he observed
smoke issuing from the chimneys of a number of detached buildings which he took to be farmhouses;
while, studying the scene more intently, he was presently able to pick out the forms of numerous
people apparently engaged in tilling the wide fields and at work in the orchards--as he took
them to be--dotted here and there in the valley far below.  Farther away, he perceived a number
of small dots on the bosom of the lake, carefully watching which he at length became convinced
that they were canoes, or some similar kind of craft, crossing the lake, some heading towards
the city and others from it.

Some two hours later, Dick called a halt in a small pine wood, and ordered Moquit to kindle
a fire and prepare a brace of the shot birds for their mid-day meal; and while this was being
done the young Englishman sauntered off a little way in search of another spot from which he
might advantageously effect a further reconnaissance of the valley.  He found such a spot at
no great distance and, unslinging his glasses, proceeded to search the valley and the face
of the neighbouring cliffs from his new view point.  But, look where he would, it everywhere
seemed the same: vertical unscalable precipices of appalling height, and nowhere anything suggesting
the existence of a road by means of which the valley might be reached.

Yet stay!  As he was in the very act of removing the binoculars from his eyes his keen sight
detected what appeared to be an infinitesimally small moving dot against the bare drab face
of the cliff, some two miles away.  Focussing his glasses afresh upon the spot, Dick watched
it steadily for two or three minutes until he became certain that it was moving.  Yes, moving
downward along the cliff face toward the valley. Precisely what it was, he could not determine
with any certainty, but he judged it to be a vehicle of some sort, a slow moving vehicle; and
if so, it was of necessity travelling over a road, and that road, although it was indistinguishable
from where Dick stood, was one of very easy gradient, judging from the movements of the object
upon it.  Satisfied now that he had made an important discovery, the lad carefully noted his
surroundings, noted with equal care a number of objects which would enable him to fix the position
of the road, and closing his glasses, walked briskly back to his temporary camp, where he found
Moquit anxiously awaiting his return, with the birds cooked to a turn and just ready for eating.

Hurriedly dispatching his meal, Dick, with Moquit at his heels, resumed his task of exploration,
proceeding first to the spot from which he had just observed the moving object, and there treating
the face of the cliff to a further close scrutiny.  But the object, whatever it may have been,
was no longer to be seen; and, satisfied of this, Dick pressed on. Two miles farther on, still
following the edge of the cliff as closely as was prudent, he halted, arrested by the sight
of what, at the distance of about half a mile, had the appearance of a structure of some sort,
clinging to the very verge of the cliff; and inspecting it through his binoculars, he saw that
he was right in his surmise.  It was a building, something in the nature of a wall, with what
looked like a closed gateway in its centre.  And on the parapet immediately above the gateway,
there was a figure, apparently that of a sentinel, stalking slowly to and fro!

It was enough; the structure before him was undoubtedly the gateway at the head of the road
giving access to the valley, and his mission was accomplished.  His first impulse was to go
on and view the gateway, or whatever it might be, at close quarters; but the inhabitants of
the valley were evidently jealous of the intrusion of strangers, as was clear from the presence
of the sentinel on the parapet; and giving the matter a few moments' consideration, Dick came
to the conclusion that, before revealing his presence, it would be well to return to Earle
and report.  He therefore faced about forthwith and, keeping under cover as well as he could,
retired in good order, pretty confident that, up to that moment, he and his follower had not
been seen.

The sun was just sinking behind the mountain ridges to the westward of the mysterious city
when Dick reached the camp.  Earle, he found, had not yet returned, but he arrived some ten
minutes later, greatly disgusted at his own want of success.  He had searched the northern
cliffs for a distance of some twelve miles, it appeared, and nowhere had found a spot where
even a goat or a monkey might have passed up or down them.  But he had penetrated to within
some eight or nine miles of the city, and having viewed it at that distance and from a great
height through the lenses of his powerful glasses, was fully persuaded that, let the name of
the city be what it might, it was none other than that which, crowned with the halo of legend
and romance, had been spoken and written of and sought for as "Manoa."

"It is a magnificent city, Dick," he exclaimed, enthusiastically; "a city of palaces embowered
in gardens; and the roofs of many of its buildings are covered with gold.  They must be," he
insisted, in reply to Dick's incredulous shrug of the shoulders, "otherwise they would not
gleam so brilliantly in the sun as they do.  And to-morrow night, please God, we will rest
our weary limbs in that same city, and perhaps, if luck is with us, make the acquaintance of
El Dorado himself, or at all events, his successor."

CHAPTER TWELVE.

GUESTS--OR PRISONERS?

The camp was astir with the coming of dawn on the following morning; and after an early breakfast
the expedition started, under Dick's guidance, for the gateway, which was reached shortly before
noon.  As the party approached, the sentinel was seen pacing to and fro across the parapet,
as on the preceding afternoon; and that he was keeping a sharp look-out was manifest, for the
little band had scarcely emerged from the pine wood in which Dick had halted for his mid-day
meal on the preceding day, when the man was seen to pause in his monotonous march to and fro
and gaze toward them under the shadow of his hand.  Then, apparently satisfied that the party
were bound for the gateway, he was seen to move a few paces and bend over, with his hand to
his mouth, as though shouting to someone below, after which he resumed his march as before,
occasionally eyeing the strangers as they approached.

Arrived at length at the gateway, it was seen that the structure consisted of a wall, some
thirty feet high, very solidly built of great blocks of masonry dressed to a perfectly smooth
face, and so accurately jointed that, even at the distance of a few paces, the joints were
scarcely perceptible.  The wall was built with a vertical face to a height of some twenty feet,
above which it swelled outward in the form known as a "bull-nose," the upper surface of which
sloped so steeply upward as to render it unclimbable; so that, even if a man, or men, should
climb as far as the swell of the bull-nose by means of a pole or ladder, the would-be intruders
could get no farther.  The wall was semi-circular in plan, jutting out from the edge of the
cliff for a distance of some fifteen feet at either end and descending the face of the cliff,
diminishing as it went, until it died away to nothing, some fifty feet below, rendering it
an impossibility for anyone to pass round either end of it.  The middle of the wall was so
constructed as to form a watch-tower, some thirty feet square, with a flat roof, upon which
it appeared a sentinel was always posted; and it was in the base of the watch-tower that the
gateway, about ten feet wide, was pierced, the opening being filled with a pair of wooden doors
of exceedingly solid construction.

As the party halted, the sentinel, who wore a burnished helmet and corselet that flashed in
the sun like gold and was the colour of gold, leaned over the parapet and shouted to them what
seemed to be an inquiry; but the words, though quite distinctly pronounced, were utterly unintelligible
to all.

"Wants to know our business, I guess," remarked Earle.  "Step forward, Inaguy, and explain
that we wish to pay our respects to his majesty, El Dorado.  Try him in all the dialects you
happen to be acquainted with."

Inaguy accordingly stepped forward and did his best, but without avail; the sentinel, though
he listened attentively to all that was said, could evidently make nothing of it, replying
only with shakes of the head.

"It is the usual fate of the explorer who enters a new country," remarked Earle.  "He is unable
to understand or make himself understood. But there is always the language of signs to fall
back upon.  Let me see what I can do in that way."

Stepping forward and thus claiming the sentinel's attention, he pointed first to himself, then
to Dick, then, with a comprehensive wave of the hand, to the Indian carriers, and finally to
the door, motioning with his hands as though opening it.  This seemed to be intelligible to
the sentinel, for he nodded, and stepping aside a few paces, shouted a few words to someone
below in the interior of the tower.  A few moments later a second man appeared on the top of
the tower and, approaching the parapet, regarded the would-be visitors intently.  The inspection
appeared to result satisfactorily, for a few moments later he disappeared; a short interval
of waiting ensued, then the gate swung open, and he came fearlessly forward, while the gates
swung to behind him, and there was a sound of ponderous bars being shot into their sockets.

Judging from the richness of his dress and the quiet dignity of his manner, the man was probably
an officer.  He was apparently about thirty years of age, some five feet ten inches in height,
and was well-made though perhaps a trifle slight in build.  In complexion he was somewhat sallow,
but he was distinctly good-looking, with a somewhat Hebrew cast of features, and with coal-black
hair, eyebrows, beard and moustache, the beard trimmed square, and the hair worn rather long,
trimmed square across the nape of the neck, with a short fringe trimmed square across the forehead.
His eyes were black and piercing, but there was a straightforward honest look in them that
instantly created a favourable impression.  He was attired in helmet and corselet, apparently
of gold, like those worn by the sentinel, but with the addition of a splendid plume of long
black feathers surmounting his helmet.  Beneath his corselet appeared a sort of skirt of fine
chain mail reaching to just below the knees, and his legs were protected by greaves made of
the same metal as the rest of his armour.  His feet were encased in buskins, a sash of black
and yellow passed over his left shoulder and was knotted upon his right hip, while at his left
dangled a short sword encased in a jewelled scabbard, supported by a jewelled belt or chain
of broad links, all made of the same gold-like metal.  As he strode forward, his eyes glancing
questioningly from Earle to Dick and back again, he threw up his open right hand, palm forward,
and said a few words, which sounded like a greeting, in a full but very pleasant tone of voice.
Like the speech of the sentinel, his words were quite unintelligible to those addressed, but
his action seemed easily interpretable as the sign of peace, and Earle instantly imitated it.

"Thanks, old chap," the American replied, beaming amiably upon the soldier; "it is good of
you to say so; but I'm awfully sorry that I can't understand you.  The fact is, you know, that
I and my friend Cavendish"--he indicated Dick with a wave of his hand--"have come all the way
from New York expressly to discover your city--which I learn is called Ulua--"

The officer instantly caught the name Ulua and repeated it, smilingly pointing in the direction
of the city.

"Yes," proceeded Earle, "that is so.  I guess you get me all right.  We want to go in through
that gate and make the acquaintance of your king, El Dorado, or whatever his name may be. 
Do you get that?"

All this was accompanied by much gesture, but it did not seem to be very illuminating to the
officer, who merely repeated the word Ulua, pointing again toward the city.  Then, pointing
to himself, he pronounced the word "Adoni," following it up by pointing at Earle, and uttering
a word that sounded like "Hu."

"Yes, sirree, I get you all right," was Earle's reply as he gripped the astonished man's right
hand and shook it heartily, smiling in his eyes as he did so.  "Gee!" he exclaimed, turning
to Dick, "we're getting on like a house afire.  He says his name is Adoni, and he asks who
I am. Isn't that right, old golden image?"

The "old golden image" looked a trifle nonplussed for a moment, but presently repeated his
last performance; upon which Earle remarked:

"Of course, I knew I wasn't mistaken.  You sir," pointing, "are named Adoni--" The officer
nodded.  "And I," he continued pointing to himself, "am named Earle--Earle.  You get that?"

"Adoni," replied the officer, pointing to himself, "Earle"--pointing to the owner of the name.

"Right!" agreed Earle.  "You are a quite intelligent guy, if I may be permitted to say so.
And this youngster's name is Dick--Dick.  That's easy enough to remember, isn't it?"

"Adoni," replied the officer, again pointing to himself.  "Earle--Dick," pointing first to
one and then the other.

"Sure!" exclaimed Earle, delighted with the progress which he considered he was making.  "I
knew there must be a way of making you understand." And he proceeded to explain all over again,
and speaking very slowly, with plenty of gesture, his desire that he and his party might be
allowed to pass through the gate and visit the city of Ulua.  It was a tedious and lengthy
process, but apparently it was in the end attended with a certain measure of success, for eventually
the officer shouted an order, the gate was thrown open, and, taking Dick and Earle each by
an arm, Adoni led the pair through.  Inaguy and the other Indians, who had grounded their burdens
while the long colloquy was proceeding, hastened to resume them and follow the white men, but
before they could do so their leaders were inside, and the gate was bolted and barred upon them.

Taken by surprise for the moment, Earle did not realise what was happening until it was too
late; but the instant that he did so he broke free from Adoni's grasp and dashed up a flight
of steps, which he saw a little ahead of him, and which he rightly guessed led up to the parapet.
Arrived there he brushed aside the sentinel, who half-heartedly sought to bar his way and,
rushing to the parapet, ordered Inaguy and the rest to remain where they were, and on no account
to think of departing, for he would certainly arrange, sooner or later, for their admission.
Then he calmly descended and surrendered himself to the astonished and somewhat amused Adoni,
who said a few words which sounded as though they were intended to be reassuring.

Resuming the role of guide, Adoni now conducted the pair into a room in the rear portion of
the tower, in which was a window opening, unglazed, affording a delightful view of the valley
and lake, with the road leading thereto; and here they were turned over to another officer,
who by signs, indicated a request that the strangers should remove their outer garments. To-day we
see very few penguins. I'm afraid there can be no observations to give us our position.

Release after Twenty Days in the Pack

Friday, December 30.--Obs. 72° 17' S. 177° 9' E. Made good in 48 hours, S. 19 W. 190'; C. Crozier
S. 21 W. 334'. We are out of the pack at length and at last; one breathes again and hopes
that it will be possible to carry out the main part of our programme, but the coal will need
tender nursing.

Yesterday afternoon it became darkly overcast with falling snow. The barometer fell on a very
steep gradient and the wind increased to force 6 from the E.N.E.
In the evening the snow fell heavily and the glass still galloped
down.

In any other part of the world one would have felt certain of a coming gale. But here by experience
we know that the barometer gives little indication of wind.

Throughout the afternoon and evening the water holes became more frequent and we came along at
a fine speed. At the end of the first watch we were passing through occasional streams of ice;
the wind had shifted to north and the barometer had ceased to fall. In the middle watch the snow
held up, and soon after--1 A.M.--Bowers steered through the last ice stream.

At six this morning we were well in the open sea, the sky thick and
overcast with occasional patches of fog.

We passed one small berg on the starboard hand with a group of Antarctic petrels on one side
and a group of snow petrels on the other. It is evident that these birds rely on sea and swell
to cast their food up on ice ledges--only a few find sustenance in
the pack where, though food is plentiful, it is not so easily come by.

A flight of Antarctic petrel accompanied the ship for some distance, wheeling to and fro about
her rather than following in the wake as do the more northerly sea birds.

It is [good] to escape from the captivity of the pack and to feel
that a few days will see us at Cape Crozier, but it is sad to remember
the terrible inroad which the fight of the last fortnight has made
on our coal supply.

2 P.M.--The wind failed in the forenoon. Sails were clewed up, and at eleven we stopped to sound.
The sounding showed 1111 fathoms--we appear to be on the edge of
the continental shelf.

Nelson got some samples and temperatures.

The sun is bursting through the misty sky and warming the air. The snowstorm had covered the
ropes with an icy sheet--this is now peeling off and falling with a clatter to the deck, from
which the moist slush is rapidly evaporating. In a few hours the ship will be dry--much to our
satisfaction; it is very wretched when, as last night, there is slippery wet snow underfoot and
on every object one touches.

Our run has exceeded our reckoning by much. I feel confident that our speed during the last two
days had been greatly under-estimated and so it has proved. We ought to be off C. Crozier on New
Year's Day.

8 P.M.--Our calm soon came to an end, the breeze at 3 P.M. coming
strong from the S.S.W., dead in our teeth--a regular southern blizzard.

We are creeping along a bare 2 knots. I begin to wonder if fortune will ever turn her wheel.
On every possible occasion she seems to have decided against us. Of course, the ponies are
feeling the motion as we pitch in a short, sharp sea--it's damnable for them and disgusting for
us.

Summary of the Pack

We may be said to have entered the pack at 4 P.M. on the 9th in latitude 65 1/2 S. We left it
at 1 A.M. on 30th in latitude 71 1/2 S. We have taken twenty days and some odd hours to get
through, and covered in a direct line over 370 miles--an average of 18 miles a day. We entered
the pack with 342 tons of coal and left with 281 tons; we have, therefore,
expended 61 tons in forcing our way through--an average of 6 miles
to the ton.

These are not pleasant figures to contemplate, but considering the exceptional conditions experienced
I suppose one must conclude that things might have been worse.

9th. Loose streams, steaming. 10th. Close pack. 11th. 6 A.M. close pack, stopped. 12th. 11.30 A.M.
started. 13th. 8 A.M. heavy pack, stopped; 8 P.M. out fires. 14th. Fires out. 15th. ... 16th.
... 17th. ... 18th. Noon, heavy pack and leads, steaming 19th. Noon, heavy pack and leads,
steaming. 20th. Forenoon, banked fires. 21st. 9 A.M. started. 11 A.M. banked. 22nd. ,, ,,
23rd. Midnight, started. 24th. 7 A.M. stopped 25th. Fires out. 26th. ,, ,, 27th. ,, ,, 28th. 7.30
P.M. steaming. 29th. Steaming. 30th. Steaming.

These columns show that we were steaming for nine out of twenty days. We had two long stops,
one of five days and one of four and a half days. On three other occasions we stopped for short
intervals without drawing fires.

I have asked Wright to plot the pack with certain symbols on the chart made by Pennell. It promises
to give a very graphic representation of our experiences.

'We hold the record for reaching the northern edge of the pack, whereas three or four times
the open Ross Sea has been gained at an earlier date.

'I can imagine few things more trying to the patience than the long wasted days of waiting. Exasperating
as it is to see the tons of coal melting away with the smallest mileage
to our credit, one has at least the satisfaction of active fighting
and the hope of better fortune.

To wait idly is the worst of conditions. You can imagine how often and how restlessly we climbed
to the crow's nest and studied the outlook. And strangely enough there was generally some change
to note. A water lead would mysteriously open up a few miles away or the place where it had been would
as mysteriously close. Huge icebergs crept silently towards or past us, and continually we
were observing these formidable objects with range finder and compass
to determine the relative movement, sometimes with misgiving as to
our ability to clear them.

Under steam the change of conditions was even more marked. Sometimes we would enter a lead of
open water and proceed for a mile or two without hindrance; sometimes we would come to big sheets
of thin ice which broke easily as our iron-shod prow struck them, and sometimes even a thin
sheet would resist all our attempts to break it; sometimes we would push big floes with comparative
ease and sometimes a small floe would bar our passage with such obstinacy that one would almost
believe it possessed of an evil spirit; sometimes we passed through acres of sludgy sodden ice
which hissed as it swept along the side, and sometimes the hissing ceased seemingly without
rhyme or reason, and we found our screw churning the sea without any effect.

'Thus the steaming days passed away in an ever changing environment and are remembered as an
unceasing struggle.

'The ship behaved splendidly--no other ship, not even the Discovery, would have come through so well.
Certainly the Nimrod would never have reached the south water had she been caught in such pack.
As a result I have grown strangely attached to the Terra Nova. As she bumped the floes with mighty
shocks, crushing and grinding a way through some, twisting and turning to avoid others, she seemed
like a living thing fighting a great fight. If only she had more economical engines she would
be suitable in all respects.

'Once or twice we got among floes which stood 7 or 8 feet above water,
with hummocks and pinnacles as high as 25 feet.

The ship could have stood no chance had such floes pressed against her, and at first we were
a little alarmed in such situations. But familiarity breeds contempt; there never was any pressure
in the heavy ice, and I'm inclined to think there never would be.

'The weather changed frequently during our journey through the pack. The wind blew strong from
the west and from the east; the sky was often darkly overcast; we had snowstorms, flaky snow,
and even light rain. In all such circumstances we were better placed
in the pack than outside of it.

The foulest weather could do us little harm. During quite a large percentage of days, however,
we had bright sunshine, which, even with the temperature well below freezing, made everything
look bright and cheerful. The sun also brought us wonderful cloud effects, marvellously delicate
tints of sky, cloud, and ice, such effects as one might travel far to see. In spite of our impatience
we would not willingly have missed many of the beautiful scenes which our sojourn in the pack afforded
us. Ponting and Wilson have been busy catching these effects, but no art can reproduce such colours
as the deep blue of the icebergs.

'Scientifically we have been able to do something. We have managed to get a line of soundings on
our route showing the raising of the bottom from the ocean depths to the shallow water on the
continental shelf, and the nature of the bottom.

With these soundings we have obtained many interesting observations of the temperature of
different layers of water in the sea.

'Then we have added a great deal to the knowledge of life in the pack from observation of the
whales, seals, penguins, birds, and fishes as well as of the pelagic beasts which are caught in
tow-nets. Life in one form or another is very plentiful in the pack, and the struggle for existence
here as elsewhere is a fascinating subject for study.

'We have made a systematic study of the ice also, both the bergs and sea ice, and have got a good
deal of useful information concerning it. Also Pennell has done a little magnetic work.

'But of course this slight list of activity in the cause of science is a very poor showing for
the time of our numerous experts; many have had to be idle in regard to their own specialities,
though none are idle otherwise. All the scientific people keep night watch when they have no special
work to do, and I have never seen a party of men so anxious to be doing work or so cheerful in
doing it. When there is anything to be done, such as making or shortening sail, digging ice
from floes for the water supply, or heaving up the sounding line, it goes without saying that all
the afterguard turn out to do it. There is no hesitation and no distinction. It will be the same
when it comes to landing stores or doing any other hard manual labour.

'The spirit of the enterprise is as bright as ever. Every one strives to help every one else,
and not a word of complaint or anger has been heard on board. The inner life of our small community
is very pleasant to think upon and very wonderful considering the extremely small space in which
we are confined.

'The attitude of the men is equally worthy of admiration. In the forecastle as in the wardroom
there is a rush to be first when work is to be done, and the same
desire to sacrifice selfish consideration to the success of the expedition.

It is very good to be able to write in such high praise of one's companions, and I feel that
the possession of such support ought to ensure success. Fortune would be in a hard mood indeed
if it allowed such a combination of knowledge, experience, ability, and enthusiasm to achieve nothing.'

CHAPTER
III

Land

Saturday, December 31. New Year's Eve.--Obs. 72° 54' S., 174° 55' E. Made good S. 45 W. 55'; C. Crozier
S. 17 W. 286'.--'The New Year's Eve found us in the Ross Sea, but not at the end of our misfortunes.'
We had a horrible night. In the first watch we kept away 2 points and set fore and aft sail. It
did not increase our comfort but gave us greater speed. The night dragged slowly through. I could
not sleep thinking of the sore strait for our wretched ponies. In the morning watch the wind and
sea increased and the outlook was very distressing, but at six ice was sighted ahead. Under
ordinary conditions the safe course would have been to go about and
stand to the east.

But in our case we must risk trouble to get smoother water for the ponies. We passed a stream
of ice over which the sea was breaking heavily and one realised the danger of being amongst
loose floes in such a sea. But soon we came to a compacter body of floes, and running behind this we
were agreeably surprised to find comparatively smooth water. We ran on for a bit, then stopped
and lay to. Now we are lying in a sort of ice bay--there is a mile or so of pack to windward,
and two horns which form the bay embracing us. The sea is damped down to a gentle swell, although
the wind is as strong as ever. As a result we are lying very comfortably. The ice is drifting
a little faster than the ship so that we have occasionally to steam slowly to leeward.

So far so good. From a dangerous position we have achieved one which only directly involved a waste
of coal. The question is, which will last longest, the gale or our temporary shelter?

Rennick has just obtained a sounding of 187 fathoms; taken in conjunction with yesterday's 1111
fathoms and Ross's sounding of 180, this is interesting, showing the rapid gradient of the continental
shelf. Nelson is going to put over the 8 feet Agassiz trawl.

Unfortunately we could not clear the line for the trawl--it is stowed under the fodder. A light
dredge was tried on a small manilla line--very little result. First the weights were insufficient
to carry it to the bottom; a second time, with more weight and line, it seems to have touched
for a very short time only; there was little of value in the catch, but the biologists are
learning the difficulties of the situation.

Evening.--Our protection grew less as the day advanced but saved us much from the heavy swell. At
8 P.M. we started to steam west to gain fresh protection, there being signs of pack to south
and west; the swell is again diminishing.

The wind which started south yesterday has gone to S.S.W. (true), the main swell in from S.E.
by S. or S.S.E. There seems to be another from south but none from the direction from which the
wind is now blowing. The wind has been getting squally: now the squalls are lessening in force,
the sky is clearing and we seem to be approaching the end of the blow. I trust it may be so
and that the New Year will bring us better fortune than the old.

If so, it will be some pleasure to write 1910 for the last time.--Land oh!

At 10 P.M. to-night as the clouds lifted to the west a distant but
splendid view of the great mountains was obtained.

All were in sunshine; Sabine and Whewell were most conspicuous--the latter from this view is
a beautiful sharp peak, as remarkable a landmark as Sabine itself. Mount Sabine was 110 miles away when
we saw it. I believe we could have seen it at a distance of 30 or 40 miles farther--such is the
wonderful clearness of the atmosphere.

Finis 1910

1911

Sunday, January 1.--Obs. 73° 5' S. 174° 11' E. Made good S. 48 W. 13.4; C. Crozier S. 15 W.
277'.--At 4 A.M. we proceeded, steaming slowly to the S.E. The wind having gone to the S.W. and
fallen to force 3 as we cleared the ice, we headed into a short steep
swell, and for some hours the ship pitched most uncomfortably.

At 8 A.M. the ship was clear of the ice and headed south with fore and aft sail set. She is
lying easier on this course, but there is still a good deal of motion, and would be more if we
attempted to increase speed.

Oates reports that the ponies are taking it pretty well.

Soon after 8 A.M. the sky cleared, and we have had brilliant sunshine
throughout the day; the wind came from the N.W. this forenoon, but
has dropped during the afternoon.

We increased to 55 revolutions at 10 A.M. The swell is subsiding but not so quickly as I had
expected.

To-night it is absolutely calm, with glorious bright sunshine. Several people were sunning themselves
at 11 o'clock! sitting on deck and reading.

The land is clear to-night. Coulman Island 75 miles west.

Sounding at 7 P.M., 187 fathoms. Sounding at 4 A.M., 310 ,,

Monday, January 2.--Obs. 75° 3', 173° 41'. Made good S. 3 W. 119'; C. Crozier S. 22 W. 159'.--It
has been a glorious night followed by a glorious forenoon; the sun has been shining almost continuously.
Several of us drew a bucket of sea water and had a bath with salt water soap on the deck.
The water was cold, of course, but it was quite pleasant to dry oneself in the sun. The deck bathing
habit has fallen off since we crossed the Antarctic circle, but Bowers has kept going in all
weathers.

There is still a good deal of swell--difficult to understand after a day's calm--and less than
200 miles of water to wind-ward.

Wilson saw and sketched the new white stomached whale seen by us in the pack.

At 8.30 we sighted Mount Erebus, distant about 115 miles; the sky
is covered with light cumulus and an easterly wind has sprung up,
force 2 to 3.

With all sail set we are making very good progress.

Tuesday, January 3, 10 A.M.--The conditions are very much the same as last night. We are only
24 miles from C. Crozier and the land is showing up well, though Erebus is veiled in stratus
cloud.

It looks finer to the south and we may run into sunshine soon, but the wind is alarming and there is
a slight swell which has little effect on the ship, but makes all
the difference to our landing.

For the moment it doesn't look hopeful. We have been continuing our line of soundings. From the
bank we crossed in latitude 71° the water has gradually got deeper, and we are now getting
310 to 350 fathoms against 180 on the bank.
The Discovery soundings give depths up to 450 fathoms East of Ross
Island.

6 P.M.--No good!! Alas! Cape Crozier with all its attractions
is denied us.

We came up to the Barrier five miles east of the Cape
soon after 1 P.M. The swell from the E.N.E. continued to the end.
The Barrier was not more than 60 feet in height. From the crow's nest
one could see well over it, and noted that there was a gentle slope
for at least a mile towards the edge. The land of Black (or White?)
Island could be seen distinctly behind, topping the huge lines of
pressure ridges. We plotted the Barrier edge from the point at which
we met it to the Crozier cliffs; to the eye it seems scarcely to have
changed since Discovery days, and Wilson thinks it meets the cliff
in the same place.

The Barrier takes a sharp turn back at 2 or 3
miles from the cliffs, runs back for half a mile, then west again
with a fairly regular surface until within a few hundred yards of
the cliffs; the interval is occupied with a single high pressure ridge--the
evidences of pressure at the edge being less marked than I had expected.

Ponting
was very busy with cinematograph and camera. In the angle at the corner
near the cliffs Rennick got a sounding of 140 fathoms and Nelson some
temperatures and samples. When lowering the water bottle on one occasion
the line suddenly became slack at 100 metres, then after a moment's
pause began to run out again. We are curious to know the cause, and
imagine the bottle struck a seal or whale.

Meanwhile, one of the
whale boats was lowered and Wilson, Griffith Taylor, Priestley, Evans,
and I were pulled towards the shore. The after-guard are so keen that
the proper boat's crew was displaced and the oars manned by Oates,
Atkinson, and Cherry-Garrard, the latter catching several crabs.

The
swell made it impossible for us to land. I had hoped to see whether
there was room to pass between the pressure ridge and the cliff, a
route by which Royds once descended to the Emperor rookery; as we
approached the corner we saw that a large piece of sea floe ice had
been jammed between the Barrier and the cliff and had buckled up till
its under surface stood 3 or 4 ft. above the water. On top of this
old floe we saw an old Emperor moulting and a young one shedding its
down. (The down had come off the head and flippers and commenced to
come off the breast in a vertical line similar to the ordinary moult.)
This is an age and stage of development of the Emperor chick of which
we have no knowledge, and it would have been a triumph to have secured
the chick, but, alas! there was no way to get at it. Another most
curious sight was the feet and tails of two chicks and the flipper
of an adult bird projecting from the ice on the under side of the
jammed floe; they had evidently been frozen in above and were being
washed out under the floe.

Finding it impossible to land owing to
the swell, we pulled along the cliffs for a short way. These Crozier
cliffs are remarkably interesting. The rock, mainly volcanic tuff,
includes thick strata of columnar basalt, and one could see beautiful
designs of jammed and twisted columns as well as caves with whole
and half pillars very much like a miniature Giant's Causeway. Bands
of bright yellow occurred in the rich brown of the cliffs, caused,
the geologists think, by the action of salts on the brown rock. In
places the cliffs overhung. In places, the sea had eaten long low
caves deep under them, and continued to break into them over a shelving
beach. Icicles hung pendant everywhere, and from one fringe a continuous
trickle of thaw water had swollen to a miniature waterfall. It was
like a big hose playing over the cliff edge. We noticed a very clear
echo as we passed close to a perpendicular rock face. Later we returned
to the ship, which had been trying to turn in the bay--she is not
very satisfactory in this respect owing to the difficulty of starting
the engines either ahead or astern--several minutes often elapse after
the telegraph has been put over before there is any movement of the
engines.

It makes the position rather alarming when one is feeling
one's way into some doubtful corner. When the whaler was hoisted we
proceeded round to the penguin rookery; hopes of finding a quiet landing
had now almost disappeared.8

There were several small grounded bergs
close to the rookery; going close to these we got repeated soundings
varying from 34 down to 12 fathoms. There is evidently a fairly extensive
bank at the foot of the rookery. There is probably good anchorage
behind some of the bergs, but none of these afford shelter for landing
on the beach, on which the sea is now breaking incessantly; it would
have taken weeks to land the ordinary stores and heaven only knows
how we could have got the ponies and motor sledges ashore. Reluctantly
and sadly we have had to abandon our cherished plan--it is a thousand
pities. Every detail of the shore promised well for a wintering party.
Comfortable quarters for the hut, ice for water, snow for the animals,
good slopes for ski-ing, vast tracks of rock for walks. Proximity
to the Barrier and to the rookeries of two types of penguins--easy
ascent of Mount Terror--good ground for biological work--good peaks
for observation of all sorts--fairly easy approach to the Southern
Road, with no chance of being cut off--and so forth. It is a thousand
pities to have to abandon such a spot.

On passing the rookery it
seemed to me we had been wrong in assuming that all the guano is blown
away. I think there must be a pretty good deposit in places. The penguins
could be seen very clearly from the ship. On the large rookery they
occupy an immense acreage, and one imagines have extended as far as
shelter can be found.  With one accord, therefore, they advanced toward where
the horsemen, now mounted, awaited the word of command to march.  Most of the troopers had
only their own individual horses to look after, but there were some twenty or so who were each
also in charge of a led horse, and walking up to a couple of these, the two white men took
from the somewhat surprised but submissive soldiers a horse apiece, and vaulting upon the animals'
bare backs, lined up alongside the officer in command, who received them with a respectful
salute.  Half an hour later, Dick and Earle were sporting in the lake like a couple of mermen,
to the amazement and admiration of the Uluans, not one of whom appeared to possess the most
elementary knowledge of swimming.  The temperature of the water was just right to render a
swim both invigorating and enjoyable, and when at length the two friends returned to camp,
they were in excellent form to do justice to the breakfast which they found awaiting them.

The journey from the foot of the cliff road where the camp had been pitched, round the south-eastern
extremity of the lake and so to the city, was taken at an easy pace, to spare the cattle which
drew the camp carts, in which room had been found for Earle's impedimenta as well as for a
few of the Indians, while those not so accommodated made no difficulty of running or walking
beside the carts.  The journey was devoid of incident, but the ride was an exceedingly pleasant
one, since the road wound its way for the whole distance through fields and orchards, the flourishing
condition of which bore eloquent testimony to the richness of the soil and the agricultural
skill of the inhabitants. Here and there farms were passed which were devoted to the raising
of horses, cattle, sheep, and goats, and the splendid condition of the animals was a source
of constant admiration to the two white men.

The city was reached about noon, but long before then the strangers had begun to realise the
splendour and magnificence of it.  A peculiarity of it was that it had no suburbs, the farm
lands coming right up to the gardens of the outermost houses of the city, which clustered as
thickly on its outskirts as in its heart.  A further peculiarity was that there were no rows
of houses; each was completely detached and stood in its own grounds, the only difference being
that some of the buildings were larger, more ornate, and had more extensive gardens than others.
The buildings, though by no means overloaded with ornament, were exceedingly handsome in a
quiet, chaste style, which Earle said reminded him very forcibly of certain Pompeiian houses;
much of the ornamentation consisting of painted designs upon the white walls.  All the houses
appeared to be flat-roofed, and many of them had gardens on the roofs, the shrubs and trees
showing over the low parapets.  Others were covered with gay awnings, beneath which some of
the occupants could be seen taking their ease in hammocks.  The Uluans appeared to be passionately
fond of flowers, the gardens being full of them, while their condition evidenced the care with
which they were tended.  Fountains, too, abounded, some of those adorning the public squares
being of very curious and elaborate design.  The streets were very wide, few being less than
a hundred feet in width, while some were considerably wider, with narrow strips of garden running
down the centre, full of the most exquisite flowers interspersed with umbrageous trees.  Trees
also overshadowed the rather narrow sidewalks.

Ulua, however, was by no means a city devoted exclusively to luxury. There was evidently a
considerable amount of business done there also, for some of the streets were occupied entirely
by shops, though who, except the inhabitants, patronised them, was a question, since all the
indications pointed to the fact that there was no trade done with the outside world.  The commodities
exposed for sale seemed to consist mainly of fruit, vegetables, flowers, confectionery, what
looked like bread in various fanciful shapes, embroideries, jewellery, silks, soft woollen
materials, paintings, lamps and lanterns, harness, and other goods too numerous to mention.

What surprised the visitors most of all, perhaps, in this wonderful city was the extraordinarily
lavish use made of gold; to them it appeared that everything that could possibly be made of
gold was of that metal; and it was not until some time afterwards that they learned that gold
was the most common of the metals with the Uluans, who valued it only because of its untarnishability
and beauty of colour.

The wider thoroughfares, squares, and the spacious public gardens through which the cavalcade
passed contained a fair number of people, although the visitors discovered, later on, that
this was the hour when most of the inhabitants who were not called abroad by business preferred
to remain in the seclusion of their own houses and gardens, this being the hottest hour of
the day.  Naturally, Earle and Dick regarded with some curiosity the people who paused to regard
them as they passed, and they came to the conclusion that, on the whole, the Uluans were a
distinctly attractive-looking people, the women especially reminding Earle of the Italians,
not only as regarded the regularity of their features, but also in the grace of their form
and carriage.

At length the cavalcade came to a halt in a spacious and beautiful square, situated, as the
visitors judged, in about the centre of the city.  One side of this square was entirely occupied
by an enormous, lofty, and handsome building, the central portion of which was surmounted by
an immense dome, covered with plates of gold, arranged in tiers or bands of different shapes
among which that of the lozenge was the most conspicuous, while each corner of the building
was crowned with a smaller dome, similarly covered and ornamented.  Each of the five domes
bore on its summit, as a sort of finial, the figure of a winged serpent, half of its body being
arranged in a coil, while the other half, with outstretched wings, was upreared in a graceful
curve.  A similar figure crowned a large and beautiful fountain which occupied the centre of
the square, and it was noticeable that every individual who passed this figure halted and bowed
profoundly to it, from which the two white men inferred that the winged serpent was a sacred
symbol, evidently held in the highest veneration.  This surmise ultimately proved to be correct,
the winged serpent being the figure of the Uluan god Kuhlacan, who was believed to dwell at
the bottom of the lake, in its centre, and at whose annual festival sacrifices of jewels of
immense value were made by casting them with much ceremony into the lake, from richly decorated
boats.  The building with the five golden domes was, of course, the temple, sacred to Kuhlacan,
in which the god was daily worshipped.  Earle, whose aesthetic sense was stirred by the beauty
of the fountain and the wonderful workmanship of the figure surmounting it, directed Dick's
particular attention to it and descanted at some length upon the taste of the design; and Dick,
while listening to his companion, could not fail to observe that Acor, the officer in charge
of the escort, as well as the members of the escort, and indeed all who were gathered in the
square at the moment, regarded Earle intently, with an expression of mingled wonder and satisfaction.
Acor waited respectfully while Earle was speaking and, when the latter had finished, gave the
order to dismount.

At a signal from one of the officers, two troopers advanced and took charge of the horses which
Earle and Dick had been riding, and then Acor, bowing respectfully to the pair, invited them
by word and gesture to follow him into a building on the opposite side of the square from the
temple.

This building, which, like the temple, occupied an entire side of the square, was much more
elaborate, from an architectural point of view than the sacred edifice, the design of which
was chaste, majestic, and rather severe, while its vis-a-vis--which proved to be the royal
palace--was ornate and decorative in effect.  It consisted of an immense block of buildings,
arranged in the form of a hollow square enclosing a magnificent garden, adorned with many beautiful
fountains and statues, access to which was gained through a wide and lofty archway closed by
a pair of immense and beautiful gates, modelled apparently in bronze, the archway and gates
being so treated as to form a distinctive feature in the general design of the building.

As Acor and his two companions approached the archway the great gates swung open, actuated
by some unseen agency, and the trio passed through, saluted, as they went, by the two impassive
sentries who stood on guard.

Wheeling sharply round to the left as soon as they had passed through the archway, Acor conducted
his charges along a wide pathway paved with slabs of variegated marble, until they reached
a lofty doorway, entering which, Earle and Dick found themselves in a spacious lofty hall,
the temperature of which was delightfully cool compared with the blazing sunshine outside.
They appeared to be expected, for upon their entrance, a little group of men, whose rich attire
seemed to proclaim them palace officials, came forward and bowing low, were introduced by Acor,
who simply pointed to each man and pronounced his name.  This done, the captain of the guard
gravely and respectfully saluted his charges and retired, leaving them in the hands of the
little group of supposed officials.

One of these, an elderly man of very dignified mien and presence, whom Acor had named Bahrim,
and who afterward turned out to be the major-domo of the palace, at once stepped forward and
with a low bow, signed the two white men to follow him.  He led the way to one side of the
hall, where a noble staircase of elaborately sculptured marble swept upward to a wide gallery
running round three of the walls, and ascending this, Earle and Dick were presently inducted
into a suite of three lofty and luxurious rooms, two of which were furnished as sleeping-chambers,
while the third, lighted by two lofty window openings, shaded by sun blinds, looked out over
the garden.  The rooms were all most sumptuously furnished, the furniture, of quaint but graceful
design, being made, for the most part, of rare and beautiful woods, richly carved.  In each
of the sleeping-chambers there was a large marble bath, already filled with water, and on each
of the couches was set out a change of apparel.

With a wave of the hand, Bahrim indicated the rooms and their contents generally, and said
a few words, from the tone of which Earle judged him to be asking whether they were satisfactory;
for when Earle carelessly nodded an affirmative, Bahrim smiled, as though with gratification,
and clapped his hands.  This proved to be a summons to two attendants, who instantly entered
and made their obeisances to the white men.  These Bahrim introduced by the simple process
of pointing to one and saying, "Shan," and to the other, saying, "Raba."

"Thanks," said Earle; "that will do nicely."  Then, as Bahrim respectfully bowed himself out,
the American turned to his friend and remarked:

"Say, Dick, how is this for high?  Some lodging, this.  What?  I wonder how long it is to lunch
time?  That ride has proved a fine appetiser in my case.  But those baths look good.  Guess
I'll have a dip now.  I suppose these two guys are to be our servants.  Which one will you have?"

"Oh," answered Dick, "either of them will do for me.  They both look reasonably decent chaps.
Take your choice."

"Right!" said Earle.  "Then I guess I'll have Shan, because I think his name is the easiest
to remember.  Come along, Shan, and help me to get out of these togs.  I'm going to have a
bath.  See?"

Shan apparently saw, which indeed was not difficult, since Earle pointed toward the bath as
he spoke.  The man bowed and turned to help Earle rid himself of his clothes, while Dick, beckoning
to Raba, retired to the other sleeping-chamber, and a few minutes later was also luxuriating
in the coolness of the bath.

Refreshed by their dip and a delicious luncheon, the two friends were seated in the deep embrasure
of one of the unglazed windows of their sitting-room, Earle lazily smoking as he and Dick discussed
the advisability of sallying forth, a little later, to learn the geography of the town, when
they were interrupted by the appearance of Bahrim, the major-domo, accompanied by two other
men, whom he introduced respectively as Zorah and Kedah.

The former was a tall, thin, ascetic-looking man of probably sixty or sixty-five years of age.
He had doubtless been, in his prime, an exceedingly handsome man, for, even now, his features
were well modelled and clean cut, but his sallow skin was deeply wrinkled about the forehead,
eyes, and the wings of his nostrils--his mouth and chin were hidden by a thick moustache and
long, straggling grey, almost white beard.  A few thin wisps of long white hair escaped from
the back part of the turban which covered his head, and fell to the level of his shoulders.
But perhaps the most striking feature of him after his thin, hawk-like nose, was his eyes,
which were large, black and piercing.  He was attired in a dress which was a replica in every
respect of that which had been provided for Earle, and his carriage, as he entered the apartment,
was assured, haughty, almost arrogant, that of a man of high and assured position who possessed
a profound faith in himself.

He bowed to Earle with a gesture of restrained humility which contrasted oddly with the hauteur
of his expression, and striding up to the American, laid his two thin, talon-like hands upon
the other's shoulders, and turned him round until Earle fully faced the light. Then, bending
forward, he intently scrutinised the queer jewel, or talisman, which Earle now wore fully exposed
to view.  And as he did so, the expression of almost defiant pride which his features had worn
upon his entrance, gradually relaxed until it vanished and gave place to one of humble conviction.
Then, laying the extremities of his fingers to his forehead, he bowed very low and backing
away from Earle, gradually bowing himself out of the chamber.

Meanwhile, the other man, Kedah, had stood, a profoundly interested and impressed spectator
of the short scene.  He, too, was an elderly man, short, rather inclined to be stout, and bald-headed
save for two thick tufts of white hair that sprouted over his ears.  He was attired very much
like Earle, except that the garniture of his robe was emerald green, instead of turquoise blue;
also, instead of a turban, he usually wore a small, close-fitting skull cap of green silk,
which he had removed upon entering the apartment.  In one hand he carried, as well as his skull
cap, a rather clumsy-looking umbrella of green silk, modelled somewhat after the pattern of
the Japanese article, while the other hand grasped a roll of what looked like thin parchment.

Upon the departure of Zorah, Kedah laid aside his umbrella and skull cap and, respectfully
motioning the two white men to be seated, drew forward a small table, upon which he unrolled
the parchment, revealing the fact that its inner surface was covered with small but beautifully
executed drawings of a multitude of objects, such as men, women, boys, girls, infants, horses,
cattle, sheep, etc.  To several of these he pointed in turn, giving each its proper designation
in the Uluan tongue, making his pupils--for such they were--repeat the words several times
after him until they had caught the correct accent.  Then, after he had named some twenty objects,
he harked back to the beginning again, pointing to each object and then, by expressive motions
of his hands and bushy eyebrows, requiring them to repeat as many of the names as they could
remember. In this fashion they proceeded for about an hour and a half, by which time the two
white men had mastered the designations of some fifty objects and were enabled to repeat them
when pointed at haphazard. Kedah graciously expressed his satisfaction at their progress in
a flow of words accompanied by so much action and spoken in such a tone that there was little
difficulty in understanding his general meaning.  This system of tuition was continued day
after day, accompanied by a gradual extension of the hours of study, and, after the first week,
by the introduction of short sentences, such as: "This is a table.  That is a picture.  There
is a man.  Yonder go a woman and child.  Observe that crowd of people," and so on, the sentences
gradually lengthening and becoming more intricate, so that by the end of two months, Kedah's
pupils were not only able to gather the general sense of most of what was said to them, but
also intelligibly to ask for almost anything they required.

Meanwhile, during the progress of that first lesson, certain muffled exclamations, accompanied
by the sounds of heavy breathing and scuffling feet, reached the ears of the pupils from the
adjoining apartments; and when, upon the conclusion of the lesson they entered those apartments,
Dick and Earle had the satisfaction of finding that all their belongings had been brought up
and were neatly stowed away; also that Inaguy and Moquit, two of their Indian followers, had
been added to their staff of servants.  And from these men they also received the satisfactory
information that the rest of the Indians were lodged together and being well cared for in a
chamber beneath the palace.

The afternoon was by this time so far advanced that the two white men felt they might safely
venture to sally forth and see something of the city, without much fear of being unduly incommoded
by the heat, and they were also curious to ascertain how far they were free agents to come
and go as they pleased; they resolved, therefore, to put the matter to the test without further
ado.  Accordingly, each thrusting a pair of fully loaded automatics into his belt, as a measure
of precaution against possible contingencies, they left their apartments and, descending the
stairs, made their way to the garden quadrangle, from whence they passed, without interference,
into the grand square, receiving the salute of the sentry at the gates as they went.

The temple, situate on the opposite side of the square, was naturally the first object to claim
their attention, and observing that its great main entrance doors stood wide open, the pair
sauntered across the square, reverentially saluted as they went by everyone they met, and passing
up the long flight of steps leading to the open doorway, they boldly entered the building.

It was a magnificent structure, the rich and lavish ornamentation of its interior making ample
amends for the severity of its exterior design. The four corners of the building were occupied
by spacious rooms, or possibly subsidiary chapels, the doors of which were closed, but the
main or principal temple was open, and into this the two friends boldly made their way, Earle
declaring to Dick that he was determined to put to the test the exact measure of independence
and power which the possession of the talisman conferred upon him, which he believed to be
almost supreme, judging by the extraordinary reverence and veneration with which it had thus
far been regarded by the Uluans.

The main temple was far and away the most spacious interior which either of them had thus far
seen, Earle, after running his eye over it, expressing the opinion that its floor would accommodate
at least twenty thousand persons comfortably.  It was rectangular in shape, its longest dimension
running east and west.  Its main walls were about sixty feet high, tinted turquoise blue--as
was the ceiling--with decorative designs in white.  It was lighted by windows in the sides,
fitted with slats instead of glass, so carefully adjusted that while admitting a sufficiency
of light--when one's eyes became accustomed to the semi-obscurity--they effectually excluded
rain.  The centre of the ceiling was pierced by a circular aperture about one hundred feet
in diameter, above which rose the majestic dome which, from the outside, had already attracted
their admiring attention.  This dome was supported by four enormous columns connected by arches,
and its interior, while shrouded in gloom, was a mass of subdued scintillating colour, as though
it were encrusted with innumerable gems and glowing enamels.  The eastern wall of the interior
was remarkable from the circumstance that it bore a gigantic replica of the jewel, or talisman,
which Earle wore-- a fact which finally and definitely confirmed the conviction already arrived
at by the American that the possession of the ornament conferred upon him almost supernatural
powers and authority.  At a distance of some twenty feet from this eastern wall there was an
immense figure--or statue--of the Winged Serpent, reproduced in the middle of the square and
on the domes of the temple, and before it stood a very large altar which bore evidences that
sacrifices were continually offered upon it.

Upon entering the building the two friends were under the impression that it was empty; but
they had scarcely been in it ten minutes, and were standing before the altar, studying the
marvellous modelling of the Winged Serpent, when a strain of music smote upon their ears, and
the next moment a curtain parted and a company of priests, some sixty in number, of whom about
a third were playing upon quaint-looking musical instruments, filed into the building, headed
by Zorah, their acquaintance of an hour or two earlier.  Advancing with slow and solemn steps
they halted before the two friends and, after bowing profoundly to Earle, broke into a slow
and solemn chant, which gradually changed into a kind of triumphal hymn, at the conclusion
of which they again bowed until their foreheads almost touched the pavement, and then filed
out again.

The two white men, completely taken aback by the solemnity and unexpectedness of this apparently
impromptu ceremony, knew not what to do, and therefore did nothing, which, as afterwards transpired,
was the wisest course they could possibly have adopted.  For, although they were quite unaware
of it at the moment, their every movement was being carefully watched, and when they entered
the temple, Zorah, the high priest, was instantly informed of the fact; whereupon he marshalled
his subordinate priests and carried out the ceremony above recorded, in order to do honour
to the individual who, in virtue of his possession of the mysterious jewel bearing the "sign"
of Kuhlacan, the Winged Serpent, was implicitly believed to be either Kuhlacan's special ambassador
to the Uluans, or, possibly, a human incarnation of Kuhlacan himself.  The ceremony brought
home a vague inkling of this state of affairs to both of the individuals most intimately concerned,
and Earle, while expressing some embarrassment and dislike of the position in which he found
himself placed, announced to Dick his determination to accept it, in the hope and belief that,
before leaving Ulua, it might be his good fortune to wield the authority with which he was
endowed for the benefit and advantage of the people, and quite possibly, the correction of abuses.

Leaving the temple, the two friends passed out of the square and entered a road which attracted
them because of its extraordinary width, the magnificence of its shade trees, the beauty of
its central strip of garden, the sumptuous character of its buildings, and the air of dignity
and well-being which seemed to characterise the people who were promenading it.  Taken altogether,
it appeared to be Ulua's most aristocratic quarter, or at least its most fashionable promenade,
for the men and women who thronged it were all elegantly dressed, and all had the air of belonging
to the leisured class, while the roadway was thickly sprinkled with elegant and beautifully
decorated chariots, drawn by teams of two, or sometimes three, handsome horses, driven by young
men who appeared to be inviting the admiration of Ulua's fair ones.

Still unobtrusively followed by a palace official, the two friends wended their way down the
street, receiving the respectful homage of all who passed them.  They had traversed about half
the length of the street, which was about two miles long, when suddenly loud and excited cries
arose behind them, punctuated by the quick clatter of galloping hoofs, and wheeling round,
they beheld a beautiful chariot, the body, wheels, and pole of which were entirely covered
with plates of embossed gold, coming careering along the road toward them at full speed, and
swerving wildly from side to side of the road as it came, the two cream stallions which drew
it having evidently bolted.

The man who drove was doing his best to regain control of his terrified and mettlesome animals,
and at the same time to avoid the chariots ahead of him, the drivers of which hurriedly drew
in towards the sides of the road to give the runaways a free passage; but the lad--for he was
apparently still in his teens--might as well have attempted to control the elements; the horses
had got their heads and seemed determined not to stop until they were tired, while it was evident
that a very serious accident was inevitable, the road being thronged with vehicles, horsemen
and pedestrians--the latter seeming to use the roadway quite as much as the footpaths.

And even as Dick and Earle halted and turned to ascertain the cause of the commotion, the wildly
careering chariot collided with another, a wheel of which it sheared off, while the impact
of the two vehicles jolted the driver of the runaways off his feet and flung him violently
into the road, where he lay motionless.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Dick, as the two creams came tearing along, with the reins trailing
in the roadway, "the brutes will not only kill themselves, but dozens of people as well, if
they are not stopped!"  And before Earle could reply, or do anything to restrain him, the lad
sprang into the roadway, close to the path of the runaways, and braced himself for a spring.
The next instant the frantic horses were upon him; but meanwhile, with a leap, Dick had started
to run in the same direction as the horses, and as they tore past, with one hand he snatched
at the reins and got them, while with the other, he gripped the rear of the chariot and swung
himself into it.  Then, gripping the reins with a firm hand, and shouting all the time to warn
those ahead, he brought a steady strain to bear upon the horses' mouths, guiding them meanwhile
as best he could.  And almost immediately his pull upon the reins began to tell, for his thews
and sinews, hardened and tempered to the strength of steel by his long tramp from the banks
of the Amazon, were very different from those of the effeminate youth who had been thrown out;
and after traversing a couple of hundred yards, the animals acknowledged themselves beaten
and came to a standstill without having done further damage.  Then, turning the sweat-lathered
animals gently round, Dick drove them at a foot pace, snorting and curvetting, back to the
spot where the owner, still insensible, lay upon the footpath, being tended by sympathisers,
of whom Earle was one.  As Dick came up and dismounted from the chariot, which he surrendered
to an official, he was greeted with loud plaudits, the people clapping their hands and shouting
"Aha! aha!"

They made way for him as he came up and joined Earle, who was already bending over the insensible
charioteer, feeling the youth's body and limbs.

"Any damage done?" he inquired, as he came to a stand and looked down on his friend.

"Hillo! you back?" returned Earle.  "You've soon done the trick, Dick. Did you manage to stop
'em without hurting anybody else?"

"Yes, luckily," answered Dick.  "Pulled 'em up, and brought 'em back again.  They're in the
road there, now, in charge of a fellow who, I suppose, is a sort of policeman.  Is that dude
hurt at all?"

"Left arm broken; but that seems to be the full extent of the damage," answered Earle.  "If
I could get a couple of sticks and a bandage, I'd set it while he is still insensible.  Just
see if you can find anything that will do, Dick, there's a good chap."

Dick looked about him, but could see nothing at all suitable until his gaze happened to fall
upon the window of a house opposite him, which was closed by a kind of jalousie shutter.  A
couple of slats from this shutter would serve excellently, and without ceremony he wrenched
two of them out and, breaking them into suitable lengths, handed them to Earle. Then, while
the latter brought the ends of the fractured bone into position and held them there, Dick adjusted
the splints, as directed by Earle, afterwards assisted by a bystander, binding them firmly
into position with the folds of his turban, which he unwound for the purpose.

By the time that this was done the friends of the injured man had been summoned and were on
the spot; and to them Earle handed over his patient, directing them by signs what to do, after
which the two friends returned to the palace, amid the admiring murmurs of all whom they encountered.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

EARLE SETTLES A DELICATE MATTER.

The following day was marked by two incidents, namely, a visit to Earle and Dick from the parents
of Mishail, the young man who had been injured by being thrown out of his chariot, and the
presentation of the two friends to Juda, the King of Ulua, and his granddaughter, the Princess
Myrra.

The visit occurred shortly after the friends had finished breakfast, and the visitors were
accompanied and introduced by Kedah, the individual who, on the previous day, had begun the
task of instructing the two white men in the Uluan tongue.

Kedah introduced the visitors by simply indicating them and pronouncing their names, that of
the man whom he introduced first being Hasca, while he named the lady Tua.

Judging by the deference which Kedah displayed toward them the visitors were people of high
degree; an inference which was borne out in the first instance by the stately dignity of their
manner and the richness of their garb, and afterwards by the sumptuousness of their abode,
which was almost palatial in its spaciousness and the magnificence of its furnishing.  Hasca
was, in fact, one of the most powerful and influential nobles of Ulua, and the acquaintance
which began with this visit was destined to have important results.

Hasca was a very fine specimen of Uluan manhood, some forty years of age, standing about five
feet ten inches in his sandals, of swarthy complexion, with coal-black hair, beard and eyes,
the latter very keen and piercing.  There was a distinct touch of hauteur in his manner to
Kedah; but to Dick he and his wife were friendliness itself, while to Earle they showed that
deep reverence which seemed to be the invariable rule with the Uluans.

The lady Tua seemed to be some five years younger than her husband, dark, and decidedly handsome,
but, like all the Uluan women of mature age, she displayed a distinct tendency to become stout.

Kedah undertook the task of explaining to his two pupils the object of the visit, and to do
the old gentleman justice, he succeeded fairly well, considering the difficulties which confronted
him.  He talked a good deal, but speech, of itself, naturally did not count for much.  He supplemented
his words, however, with such a wonderful wealth of gesture, accent and tone, that the two
white men found it by no means difficult to guess the general drift of his speech, especially
as he adopted the novel method of further elucidating his meaning by a number of amazingly
clever sketches produced upon a kind of papyrus, with the aid of a very fine brush and a small
bottle of some kind of ink, which he had taken the precaution to bring with him.

With these aids, then, he managed to make Earle and Dick understand that the visit was, first,
one of thanks for the assistance rendered to the unfortunate Mishail on the preceding day,
and next, a request that one, or both, would be so very obliging as to visit the patient, who
was either very ill, or suffering much pain--they could not quite make out which was meant--and
see what could be done for him.

To this request the comrades at once willingly assented, the more readily because, having,
by a piece of extraordinarily good luck, obtained entrance to what they understood was, to
all intents and purposes, a forbidden city, so far as outsiders were concerned, it was now
good policy on their part to establish the best possible relations with its people.  Accordingly,
Earle routed out his medicine case and, tucking it under his arm, signified his readiness to
go at once.

As it chanced, they had not very far to go, the Hasca residence being situated less than a
mile from the palace, in an even more aristocratic looking avenue than the one in which the
accident had occurred.  They found Mishail, the patient, lodged in a sumptuous chamber, attended
by his sister Lissa, a remarkably pretty girl, some sixteen years of age.

The patient appeared to be suffering great pain, was in a high state of fever, and in a condition
bordering on delirium, which indeed was not surprising, since the unhappy youth was in a room
upon the outer wall of which the sun beat all day, while the shutters of the two windows were
closed and heavy curtains drawn across them.  The room, in fact, was as stifling as an oven,
and Earle's first act was to draw apart the heavy curtains and throw wide the shutters, thus
letting in both air and light.  Then he looked at the injured arm, which he expected to find
properly dressed, naturally supposing that upon the arrival of the lad at his home, the family
physician would be summoned and the fracture carefully attended to.  To his great surprise,
however, he found the limb in exactly the same state as when he had left it, with the makeshift
splints still there, but shifted out of position by the restless movements of the patient,
and he afterwards learned that this was because they had not dared to tamper or in any way
interfere with the work of the illustrious representative of Kuhlacan!

Upon the arm being unstrapped, Earle found, as he fully expected, that the bone had become
displaced and needed re-setting; and this he at once proceeded to do, having first secured
all that he needed in the way of effective splints and bandages, and put his patient under
chloroform. He took care that this time the job was properly done, and the patient's arm so
securely strapped to his body that it could not be moved; and as soon as Mishail had recovered
from his state of anaesthesia, Earle administered a draught designed to reduce the fever, and,
having made his patient as comfortable as possible, left him, promising to call again some
time during the evening.  And, not to dwell at undue length upon the incident, it may here
be said that, under Earle's skilful treatment the patient made a rapid and perfectly satisfactory
recovery, to the admiration, delight, and gratitude of the entire family.

Upon leaving Hasca's house, the two friends indulged in a walk through a few of the streets
that they had not yet visited; consequently it was after noon when at length they got back
to the palace.  Here they found Bahrim, the major-domo, in their suite anxiously awaiting their
return. The poor man was evidently in a state of great excitement concerning some matter which
he found himself wholly unable to explain; but by dint of signs he at length contrived to make
them both understand that he desired them to bathe, and afterwards don certain festive garments,
to which he respectfully directed their attention.  Understanding at last what the old fellow
required of them, and also that he was in a most desperate hurry, the two friends disappeared,
to re-appear, about a quarter of an hour later, bathed, perfumed--by their assiduous servants,
who insisted upon the process--and clad in garments of so sumptuous a character that there
could be no doubt the wearers were booked for some exceedingly important ceremony.

They were immediately taken in charge by the obsequious Bahrim, who, by expressive signs, invited
them to follow him.  Led by the major-domo, the two friends rapidly traversed several corridors
until they reached another wing of the palace, finally halting before a closed door, outside
which two soldiers, clad in golden armour and armed with sword and spear, stood on guard. 
Signing to the white men to remain where they were, Bahrim opened the door, disclosing a drawn
curtain beyond it, and closed the door behind him, only to re-appear, some two minutes later,
beckoning his charges to follow him.

Not until having received the salute of the guards as they passed through the re-opened doorway,
and the door was closed behind them, was the shrouding curtain withdrawn, and then Earle and
Dick found themselves in a small but most sumptuously furnished apartment, at the far extremity
of which were seated two people, a man and a girl.

The man was apparently between fifty and sixty years of age--and a very fine specimen of Uluan
manhood, as the visitors presently discovered when he rose to his feet.  Like most Uluans,
he was dark complexioned, his hair, beard and moustache, all of which he wore of patriarchal
length, having been originally black, though now thickly streaked with grey.  His features
were well formed, clean cut, and aristocratic looking, as they might well be, seeing that the
man was none other than Juda, the King of Ulua, and direct descendant of a long line of kings
whose origin was lost in the mists of antiquity.  He wore a long sleeved garment, which reached
from his throat to his feet, the colour of it being red, with a wide border containing an intricate
pattern wrought in black, white and gold braid.  On his head he had a kind of turban of red,
black and gold, surrounded by a coronet that appeared to be made of iron, set with many beautiful
stones, while its front was adorned with an aigrette of crimson feathers, fastened by a brooch
which also appeared to be made of iron.  A broad belt, embroidered in red, black and gold,
encircled his waist, attached to which was a great cross-hilted sword which looked as though
it might have originally belonged to a crusader.  His feet were shod with sandals of crimson
leather, and his fingers decorated with several rings, apparently of wrought iron, each of
which was set with a very fine stone, either emerald, sapphire, ruby, or diamond.

Taken altogether, Juda was a remarkably imposing specimen of manhood, and a worthy progenitor
of his handsome granddaughter, Myrra.  She, however, unlike her grandfather, was fair as a
summer's dawn, of medium height, with violet eyes, and an extraordinary wealth of ruddy-golden
hair which, confined to her head by a fillet of what looked like red velvet set with precious
stones, rolled thence to far below her waist in great waves.  Her outer garment, sleeveless,
might have been copied from those depicted on the Greek vases in the British Museum and, like
her grandfather's, was red in colour, adorned with braiding in the same colours as his.  Her
sandals were of white leather, and she wore armlets and bracelets of beautifully worked iron
encrusted with precious stones.

As the two white men, intuitively guessing the identity of those in whose presence they found
themselves, walked slowly up the room, Juda and Myrra rose to their feet and stood gazing with
the utmost interest at their visitors.  Juda's eyes were intently fixed upon the amulet which
Earle now habitually wore fully exposed to view; but after the first glance, Myrra seemed far
more interested in Dick, with his stalwart frame and good-looking features.

Arrived within some half-a-dozen paces of the two august figures, Earle and Dick came to a
halt and bowed, while Bahrim, who had been bowing almost to the earth during his progress up
the hall, now knelt down, touched the marble pavement three times with his forehead, and then,
rising to his feet, introduced the visitors in a long speech, which was of course utterly unintelligible
to the white men, though they gathered from certain of Bahrim's movements and gestures that
the incident of the runaway horses, of Dick stopping them, and of Earle's attentions to Mishail,
the injured charioteer, formed part of the speech.

The two royal personages listened with the closest attention to Bahrim's long speech, the king
nodding emphatic approval as the major-domo, with much appropriate gesture, described Dick's
dash into the road and stoppage of the runaway horses, while the eyes of the princess flashed
and sparkled with excitement and undisguised admiration at what, from the expression of the
listeners, seemed to be a deed of most unparalleled heroism.  The speech came to an end at
last; and then, as Bahrim stepped back with the air of a man who has performed his duty well,
Juda advanced to Earle and fixed his eyes upon the amulet, intently examining its every detail.
Then, to the amazement of the two white men, he turned to the princess, addressed a few words
to her, beckoned her to his side, and the next moment the royal pair had prostrated themselves
at Earle's feet, with their foreheads humbly bowed to the pavement.  They remained thus for
nearly five minutes, until Earle, fearing that they were never going to rise from their humble
posture, bent forward, touched each lightly upon the shoulder and, extending his hands, raised
them gently to their feet, when, first Juda, and then the princess, reverently took the amulet
in their hands, raised it to their foreheads, and bowing low, backed to their seats.  The king
then drew a handsome ring from his finger and, beckoning to Dick to draw near, slipped it on
to the corresponding finger of the young Englishman's hand, while the princess, following suit,
transferred one of her bracelets to Dick's wrist, each with a polite little speech, which Cavendish
greatly regretted his inability to understand.  This little ceremony performed, Juda bowed
his dismissal of his visitors, and, led by Bahrim, the pair retired to their own quarters,
a good deal puzzled by, yet very much pleased with, all that had passed.

As they went Earle turned to Dick and remarked:

"Gee!  Dick, I guess this is some amulet, eh, when even a king and a princess of the blood
royal do homage to it.  Seems to me that I'm the most important personage in this realm; and
as soon as we are able to understand the language a bit, and get the hang of things, I mean
to use the power and influence which it bestows for the abolition of a few of the evils which
are sure to exist, either in the religion or the government of the country."

"If you take my advice, you will leave this people's religion and politics alone," remarked Dick.

"I will," agreed Earle, "if there is nothing to find fault with, but not otherwise.  Gee! 
What's the good of possessing such power as mine, if I don't make use of it?  And, civilised
as these people are in some respects, they are centuries behind the rest of the world in others;
and I'm prepared to bet that, when we begin to understand things a bit, we shall find that
there is plenty of room for improvement in a good many directions.  And it is entirely against
my principles not to do good when the opportunity offers.  But--well, we shall see."

And now, something like a month passed without anything occurring worthy of detailed record.
Kedah, the instructor told off to teach the two white men the Uluan language, was indefatigable
in the execution of his rather difficult task, while his pupils were equally indefatigable
in their efforts to master the tongue spoken by all around them, with the result that they
made excellent progress and were no longer obliged to remain dumb when addressed.  They made
a good many acquaintances, and not a few friends, chief among whom were the king and the princess,
whose demeanour toward the white men was, like that of everybody else, indeed, a curious mingling
of reverence and friendliness.  They spent a good deal of time walking and riding about the
city and its outskirts, thus in the course of time becoming intimately acquainted with every
street, road, alley and by-way; while Dick early found an outlet for his superabundant energies
among the shipbuilders, whose ideas concerning the most desirable model for their craft were
of the crudest possible character.  He also discovered that they knew nothing about sails and
how to use them, and he enjoyed himself immensely in rigging one of their most suitable lighters
as a fore-and-aft schooner, and then watching the crew's amazement and delight as he navigated
her across the lake and back in about a quarter of the time usually occupied upon the trip.

It was about this time, when their progress under the tuition of Kedah was so far advanced
that they were able to catch a glimmer of the meaning of what was said to them or in their
hearing, that the two white men began to sense a suggestion of steadily growing excitement
among the populace generally, accompanied, on the part of those with whom they were more intimately
acquainted, by a continually increasing curiosity, not unmingled with anxiety, concerning themselves
and something with which, in some mysterious manner, they (Dick and Earle) seemed to be intimately
connected.  They became aware that they were being keenly watched, and their slightest words
and actions carefully noted, as though some word or action of extreme significance or importance
on their part was being eagerly expected and watched for.  More particularly was this the case
with regard to Earle; but although the two friends frequently exchanged ideas upon the subject,
neither of them caught the slightest clue to the mystery until Zorah, the high priest, one
day sought Earle and, with the assistance of Kedah, the tutor, broached the subject of the
approaching great Septennial Festival in honour of Kuhlacan, the Winged Serpent, god of the
Uluans, who was supposed to have his abode at the bottom of the lake.

This was the first that either Earle or Dick had heard of the festival, but bearing in mind
the fact that the amulet which he wore bore the "sign" of Kuhlacan, and that it was undoubtedly
the possession of this amulet which, from the first, had inspired the Uluans with that profound
reverence which had everywhere been shown him, the American at once began to suspect that the
Uluans were in some way connecting his presence in the country with the approaching festival,
and possibly expecting him either to take a leading part in it, or it might be, to issue some
definite pronouncement in connection with it.  Therefore, as soon as Earle clearly realised
the attitude of the people toward him, and realised also that one or more important, perhaps
vital, issues hung in the balance awaiting his pronouncement, he assumed what he deemed to
be the correct oracular pose, in accordance with which he now bade Zorah set forth his statement,
or propound his questions, without circumlocution.

Then the whole terrible truth came out, though it had to be wrung from Zorah bit by bit, the
high priest using his utmost endeavours to induce Earle to endorse certain generalities put
forward by the wily ecclesiastic.  But Zorah, clever and astute as he was, was no match for
the American, who simply listened to the priest's statements as he made them, one by one, and
then, without comment, bade the man pass on to the next point.  Earle's imperfect knowledge
of the Uluan language, coupled with Zorah's rapid, excited speech, made anything like a clear
understanding of the case exceedingly difficult.  But Earle was in no hurry; no sooner did
he get an inkling of the actual object of the high priest's visit than he determined to arrive
at a perfectly clear and definite understanding of the whole case; and in this he was ably
seconded by Kedah, who spared no pains to make every point advanced by Zorah intelligible.

Condensed into a few words the issue raised was as follows:

On a certain date, the anniversary of which was now rapidly approaching, an annual festival
was held in honour of Kuhlacan, in the course of which offerings were made to the god by every
Uluan, who, embarking in a gaily-decorated boat, proceeded to the middle of the lake and there
cast into the depths the most precious thing in his possession, usually some costly article
of jewellery made especially for the purpose.  But every seventh year the festival assumed
a much more serious and important character, inasmuch as that, in addition to the offerings
above referred to, the nation as a whole was accustomed to make a joint offering; such offering
consisting of the seven most beautiful maidens, between the ages of twelve and twenty, in Ulua,
who, on this great day, were dressed in magnificent garments, loaded with jewels, until they
could scarcely stand for the weight of them, and then taken to the middle of the lake, where,
with much ceremony, and to the accompaniment of prayers and hymns chanted by the priests, they
plunged into the lake, one by one, and were of course never again seen.

This ceremony, known as the Sacrifice of the Maidens, had been observed, it appeared, from
time immemorial, and was regarded by the priests--who, being celibates, had no daughters to
lose--as of the utmost importance and sanctity, to such an extent, indeed, that even the slightest
approach to a murmur or protest against it was denounced as an unpardonable sin.  Yet, as may
be easily understood, the approach of every Septennial Festival was a time of infinite anxiety
to all those who happened to have daughters eligible for the sacrifice, the more so that no
family, not even royalty itself, was exempt, while the choice of the maidens rested with the
priests, from whose decision there was no appeal.  And the barbarity of the custom was accentuated
in this particular year, from the fact that Princess Myrra was both by age and her remarkable
beauty, to be certainly reckoned among the eligibles, while an impression had arisen, rightly
or wrongly, that the priesthood, in order to manifest and assert their power, would assuredly
so arrange matters that she should be included among the fatal seven.

It is supposed that the king's opposition to the immemorial custom really took definite shape
on the day upon which his orphan granddaughter entered upon her thirteenth year.  Be this as
it may, it was not long afterwards that Juda, pious monarch as he was, ventured to hint to
Zorah his opinion that the time had arrived when the Sacrifice of the Maidens might very well
be abolished.  But Zorah, a zealot of zealots, would not hear of such a thing, possibly because,
among other reasons, the abolition would rob him of an appreciable amount of the power which
he now possessed, and which power, it was hinted, had been more than once wielded to secure--for
a substantial consideration--the elimination of a name from the list of the chosen.  Juda,
of course, might have approached the high priest with a similar proposal on behalf of his granddaughter;
but there were several reasons against it, one of which was that the king was, according to
his lights, a just monarch, and would have scorned to secure the princess's exemption by any
such means, while another was that he shrewdly suspected Zorah would refuse to forgo such a
marked demonstration of his power and, in addition, give himself away even at the cost of an
enormous bribe. 

"Poor baby!" said her mother when she was gone. She disposed of the stringing of the pop-corn
to the biggest brother and began to pick over a quart of wheat that was to be their supper. Having
finished and put it on to boil, she turned to the roasting of some barley for the next morning's coffee.

"I
wish we'd a-got her a little trinket for to-night," said the biggest brother, "even if it'd
a-been only worth ten cents." He took out his pipe and filled it from a handful of corn-silk in his
jumper pocket. "I'd be tickled to death," he added, "if I could have a plug of tobacco."

"And I a sack of flour," said his mother. "We'll have the last in
biscuits for to-day's dinner.

I suppose I shouldn't have used it up for a week more, because we had white biscuits only last
Sunday. But it is Christmas day; I can't resist giving you boys something a little extra. I've
kept enough flour out, though, to thicken gravies with. Now, if we only had plenty of potatoes."

"When
it gets nearer spring, we c'n eat the inside of the potatoes and save the peelin's for plantin'."

"Oh,
I thought of that long ago," laughed his mother; "I've got half a sack of peelings here behind
the stove where they won't freeze."

"The meat's gettin' low, ma. There's only a hunk or two left in the barrel, and I just noticed,
when I was gettin' the coal, that that pig in there on the rafters is dwindlin' fast. I guess
another cow'll have to go. Might as well, anyway. Hay won't more 'n last the horses."

They were interrupted by the eldest and the youngest brothers, who came in, stamping the snow
from their boots and swinging their arms.

"Gee! it's cold!" cried the youngest, keeping in a far corner, out of way of the warmth from
the stove, and thumping his toes alternately as he moved in a circle. "Sloughs are frozen to
the bottom. Didn't catch a thing, and had to use the ax to chop out the traps every place we'd set."

Dinner
was eaten in silence that Christmas day.

The family could not help contrasting the meal with those served on former like occasions. Since
nearly all the turkeys and chickens had perished in the fire, and
what few remained were being kept over for the following year, no
plump fowl lay, shins in air, before the eldest brother.

A small piece of baked pork held the place of honor, surrounded by the never-absent dish of
boiled wheat, the plate of precious white biscuits, and some sweetened corn-bread. When dinner was
over, the big brothers tramped off to the chain of sloughs, taking with them the violin and the
corn their mother had strung so that the latter could be put on the tree that afternoon. The
little girl and her mother cleared the table and then sat down to unravel some old wristlets
and from them knit new heels and toes into the big brothers' stockings.

The little girl was very quiet and thoughtful. Her mouth drooped mournfully,
her eyes were wistful.

She spoke to her mother only in answer, and then in monosyllables. Her mother, as she watched her,
felt that the little girl's unhappiness was the last bitter touch to her own grief, and she
was glad when the child put on her dried leggings, her cap and coat, preparatory to spending
an hour in her own room, where there was no fire.

The mother heard no sound from the other part of the house until the middle of the short afternoon.
Then she caught the notes of a song. A moment later the little girl came running into the kitchen,
her eyes dancing, and went running out again, carrying a sheet of
brown wrapping-paper and a long piece of white string.

No more sounds came from her room. When she came out at suppertime, dressed for the evening's
entertainment, she was her usual cheerful self, much to the mystification of her compassionate
mother and the big brothers.

There was a false ring of gladness in the sleigh-bells that night as they came jingling from
the stable.

For what right have sleigh-bells to ring when every pocket is flat and when there is no lumpy flour-sack
hidden from sight under the hay in the pung bottom?

So the eldest and the youngest brothers, their mother and the little girl, took their places in
the low box and let the biggest brother cover them with a feather-tick, without any of the
gay laughter and banter that marked the pleasure-rides of former years. Then the biggest brother,
only his eyes showing from his head-wrappings, sprang to his seat behind the horses and sent the
team briskly forward with the storm toward the huge bonfire of cottonwood logs that had been lighted
close to the school-house on the farther edge of the farthest slough.

When the reservation road, hidden under four feet of packed snow, was crossed, the pung slid
down to the carpeted ice of the first slough in the train of the capering horses, and was whisked
through the crisp night toward the distant beacon.

So swiftly did it scud that, before the quartet behind realized it,
the horses had pressed up the hill beside the burning cottonwoods
and halted before the school-house.

The little girl was the first to scramble from the snug box when the tick was lifted. Still wearing
a big buffalo coat that enveloped her from head to foot, she squirmed through the door, about
which was a crowd, and threaded her way past the high desk that daily secluded her while she
ate her poor lunches, past the hot stove with its circle of new-comers, to where, hidden by
the chart, stood the teacher. There she held a moment's whispered conversation, produced a
package from under her greatcoat, and then joined the other children, who were seated up in
front on boards placed across the main aisle.

The little building, that had been saved in the prairie fire by the well-trodden oval around it,
was crowded with the people of the district, assembled to enjoy their first public entertainment
and tree.

Among the younger ones were the Dutchman's girls and their baby nephew, the neighbor woman's
children. "Frenchy's" brother, and the Swede boy.

On either hand and behind were the grown people,--the Dutchman and his wife, the young couple
from the West Fork, the cattleman, "Frenchy," the Swede, and the
big brothers and their mother.

When the family entered, the room was so full that the eldest and
the youngest brothers had to content themselves with a perch on the
coal-bins.

The little girl, turning to survey the room, could not catch a glimpse
of the biggest brother, however, and finally concluded that he was
still busy with blanketing the horses and putting them away in the
long shed.

The tree was ablaze from its top to the rim of the cloth-wound churn, and was hung with tinsel
trimmings from the farm-house,--the selfsame trimmings that for years had twinkled and winked
at the little girl each Christmas eve. Among the tinsel was festooned the pop-corn, while from
every bending branch and stem hung apples and oranges supplied by the teacher, colored bags
of candy and bright cornucopias given by the cattleman, sorghum taffies-on-a-stick made by the
neighbor woman, while eggs, colored in gaudy and grotesque patterns by boiling them in pieces of
calico, were suspended in tiny cunning willow baskets that testified to the nimble fingers of the
Dutchman's wife. Around the base of the churn and heaped high against it was the pile of gifts.

The
program opened immediately after the arrival of the family. The teacher, keeping one eye upon
the fast burning and unstable candles above her, came forward to the edge of the platform to
say a few words of greeting.

The children then gave a rousing Yule chorus, the laden boughs over them waving gently in time with
their voices. The little girl and her violin followed, and the tree was as still as those who sat
before it while the strains of "I Dreamt I Dwelt in Marble Halls" floated tremblingly out from
under her uncertain bow. A new settler's four-year-old lisped "Six Little Rabbits," with many promptings
and encouraging nods from the teacher. The Dutchman's youngest got up to recite "The Burial
of Sir John Moore," and, though shaking from head to foot, attacked the doleful stanzas in a
high key and with sprightly gesticulations. "Frenchy's" brother spoke in his own tongue a piece
that was suitable to the occasion; much to his amazement, it elicited
peals of laughter.

When he sat down, the program wound on its tedious, recitative way until the tree was again
supplied with candles by the neighbor woman's son, and the little girl arose to deliver a welcome to
that same Santa Claus from whom she expected nothing.

If her mother, the big brothers, and the doting Swede boy hoped to see her final effort a triumphant
one, they were disappointed, for she spoke falteringly and, at one juncture, forgot her lines.
Her eyes wavered from her mother to the tree, from the tree to the teacher, and her closing
words were inarticulate.

In the excitement of the moment, however, only the fond few noticed her confusion. The faint
tinkle of bells and the swelling toots of a tin horn were announcing the approach of Santa
Claus. Before the little girl had finished, and in spite of the teacher's admonition, the children
were standing up and looking expectantly toward the rear; and no sooner had the little girl taken
her seat, than they broke forth into excited chatter, calling to one another eagerly. Then
the door was suddenly thrust open to the sound of a shrill toot, and Santa Claus came bounding
in.

Amid the din of the horn and the shouts of the children, he clambered forward to the platform,
bobbing to right and left, and tweaking the ears of those he passed. Long, yellow rope hair
hung down from under a round, scarlet cap, and a rope beard reached to his portly waist. Cotton
snow and another kind that melted promptly in the warm room covered his shoulders and sleeves.
In a gruff though merry voice that sounded above all the others, he sang out the names pinned to
an armful of candy-bags.

One by one, big and little hurried up to receive their gifts of sweets. The little girl evinced
none of the delight that shone on the faces of the other children. She watched the distribution
silently, with no glad throbs of the heart, and took her share of the fruit and candy with downcast
eyes. Her mother sorrowfully noted that, even when the bags and cornucopias had been given out
and Santa turned his attention to the pile around the churn, her interest did not increase.

She watched dully as the girls skipped boldly up, with proud, knowing looks, to seize their
presents, or the boys sidled forward bashfully with changing color. All unwrapped and admired
their gifts as soon as they were back in their seats. The Dutchman's girls shrieked with joy as
they undid their presents, the neighbor woman's daughter could scarcely
hold her share in her best apron.

"Frenchy's" brother had distended pockets. The young farmer's baby crowed in purple delight
over the stack of parcels before him.

The little girl's lap was empty, save for the candy and fruit dropped carelessly into it. When the
pile around the churn had dwindled sorely and but a dozen gifts remained, the little girl had
not yet gone forward to claim one. The other children had been too occupied to notice her ill
fortune until they had spent their first joy over their gifts. Then one of the Dutchman's girls
elbowed the neighbor woman's son, who sat next her, to call his attention to the little girl,
and he passed the news on. Soon all the children were glancing questioningly at her and nudging
one another.

The neighbor woman's daughter, who had often shared the generous fruit of the annual tree at the
farm-house, took secret satisfaction in the unlooked-for fall of the little girl's pride,
and leaned to all sides to whisper.

She even stretched in front of the little girl to tell it to a boy beyond. Not daring to speak
plainly, she resorted to pig-Latin. "Seegry," she cried, pulling at his coat, "shegry ain'tgry
gotgry agry thinggry." But when the little girl, who knew pig-Latin in all its various dialects,
turned angry, scornful eyes upon her, the neighbor woman's daughter sat up and her smile faded
to a sickly blankness.

Santa Claus was now almost at the end of his resources. The floor was bare about the churn, and
there remained only three or four parcels in his arms. The teacher was despoiling the tree
of its pop-corn festoons and tossing them gaily about. Already there was a sound of crunching
in the room, as the candy, nuts, and fruit met their destined fate.

But all at once, with the last package, a long, thick one, held up before his jovial face, Santa Claus
started, looked a second time at the writing upon it, and then, with a jubilant laugh, called out
the little girl's name!

The children about her hushed on the instant, and all eyes were turned upon her. The pitying
expression on her mother's face changed to one of joy, and the eldest and the youngest brothers
slid off the coal-bins as if they were possessed. The Swede boy and the cattleman, who had
each been busy blaming himself for something worse than forgetfulness or negligence, fairly beamed
at the back of the little girl's curly head.
Very deliberately she got up and stepped to the platform. A smile
curved her mouth, and she carried her pink chin high. As she received
her gift, she paused for one moment to drop a dainty curtsy and to
thank Santa Claus, a proceeding which filled all the other girls with
envy, since they had omitted it. Then she proudly took her seat, the
long, thick package in one hand. It was wrapped in brown paper and
tied with white string.

The little girl did not open the package;
instead, she sat quietly with it across her knee, displaying, as if
unconsciously, her name printed in full across it in large letters
that strayed upward, and that were headed by a "Miss" entirely of
capitals. Under her name, in glowing red ink, was written "Merry Christmas,"
and, farther down, the words: "There are seven beautiful things in
this box for you.--S. C."

When the teacher had made her closing speech,
all rose to go. The little girl, as she put on her cap and the big
buffalo coat, was the center of interest, for the children crowded
about her and handled her package. The neighbor woman's daughter hung
the closest, and even put one arm around the little girl. The latter
did not seem to notice any one, but put the package under her coat
and joined her mother.

When the pung drove up to the door the little
girl lost no time in getting into it. The eldest and the youngest
brothers followed her.

The biggest and his mother tarried a little,
however, the one to speak to the Swede boy, the other to accost the
cattleman.

There was a teasing look in the biggest brother's eyes
as he gave the Swede boy a slap on the back. "Good for you!" he said
in an undertone; "I'll never forget that, long 's I live." The Swede
boy tried to answer, hung his head, and finally made off. The biggest
brother took up the reins and, while he waited, continued to pick
cotton from the lapels of his overcoat.

Meanwhile the cattleman,
coming out of the school-house ready for his drive home, suddenly
found himself face to face with a tearful little woman who gratefully
seized his big hands. "Oh, how good of you!" she cried; "how thoughtful
and good and kind!  This
decision was regarded as a quite satisfactory solution of the difficulty; and it was immediately
proposed that a list of approved names should be there and then prepared for submission to
her Majesty, and that she should be invited to select from that list the person whom she would
accept as her spouse.

So far, so good.  But now, at the very moment when the great difficulty appeared to have been
surmounted, other and equally awkward difficulties at once began to arise.  The position of
husband to the queen was one which naturally appealed to every member of the council, and equally
naturally, each member claimed the right to have his name included in the list.  Sachar, the
most powerful of the nobles--he who had suggested the election of one of themselves to fill
the throne--seized a parchment and, with the air of an autocrat, at once inscribed his own
name at the head of the list, without deigning to inquire whether such action was or was not
acceptable to his colleagues.  Then, still retaining the pen in his hand, he glanced round
at the assemblage and said:

"I propose that the next name upon the list shall be that of Lyga, the Keeper of Statutes."

For a moment the members regarded each other in amazement; then, under the impression that
Sachar was perpetrating an ill-timed jest of more than questionable taste, they broke into
a storm of protest; for Lyga was a little wizened, dried-up man, close upon eighty years of age.

But Sachar answered their protests with a stare of haughty surprise that quickly silenced them,
for not only was he the most powerful man among them, but he was also of a headstrong, domineering
disposition, impatient of opposition and quick to resent anything that in the least degree
savoured of it.  He was by no means popular, either with his colleagues or with the people
at large; but he was greatly feared, because of the immense power and influence which he commanded,
and the unscrupulous manner in which he wielded it.

"What mean ye?" he fiercely demanded.  "Am I to understand that ye object to Lyga as unsuitable?
And if so, upon what grounds?  Is he not the `Keeper of Statutes,' and as such, the most suitable
man for the position of virtual ruler of Ulua?  For who among ye knows a tithe so much as he
of the laws by which we are governed; or who so likely to see that those laws are maintained
in perfect integrity?"

"So far, perhaps ye are right, Sachar," retorted Lyga, who was the only man present entirely
devoid of fear of the formidable noble.  "But is my age to be counted as nothing?  Am I a suitable
consort for a girl of sixteen?  Ye know that I am not; and ye know, too, that if the choice
rested between me and thee, thou would'st be the chosen one.  Go to!  Ye are astute, Sachar,
but not astute enough to deceive old Lyga.  If ye are taking it upon yourself to propose names,
propose those of men who shall not only be capable of efficiently discharging the duties of
their exalted position, but who shall also be acceptable to her Majesty in point of age and
disposition.  I say that, in nominating such a man as myself, ye are lacking in respect and
consideration to your sovereign."

There was a low murmur of approval at this fearless, straightforward speech from the old man,
hearing which, Sachar, who perceived that his ruse had been seen through, savagely dashed down
the pen and, wheeling round upon his colleagues, exclaimed:

"So ye approve of and endorse the unworthy insinuation which Lyga has preferred against me?
It is well!  Proceed ye with your nominations, uninfluenced by me.  My aim was to nominate
those who, by wisdom and experience, are most suited to rule over us, irrespective of age or
other considerations.  But since ye have seen fit to suspect my motives, nominate whom ye will.
Understand this, however, I demand that my name shall be included, for I am at least as capable
of governing as any man among ye; and understand this also, that I retain my right to vote
against those nominated whom I may regard as unsuitable."

And therewith Sachar bowed to the assembly, a bow in which scorn and contempt were about equally
expressed, and stalked out of the chamber.

For a few moments consternation reigned supreme among those who remained, for they knew Sachar
well, and clearly understood that, quite unwittingly, they had made a bitter and implacable
enemy of the most powerful and unscrupulous man in Ulua.  But presently Lyga grappled with
the situation and, with a few carefully chosen words, rallied his colleagues upon their alarm,
which he assured them was altogether disproportioned and uncalled for, and brought them back
to the business in hand, with the result that, after a long and acrimonious discussion, a list
was drafted, containing some twenty names, for submission to her Majesty.

In due course the list was presented, with all the state and ceremony which so momentous an
occasion demanded.  And then consternation again reigned; for the young queen, after carefully
perusing the list, handed it back to Sachar, who had presented it, with the calm pronouncement
that none of the names therein was acceptable to her!

Thereupon the council retired in confusion; another meeting was held, another list prepared--in
which Sachar insisted that his name should be included, notwithstanding the queen's previous
rejection; and her Majesty was requested to name an early date for its presentation, which she did.

The second presentation took place at about half-past nine o'clock in the morning, a few minutes
prior to which the Council of Nobles, having previously assembled in the antechamber, filed
in and took their places. These were immediately followed by a squadron of the queen's bodyguard,
fully armed, under the command of their officer, who drew them up across the lower end of the
chamber, completely blocking all means of exit or entrance, except through the doorway at the
upper end of the chamber, used exclusively by the monarch and his or her personal attendants.
This done, a court messenger was dispatched to acquaint the queen that the council had assembled;
and a few minutes later her Majesty entered, heralded by a flourish of trumpets moulded out
of a sort of terra-cotta, and, accompanied by the ladies and officers of her household, among
whom were Earle and Dick.

With slow and dignified step her Majesty moved to the throne and, bowing to the assembled council,
seated herself, at the same time signing to the two white men to stand one on either side of
her, to the undisguised astonishment of the nobles and the scarcely concealed indignation of
Sachar.

A short pause now ensued while the members of council, who had risen upon the queen's entrance,
seated themselves.  Then Sachar, who occupied the place at the head of the table on the queen's
right hand, rose to his feet and, addressing her Majesty, made a lengthy speech, in which he
set forth, in considerable detail, all the reasons which had led up to the present action of
the council, reminded her of her rejection of the first list presented, and in veiled dictatorial
tones, ventured to express the hope that her Majesty would experience no difficulty in selecting
a name from the list now about to be laid before her.  Then he unrolled the parchment and,
with a bow which seemed to say: "This is your last chance, so make the best of it," laid it
upon the table before her.

Bowing in return, and with just the faintest suggestion of a smile lurking about her lips and
in her eyes, Myrra stretched forth her hand and, taking the parchment began to read it.  But
no sooner had her eyes rested upon it than she laid it down again.

"How now, my Lord Sachar!" she exclaimed.  "What means this?"  And she laid her finger upon
the place where his name again occupied the head of the list.  "Have ye here the list which
was first submitted to me?"

"No, your Majesty, we have it not here," answered Sachar. "Understanding that the names therein
were unacceptable, we thought it unnecessary to produce it.  But it can be procured in a very
brief space of time, if your Majesty so desires."

"I do so desire," remarked the queen.  "Let it be brought forthwith." And she sank back in
her seat to await the arrival of the document.

A few minutes later Lyga, in whose charge it was, appeared with the first list, which he laid
open upon the table before the queen.  He wore a smile of amusement as he hobbled back to his
place, for in common with most of the members of council, he pretty shrewdly guessed what was
impending, and he would very cordially welcome anything that savoured of a snub administered
to the haughty and domineering Lord Sachar.

"So!" continued the queen, placing a slim forefinger upon each of the documents.  "I felt sure
I was not mistaken.  The name of my Lord Sachar heads each of these documents.  Yet I think
it will be remembered that, only a few days agone, I distinctly stated that none of the names
in this list"--tapping Number 1 with her left forefinger--"was acceptable to me.  How comes
it, then, that a name once rejected by me is again submitted for my approval?"

And, so saying, Myrra stretched forth her hand and, taking the reed pen which Lyga smilingly
handed to her, drew it firmly and deliberately through Sachar's sprawling signature.

For a moment there was a breathless hush, while the very atmosphere seemed to shudder in anticipation
of that tempestuous and irreparable outbreak on the part of Sachar which the queen's deliberate
snub might be expected to provoke.  The man's sallow visage grew black with fury, his eyes
blazed lightnings down upon the head of the girl who was smilingly erasing his name, his fists
clenched until the knuckles showed white, and his beard and moustache bristled like the mane
of an angry lion.  Indeed, so menacing was his aspect that Dick Cavendish, with a single stride,
interposed his own bulky form between that of the queen and the infuriated Sachar, into whose
flashing eyes he stared so threateningly that the noble suddenly found a new object for the
vials of his wrath.  But Dick simply did not care a fig for Sachar or his anger; he already
knew the man pretty well by reputation, and instinctively understood that there was but one
way to deal with a bully, therefore he laid a heavy hand upon the noble's shoulder, glared
as savagely at him as he knew how, and whispered--a whisper which reached the ears of every
occupant of the table:

"Have a care, my lord; have a care!  Restrain yourself, sit down if you don't want me to wring
your neck for you!"

And Sachar, who had never in his life before been cautioned, much less threatened, sank into
his seat, speechless and utterly overwhelmed with amazement, for the moment, at the discovery
that there actually existed an individual who was not afraid of him.

Meanwhile, the queen, with the pen still in her hand, was thoughtfully considering the list
before her and calmly and deliberately erasing name after name, until not one remained.  Then,
with a smile, Myrra glanced at the faces turned toward her, and remarked:

"I am sorry, my lords, that you should have been put to so much trouble to no purpose, but
the names in this list are no more acceptable to me than were those in the first."

Sachar had been watching the steady process of erasure with fast growing anger.  He believed
he began to see the full meaning of the queen's action.  She did not intend to wed at all if
she could help it, and unless she could be compelled to do so, his chance of becoming king
was gone.  If she could only be induced to name some person as acceptable, he believed he could
find means to persuade that person to waive the honour in his (Sachar's) favour; but if she
would not do so, what was to be done?  Therefore, when the queen lightly pushed the rejected
list from before her, Sachar sprang to his feet and, addressing the assembly at large, said:

"My lords, we seem to be singularly unfortunate in our endeavours to find a consort in every
way acceptable to her Majesty.  To me it seems possible that we may compile list after list
of names regarded by ourselves as in every respect eligible, and every list shall meet with
a fate like unto that now upon the table.  I would therefore venture to suggest that the process
be reversed, and that instead of our drafting a list and presenting it for her Majesty's approval,
the Queen be requested to prepare a list of persons acceptable to her, and submit it to us.
Then we, in council assembled, will take that list, give it our most careful consideration,
and decide whether there be any names in it of which we can all conscientiously approve.  What
say you, my lords; does my proposal seem acceptable to you?"

A momentary silence followed this proposal; then, one after another, the assembled nobles briefly
expressed their acquiescence, finishing up with old Lyga, who pithily remarked:

"If her Majesty approves your proposal, my Lord Sachar, I see not why any of us should disapprove."

"That being the case--" began Sachar.  But the queen stopped him with uplifted hand.

"One moment, if you please," she said.  "If I understand the council aright, their purpose
in all this talk about lists, is to hurry me into marriage, irrespective of my own inclinations.
Now, my Lord Lyga, before we proceed farther into this matter, I wish to ask you, as Keeper
of Statutes: Is there in existence a law compelling me to wed at the bidding of my Council
of Nobles?"

"I am not aware of any such law, your Majesty," answered Lyga.  "Nay, I will go farther than
this, and say that, knowing the statutes intimately as I do, there is no such law."

"Good!" answered the queen.  "I have never heard of any such law, but in view of my council's
somewhat high-handed action, I thought it possible such a law might exist, of which I had not
heard.  You say that there is no such law; and I trust my council will accept your assurance
as proof of its non-existence.  Now, one more question.  Is there a law prohibiting an unmarried
woman from ruling Ulua?"

"No, your Majesty, there is no such law," answered Lyga.  And the glance of triumph which he
flashed at Sachar seemed to say that he was glad of it.

"Again, good!" remarked the queen.  "My thanks to you, my Lord Lyga, for making this matter
perfectly clear.  And my thanks to you also, the members of my council, for the keen interest
which you have been pleased to manifest in a matter which, now that it comes to be investigated,
seems to concern me alone.  Believe me, I appreciate that interest at its true and full value;
but I beg that you will not trouble yourselves further in the matter, for the thought of marriage
has not yet occurred to me, and at the present moment I am not prepared to entertain a proposal
from anyone.  When I am, I will let you know, and the matter can be re-opened.  Meanwhile,
I will seize this opportunity to say that I believe I, though unmarried, shall be able, with
your wise advice and assistance, to govern Ulua as efficiently as though I enjoyed the help
of a husband."

For a moment the members of council were stricken dumb with amazement and consternation at
the quiet, self-possessed firmness with which this young girl deliberately set herself in opposition
to their combined wishes.  And the worst of it was that, as they now fully realised, she was
acting entirely within her rights.

They were still struggling with their emotions when Sachar, always bitterly impatient of opposition,
and always accustomed to act upon the impulse of the moment, sprang to his feet, his eyes ablaze
with fury, and shouted:

"My lords, fellow members of the Council of Nobles, are you going to submit without protest
to this most monstrous disregard of our wishes? Because, if you are, I am not.  I say that,
law or no law, we will not be governed by a woman.  The queen must and shall marry forthwith;
and if she will not choose for herself a husband, acceptable to us all, we will choose one
for her and compel her to marry him, by force, if necessary--"

He stopped suddenly and sank helplessly back into his seat, forced thereto by the irresistible
pressure of Dick's hands upon his shoulders, the grip of which threatened to crush his shoulder-blades
together. And, looking up, he found Dick Cavendish towering over him with a look in his eyes
that seemed to spell sudden death to the rash offender.  For three or four seconds Dick, still
retaining that frightful and agonising grip upon Sachar's shoulders, glowered at the now writhing
noble; then he shook the unfortunate man with such furious violence that Sachar's teeth not
only clicked together like castanets, but they also bit his tongue through as he attempted
to speak.

By this time the whole chamber was in an uproar, every man having started to his feet in terror
of what should happen next.  A few of the more timid ones were hastily leaving their seats
and beating a precipitate retreat toward the door, only to be stopped, however, by the crossed
halberds of the guard.  Lyga was the only noble who seemed in nowise disconcerted by so extraordinary
a happening, and he stood smiling benevolently on Dick while the latter was manhandling the
enraged yet terrified Sachar.  Several of the other nobles, however, anxious to curry favour
with Sachar, hastened to his assistance, and strove unavailingly to break Dick's grip, while
the captain of the guard, accompanied by a file of soldiers, having responded to Dick's call,
now stood uncertainly by, at a loss to know whether or not he ought to obey the young Englishman's
order to arrest a noble and member of the council.

This state of uncertainty on the part of the captain of the guard did not pass wholly unnoticed
by those present, a few of whom loudly protested against the arrest as illegal, in that it
had been ordered by one without authority.

"Ha! say you so?" cried the queen, also rising to her feet.  "Then that is a matter to be easily
remedied."  Turning to Dick, she added:

"My Lord Dick, I appoint you Captain-General of my bodyguard, here and now.  And I authorise
you to arrest my Lord Sachar and lodge him in prison."

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

AN OMINOUS DISAPPEARANCE.

The startling character of the entire episode, coupled with the suddenness and utter unexpectedness
of its development, and the equally unexpected firmness and decision of character manifested
by the young queen, exercised such a paralysing effect upon the members of council that, as
with one accord, they sank back into their seats and in silence watched the arrest and removal
of Sachar from the Council Chamber.  And before any of them could pull themselves together
to take any definite action, the queen rose to her feet and, bowing to the assembly with a
serene and most engaging smile, said:

"My lords of the council, you are dismissed." 

Until a few years ago every census map of the United States was seamed by a long line marked 'frontier.'
That line is gone.

That's the situation in a nutshell. Our work, the subjugation of the land, is about done, and
the question is now up to you; what are you going to do with it? You know the old story of
the man who said he had a horse who could run a mile in two-forty. And the other fellow asked,
'What are you going to do when you get there?' We've done the running and our children are
there. Now what?

You must develop a whole set of new talents--not trotting talents, but staying talents."

"I suppose," said Norris slowly, for Dick was silent, "circumstances bring out abilities. That's
the law that operated in the case of the older generation, and we'll
have to trust to it in ours."

"That's true. But I sometimes wonder if, after all, we are helping you to the best preparation.
We send you back to get the old education. The tendency of old communities is to rehash the
traditions until they become authority. New communities have to face problems for themselves
and solve them by new ways. The first kind of training makes scholars. The second brings out genius.
The old makes men think over the thoughts of others. Heaven knows we need men who will think for
themselves!"

"Well, 'old and young are fellows'," said Dick. "To-day grows out of yesterday."

"Yes, if it grows. The growing is the point. It mustn't molder on yesterday. You must have enough
books to get your thinkers going, but not more.

You must not feast on libraries until you get intellectual gout and
have to tickle your palate with dainties.

A good deal of stuff that's written nowadays seems to me like literary cocktails,--something
to stir a jaded appetite. That's my friend Early's specialty--to serve literary cocktails. But
the appetite you bolster up isn't the equivalent of a good healthy hunger after a day out-of-doors."

"When
nature wants a genius, I suppose she has to use fresh seed," said Dick.

"And genius is creative," Mr. Elton went on. "So far, the genius this country has developed is
that which takes the raw material of forest and river and creates
civilization.

And let me tell you that's a very different job from heaping up population."

Silence fell on the little group and they became suddenly aware of
lapping waters and the sleepy twitter of birds, and even of a long
slender thread of pale light that struck across the lake from a low-lying
star.

Madeline gave a little sigh and pressed her mother's hand.

Dick flushed and hesitated in the darkness, with youth's confidence in its own great purposes
and youth's craving for sympathy in its ambitions.

Mr. Elton's combination of kindness and shrewdness seemed to draw
him out.

"It sounds impertinent and conceited for a young fellow like me to talk about what he means
to do."

"Fire away. I knew your father, Dick."

"Then you'll know what I mean when I say that it has always been my ambition to live up to his
traditions--his ideal of a man's public duties."

Mr. Elton nodded and Dick went on, while Ellery eyed him with some
of the old college respect, and Madeline leaned eagerly forward.

"I don't mean any splurge, you understand, but the same quiet service he gave. Father left his
affairs in such good order that there isn't any real necessity for me to try to add to my income.
Of course, it isn't a great fortune, but it's more than enough; and my ambitions don't lie
that way. There's a certain amount of business in taking care of it as it stands. Mother is glad
to turn the burden of it over to me. She's done nobly--dear little
woman--but--"

"I understand. It's a man's business."

"Yes," said
Dick, with the simple masculine superiority of four and twenty. "That's
enough of a background for life, you see; but I long since made up
my mind that public affairs--affairs that concern the whole community--are
to be my real interest."

"So you're going into politics, Dick?" said
the older man slowly.

"Well, not to scramble for office," Percival
answered with a flush. "We fellows have been well-enough taught, haven't
we, Ellery? to know that it is rather an ugly mess--I mean municipal
affairs in this country. The local situation, here in St. Etienne,
I have yet to study; and I don't mean to lose any time in beginning."

Mr.
Elton made no reply for a moment, and when he spoke there was an unpleasant
cynicism in his voice that galled Dick's pride.

"The young reformer!
Well, I suppose a decent man with a little ability could do something
here, if he knew what he was going to do. It's a good thing to get
on your sea-legs before you try to command a ship."

"Father!" Madeline
cried out, unable to contain herself. "Don't you be a horrid wet blanket!"


Earle nodded emphatic assent, and Dick resumed:

"Is your sympathy with her Majesty strong enough to induce you to co-operate with us in her
cause, my lord?"

"Assuredly," assented Lyga, "else had I left ye to learn of Sachar's escape at your leisure."

"Good!" approved Dick.  "Being strangers among you, we are naturally to a very great extent
ignorant of the characters of Sachar and those who are likely to take part with him against
the Queen; therefore we shall be glad to hear your opinion as to the probable outcome of Sachar's
act of defiance.  How, think ye, will it end?"

"I will tell you," answered Lyga.  "Knowing Sachar and his ambitions so intimately as I do,
I think this is what has happened and will happen. Sachar doubtless went direct from the Council
Chamber to his own home, provided himself with all the money he could lay his hands upon at
the moment, and then probably proceeded to the house of Nimri, the husband of his sister, where,
having explained the happenings of this morning, he has arranged with Nimri to manage his affairs
for him, collect his moneys, and provide him with such funds as he may need, from time to time.
These arrangements made, Sachar will almost certainly go into hiding, and, from his place of
concealment, endeavour to organise a revolt against the Queen's authority, with the object
of either dethroning her, or--if the people will not permit that--compelling her to marry him."

"So," said Dick, "that means something very like civil war, does it not?"

"It does," agreed Lyga, tersely.

"And, in such an event, how think ye will it go?" demanded Earle.

Lyga considered deeply.  "It is a difficult matter to forecast," he presently replied.  "On
the one hand, such a thing as a revolt against the royal house has never yet occurred in Ulua,
and, broadly speaking, the Uluans, as a people, will be opposed to it.  For it would be an
upsetting of one of Ulua's fundamental laws, and the people at large will naturally argue that
if it is possible to upset one law, it will be possible to upset others, with consequences
which no man can foresee. On the other hand, Sachar is, far and away, the most powerful and
influential man in the kingdom.  There are few, if any, who love him, but there are many who,
believing in his power, may be prepared to help him in the hope of being lavishly rewarded
in the event of his being successful, while there are many more--probably thousands--who, directly
or indirectly, are so dependent upon his favour that they will feel they have no choice but
to help him, if called upon.  And you may rest assured that he will call upon every man who
is in the least degree under his influence.  I fear it will be found that he will have a very
large following."

"In that case," said Dick, "it appears to me that prompt and energetic action is called for.
And right here, my Lord Lyga, is where you can be of the utmost service.  I know little or
nothing of the laws by which Ulua is governed, while you, I understand, have them at your fingers'
ends.  Tell me, therefore, how far does my authority, as Captain-General of the Queen's Bodyguard,
extend?"

"It extends just as far as her Majesty may be pleased to permit," answered Lyga.  "You are
entitled, even without obtaining her Majesty's express permission, to take whatever steps you
may deem necessary for the protection of the Queen's person; and, beyond that, you have only
to obtain her Majesty's permission to render lawful any act performed by you in the maintenance
of law and order."

"I see," returned Dick.  "It would appear, then, that my powers are tolerably wide.  Are they
wide enough, think you, to justify me in seizing, on behalf of the Queen, all property belonging
to Sachar?"

"With what object?" demanded Lyga.

"Primarily, to deprive him of what we English term `the sinews of war,'" replied Dick, "or,
in other words, the means to organise a campaign; and secondarily, with the object of impressing
upon all whom it may concern that we who are taking the side of the Queen are fully prepared
to suppress with a strong hand any attempt to deprive her of any of her rights or of her liberty."

"By Kuhlacan!" ejaculated Lyga.  "Are ye prepared to adopt such stringent measures?  We Uluans
are a little apt to deprecate force, a little apt to parley and bargain, to compromise.  I
think that, as a people, we are so timorous that we would concede almost anything in order
to avoid strong measures.  And that is where Sachar has already the advantage.  He is not timorous;
on the contrary, he is bold, courageous, overbearing--he frightens people into surrendering
to his will.  And if ye also are prepared to be firm, resolute, fearless, I believe ye will
conquer; for if once the people can be brought to realise that your determination is as strong
and unshrinking as that of Sachar, there are many who will fear to join him, lest he fall and
they fall with him.  But it will not be well that the Queen shall be personally involved in
the struggle which I foresee.  She must remain personally aloof, passive and detached from
it.  The issues will be of too grim and strenuous a character for her to be brought into personal
contact with them.  She is too young, too inexperienced, too tender-hearted to grapple successfully
with them; at a critical moment when perhaps her throne, her liberty, possibly even her very
life, may be hanging in the balance, she might be tempted to yield, rather than fight for what
is rightfully her own, in order to avert bloodshed.  That is a trait of her character upon
which Sachar will confidently reckon, therefore we who have her interests at heart must safeguard
her from the effects of untimely weakness by inducing her to invest you with full power and
authority to act in her behalf as may seem to you best, without being obliged first to submit
the point to her.  Thus, you and Sachar, not she, will be responsible for what may happen.
Does such a prospect make you shrink?"

"It does not, friend Lyga," answered Dick.

"I am glad to hear you say so," returned Lyga, "for your view accurately coincides with my
own.  Would that I were young enough actively to support you!  But what matters?  My brain
will be worth more to you than thews and sinews, and I tell you, my Lord Dick, that the best
my brain can offer is and shall be at all times freely yours.  I am ready, if need be, to back
my wisdom and cunning against Sachar's courage and strength.  And now, see ye, I advise that
ye take immediate steps to seize every item of Sachar's property and goods that ye can lay
hands upon.  Give the matter into the hands of Acor, who met ye at the gate when ye first entered
Ulua; he is a good man, staunch and--I believe-- faithful, and such orders as ye may give him
he will execute. Meanwhile, I will retire to mine own quarters and will there prepare a parchment
investing you with full power to act as you may deem necessary in defence of the Queen's peace.
And to-morrow you and I will go together and beseech her Majesty to sign it."

"Jove! the plot is thickening, with a vengeance," exclaimed Dick, when Lyga had left them.
"But," he continued, "what puzzles me is, how it comes that I am suddenly boosted to the front
and the top in such an extraordinary manner.  What I mean is, that up to the present you have
been persona grata here, and now, without rhyme or reason, it seems to me, I am pitch-forked--"

Earle smiled as he laid his hand on Dick's shoulder.

"My dear chap," he said, "if, as you say, I have thus far been the more important individual
of the two here in Ulua, you know as well as I do that it has been solely by virtue of this
Kuhlacan amulet that I wear. But you have only to glance into one of those mirrors which reflect
our images to understand in a moment why a young girl like Queen Myrra should instinctively
turn to you, rather than to me when--"

"Oh, I say! that's the most utter rot, you know--" began Dick, blushing furiously.  But Earle
again interrupted him.

"Rot, or not, my young friend," he said, "it is human nature, which, take my word for it, is
pretty much the same all the world over. Besides, you must remember that it was you who intervened
so vigorously when that bounder, Sachar, threatened the Queen; therefore it was but natural
that when those other johnnies began to protest against the illegality of your order for Sachar's
arrest, her Majesty should at once invest you with the necessary authority to legalise your
order.  And, having made you Captain-General of her bodyguard, she will of course look to you
to discharge the functions of the post.  And as for me, I tell you frankly that I think, in
choosing you, she showed herself to be a very wise little woman; for you are accustomed to
responsibility and command.  You go ahead, youngster, and fear nothing.  I'll back you up to
the last cent, whatever you do; and always remember that whenever you feel in need of information
or advice, you have wise old Lyga to fall back upon, and he is a host in himself."

Thus reassured, Dick Cavendish summoned a servant and forthwith dispatched him to the adjacent
barracks in which the officers and men of the bodyguard were lodged, with a message requesting
Captain Acor's immediate attendance.  And when, about a quarter of an hour later, Acor put
in an appearance, Dick briefly recounted to him the morning's happenings, and wound up by directing
him to tell off a sufficient number of men and with them proceed to search for and arrest Sachar,
to take possession of and occupy not only Sachar's residence, but every other building belonging
to the man, and to seize and lodge in a place of security all Sachar's horses, slaves, and
other property capable of being moved.  Acor readily undertook to do this, assuring Dick that
he believed he could enumerate every item of property belonging to Sachar, and that he would
permit nothing to escape him. In elevation it consists of one lofty well-proportioned arch supported
on either side by semi-hexagonal buttresses taken up as high as the apex of arch; above comes
a plain gable, in which, centred over the arch below, is a canopied niche with the kneeling figure
of Sir Thomas Erpingham.

Built probably about 1420, and while yet some of the noble simplicity of the thirteenth had not
passed into the over-wrought richness of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, it presents
a type of the best Perpendicular work we have in England.

The form of the arch is lofty, and may have been suggested by the wish to preserve a view through
of the cathedral.

The arch moulding is enriched on the outer part with figures of fourteen female saints, and on the
inner with twelve male saints; the semi-hexagonal panelled buttresses are covered with the shields
of the families of Erpingham, Clopton, and Walton, and each has a seated figure of an ecclesiastic
on the top.

The richness of this lower arch stage tells against the plain gable
over, and is quite admirable in effect and defensible as a method
of design; it is ornament decorating construction pure and simple,
and not what later work generally was and is, constructed ornament,
suggesting over-elaborate construction thereby made necessary.

It will be noticed that labels with the word "Yenk" (think) sculptured thereon are placed between
the shafts on either side of the archway; this has been construed "pend" by some writers,
and from this the view was taken that Sir Thomas Erpingham was made to build the gate as a penance
for favouring Lollardism, and that the figure of himself in the gable over the archway represents
him as praying pardon for the offence.

This interpretation, however, amusing as it is, is probably erroneous, and the gate, with its
shields of allied families, stands to the memory of its founder.

Sir Thomas Erpingham was at Agincourt in 1415, and Shakespeare, in Act iv. of Henry V., remarks of
him that he was "a knight grown grey with age and honour." Sir Thomas Browne also (p. 9 of his
"Repertorium") says: "He was a Knight of the Garter in the time of Henry IV. and some part of
Henry V., and I find his name in the list of the Lord Wardens of the Cinque Ports."

Sir Thomas Erpingham had two wives, Joan Clopton and Joan Walton,
whose arms appear on the gateway.

#St. Ethelbert's Gate#, to the south, is an early "Decorated" structure. Its elevation is divided
into three storeys, in the lowest of which is the gateway, with flat buttresses on each side carried
up the height of two storeys, and enriched with pedimented niches in both stages. In the compartment
over the arch are seven niches, four of which are pierced with windows. The upper stage is in
flintwork. It was built by the citizens as part of the fine imposed on them for their share in
the riots and fire of 1272 by the Court of King Henry III., though probably not until some
years had elapsed, and when Edward the First had come to the throne.
The upper part of the front was restored early in this century. The
back elevation is interesting--the window over the arch being typical
of the style.

#The Gate-House# forming the entrance to the bishop's
palace, on the north side of the cathedral, was built by Bishop Alnwyck
about 1430, and probably replaced an earlier structure; it is an interesting
piece of Perpendicular work, and consists, in the lower stage, of
a gate and doorway under a deep horizontal band ornamented with plain
shields and monograms of the Virgin.

With the first appearance of dawn the streets of the city had begun to assume a festive appearance,
which, to Dick and Earle at least, seemed distinctly incongruous until it was explained to
them by Lyga--who came to them early--that the pageant was in nowise intended to be typical
of a nation mourning the loss of its monarch (the theory being that the monarch never dies),
but rather of the nation doing honour to one who, after ruling them wisely and well, has laid
him down to enjoy a well-earned rest.

It was not, however, to furnish this explanation that Lyga had presented himself at such an
early hour, but rather to inquire what progress, if any, had been made in the quest for the
missing Sachar.

Dick was obliged to reply to this that, notwithstanding his utmost efforts, and in the following
up of innumerable clues which had proved to be false, he had been unable to discover the whereabouts
of the missing man, who indeed had disappeared as effectually as though the earth had swallowed
him up.

"I feared so; I feared so," commented Lyga, in response to Dick's explanation.  "I am inclined
to the belief that he is being harboured by some friend whose power and influence are so great
that he believes himself strong enough to defy you.  And I fear that, all this time, Sachar
has been using his own influence and that of his friend to plot some scheme whereby he may
secure possession of the Queen's person for a sufficient length of time to compel her to marry
him.  Hitherto this has been impossible, for the simple reason that, thus far, her Majesty
has never left the precincts of the palace, where of course she is safe. But to-day her Majesty
goes forth to render the last honours to her beloved grandfather, and to witness, according
to custom, the deposition of his body in the royal sepulchre; to-day, therefore, an opportunity
may arise for the conspirators to attempt to secure possession of the Queen's person, if they
deem themselves strong enough.  And if not to-day, the opportunity must soon present itself;
for it is manifestly out of the question that her Majesty shall become virtually a prisoner
in her own palace.  She must of necessity frequently go abroad and show herself to the people,
otherwise they would soon begin to think, and to say, that she is afraid of Sachar; and that
would but strengthen Sachar's hands and weaken her own.

"But mark ye this, my lords.  It is in my mind that if, as I very strongly suspect, it is Sachar's
intention to secure possession of the Queen's person, the attempt is likely enough to be made
to-day, for the reason that to-day all Ulua will be abroad, and therefore it will be the easier
for a large body of Sachar's adherents to assemble together, and maybe form part of the funeral
procession, without exciting comment or suspicion."

It was about eleven o'clock in the morning when, the great wrought copper gates at the main
entrance of the palace having been swung open, the queen's chariot emerged therefrom and was
carefully piloted to its station immediately in the rear of the funeral car, to which, in the
meantime, twelve magnificently caparisoned white horses had been yoked, the great cloths which
covered the animals from head to heel being made of purple silk, lavishly embroidered in silver
thread and weighted at the edges with heavy silver tassels.  Their heads were decorated with
long plumes of the royal colours, and their bridles were fringed with purple silk bands, scalloped
and heavily embroidered in silver.  All the horses taking part in the procession, from those
in the queen's chariot down to the humble vehicle drawn by a single animal, were caparisoned
exactly alike, by strict regulation.  And after the chariots, some of which were drawn by six
horses, yoked three abreast, came those who, not being wealthy enough to own a chariot, must
follow on foot.

The horses having been yoked to the funeral chariot, Dick Cavendish mounted his powerful charger
and gave the order for the bodyguard to form round it and the queen's chariot, which was at
once done, the troopers forming a cordon six deep, which completely enveloped the two chariots.
At the same moment the great doors of the temple were thrown open, and the priests, to the
number of about one hundred and fifty, clad in white robes and turbans edged with turquoise
blue, filed out through the portals of the building, walking with slow and measured steps,
and playing a kind of dirge upon their queer-looking musical instruments, of which the most
numerous consisted of long curved trumpets formed of a kind of terra-cotta.  Zorah, the high
priest, marched in the van bearing aloft a pole surmounted by an effigy of Kuhlacan, the Winged
Serpent, while on either side of him walked acolytes swinging censers charged with certain
aromatic substances, smouldering and throwing off thin wisps of perfumed smoke.

Down the great flight of the temple steps came the priests, and across the square, until they
reached the foremost files of the bodyguard, when they wheeled to the left and proceeded along
the appointed route, the funeral car and the rest of the procession getting into motion close
behind.

Proceeding at the solemn pace which had been set by the priests at the outset, the funeral
procession slowly wended its way along the road toward the place of sepulture, the route being
lined on either hand by a continuous crowd of people of the humbler classes, who knew that
it would be hopeless for them to attempt to file past the bier while it stood in the great
square before the palace, the time allowed for this being only sufficient to permit the nobles
and the more affluent classes to pay this last tribute to their dead king; those, therefore,
who could not do this adopted the alternative of assembling along the highway and casting their
little bouquets of flowers upon the road when the head of the procession approached.

The journey from the square to the great plain before the rocky cliff which contained the royal
sepulchre occupied practically four hours, and another two hours elapsed before the tail end
of the procession arrived and was arranged in position to witness the elaborate ceremony attending
the consignment of the body to its last resting place; thus it was after sunset and the brief
dusk of the tropics was falling upon the plain, enveloping it in a veil of mystery and cloaking
many of the movements of the enormous crowd assembled, when at length, after the observance
of the final rites, the queen, followed by such nobles as were entitled to be present, and
the priests emerged from the great cavern.  The funeral ceremonies were over, and it now only
remained for those who had taken part in them to get back to their homes as speedily as might be.

Dick, in his capacity as Captain-General of the Queen's Bodyguard, and Earle, in the character
of a highly distinguished individual closely connected in some mysterious fashion with the
god Kuhlacan, were awaiting her Majesty at the entrance of the cave, and immediately upon her
emergence they each offered her a hand and proceeded to lead her to a chariot, which was awaiting
her at some little distance, the troopers of the bodyguard closing up in the rear of the trio
and thus cutting them off from everybody outside the cordon.

No sooner was this accomplished than Earle began hurriedly to address the queen in a low voice:

"Your Majesty," he said, "we have the strongest reason for suspecting that a very formidable
and determined attempt will be made to secure possession of your person to-night, during the
progress of our journey toward the city.  There is no time to enter into even the most brief
of explanations, but the point is this: My Lord Dick and I have devised a plan to frustrate
this atrocious plot, and all that we need is your Majesty's immediate and unqualified assent
to enable us to put the plan into effect.  It involves your trusting yourself alone with me
while I take you back to the city and the palace by a shorter but very lonely route.  Will
you do it?  It is the joint plan of my Lord Dick and myself, and it is our earnest desire and
entreaty that you will be graciously pleased to assent to it."

"Of course," agreed the queen, with the utmost readiness.  "I will trust myself with my Lord
Dick and you anywhere."

"I greatly appreciate the confidence which your Majesty is pleased to put in me," remarked
Earle.  "But I fear that I have not succeeded in making myself quite understood.  The success
of our plan demands that you come with me alone.  My Lord Dick cannot come with us.  It is
necessary that he shall remain with the bodyguard."

"Necessary that he should remain?" objected the queen.  "Nay, surely not.  Let him turn over
the command for the moment, to Acor, and come with us.  It is not that I am afraid to trust
myself alone with you, my lord," she added, in response to a sigh and a gesture of disappointment
from Earle, "but--but--"

"Oh yes, your Majesty, of course I know," responded Earle wearily, "but what you suggest simply
cannot be done.  You see--Oh! hang it all," he continued, breaking into English, "tell the
child that she simply must do as we ask; that you wish it; or she'll stand here arguing until
further orders."

The unmistakable tone of annoyance and impatience with which Earle ended his speech caused
the queen to glance at him with big, startled eyes; but when Dick bent over her and whispered
an entreaty that she would fall in with the plan, so that he might thus be relieved of a very
heavy load of anxiety, she acquiesced without further ado, while Earle triumphantly chortled,
in English:

"I told you so!"

They were by this time close to the royal chariot, near which stood a dismounted trooper, holding
his horse by the bridle with one hand, while over his other arm he held unfolded the long,
black military cloak in which officers and men alike were wont to envelop themselves at night
time to protect their armour and accoutrements from the drenching night dews.

Without saying a word, Dick at once took the cloak from the man and wrapped it round the queen,
enveloping her from head to foot; next he drew the hood over her head and so arranged it that
while the girl could see clearly, her features were hidden in the deep shadow cast by the overhanging
hood. In the fourth bay (marked 11 on plan) the altar tomb of Sir William Boleyn of Blickling (d.
1505).

Of the fourth bay eastward from tower on the south side (marked 9 on plan), Sir Thomas Browne
says: "On the north of the choir--the presbytery is meant--between the two arches, next to
Queen Elizabeth's seat, were buried Sir Thomas Erpingham and his
wives, the Lady Joan, etc., whose pictures were in the painted glass
windows next to this place, with the arms of the Erpinghams.

The insides of both the pillars were painted in red colours, with divers figures and inscriptions
from the top almost to the bottom, which are now washed out by the late whiting of the pillars....
There was a long brass inscription about the tombstone, which was torn away in the late times,
the name of Erpingham only remaining."

During the recent works, under this same spot was found a leaden coffin enclosing human bones,
which were possibly the remains of Sir Thomas Erpingham.

An amusing tale is told by Harrod of Roger Bigod's burial in the cathedral.
He was the founder of Thetford Priory, and died in 1107, leaving directions
that his body should be buried in his own monastery. The prior of
Thetford was much perplexed to hear that Bishop Herbert had taken
possession of the body, and had determined that it should be interred
with all the due solemnities at Norwich. Herbert was anxious to secure
for his own foundation so valuable a source of income as the offerings
and celebrations at the tomb of a pious man like Bigod; and no doubt
the prior was not actuated alone by love for his departed abbot.  In
this fashion about a mile and a half of the return journey was accomplished, and a bend of
the road was reached where a sort of bridle path bore sharply off to the right, forming a short
cut to the city, but practicable only for horsemen or pedestrians, because of its narrowness,
the road through the scrub being only wide enough to permit the passage of a single horseman.
Here Earle left the escort and, closely followed by the queen, plunged into the by-path, where
their forms instantly became merged in the deep shadow of the surrounding bush, while the soft,
sandy character of the soil so muffled the hoof-beats of their horses as to render them inaudible
above the sounds caused by the passage of the horses and chariots along the high road. Ten
seconds after they had parted from the main body, Earle and his companion had vanished as completely
as though the earth had swallowed them up, while none but the leading files of the escort had
witnessed their going.  Five minutes later, Dick uttered a low word of command, and a sergeant,
accompanied by four files of troopers, separated themselves from the main body and pushed forward
along the main road at a canter acting as scouts.

Scarcely had these men vanished in the distance when the sky on the left assumed an appearance
as though being overspread by a soft golden radiance, throwing the outline of the encircling
cliffs in that direction into sharp relief, the stars thereabout paled into insignificant pin
points of light ere they vanished altogether, and presently up sailed the full moon into view
above the hill tops, instantly flooding the valley with her soft, mysterious effulgence, until
in the course of a few minutes objects were almost as clearly visible as in the light of day,
while the multitudinous polished metal domes and roofs, of the distant city shimmered under
the clear rays like the waters of another lake.

Some ten minutes later, a clear, shrill whistle sounded far ahead, which was the preconcerted
signal announcing that the scouts had come into touch with an opposing body of some description,
and Dick immediately gave the order for the bodyguard to roll up their cloaks and hold themselves
ready for action. Another is, a satirical medal struck on Lewis XIV.; 'tis a bomb, covered with
flower-de-luces, bursting; the motto, Se ipsissimo. The last, and almost the only one I ever
saw with a text well applied, is a German medal with a Rebellious town besieged and blocked
up; the inscription, This kind is not expelled but by fasting. Now I mention medals, have they
yet struck the intended one on the taking of Porto-Bello? Admiral
Vernon will shine in our medallic history.

We have just received the news of the bombarding Carthagena, and
the taking Chagre.

(209) We are in great expectation of some important victory obtained by the squadron under
Sir John Norris. we are told the Duke is to be of the expedition; is it true?
  Then, keeping pace with the Captain-General,
the sergeant made his brief report, before falling back into his proper place in the troop.
Five minutes later, upon rounding a bend in the road, Dick found himself within fifty yards
of the opposing force, which had been posted with some skill right across the road, at a point
where the growth of scrub on either hand was so dense as to render it impossible for either
infantry or cavalry to pass through it and so execute an outflanking movement.

"Halt!" shouted Dick to the troopers in his rear; and as the horsemen reined in and came to
a standstill, he allowed his hand to drop to the butt of one of the four automatic pistols
which he had taken the precaution to thrust into his belt before setting out from the palace
in the morning.  Drawing forth the weapon and allowing the hand which held it to drop to his
side, he urged his horse forward until he was within a few yards of the front rank of the opposing
force, when he drew rein, and demanded:

"Who are ye, and where is your leader?  Let him stand forth and explain the meaning of this
outrage.  Know ye that ye are opposing the passage of the chariot of the Queen's most excellent
Majesty?"

"Ay, right well do we know it, since that is our purpose," replied a man, stepping forth in
response to Dick's challenge.  He was dressed in a suit of complete gold armour; but since
the Uluan helmet has no visor, and the light of the moon, now almost as brilliant as that of
day, fell full upon his face, Dick at once recognised him as the recalcitrant Sachar.

"So it is thou, my Lord Sachar," remarked Dick. Later in the day the wind has veered to the westward,
heading us slightly.

I trust it will not go further round; we are now more than a point to eastward of our course
to the ice, and three points to leeward of that to Campbell Island,
so that we should not have fetched the Island anyhow.

Friday, December 1.--A day of great disaster. From 4 o'clock last night the wind freshened with
great rapidity, and very shortly we were under topsails, jib, and staysail only. It blew very
hard and the sea got up at once. Soon we were plunging heavily and taking much water over
the lee rail. Oates and Atkinson with intermittent assistance from others were busy keeping
the ponies on their legs. Cases of petrol, forage, etc., began to break loose on the upper deck;
the principal trouble was caused by the loose coal-bags, which were bodily lifted by the seas
and swung against the lashed cases. 'You know how carefully everything had been lashed, but no
lashings could have withstood the onslaught of these coal sacks for
long'; they acted like battering rams.

'There was nothing for it but to grapple with the evil, and nearly all hands were labouring for
hours in the waist of the ship, heaving coal sacks overboard and re-lashing the petrol cases,
etc., in the best manner possible under such difficult and dangerous circumstances. The seas
were continually breaking over these people and now and again they
would be completely submerged. Here the soldiers of the bodyguard broke in with loud and enthusiastic
cheers.  "And," continued Dick, when silence was once more restored, "ye have also now heard
his audacious and treasonable demand that the Queen shall be surrendered, a prisoner, into
his keeping, that he may work his wicked will upon her.  Know, therefore, that, rather than
concede this outlaw's treasonable demands, I will die here in the road fighting in defence
of the Queen's person and liberty, and so will every man who wears her Majesty's uniform--"
Here fresh cheers from the bodyguard again interrupted him.  "Ye hear those cheers?" resumed
Dick, as the shouts died into silence.  "And know ye what they mean, oh misguided adherents
of the outlawed Sachar?  They mean death to you!  For your own sakes, therefore, I counsel
you to return to your allegiance to the Queen, surrendering Sachar to me, a prisoner, to be
tried and dealt with for his offence as the law of Ulua directs.  Those of you who are willing
to save your lives, face about and retire with all speed, lest evil befall you."

"So!" roared Sachar, advancing upon Dick with uplifted sword, "ye would pervert my followers
and terrify them into deserting me!"  And he aimed a mighty blow at Dick as the pair rushed
at each other.  But Dick, anticipating something of the sort, had already dropped the bridle
upon his charger's neck, thrust his automatic back into his belt, and whipped out the good
steel sword that he had that morning deemed it advisable to substitute for the handsome but
comparatively useless weapon that went with his uniform, and the next instant the two blades
clashed together. The result was precisely what Dick had anticipated, the steel shattered the
hardened and toughened copper blade as though the latter had been glass, and before Sachar
in the least realised what had happened Dick had driven his sword hilt into his antagonist's
face, causing the Uluan noble to stagger so that he would have fallen, had not Dick leaned
forward in his saddle and gripped the man by the arm.

"Sergeant Mato," he called, "take this man back to the centre of the troop, bind him hand and
foot, and see to it that he does not escape you.  Now, followers of Sachar," he continued,
"your leader is a prisoner.  Will ye--"

But at that moment he was interrupted by a confused din of angry shouting, the trampling of
horses, and the clinking of blade upon blade coming from the rear, showing that the armed retainers
of some at least of the nobles who had attended the interment had fallen upon the bodyguard.
The sounds also reached the ears of Sachar's followers and, encouraged thereby, they in their
turn raised a great shout and rushed forward, with the result that in a moment a fierce battle
was raging in the road, with the bodyguard attacked front and rear, while it soon became evident
that the aim of the assailants was to reach the queen's chariot, doubtless in the hope of being
able to secure possession of it and drive it off through the melee.

For a few minutes the bodyguard were fighting at a serious disadvantage, being all jammed up
tightly together round the queen's chariot, so that only a dozen or so in front and rear were
able to strike a blow.  But Dick and Earle, while discussing the probabilities of attack, had
foreseen just such a state of affairs as now obtained, and had issued their orders accordingly. The
three looked at her to see her face aglow with the lovely feminine belief in masculinity that
also belongs to the early twenties.

"That's all right," said the elder Elton unemotionally. "I wasn't wet-blanketing--I know things
are needed. There's plenty of corruption wanting to be buried, and most of us are content
to hold our noses and let it lie. Or perhaps we give an exclamation of disgust when it is served
up in the newspapers. Reform if you must, but don't reform all day and Sundays too; and build
your cellars before you begin your attics."

Then he went on a shade more heartily: "It's a mighty good thing for some of you young fellows
to be going into politics; perhaps that's the chief work for the next generation. And Norris--what
of you?"

Ellery started. It had been a silent evening for him, but his silence had glowed with interest,
not so much in the conversation as in his own thoughts. Two things had forced themselves home,--the
first when he looked down on that expanse of vivid water, vivid sky, vivid green. Here a man,
even a young man, might waken to all his faculties and make something of life. He need not plod
dully through years, to reach success only when he is old and tired. The landscape poured like wine
into Ellery Norris' veins.

And now here was the other side. He had watched with fascination the restfulness of Miss Elton's
hands, the one that held her mother's, the one that lay quietly in
her lap. He watched her steady eyes that kept upon her father and
Dick as they talked. He saw her face glow with sympathy and interest
and yet remain calm, as if secure in the goodness of the world; and
he told himself that he was glad this wonderful thing belonged to
Dick. Dick's restlessness would be held in leash, as it were, by this
steadfastness.

Once she half turned as though she felt his scrutiny,
and queer pains darted through his body when her eyes met his.

Now
when Mr. Elton attacked him, he came back from his far-away excursion
with a sense of surprise that there was a present, but he smiled cheerfully.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS.

Dick's first act on the following morning, was to dispatch to the scene of the fight a strong
body of men, whose duty it would be to collect the slain and bury them in a common grave by
the roadside, after the officer in command of the party had ascertained, by means of the dead
men's uniforms, the names of their chiefs.  Then he proceeded in person to the large building
which had been hastily converted into a temporary hospital, to which the wounded had been conveyed,
and took the necessary steps to discover the names of their chiefs also.  The final result
of this investigation was the discovery that at least five of the Council of Nobles, in addition
to Sachar, had been implicated in the previous night's attack upon the Queen's Bodyguard, in
the attempt to secure possession of the queen's person.  Dick's next act was to dispatch to
the houses of the implicated five a sergeant's guard, with instructions to the officer in command
to arrest the owner--if he could be found, and to seize his property.  To do the last was simple
enough, but Dick was not greatly surprised to learn that, in each case, the "wanted" noble
had failed to return home on the previous night, and that nobody was able to give the slightest
hint as to his probable whereabouts.  This, however, did not very greatly trouble the young
captain-general; Sachar, the instigator and leader of the whole treasonable conspiracy, was
safely lodged in durance vile, under conditions which rendered his escape a practical impossibility,
the victory of the queen's troops over the rebels had been signal and complete, the queen herself
was safe and sound, and Dick was disposed to think that, under the circumstances, he would
have no great difficulty in stamping out the smouldering remains of the rebellion.

Nor was he mistaken, as circumstances soon proved.  He proclaimed the missing nobles outlaws,
announced the confiscation of their property, and offered a substantial reward for their persons,
dead or alive, which, with the terrible threats against all who should dare to harbour or help
them directly or indirectly, produced such a wholesome effect that, within four days, every
one of the missing men had been ignominiously brought in and surrendered.  And now, each man
anxious only to save his own skin, not only did the five--of whom Nimri, Sachar's brother-in-law
was one--proceed to lay the blame of the whole affair upon Sachar, accusing him of influencing
them by alternate bribes and threats, but they also testified against certain other nobles
who, but for this, might have gone scot free and unsuspected; so that ultimately no less than
eleven of Ulua's most powerful and ambitious nobles found themselves in danger of losing their
heads in consequence of their ambition having o'erleaped itself.

And now, Dick and Earle found themselves confronted with a difficulty, for there were no such
things as civil or criminal courts of justice in Ulua, criminals being in the usual course
haled before the shiref of the particular district in which the crime was committed, and summarily
sentenced by him to such punishment as he, in his wisdom, might deem meet and adequate; while,
if the crime was of a specially serious character--as in the present case--it was the monarch
who pronounced judgment and determined the nature of the punishment.

But the two white men felt that it would never do to permit the young queen to be saddled with
the responsibility of judging eleven rebels against her sovereign authority, and with the onus
of personally determining what amount of punishment they should receive; they therefore put
their heads together and, without very much difficulty, drafted a scheme for the establishment
of courts of justice, somewhat similar in character to those in England, wherein criminals
could be tried and sentenced by duly qualified judges; though they decided that the Uluans
were not yet ripe for the introduction of the jury system. This scheme they first submitted
to Lyga, who, after suggesting certain modifications calculated to adapt it more closely to
the requirements and peculiarities of the Uluan character, fully approved of it and agreed
to recommend it to the queen for acceptance and embodiment upon the Statute Book.  This was
done, and, the idea having been fully explained to the queen by Lyga, was approved by her and
in due course became one of the laws of the land. Dean Gardiner, 1573-89, was a great reformer,
and, as we have already noted, pulled down the thirteenth-century Lady Chapel, and as well the
chapter-house.

In 1643 the cathedral was taken possession of by
Cromwell's soldiers, and the work of spoliation carried on.  No attempt was made to clear any of the prisoners by means of
clever advocacy or specious argument, the questions before the court were the straightforward
ones whether or not the accused were guilty of conspiracy, and, if guilty, to what extent;
and in every case the verdict was the same, every prisoner was found guilty, but not all to
the same extent, some of them being able to show that, owing to the power and influence wielded
by Sachar, they were practically compelled to throw in their lot with him, whether or not they
approved of his designs.  The result of the trial was, under the circumstances, eminently satisfactory,
considering that it was the first of the kind ever held in Ulua; for the judges, instructed
by Earle and Dick, devoted themselves wholeheartedly to the task of administering strict justice,
without regard to the position or personality of the accused; and the trial terminated with
the condemnation of Sachar, Nimri, and two others to death, with the confiscation of all their
property, while the remaining seven were punished in varying degrees, some by heavy fines,
and others by more or less lengthy periods of penal labour.

It was with considerable anxiety that Dick and Earle awaited and watched for the effect upon
the populace of this innovation in the judicial methods of Ulua; but they had not long to wait
before it became apparent that the formality and solemnity of public trial were far more effective
as a deterrent than the former rough and ready methods, under which a culprit was haled before
a shiref and summarily punished, with nobody but himself and his immediate connections being
a penny the wiser; publicity and its attendant disgrace soon became more wholesomely dreaded
than even fine or imprisonment, and when a period of three months had elapsed without the smallest
sign of any recurrent restiveness on the part of the Council of Nobles, the two white men felt
that Queen Myrra was firmly enough established upon her throne to be in no further need of
their services; they therefore announced their intention to make an early departure, and proceeded
to make their preparations for the return journey.

It is not putting the matter any too strongly to say that the announcement of the impending
departure of the two white men from Ulua was productive of the utmost consternation and dismay.
So thoroughly had the two identified themselves with every movement having for its object the
improvement of previous conditions, and so far-reaching and wholesome had been their influence
generally, that the inhabitants of the city had insensibly grown to regard them as heaven-sent
reformers, permanently settled among them for their benefit and advantage by the especial favour
of Kuhlacan, and the news that the pair were about to leave them fell upon the Uluans with
something of the effect of a bolt from the blue.

And upon no one did the intelligence seem to produce so stunning and grievous an effect as
upon the young queen.  When, upon a certain morning, Dick and Earle, having craved audience
of her Majesty, made the momentous announcement and asked her permission to depart, they were
shocked and astounded at the manner in which she received the intimation.  She went as white
as death, sank back in the throne-like chair upon which she was seated, closed her eyes, and
for a moment it looked as though she had fainted.

And then, at the sight of the queen's manifest distress, a most extraordinary revulsion of
feeling swept over Dick Cavendish.  Up to that moment he had regarded the projected return
to civilisation as merely part and parcel of the fulfilment of his contract with Earle, as
something which he had undertaken and must therefore of necessity carry out; yet now he was
fully conscious for the first time that it was Earle, and not he, who had broached the subject
of return, and he was conscious, moreover, of the fact that he had viewed the prospect of departure
from Ulua with a singular lack of enthusiasm.

This illumination, however, remained with him only long enough to impress itself upon his mind
as a flash of lightning impresses itself upon the sight, and was instantly succeeded by a rush
of most extraordinary and tumultuous emotion at the young queen's extreme distress.  An overwhelming
sense of her utter isolation and friendlessness, a sudden realisation of her as the centre
and victim of a thousand ambitious plots by unscrupulous nobles like Sachar, and of her bitter
need of a strong arm and a cool head to keep and protect her in the multitudinous trials incidental
to her exalted position, a quick appreciation of her extraordinary beauty, physical and mental,
and--some other exquisitely sweet and tender feeling which he had no time to analyse, swept
over him like a flood, causing him to forget everything but the utterly irresistible desire
to comfort her and alleviate her distress; and, acting as irresponsibly as though he were in
a dream, forgetful alike of Earle's presence and that of the ladies-in-waiting at the far end
of the room, he sprang forward, flung himself upon his knees beside the girl, took her in his
arms, and proceeded to pour forth a flood of tender incoherences, mingled with caresses, that
very speedily brought back the colour to her Majesty's lips and cheeks and the light into her eyes.

"Oh, my Lord Dick," she murmured, placing her hands upon Dick's shoulders as she gazed with
dilated eyes into his, "What is this you say?  That you are about to leave me?  Why?  What
have I done, and wherein have I failed in hospitality, that you should desire to go from me?"

"Nay, your Majesty," answered Dick, "nay, it is not that at all, on my soul.  It is simply
that we have done what we came to do in Ulua, and now, I suppose--I fear--we must--Earle and I--"

"My dear chap, don't worry about me," broke in Earle, in English, with a grin. He laid it gently
on the table, and folded his arms solemnly. "Thet came all the way from Yankton," he said,
as if recounting the history of some famous work of art. "I bought it down thar of a feller,
an' paid some little money fer it." He did not add that she was in his thoughts when he bought it.
"Now I'm going out to hitch up an' take ye home," he continued.

"While I'm gone, ye make up yer mind which ye want--" He started for the door, but paused half-way.
"--which ye want," he repeated, lowering his voice, "Sultan--er thet
beautiful cane?"

When he was gone the little girl stole closer to the table and gazed rapturously down. Never
in her life, as the cattleman truly said, had she seen anything like it. No horse, on a prairie
overrunning with horses, could compare with it.

She put out her hand and touched its crooked head, almost reverently, with one small finger.

The
cattleman harnessed a span of fat mules at the barn, and led them into their places on each side
of a wagon tongue. All the while he talked out loud to himself, with
occasional guffaws of hearty laughter and sharp commands to the team.

Despite his merriment, however, he peered back at the shanty uneasily from time to time; so
that it was a full quarter of an hour before the mules were hitched to the whiffletrees and ready
for their journey. Then he climbed to the seat and circled toward the door.

She was not in sight when he brought up with a loud whoa, and getting down, the lines in one hand and
a black-snake in the other, he advanced to the sill and looked in. "Any passengers goin' south?"
he cried cheerily, cracking the whip.

"Me," answered a voice from behind the table, and the little girl, fagged but blissful, came
forward smilingly, a long, brown-paper package clasped tightly to her breast.

X

"BADGY"

IT was the little girl who discovered that the badgers were encroaching upon the big wheat-field that
stretched westward, across the prairie, from the farm-house to the sandy bank of the Vermillion.
In bringing the cattle home from the meadows one night, along the cow-path that bordered the northern
end of the grain, she allowed several to stray aside into the field, which was now faintly green
with its new sprouting. And as she headed them out, riding her pony at full gallop, she saw a fine
shorthorn suddenly pitch forward with a bellow and fall. She checked her horse and waited
for the animal to rise again. But it could not--it had snapped a fore ankle in a freshly dug
badger hole.

The shorthorn was a favorite and, as befitted her good blood, carried
across her dewlap the string of silver sleigh-bells that in wintertime
tinkled before the pung.

So the news of her injury was received with sorrow at the farm-house; and when, later in the
evening, the little girl's big brothers went down to the field to put the heifer out of her
misery, they vowed that the last feeble jingle of her bells should be the death-knell of the
badgers.

They found that the burrowing host, driven out of their former homes
either by an unlooked-for seepage or the advent of a stronger animal,
had been attracted to the field because the harrow had so recently
broken and softened the fallow, and had dug so rapidly since the planting
of a few weeks before, that the north end, perforated every three
or four feet, would be utterly useless, that year at least, for either
the harvester or the plow.

Each family had dug two tunnels that slanted toward each other and met at the nest. And since
the tunnels of one family often crossed those of another, the ground was treacherously unstable.
The outlying, unplowed land also bore, mile upon mile, marks of the ravages of an army of badgers;
but the north end of the wheat-field was the concentration camp.

The
badgers had thrived in their new home, for on one side was a grassy
rise where the eggs and young of the plover and prairie-chicken could
be found; and, on the other, a gully led down to the sloughs that
yielded succulent roots and crawling things. The little girl's big
brothers saw that the animals were so abundant that shot, traps, or
poison would not avail--only a thorough drowning-out would rid the
grain-land of the pest.

The attack was planned for the following day.  He pointed out at length the immense
power for good which Dick, as King of the Uluans, would wield, the many reforms which it would
be possible for him to introduce, the many evils which he could abolish, and, with the instinct
for business characteristic of the American, he rapidly sketched out the numerous advantages
to the Uluans which must result from the opening of communication between them and the outer
world--an easy matter to accomplish, with the vast wealth at their command.  And, as to Grace,
he pooh-poohed the idea that she and Dick were never again to meet; indeed, in his enthusiasm,
he more than half promised that his and Grace's honeymoon tour should include a visit to Ulua.
And lastly, he touched, with the warmth and delicacy of a true friend and gentleman, upon the
manifold perfections and virtues of the girl queen, and especially upon her frank and whole-hearted
affection for Dick--to say nothing of his for her; so that, before their chat was over, every
one of Dick's doubts and fears was dissipated and he felt free to regard himself, as indeed
he was, one of the most fortunate young men in the world.

"Come to think of it, you know, Dick," remarked Earle, when at length they were able to get
back naturally to more mundane matters, "this is the most lucky thing that could possibly have
happened for both of us. For I have had that emerald mine of ours upon my mind for some time,
and have felt a bit puzzled as to how it was to be worked to our mutual advantage.  But with
you as King of Ulua, the thing will be as simple as falling off a log.  You will be on the
spot, so to speak--for, after all, in actual mileage, the mine is really not very far from
here--and it will be an easy matter for you to arrange with our friends, the Mangeromas, to
work the mine and bring in the emeralds to you.  Then, I have been studying my map, and according
to it and our observations, I calculate that we are here only some four hundred miles from
the town of Cerro de Pasco, in Peru, which appears to be connected by railway with Lima and
Callao.  I propose to return home by that route, roughly surveying the ground as I go, and
I think it not improbable that I may discover a practicable road between the two places, by
means of which you may be able to communicate with the outer world and perhaps establish a
profitable trade with it.  With your permission, I will take along half-a-dozen or so of good,
reliable Uluans with me, sending them back to you with a detailed report of the results of
my exploration as soon as I reach civilisation; then, if you think it worth while, you can
get to work to make a proper road.  But we can discuss all these little business matters more
at length, later on.  There will be plenty of time, now, before I go."

This is not a love story, but a yarn of adventure, pure and simple; all that need be said,
therefore, in connection with Cavendish's wedding, is that the preparations for it, upon a
scale of unusual magnificence, even for Ulua--the circumstances connected with it being in
themselves very unusual--went smoothly forward, and in due time culminated, as such preparations
should, in a ceremony, the splendour of which will linger long in the memory of those who were
privileged to witness it.  The wedding ceremony, which was performed in the temple, was immediately
followed by the crowning of Dick as King, in strict accordance with Uluan precedent and usage;
and thereupon Dick entered upon his new duties as a practically despotic monarch with the zest
and thoroughness which had always characterised his actions, yet with a discretion and moderation
which speedily lifted him to the zenith of popularity with his subjects.

Earle remained on in Ulua for a full month after the celebration of the royal wedding, and
then, satisfied that all was going well with his chum, completed his preparations for departure,
and finally bade farewell to Ulua and his many friends therein on the anniversary--as it happened--of
the departure of himself and Dick from New York on the expedition which was destined to produce
such extraordinary and far-reaching results.

He departed, laden with costly gifts from Dick, Myrra, and numerous other friends, for it turned
out that the mountains which hemmed in the valley and lake of Ulua were fabulously rich in
gold and precious stones, and the value of those which he took away with him amounted in itself
to a princely fortune.  Also he took a long letter from Dick to Grace, containing, among other
items, a cordial invitation from the royal pair to visit Ulua as often and for as long a time
as she pleased, together with a parcel of priceless rubies as a joint wedding gift from Dick
and Myrra.  A dozen, instead of half-a-dozen, Uluans accompanied Earle as far as Cerro de Pasco,
in addition to Peter and the Indians who had formed part of the original expedition.  The Uluans
returned to the city after an absence of a trifle over three months, bringing with them a long
and detailed report, accompanied by a map, from Earle, from which it appeared that the American,
during an eventful journey, packed with adventure, had discovered a practicable route from
Ulua into Peru; and when last heard from, Dick was busily engaged upon the task of improving
this route, with a view to establishing regular communication between Ulua and the sea.

THE END.

