This style of objurgation Lambourne, who was elated to an unusual degree, not only by an extraordinary
cup of wine, but by the sort of confidential interview he had just had with the Earl, and the
secret of which he had made himself master, did not receive with his wonted humility. "He would
take no insolence of language," he said, "from the best knight that ever wore spurs. Lord Leicester
had detained him on some business of import, and that was enough for Varney, who was but a
servant like himself."

Varney was not a little surprised at his unusual tone of insolence; but ascribing it to liquor,
suffered it to pass as if unnoticed, and then began to tamper with Lambourne touching his willingness
to aid in removing out of the Earl of Leicester's way an obstacle to a rise, which would put
it in his power to reward his trusty followers to their utmost wish. And upon Michael Lambourne's
seeming ignorant what was meant, he plainly indicated "the litter-load, yonder," as the impediment
which he desired should be removed.

"Look you, Sir Richard, and so forth," said Michael, "some are wiser than some, that is one
thing, and some are worse than some, that's another. I know my lord's mind on this matter better
than thou, for he hath trusted me fully in the matter. Here are his mandates, and his last
words were, Michael Lambourne--for his lordship speaks to me as a gentleman of the sword, and
useth not the words drunken villain, or such like phrase, of those who know not how to bear
new dignities--Varney, says he, must pay the utmost respect to my Countess. I trust to you
for looking to it, Lambourne, says his lordship, and you must bring back my signet from him
peremptorily."

"Ay," replied Varney, "said he so, indeed? You know all, then?"

"All--all; and you were as wise to make a friend of me while the weather is fair betwixt us."

"And was there no one present," said Varney, "when my lord so spoke?"

"Not a breathing creature," replied Lambourne. "Think you my lord would trust any one with
such matters, save an approved man of action like myself?"

"Most true," said Varney; and making a pause, he looked forward on the moonlight road. They
were traversing a wide and open heath. The litter being at least a mile before them, was both
out of sight and hearing. He looked behind, and there was an expanse, lighted by the moonbeams,
without one human being in sight. He resumed his speech to Lambourne: "And will you turn upon
your master, who has introduced you to this career of court-like favour--whose apprentice you
have been, Michael--who has taught you the depths and shallows of court intrigue?"

"Michael not me!" said Lambourne; "I have a name will brook a MASTER before it as well as another;
and as to the rest, if I have been an apprentice, my indenture is out, and I am resolute to
set up for myself."

"Take thy quittance first, thou fool!" said Varney; and with a pistol, which he had for some
time held in his hand, shot Lambourne through the body.

The wretch fell from his horse without a single groan; and Varney, dismounting, rifled his
pockets, turning out the lining, that it might appear he had fallen by robbers. He secured
the Earl's packet, which was his chief object; but he also took Lambourne's purse, containing
some gold pieces, the relics of what his debauchery had left him, and from a singular combination
of feelings, carried it in his hand only the length of a small river, which crossed the road,
into which he threw it as far as he could fling. Such are the strange remnants of conscience
which remain after she seems totally subdued, that this cruel and remorseless man would have
felt himself degraded had he pocketed the few pieces belonging to the wretch whom he had thus
ruthlessly slain.

