The moral, and even more particularly the aesthetic, value of such a line of gentlefolk, and
of the culture which they may be expected to place on view,--this cultural side of the case,
of course, is what one would prefer to dwell on, and on the spiritual gains that might be expected
to accrue to humanity at large from the steady contemplation of this meritorious respectability
so displayed at such a cost.

But the prosaic necessity of the argument turns back to the economic and civil bearing of this
prospective development, this virtual bifurcation of the pacified nation into a small number
of gentlemen who own the community's wealth and consume its net product in the pursuit of gentility,
on the one hand, and an unblest mass of the populace who do the community's work on a meager
livelihood tapering down toward the subsistence minimum, on the other hand. Evidently, this
prospective posture of affairs may seem "fraught with danger to the common weal," as a public
spirited citizen might phrase it. Or, as it would be expressed in less eloquent words, it appears
to comprise elements that should make for a change. At the same time it should be recalled,
and the statement will command assent on slight reflection, that there is no avoiding substantially
such a posture of affairs under the promised régime of peace and security, provided only that
the price-system stands over intact, and the current rights of property continue to be held
inviolate. If the known principles of competitive gain and competitive spending should need
enforcement to that effect by an illustrative instance, the familiar history of the Victorian
peace is sufficient to quiet all doubts.

Of course, the resulting articulation of classes in the community will not be expected to fall
into such simple lines of sheer contrast as this scheme would indicate. The class of gentlefolk,
the legally constituted wasters, as they would be rated from the economic point of view, can
not be expected personally to take care of so large a consumption of superfluities as this
posture of affairs requires at their hands. They would, as the Victorian peace teaches, necessarily
have the assistance of a trained corps of experts in unproductive consumption, the first and
most immediate of whom would be those whom the genial phrasing of Adam Smith designates "menial
servants." Beyond these would come the purveyors of superfluities, properly speaking, and the
large, indeed redundant, class of tradespeople of high and low degree,--dependent in fact but
with an illusion of semi-dependence; and farther out again the legal and other professional
classes of the order of stewards, whose duty it will be to administer the sources of income
and receive, apportion and disburse the revenues so devoted to a traceless extinguishment.

There would, in other words, be something of a "substantial middle class," dependent on the
wealthy and on their expenditure of wealth, but presumably imbued with the Victorian middle-class
illusion that they are of some account in their own right. Under the due legal forms and sanctions
this, somewhat voluminous, middle-class population would engage in the traffic which is their
perquisite, and would continue to believe, in some passable fashion, that they touch the substance
of things at something nearer than the second remove. They would in great part appear to be
people of "independent means," and more particularly would they continue in the hope of so
appearing and of some time making good the appearance. Hence their fancied, and therefore their
sentimental, interest would fall out on the side of the established law and order; and they
would accordingly be an element of stability in the commonwealth, and would throw in their
weight, and their voice, to safeguard that private property and that fabric of prices and credit
through which the "income stream" flows to the owners of preponderant invested wealth.

Judged on the state of the situation as it runs in our time, and allowing for the heightened
efficiency of large-scale investment and consolidated management under the prospective conditions
of added pecuniary security, it is to be expected that the middle-class population with "independent
means" should come in for a somewhat meager livelihood, provided that they work faithfully
at their business of managing pecuniary traffic to the advantage of their pecuniary betters,--meager,
that is to say, when allowance is made for the conventionally large expenditure on reputable
appearances which is necessarily to be included in their standard of living. It lies in the
nature of this system of large-scale investment and enterprise that the (pecuniarily) minor
agencies engaged on a footing of ostensible independence will come in for only such a share
in the aggregate gains of the community as it is expedient for the greater business interests
to allow them as an incentive to go on with their work as purveyors of traffic to these greater
business interests.

The current, and still more this prospective, case of the quasi-self-directing middle class
may fairly be illustrated by the case of the American farmers, of the past and present. The
American farmer rejoices to be called "The Independent Farmer." He once was independent, in
a meager and toil-worn fashion, in the days before the price-system had brought him and all
his works into the compass of the market; but that was some time ago. He now works for the
market, ordinarily at something like what is called a "living wage," provided he has "independent
means" enough to enable him by steady application to earn a living wage; and of course, the
market being controlled by the paramount investment interests in the background, his work,
in effect, inures to their benefit; except so much as it may seem necessary to allow him as
incentive to go on. Also of course, these paramount investment interests are in turn controlled
in all their manoeuvres by the impersonal exigencies of the price-system, which permits no
vagaries in violation of the rule that all traffic must show a balance of profit in terms of price. 

I know your heart is set against me on account of the arrest of your betrothed. Do not blame me for
having a hand in his incarceration. The law of the land is severe, and although I exerted
my influence, I was powerless to stay its hand in the matter. Your friend is condemned to a life-long
exile in Siberia. It is a terrible fate, worse than death itself. You alone can save him from
it. Consent to come to me, to share my heart, to make me the happiest of men, and I myself will
plead with the Governor and obtain his pardon. The day that sees you at my side will restore
your friend to liberty. Do not deem me cruel. I would serve you if you but gave me the right
to do so. I await your reply. LORIS.

When Kathinka had ceased reading, she dropped the letter and hid her burning head in her hands,
while her body rocked with grief and despair.

Her father gazed at her in silence, with a look of intense commiseration on his face.

"What can I do?" she moaned, at length. "What would Joseph have me do? He would rather die a
thousand deaths than owe his liberty to my degradation. Father, my duty is clear! Joseph is innocent
of any crime and the God of Israel will protect him."

"God bless
you, my daughter," replied the Rabbi. "You have spoken well. Will
you answer this letter?"

"No, father; I shall treat it with contempt.
The writer can draw his own conclusions from my silence."

It was
a sad day for both the Rabbi's and Kierson's families. In pecuniary effect, the ordinary American farmer, who legally
owns a moderate farm of the common sort, belongs among those who work for a livelihood; such
a livelihood as the investment interests find it worth while to allow him under the rule of
what the traffic will bear; but in point of sentiment and class consciousness he clings to
a belated stand on the side of those who draw a profit from his work.

So it is also with the menial servants and the middle-class people of "independent means,"
who are, however, in a position to see more clearly their dependence on the owners of predominant
wealth. And such, with a further accentuation of the anomaly, may reasonably be expected to
be the further run of these relations under the promised régime of peace and security. The
class of well-kept gentlefolk will scarcely be called on to stand alone, in case of a division
between those who live by investment and those who live by work; inasmuch as, for the calculable
future, it should seem a reasonable expectation that this very considerable fringe of dependents
and pseudo-independents will abide by their time-tried principles of right and honest living,
through good days and evil, and cast in their lot unreservedly with that reputable body to
whom the control of trade and industry by investment assigns the usufruct of the community's
productive powers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Something has already been said of the prospective breeding of pedigreed gentlefolk under the
projected régime of peace. Pedigree, for the purpose in hand, is a pecuniary attribute and
is, of course, a product of funded wealth, more or less ancient. Virtually ancient pedigree
can be procured by well-advised expenditure on the conspicuous amenities; that is to say pedigree
effectually competent as a background of current gentility. Gentlefolk of such syncopated pedigree
may have to walk circumspectly, of course; but their being in this manner put on their good
behavior should tend to heighten their effectual serviceability as gentlefolk, by inducing
a single-mindedness of gentility beyond what can fairly be expected of those who are already
secure in their tenure.

Except conventionally, there is no hereditary difference between the standard gentlefolk and,
say, their "menial servants," or the general population of the farms and the industrial towns.
This is a well-established commonplace among ethnological students; which has, of course, nothing
to say with respect to the conventionally distinct lines of descent of the "Best Families."
These Best Families are nowise distinguishable from the common run in point of hereditary traits;
the difference that makes the gentleman and the gentlewoman being wholly a matter of habituation
during the individual's life-time. It is something of a distasteful necessity to call attention
to this total absence of native difference between the well-born and the common, but it is
a necessity of the argument in hand, and the recalling of it may, therefore, be overlooked
for once in a way. There is no harm and no annoyance intended. The point of it all is that,
on the premises which this state of the case affords, the body of gentlefolk created by such
an accumulation of invested wealth will have no less of an effectual cultural value than they
would have had if their virtually ancient pedigree had been actual.

At this point, again, the experience of the Victorian peace and the functioning of its gentlefolk
come in to indicate what may fairly be hoped for in this way under this prospective régime
of peace at large. But with the difference that the scale of things is to be larger, the pace
swifter, and the volume and dispersion of this prospective leisure class somewhat wider. The
work of this leisure class--and there is neither paradox nor inconsistency in the phrase--should
be patterned on the lines worked out by their prototypes of the Victorian time, but with some
appreciable accentuation in the direction of what chiefly characterised the leisure class of
that era of tranquility. The characteristic feature to which attention naturally turns at this
suggestion is the tranquility that has marked that body of gentlefolk and their code of clean
and honest living. I tremble even now, lest they should discover me. I will go to Berditchef for the present."

"And
your aspirations for a physician's career--what will become of them?" asked his father.

Joseph sighed, and his eyes were dimmed with tears.

"It will be hard to give up my plans, but I see no alternative."

"Don't
worry, my boy," said the Rabbi, consolingly. "There are more ways
than one to make an honorable living. Honesty, thrift and energy will
enable you to succeed in any undertaking. The place of gentlefolk in the economy
of Nature is tracelessly to consume the community's net product, and in doing so to set a standard
of decent expenditure for the others emulatively to work up to as near as may be. It is scarcely
conceivable that this could have been done in a more unobtrusively efficient manner, or with
a more austerely virtuous conviction of well-doing, than by the gentlefolk bred of the Victorian
peace. So also, in turn, it is not to be believed that the prospective breed of gentlefolk
derivable from the net product of the pacific nations under the promised régime of peace at
large will prove in any degree less effective for the like ends. More will be required of them
in the way of a traceless consumption of superfluities and an unexampled expensive standard
of living. But this situation that so faces them may be construed as a larger opportunity,
quite as well as a more difficult task.

A theoretical exposition of the place and cultural value of a leisure class in modern life
would scarcely be in place here; and it has also been set out in some detail elsewhere.[10]
For the purpose in hand it may be sufficient to recall that the canons of taste and the standards
of valuation worked out and inculcated by leisure-class life have in all ages run, with unbroken
consistency, to pecuniary waste and personal futility. In its economic bearing, and particularly
in its immediate bearing on the material well-being of the community at large, the leadership
of the leisure class can scarcely be called by a less derogatory epithet than "untoward." But
that is not the whole of the case, and the other side should be heard. The leisure-class life
of tranquility, running detached as it does above the turmoil out of which the material of
their sustenance is derived, enables a growth of all those virtues that mark, or make, the
gentleman; and that affect the life of the underlying community throughout, pervasively, by
imitation; leading to a standardisation of the everyday proprieties on a presumably, higher
level of urbanity and integrity than might be expected to result in the absence of this prescriptive
model.

[Footnote 10: Cf. The Theory of the Leisure Class, especially ch. v.-ix. and xiv.]

Integer vitae scelerisque purus, the gentleman of assured station turns a placid countenance
to all those petty vexations of breadwinning that touch him not. Serenely and with an impassive
fortitude he faces those common vicissitudes of life that are impotent to make or mar his material
fortunes and that can neither impair his creature comforts nor put a slur on his good repute.
So that without afterthought he deals fairly in all everyday conjunctures of give and take;
for they are at the most inconsequential episodes to him, although the like might spell irremediable
disaster to his impecunious counterfoil among the common men who have the community's work
to do. In short, he is a gentleman, in the best acceptation of the word,--unavoidably, by force
of circumstance. As such his example is of invaluable consequence to the underlying community
of common folk, in that it keeps before their eyes an object lesson in habitual fortitude and
visible integrity such as could scarcely have been created except under such shelter from those
disturbances that would go to mar habitual fortitude and integrity. There can be little doubt
but the high example of the Victorian gentlefolk has had much to do with stabilising the animus
of the British common man on lines of integrity and fair play. What else and more in the way
of habitual preconceptions he may, by competitive imitation, owe to the same high source is
not immediately in question here. 

       Suddenly he stopped.

He had almost run against a man who was hurriedly walking in the opposite direction.

"What, Loris! is it you?" he cried, upon recognizing his protector's son. "What are you doing
in this part of the town?"

"I might repeat the question," answered Loris. "Why is a priest roaming about these streets, when he
should be counting his beads up in the Petcherskoi convent?"

Mikail
frowned. Loris' sneering tone grated harshly upon him.

"I owe you
no explanation," he said, curtly; "but if it will give you any satisfaction
to know, I am following up a subject of importance to the State."

"And
I," said Loris, confidingly, "am following up a far more interesting
subject. You should see her, Mikail! Such a head, such eyes, such
a form! This margin of error should
tend continually to grow narrower as the businesslike management of industry grows more efficient
with experience; but it will also continually be disturbed in the contrary sense by innovations
of a technological nature that require continual readjustment. This margin is probably not
to be got rid of, though it may be expected to become less considerable under more settled
conditions.

It should also not be overlooked that the standard of living here spoken of as necessarily
to be allowed the working population by no means coincides with the "physical subsistence minimum,"
from which in fact it always departs by something appreciable. The necessary standard of living
of the working community is in fact made up of two distinguishable factors: the subsistence
minimum, and the requirements of decorously wasteful consumption--the "decencies of life."
These decencies are no less requisite than the physical necessaries, in point of workday urgency,
and their amount is a matter of use and wont. This composite standard of living is a practical
minimum, below which consumption will not fall, except by a fluctuating margin of error; the
effect being the same, in point of necessary consumption, as if it were all of the nature of
a physical subsistence minimum. 

Bring me the names of the moujiks who supported Podoloff in his rebellion. I shall send them to
Siberia to reflect on the uncertainty of human aspirations. Now,
go! Here is a rouble for you. Should any new symptoms of revolt show
themselves, send me word at once." From which in turn
it should follow that the rest of what is comprised under the general caption of "culture"
will find a place only in the interstices of leisure-class expenditure and only at the hands
of aberrant members of the class of the gently-bred. The working population should have no
effectual margin of time, energy or means for other pursuits than the day's work in the service
of the price-system; so that aberrant individuals in this class, who might by native propensity
incline, e.g., to pursue the sciences or the fine arts, should have (virtually) no chance to
make good. It would be a virtual suppression of such native gifts among the common folk, not
a definitive and all-inclusive suppression. The state of the case under the Victorian peace
may, again, be taken in illustration of the point; although under the presumably more effectual
control to be looked for in the pacific future the margin might reasonably be expected to run
somewhat narrower, so that this virtual suppression of cultural talent among the common men
should come nearer a complete suppression.

