Between five and six the next morning a number of us met at the house of the Archbishop of
Rheims at the end of the Pont Royal, behind the Hotel de Mailly, and there, in accordance with
a resolution previously agreed upon, it was arranged that I should make a protest to the Parliament
before the opening of the King's will there, against certain other usurpations, and state that
it was solely because M. le Duc d'Orleans had given us his word that our complaints should
be attended to as soon as the public affairs of the government were settled, that we postponed
further measures upon this subject.  It was past seven before our debate ended, and then we
went straight to the Parliament.

We found it already assembled, and a few Dukes who had not attended our meeting, but had promised
to be guided by us, were also present; and then a quarter of an hour after we were seated the
bastards arrived.  M. du Maine was bursting with joy; the term is strange, but his bearing
cannot otherwise be described.  The smiling and satisfied air prevailed over that of audacity
and of confidence, which shone, nevertheless, and over politeness which seemed to struggle
with them.  He saluted right and left, and pierced everybody with his looks.  His salutation
to the Presidents had an air of rejoicing.  To the peers he was serious, nay, respectful; the
slowness, the lowness of his inclination, was eloquent. His head remained lowered even when
he rose, so heavy is the weight of crime, even at the moment when nothing but triumph is expected.
I rigidly followed him everywhere with my eyes, and I remarked that his salute was returned
by the peers in a very dry and cold manner.

Scarcely were we re-seated than M. le Duc arrived, and the instant after M. le Duc d'Orleans.
I allowed the stir that accompanied his appearance to subside a little, and then, seeing that
the, Chief-President was about to speak, I forestalled him, uncovered my head, and then covered
it, and made my speech in the terms agreed upon.  I concluded by appealing to M. le Duc d'Orleans
to verify the truth of what I had said, in so far as it affected him.

The profound silence with which I was listened to showed the surprise of all present.  M. le
Duc d'Orleans uncovered himself, and in a low tone, and with an embarrassed manner, confirmed
what I had said, then covered himself again.

Immediately afterwards I looked at M. du Maine, who appeared, to be well content at being let
off so easily, and who, my neighbours said to me, appeared much troubled at my commencement.

A very short silence followed my protest, after which I saw the Chief- President say something
in a low tone to M. le Duc d'Orleans, then arrange a deputation of the Parliament to go in
search of the King's will, and its codicil, which had been put in the same place.  Silence
continued during this great and short period of expectation; every one looked at his neighbour
without stirring.  We were all upon the lower seats, the doors were supposed to be closed,
but the grand chamber was filled with a large and inquisitive crowd.  The regiment of guards
had secretly occupied all the avenues, commanded by the Duc de Guiche, who got six hundred
thousand francs out of the Duc d'Orleans for this service, which was quite unnecessary.

The deputation was not long in returning.  It placed the will and the codicil in the hands
of the Chief-President, who presented them, without parting with them, to M. le Duc d'Orleans,
then passed them from hand to hand to Dreux, 'conseiller' of the Parliament, and father of
the grand master of the ceremonies, saying that he read well, and in a loud voice that would
he well heard by everybody.  It may be imagined with what silence he was listened to, and how
all eyes? and ears were turned towards him.  Through all his; joy the Duc du Maine showed that
his soul was, troubled, as though about to undergo an operation that he must submit to.  M.
le Duc d'Orleans showed only a tranquil attention.

I will not dwell upon these two documents, in which nothing is provided but the grandeur and
the power of the bastards, Madame de Maintenon and Saint-Cyr, the choice of the King's education
and of the council of the regency, by which M. le Duc d'Orleans was to be shorn of all authority
to the advantage of M. le Duc du Maine.

I remarked a sadness and a kind of indignation which were painted upon all cheeks, as the reading
advanced, and which turned into a sort of tranquil fermentation at the reading of the codicil,
which was entrusted to the Abbe Menguy, another conseiller. "Well, good, Collins," Gordon, the Division
Administrator, had said, "glad to check it over. Always happy when one of our men has something
for publication. Gives the Division a good name. I'll let you know,
but we have to be careful. Security you know."

The reading being finished, that prince spoke, casting his eyes upon all the assembly, uncovering
himself, and then covering himself again, and commencing by a word of praise and of regret
for the late King; afterwards raising his voice, he declared that he had only to approve everything
just read respecting the education of the King, and everything respecting an establishment
so fine and so useful as that of Saint-Cyr; that with respect to the dispositions concerning
the government of the state, he would speak separately of those in the will and those in the
codicil; that he could with difficulty harmonise them with the assurances the King, during
the last days of his life, had given him; that the King could not have understood the importance
of what he had been made to do for the Duc du Maine since the council of the regency was chosen,
and M. du Maine's authority so established by the will, that the Regent remained almost without
power; that this injury done to the rights of his birth, to his attachment to the person of
the King, to his love and fidelity for the state, could not be endured if he was to preserve
his honour; and that he hoped sufficiently from the esteem of all present, to persuade himself
that his regency would be declared as it ought to be, that is to say, complete, independent,
and that he should be allowed to choose his own council, with the members of which he would
not discuss public affairs, unless they were persons who, being approved by the public, might
also have his confidence.  This short speech appeared to make a great impression.

The Duc du Maine wished to speak.  As he was about to do so, M. le Duc d'Orleans put his head
in front of M. le Duc and said, in a dry tone, "Monsieur, you will speak in your turn."  In
one moment the affair turned according to the desires of M. le Duc d'Orleans.  The power of
the council of the regency and its composition fell.  The choice of the council was awarded
to M. le Duc d'Orleans, with all the authority of the regency, and to the plurality of the
votes of the council, the decision of affairs, the vote of the Regent to be counted as two
in the event of an equal division.  Thus all favours and all punishments remained in the hands
of M. le Duc d'Orleans alone.  The acclamation was such that the Duc du Maine did not dare
to say a word.  He reserved himself for the codicil, which, if adopted, would have annulled
all that M. le Duc d'Orleans had just obtained.

After some few moments of silence, M. le Duc d'Orleans spoke again.  He testified fresh surprise
that the dispositions of the will had not been sufficient for those who had suggested them,
and that, not content with having established themselves as masters of the state, they themselves
should have thought those dispositions so strange that in order to reassure them, it had been
thought necessary to make them masters of the person of the King, of the Regent, of the Court,
and of Paris.  He added, that if his honour and all law and rule had been wounded by the dispositions
of the will, still more violated were they by those of the codicil, which left neither his
life nor his liberty in safety, and placed the person of the King in the absolute dependence
of those who had dared to profit by the feeble state of a dying monarch, to draw from him conditions
he did not understand.  He concluded by declaring that the regency was impossible under such
conditions, and that he doubted not the wisdom of the assembly would annul a codicil which
could not be sustained, and the regulations of which would plunge France into the greatest
and most troublesome misfortune.  Whilst this prince spoke a profound and sad silence applauded
him without explaining itself.

The Duc du Maine became of all colours, and began to speak, this time being allowed to do so.
He said that the education of the King, and consequently his person, being confided to him,
as a natural result, entire authority over his civil and military household followed, without
which he could not properly serve him or answer for his person.  Then he vaunted his well-known
attachment to the deceased King, who had put all confidence in him.

M. le Duc d'Orleans interrupted him at this word, and commented upon it. M. du Maine wished
to calm him by praising the Marechal de Villeroy, who was to assist him in his charge.  M.
le Duc d'Orleans replied that it would be strange if the chief and most complete confidence
were not placed in the Regent, and stranger still if he were obliged to live under the protection
and authority of those who had rendered themselves the absolute masters within and without,
and of Paris even, by the regiment of guards.

The dispute grew warm, broken phrases were thrown from one to the other, when, troubled about
the end of an altercation which became indecent and yielding to the proposal that the Duc de
la Force had just made me in front of the Duc de la Rochefoucauld, who sat between us, I made
a sign with my hand to M. le Duc d'Orleans to go out and finish this discussion in another
room leading out of the grand chamber and where there was nobody.  What led me to this action
was that I perceived M. du Maine grew stronger, that confused murmurs for a division were heard,
and that M. le Duc d'Orleans did not shine to the best advantage since he descended to plead
his cause, so to speak, against that of the Duc du Maine.

M. le Duc d'Orleans was short-sighted.  He was entirely absorbed in attacking and repelling;
so that he did not see the sign I made.  Some moments after I increased it, and meeting with
no more success, rose, advanced some steps, and said to him, though rather distant, "Monsieur,
if you passed into the fourth chamber with M. du Maine you could speak there more easily,"
and advancing nearer at the same time I pressed him by a sign of the head and the eyes that
he could distinguish.  He replied to me with another sign, and scarcely was I reseated than
I saw him advance in front of M. le Duc to the Duc du Maine, and immediately after both rose
and went into the chamber I had indicated.  I could not see who of the scattered group around
followed them, for all present rose at their departure, and seated themselves again directly
in complete silence.  Some time after, M. le Comte de Toulouse left his place and went into
the Chamber.  M. le Duc followed him in a little while soon again the Duc de la Force did the same.

